=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat (64-bit) 25.1.20474
producer: Adobe Acrobat (64-bit) 25.1.20474
creationDate: D:20250608195559+09'00'
modDate: D:20250608195909+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
This document is prepared and transmitted for consideration by the GCF Board at a Board meeting. It is published on the GCF public 
website in that context, which does not imply a presumed outcome. Decisions taken in relation to this document and updates to it, if any, 
will be made publicly available in accordance with applicable GCF policies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meeting of the Board 
30 June – 3 July 2025 
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
Provisional agenda item 11 
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
9 June 2025 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum XVII 
Funding proposal package for FP275 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Scaling up the Deployment of Integrated 
Utility Services (IUS) to Support Energy Sector Transformation in the Caribbean 
(Phase 1) Programme” by Caribbean Development Bank; 
b) No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure; 
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
f) Gender documentation of the funding proposal.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Content 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
124 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure 
129 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
132 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s 
assessment 
 
144 
Gender documentation 
145 
 
 
Disclaimer:  
The designations and the presentation of the materials used in this document, including their respective 
citations, maps and references, have been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Green Climate Fund concerning the legal status 
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers 
or boundaries. Also, the boundaries and names shown, and the designations used in this document have 
been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by 
the Green Climate Fund. 
Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal is being 
circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure 
confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the 
entity.

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Scaling up the Deployment of Integrated Utility Services (IUS) 
to Support Energy Sector Transformation in the Caribbean 
(Phase 1) Programme 
Country(ies): 
Barbados, Belize, Jamaica 
Accredited Entity: 
Caribbean Development Bank  
Date of first submission: 
2025/04/28 
Date of current submission  
2025/04/28  
Version number 
V.1.3

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to 
annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in 
the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all 
relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60. 
Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard 
time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be 
disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the 
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are 
asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 2 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS / ABBREVIATIONS 
AC 
Air Conditioner 
APRs 
Annual Performance Reports 
AQI 
Air Quality Index 
AE 
Accredited Entity 
BAU 
Business as Usual 
BCCI 
Barbados Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
BEL 
Belize Electricity Limited 
BLPC 
Barbados Light & Power Company 
BMCs 
Borrowing Member Countries (collectively Barbados, Belize & Jamaica) 
BNEP 
Barbados National Energy Policy 
BREA 
Barbados Renewable Energy Association 
CCKP 
Climate Change Knowledge Portal 
CDB 
Caribbean Development Bank  
CHP 
Combined heat and power 
CN 
Concept Note 
COP 
Community of Practice 
DERs 
Distributed Energy Resources 
DG 
Distributed Generation 
DPM 
Division of Portfolio Management 
DREAM 
Disaster Risk and Energy Access Management 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
EE 
Energy Efficiency 
ERCAP 
Energy Resilience for Climate Adaptation 
ESCOs 
Energy Service Companies 
ESD 
Energy for Sustainable Development in the Caribbean 
ESIA 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
ESMS 
Environmental and Social Management System 
ESS 
Environmental and Social Safeguards  
ESU 
Environmental Sustainability Unit 
FIT 
Feed-in Tariff 
FP 
Funding Proposal 
FX 
foreign exchange 
GAP 
Gender Action Plan 
GCF 
Green Climate Fund 
GESI 
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion 
GHG 
greenhouse gas 
GRM 
grievance redress mechanism 
ICA 
Integrity, Compliance and Accountability 
IEU 
Independent Evaluation Unit 
IPPs 
Independent Power Producers 
IUS 
Integrated Utility Services 
JPS 
Jamaica Public Services Company Limited 
KYC 
Know Your Customer 
LCDS 
Low-Carbon Development Strategy 
LEDS 
Low Emissions Development Strategy 
M&R 
Monitoring and Reporting 
MFFSD 
Ministry of Forestry, Fisheries and Sustainable Development 
ML/TF 
money laundering/terrorist financing 
MSET 
Ministry of Science, Energy, Telecommunications and Transport 
NCCPSAP 
National Climate Change Policy, Strategy and Action Plan 
NDAs 
National Designated Authorities

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 15 
 
 
 
NDC 
Nationally Determined Contributions 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
OCR 
Ordinary Capital Resources 
OIE 
Office of Independent Evaluation 
OPPM 
Operational Policies and Procedures Manual 
PMC 
Projects Complaints Mechanism 
PPF 
Project Preparation Facility 
PPU 
Procurement Policy Unit 
PSSEP 
Public Sector Smart Energy Programme 
PV 
Photovoltaic 
PWDs 
persons with disabilities 
RE 
renewable energy 
RE/FIT 
Renewable Energy Feed-In Tariff 
REDD 
Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation 
RER 
Renewable Energy Rider 
RFP 
Request for Proposals 
SDF 
Special Development Fund 
SDGs 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment 
SEFB 
The Sustainable Energy Framework for Barbados 
SIDS 
Small Island Developing States 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TSPs 
Technology Service Providers 
UNFCCC 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Private 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for 
Proposals, indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate 
template for the Simplified Approval Process and REDD+. 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)b 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme 
targets below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of 
GCF and Co-financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when 
summed should be 100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Energy generation and access 
50 % 
50 % 
☐  Low-emission transport 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Buildings, cities, industries and 
appliances 
25 % 
25 % 
☐  Forestry and land use 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Adaptation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Most vulnerable people and 
communities 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Health and well-being, and food and 
water security 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment 
25 % 
25 % 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, 
avoided or removed / 
sequestered) 
601,550 tCO2e 
(over a 25-year 
period, which 
captures the 
productive lifespan 
of all technologies/ 
assets to be 
supported through 
the Programme).  
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached) 
Approx 40,655 direct and indirect 
beneficiaries. 
Approx 10,655 
direct beneficiaries 
 
Approx 30,000 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
About 0.3% of the 
total population 
About 1% of the 
total population 
 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal.

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 
 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance2)  
68,746,295 USD  
A.9. Project 
size 
Medium (Upto USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
26,736,295 USD 
For multi-country 
proposals, please fill out 
annex 17. 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be 
consistent with A.8.  
☒  Grant 
Enter number 
 
☒  Loan 
Enter number 
☐  Guarantee Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
6 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
25 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
Within 3 months after GCF 
Board approval  
A.14. ESS category   
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No  
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
• 
Caribbean Development Bank (via the CDB TA Execution Team) 
• 
Barbados Light and Power Limited is a regulated electric utility in Barbados. It is a 
limited liability company incorporated under the Laws of Barbados, and is a wholly 
(100%) owned subsidiary of Emera Inc., a Canadian utilities conglomerate. 
• 
Belize Electricity Limited is a regulated electricity utility in Belize. It is a limited 
liability company incorporated under the laws of Belize, and is majority owned by 
the Belize public sector. The Government of Belize owns 32.58%, while the Social 
Security Board owns 31.27%. The remaining shares are owned by Fortis Cayman 
Inc. (33.3%) and 1,500 small shareholders (2.85%). 
• 
Jamaica Public Services Company Limited is a regulated electricity utility in 
Jamaica. It is a limited liability company incorporated under the laws of Jamaica, 
and is majority owned by a consortium comprising the Marubeni Corporation from 
Japana and the East-West Power Corporation from South Korea (combined 80%). 
The Government of Jamaica owns 19% of the shares while a small group of 
minority shareholders control the remaining 1%. 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
 
2 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
 
The Caribbean region is currently facing the adaptation & mitigation challenges of climate change, evidenced by 
intensified storms and rising temperatures, and an energy sector heavily reliant on imported fossil fuels, contributing 
significantly to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. 
 
Climate: The Borrowing Member Countries (collectively “Barbados, Belize and Jamaica” or the “BMCs”) are facing 
significant climate change impacts, including intensified storms, floods, droughts, sea-level rise, and rising 
temperatures. These changes are affecting not only the availability and supply of energy resources but also the 
transmission, distribution, operations, and energy demand. The historical and projected impacts of climate change 
indicate a trend of rising temperatures, escalating the risk of heat stress and severe weather events, which are expected 
to continue and intensify. For instance, the International Energy Agency has noted that extreme heat boosts the demand 
for cooling, with sustained average daily temperatures of 30°C typically resulting in a 16% spike in weekly sales of 
electricity.3 Moreover, the BMCs are committed to ambitious goals to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by increasing 
the share of renewables in their energy mix and improving energy efficiency across all sectors. 
 
Energy: The BMCs heavily rely on imported fossil fuels for electricity, which constitutes a significant portion of their 
annual greenhouse gas emissions. The energy sectors in these countries are critical to their GHG profiles, with other 
sectors such as road transport, industry, agriculture, and land-use change also being notable contributors. The 
Integrated Utility Services (IUS) Programme intends to drive investment in renewable energy and energy efficiency 
measures to reduce this dependency, which is increasingly important as the demand for electricity is expected to rise 
with economic growth. The integration of Distributed Energy Resources (DERs) is also a focus for enhancing the 
resilience and diversification of the electricity grid.  
 
The introduction of an IUS model in BMCs is seen as a strategic step toward addressing various challenges in their 
energy sectors. These include reducing GHG emissions, decentralizing energy systems, enhancing resilience to 
climate change impacts, and decreasing dependence on imported fossil fuels. Additionally, the model supports 
adaptation to heat through providing cooling solutions to ensure comfortable indoor temperatures, using energy-efficient 
air conditioners and decentralized renewable energy supply to reduce peak electricity demand during times of high 
temperatures, thereby supporting the reliability of the grid. The Programme aims to democratize energy policy, increase 
access to clean energy, reform utility business models, and enhance capabilities for financing DERs. Furthermore, it 
seeks to foster regional learning and knowledge sharing while developing a sustainable market ecosystem for behind-
the-meter solutions in the Caribbean.   
Programme Approach 
The Governments of Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica aim to accelerate decarbonization efforts in their electricity sector 
and increase the resilience of the communities to climate change impacts. They aim to meet international climate 
change commitments by focusing on renewable energy (RE) and energy efficiency (EE) technologies. The proposed 
IUS Programme will be administered by electric utilities to support the deployment of these technologies. The 
Programme will involve education for customers, financing for installations, and repayment through monthly bills, 
overcoming the barrier of high upfront costs. This Programme constitutes the first of two phases for the overall IUS 
Programme in the region. While Phase I would provide support to the three countries to implement the Programme, 
Phase II will result in a broader implementation and scale-up to other member-countries of the Caribbean Development 
Bank (CDB). 
This IUS model is a mechanism to directly implement demand-side RE and EE projects through utilities in an open 
market system.  
The IUS Programme will include a “national project” in each country to be executed by the national electric utility and 
overseen by the Ministry and regulator responsible for oversight of the electricity sector. Each “national project” will 
include a series of sub-projects at the level of the utility’s customers, notably residential customers (i.e. households) 
and commercial customers (i.e. local businesses). Through each of these small-scale sub-projects, eligible RE, EE 
and/or other DER technologies will be installed at the premises of the interested utility customers.  Utility customers will 
first receive education and awareness about the options available to them and then they will choose to implement the 
technologies through registered qualified service providers that work closely with the utility. The utility will provide the 
upfront financing for the installation of the sub-projects and support the service providers, while the customers will then 
repay the amount owed to the utility for the installation through their monthly bill. A major barrier for the uptake of these 
technologies has historically been the high upfront cost to install them, so this Programme is expected to alleviate that 
pressure.

=== PAGE 10 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
 
Programme Components: 
The IUS Programme is structured in a way that it not only addresses all the key risks and barriers assessed during the 
programme preparation phase but also supports the much-needed ecosystem development for a sustainable, scalable, 
and replicable growth of behind the meter energy solutions in the BMCs. The below figure outlines the key components 
of the IUS Programme. 
 
 
Source: CDB/CPCS 
The Programme, through Component 1, establishes and promotes IUS as a core element of each Executing Entity’s 
business model. It underpins timely and effective delivery of country-level support and enables the BMCs to guide and 
support one another during and after the Programme. Component 2 aims to build on this foundation to scale up 
investments in distributed RE, EE and other DERs through widespread use of the IUS model by the Executing Entities 
in the BMCs. 
Each programme component is broken down into sub-components, which themselves comprise several activities that 
support a robust programme design and delivery. 
Programme Benefits: 
The IUS Programme anticipates significant climate-related benefits: 
 
• 
Reduction in GHG Emissions: The Programme is projected to make a significant reduction in the carbon 
footprint of the participating countries by enabling the avoidance of an estimated 601,550 tons of CO2 
equivalent (tCO2e) over the lifetime of the Programme. This results in an estimated cost of USD 70 per tCO2e 
avoided,4 and for the GCF's contribution, the cost is approximately USD 43 per tCO2e avoided.5  
 
• 
Increasing Resilience Against Heat Stress: The Programme is projected to provide energy efficient air 
conditioners (AC) to about 9,444 residential and 1,211 commercial beneficiaries. 
 
• 
Decreased Burden on Utilities and Increased Renewable Energy Generation: Energy efficiency 
interventions are expected to reduce energy consumption across various sectors, including residential, 
commercial, and public. The Programme anticipates considerable energy savings which translate into lower 
utility bills for consumers and decreased overall demand on energy infrastructure. A shift towards renewables 
is anticipated, with a targeted increase in the contribution of clean energy to the national grids. This includes 
 
3 IEA (2023). Keeping cool in a hotter world is using more energy, making efficiency more important than ever. 
4 Estimated cost per tCO2e avoided refers to the total cost of the GCF loan, GCF grant and CDB loan (USD41.95 mil), 
excluding parallel investments by the utilities, divided by the total GHG emissions avoided. 
5 Estimated GCF cost per tCO2e avoided refers to the total GCF cost (USD25.76 mil) divided by the total GHG emissions 
avoided. 
Figure 1: Structure of the IUS Programme

=== PAGE 11 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 
the deployment of technologies like solar photovoltaic systems, solar water heating, and possibly wind and 
geothermal energy, depending on the country-specific strategies and natural resource availability. 
 
• 
Economic Development: The transition to a greener energy sector is intended to stimulate local economies 
through job creation in the renewables sector, foster innovation, and provide opportunities for local businesses. 
Energy cost savings and the potential for new energy-related businesses are additional economic benefits. 
 
• 
Capacity Building and Knowledge Sharing: A core outcome of the Programme is the enhancement of 
institutional capacities and regulatory frameworks in each participating country. This involves training programs, 
development of standards, and the establishment of best practices for EE and RE deployment. 
 
• 
Scaling Up of Investments: By de-risking investments and establishing favourable conditions for private and 
international financing, the Programme aims to catalyse additional resources for the energy sector 
transformation. This will enable a scaling up of clean energy projects and attract further investments into the 
region. 
 
• 
Gender and Social Inclusion: The Programme places an emphasis on ensuring that the benefits of the energy 
transition are equitably distributed, with specific measures to include women and vulnerable communities in 
the opportunities created by the shift to sustainable energy sources. The Programme aims to provide a more 
inclusive way to support sustainable energy investments, particularly for women who often face more economic 
barriers than men due to traditional divisions of labour and social norms. Through the Gender Action Plan 
(GAP), the Programme will address the following gender-specific needs: governance and participation (through 
targeted actions focused on policies, utilities, and other key actors), and access, education, and assets (through 
targeted actions focused on the marginalised beneficiaries).

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
 
i. 
Climate change problem 
Mitigation needs 
B.1.1. Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica 
heavily rely on imported fossil fuels for 
electricity, contributing significantly to 
their GHG emissions: The energy 
sectors in the BMCs that are participating 
in Phase I are characterized by a 
continued 
dependence 
(to 
varying 
degrees) on imported fossil fuels. Despite 
recent efforts to reduce this dependency, 
fossil fuels remain an important element 
of each country’s electricity generation 
mix.  As a result, electricity generation is 
responsible for a significant proportion of 
total annual GHG emissions in Barbados, 
Belize, and Jamaica. Other sectors that contribute significantly to total annual GHG emissions in these 
BMCs include road transport, industry, agriculture and land-use change & forestry. 
B.1.2. The Governments of Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica have each outlined clear strategies for addressing 
climate change and reducing emissions, initiatives that will be supported by the IUS programme. While 
Belize acts as a net carbon sink and the emissions from Barbados and Jamaica are comparatively lower 
than those of many high-emitting countries worldwide, all three nations have committed to ambitious goals 
to contribute to global carbon emission reduction targets. The following section provides a summary of the 
mitigation needs of these BMCs as derived from the Baseline Assessment. For detailed information, please 
refer to Annex 2b. 
Mitigation rationale 
Barbados: 
B.1.3. Emissions profile: Barbados' GHG emissions are mostly attributed to four key sectors: energy, waste, 
industrial processes, and agriculture.  
Figure 3: Barbados’s Energy Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Source Category (2000 – 2021) 
 
Source: Climatewatch Data 
 
Figure 2: Total emissions vis-a-vis energy sector emission 
(excl. industrial processes, etc.) in the three BMCs 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Barbados (2021)
Belize (2022)
Jamaica (2021)
Emissions (MT CO2e)
Total emissions
Energy sector emissions

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
 
 
6 Obtained by subtracting the 2008 emissions from the 2030 projected economy-wide BAU emissions 
7 Obtained by dividing  
B.1.4. Emission reduction targets: Barbados has established climate targets as well as international 
commitments and policies to reduce its GHG emissions across all sectors, including the energy sector. 
The table below summarizes these commitments: 
Table 1: Babados’ relevant international and climate commitments, policies, and climate targets 
Document 
Institution (date) 
Key points 
NDC 
Ministry of 
Environment and 
National Beautification 
(2021) 
By 2025: ↓ 20%* emissions ↓ 35%** emissions. Total 
reduction of 705 CO2e*** 
By 2030: ↓ 35%* emissions ↓ 70%** emissions. Total 
reduction of 1,459 CO2e*** 
Barbados National 
Energy Policy 
(BNEP) 2019-2030 
Ministry of Energy and 
Water Resources 
(2019) 
100% renewable energy by 2030: Solar centralised (205 
MW); Solar distributed (105 MW); Wind onshore (150 MW); 
Wind offshore (150 MW); Biomass and Waste-To-Energy (15 
MW); and Centralised and distributed energy storage (200 
MW) 
The Sustainable 
Energy Framework 
for Barbados 
(SEFB) 
Government of 
Barbados (2010) 
The framework seeks to achieve a reduction of Barbados’s 
dependence on fossil fuel through the diversification of the 
country’s energy matrix and its reduction to oil price volatility 
through the formulation of policy and regulation, promote 
measure to mitigate GHGs, and support institutional 
strengthening. 
*unconditional, ** conditional, upon international support, *** against the 2008 base year 
B.1.5. Associated current and projected emissions from the sector without the program: The Second 
National Communication from Barbados submitted to the UNFCCC in 2018 reported total emissions of 1.4 
Mt CO2e in 2010 for the energy sector. While the NDC included an economy-wide Business as Usual 
(BAU) emission projection, it did not disaggregate by sector. The economy-wide BAU emission projections 
for 2030 is 1.9 Mt CO2e, while the emissions for the NDC base year (2008) is 2.1Mt CO2e. Hence, the 
projected economy-wide emission reductions by 2030 is 165 kt CO2e 6, which is an average annual 
decrease in emissions by 7.5 kt CO2e since 2009.7 This is equivalent to a 0.35% annual decrease in 
emissions from the 2008 base year emission values, based on the assumption that the emissions reduction 
is uniform across the years. In order to project energy emissions, the 0.35% annual emission reduction 
was then applied to the 2010 emissions for the energy sector (1.4 Mt CO2e). Based on this, the projected 
emissions from Barbados’s energy sector in 2030 is estimated at 1.3 Mt CO2e. 
Belize 
B.1.6. Emissions profile: Emissions from Belize are attributed to two key sectors, energy and transport. The 
following figure highlights GHG emissions across key sectors over the past years.

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
 
8 Belize. 2024 National Inventory Document; Emissions data not available for 2007, 2008,  20010, 2011, 2013, 2014 and 
2016. 
Figure 4: Belize emissions across key sectors 
 
Source: CPCS analysis – data from UNFCCC8 
B.1.7. Emission reduction targets:  Belize has established climate targets as well as international 
commitments and policies to reduce its GHG emissions across all sectors, including the energy sector. 
The table below summarizes these commitments: 
Table 2: Belize’s relevant international and climate commitments, policies, and climate targets 
Document 
Institution (date) 
Key points 
NDCs 
Government of Belize 
(2021) 
Between 2021 and 2030: Total avoidance of 5,647 KtCO2e 
By 2030: Avoidance of 44 KtCO2e in the national electricity 
supply sector and 75% share of renewables in generation. 
Belize 
Low 
Emissions 
Development 
Strategy (LED) and 
Action Plan 
Belize National Climate 
Change Office (2019) 
By 2050: Elimination of the majority of its gross carbon 
emissions. 
Proposes 12 actions for reducing emissions in the energy sector 
by 2050. 
Horizon 2030 
Ministry of Economic 
Development (2010) 
Reference to the promotion of green energy and proposes 5 
actions. 
The National Energy 
Policy Framework 
Government of Belize 
(2011) 
The policy has the goal to: Promote sustainable energy for 
national development; Foster energy-efficient culture; Minimize 
energy costs and disaster impacts; Mitigate supply shocks and 
price volatility. 
The National Climate 
Resilience 
Investment 
Plan 
2013 
Ministry of Finance and 
Economic 
Development (2013) 
Proposes actions to render the energy sector of Belize more 
resilient to the impacts of climate change. 
The National Climate 
Change 
Policy, 
Strategy and Action 
Plan 
(NCCPSAP), 
2015-2020 
Ministry 
of 
Forestry, 
Fisheries 
and 
Sustainable 
Development (MFFSD) 
(2014) 
The policy seeks to achieve the mainstreaming and integration 
of Climate Change adaptation and mitigation at all levels of 
development planning. The strategy for the energy sector 
entails the elaboration of appropriate policy tools and 
instruments to advance energy efficiency, speed up the 
adoption of renewable energy and transit to clean production.

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
 
9 Belize Low Emission Development Strategy (2021) 
B.1.8. Associated current and projected emissions from the sector without the program 
The emissions attributable to Belize’s electricity sector in 2020 were estimated at 170 kt CO2e, excluding 
emissions associated with imported electricity whose value for the same year was estimated at 106 kt CO2e9. 
Hence, the 2020 total emissions from the electricity sector including imported and domestic production were 
276 kt CO2e. The Low Emission Development Strategy (LEDS) of Belize assumes an annual BAU energy 
consumption growth rate of 3%. Based on this, the BAU emissions for the electricity sector (domestic plus 
imports) in 2030 is projected to be 371 kt CO2e.  
Jamaica 
B.1.9. Emissions profile: Jamaica’s energy sector has been the largest source of CO2 emissions in the last 
two decades.  
Figure 5: Jamaica emissions across key sectors 
 
Source: International Energy Agency (2023) 
B.1.10. Emission reduction target: Jamaica’s international commitments, policies and climate targets related 
to the energy sector are presented below. 
Table 3: Jamaica’s relevant international and climate commitments, policies, and climate targets 
Document 
Institution (date) 
Key points 
NDCs 
Government of 
Jamaica (2020) 
GHGs reductions from the electricity generation and energy 
use sectors and land use change and forestry, of between 
25.4%* and 28.5%**. 
National Policy on 
Environmental 
Management 
Systems 
Ministry of Economic 
Growth and Job 
creation (2017) 
The policy has as its overall goal the promotion, certification, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of environmental 
management systems in order to curb environmental impacts 
and enhance efficiencies. 
National Energy 
Policy 2009-2030 
Ministry of Energy and 
Mining (2010) 
Revision of the Energy Policy Green Paper 2006-2020. 
20% of renewable energy in the energy mix by 2030 by 
exploring the further development of renewable resources 
such as biofuels, wind, solar and hydro. 
*unconditional, ** conditional, upon international support

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
 
 
10 Jamaica’s Third National Communication (2018) 
11 The emissions data is as per the officially published document by the three participating BMCs. These documents include 
the NDCs, the national communications. None of the participating BMCs have officially published their latest emissions data.   
12 UNFCC (2017). Caribbean Marine Climate Change Report Card. 
13 The Caribbean Development Bank (2020).  The state of the Caribbean Climate. 
 
B.1.11. Associated current and projected emissions from the sector without the program 
The emissions from the energy sector of Jamaica in 2012 was reported to be 7.4 Mt CO2e, out of which 2.8 
Mt CO2e was attributed to heat and electricity production10. As per Jamaica’s revised NDCs, BAU emissions 
in the energy sector are projected to reach 8.2 Mt CO2e by 2030. 
B.1.12. The IUS Programme will support the BMCs to achieve this vision through the provision of concessional 
financing which will drive investment in RE and EE measures. The attributable emissions from the energy 
sectors11 for each of the three countries are shown in Figure 2. 
B.1.13. To deliver on their emission reduction targets, it is of paramount importance that BMCs scale 
up the use of RE and EE measures. The need for such investments is reinforced by the fact that electricity 
demand in these countries is expected to increase over the coming decades as their economies grow. 
Consequently, the countries are working to reduce the dependence of their energy systems and energy-
intensive sectors (e.g. tourism, agriculture, industry) on fossil fuels. Opportunities for doing so are 
increasing and seen as critical to the attainment of climate change and sustainable development goals but 
may simultaneously further increase overall demand for electricity. 
Adaptation needs 
B.1.14. The Caribbean region, including Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica, is already facing, and will 
continue to face, more intense storms, floods, droughts, rising sea levels, and higher 
temperatures.12 The rise in temperature in the Caribbean is expected to gradually increase across all 
seasons consistent with global warming, through to the end of the century.13.  All BMCs broke temperature 
records in 2023, experiencing the hottest days in the last 20 years. More recently, in April 2024, Belize 
recorded the highest temperature observed in any month for the second consecutive year. These extreme 
temperatures can lead to heat stress, negatively impacting human health and well-being. Active cooling 
solutions, such as energy-efficient air conditioning, can help alleviate these issues. Additionally, pairing PV 
generation with AC demand can flatten the consumption curve during peak hours. The IUS Programme 
will support beneficiaries in accessing these adaptation measures, increasing resilience against heat 
stress. 
 
Table 4: Historical and projected climate change impacts for the BMCs 
Relevant changes in climatic conditions 
Barbados 
Historical:  Since the 1960s, Barbados has experienced a notable increase in air temperature by 
approximately 0.14°C per decade, largely influenced by the El Niño Southern Oscillation, which significantly 
impacts the island's climate by dictating weather patterns and intensity. Additionally, located within the 
hurricane belt, Barbados is prone to natural hazards like hurricanes, floods, droughts, and landslides, 
especially during the hurricane season from June to November, with a peak in activity from September to 
November, as evidenced by severe damage from hurricanes such as Elsa in 2021 and Tomas in 2010. 
Projected:    Modelling conducted under the CMIP6 framework, featured in the World Bank Climate Change 
Knowledge Portal (CCKP), projects a significant rise in the mean annual temperatures of Barbados under a 
high emissions scenario (SSP3-7.0). By the end of the century, temperatures are expected to reach 
29.07°C, up from the 1995 baseline of 26.11°C (see Figure 7). Additionally, maximum temperatures are 
projected to increase by 3.5% to 13% by the 2100s across scenarios, relative to the same baseline. This 
data suggests a general rise in maximum temperatures throughout the year, peaking slightly from August 
to October. Minimum temperatures are expected to see a greater increase than maximum temperatures,

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
 
 
14 Caribbean Development Bank (2020). The state of the Caribbean Climate. 
15 GFDRR (2020). ThinkHazard. Barbados. 
with projections showing a 4% to 18% rise across different scenarios compared to the baseline temperature 
of 25.43°C in 1995. These projections are consistent with data from more detailed, downscaled modelling 
efforts. 14 Despite these projections, the current risk associated with extreme heat is considered low, 
indicating a 5% to 25% chance of experiencing at least one instance of prolonged extreme heat exposure, 
potentially leading to heat stress, in the next five years.15 
Barbados is projected to start to face heat stress from the 2040s onwards, as well as an increase in humidity 
during the summer season is anticipated. Although there is a lack of detailed data on the adoption of cooling 
technologies in Barbados, the tourism sector, a significant part of the country's economy, has highlighted in 
its National Cooling Strategy the rising demand for air conditioning. 
 
 
Source: World Bank. Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Information retrieved on February 2024. 
Belize 
Historical:  According to the World Bank CCKP, Belize has experienced a significant warming trend, with 
mean annual temperatures rising by 0.45°C since 1960, at an average rate of 0.10°C per decade. From 
1960 to 2022, surface temperatures increased by 0.81°C. This period also saw a marked change in 
temperature patterns, with hot days and nights increasing by 67 days per year from 1960 to 2003, while cold 
days and nights decreased by 21 days per year.  
Projected:  Modelling conducted under the CMIP6 framework, featured in the World Bank CCKP, projects 
a significant rise in the mean annual temperatures of Belize under a high emissions scenario (SSP3-7.0).  
Temperatures are anticipated to increase by 1.05°C (0.88°C-1.33°C) by 2030 and are projected to reach 
29.45°C (28.07°C-30.68°C) by the end of the century, from a baseline of 25.4°C (24.95°C-25.73°C) in 1995 
(see Figure 9).  Days with temperatures above 30°C are projected to increase by 74-175% across scenarios 
by the 2100s from 1995 baseline of 122 days (90 days-149 days). Days with temperatures above 35°C are 
projected to increase an average of 6 days per decade by 2100s (SSP3-7.0), with higher-than-average 
increase in days from April to September. Nights with temperatures above 26°C are projected to increase 
by 307-430% across scenarios from 1995 baseline of 7 days (3 days-13 days) by the end of the century.  
Beginning in the 2030s, Belize is anticipated to face a significant escalation in heat stress risks, even under 
the more optimistic SSP2-4.5 scenario (see Figure 10). 
24
26
28
30
32
1950
1980
2010
2040
2070
210
Hist. Ref. Per., 1950-2014
SSP1-2.6
SSP2-4.5
SSP3-7.0
SSP5-8.5
Figure 7: Heatplot for Heat Index Heat Risk 
Categorization (SSP2-4.5) – Barbados 
Figure 6: Projected (CMIP6) changes in average annual 
temperatures in Barbados

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
 
 
16 GFDRR (2020). ThinkHazard. Jamaica. 
Heat stress is likely to constitute a major challenge for Belize and other Caribbean countries as the climate 
changes over the coming decades. These impacts are expected to be particularly pronounced in the summer 
months. Indeed, although humidity levels in Belize tend to be consistently high throughout the year (often 
between 75-85%), they are typically highest during the rainy/wet season that occurs during the summer. 
These are the same months during which temperatures and temperature extremes (hot days, hot nights) 
are projected to increase the most over the coming decades, this highlights the need for Belize to increase 
uptake of/access to cooling solutions. In 2022, penetration of cooling technologies in Belize was 67%. 
 
 
Source: World Bank. Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Information retrieved on February 2024. 
Jamaica 
Historical:  As outlined in the World Bank CCKP maximum, average, and minimum temperatures are all 
exhibiting an increasing linear trend. Since 1960, average surface temperatures have increase by an 
average of 0.11°C per decade, maximum surface temperatures have increased by 0.08°C and minimum 
temperatures have increased by 1.04°C.   
 
Projected:  Modelling undertaken in the context of CMIP6, as featured in the World Bank CCKP, projects 
that the mean annual temperatures in Jamaica will increase moderately from 25.58°C (25.35°C - 25.8°C) in 
1995 under the most optimistic scenario (SSP1-2.6) reaching 26.52°C (26.12°C - 26.89°C) by the end of 
the century. However, this scenario is highly unlikely given the current global GHG emissions trajectories.  
Comparatively, under an intermediate scenario (SSP3-7.0), temperature is anticipated to increase by 0.88°C 
(0.6°C-1.11°C) by 2030 and is projected to reach 28.77°C (28.01°C-29.64°C) by the end of the century. 
Additionally, the risk of extreme heat is classified as medium, indicating that there is more than a 25% 
chance of experiencing at least one period of prolonged exposure to extreme heat, leading to heat stress, 
within the next five years.16  
The effects of heat stress have become increasingly evident in Jamaica. Schools, for instance, have 
reported that extreme heat has negatively impacted students' learning and well-being due to inadequate 
ventilation and cooling systems.  In response, the Jamaican government has initiated pilot programs to 
install air-conditioning units in 30 schools.  Additionally, the Jamaica Public Service Company has noted a 
significant increase in electricity demand, attributed to the rising use of cooling technologies.  Furthermore, 
the Government of Jamaica has issued warnings to the population about the dangers of heat exposure, 
including heat-related illnesses such as heat exhaustion, heat rash, heat cramps, and most severely, heat 
stroke, which can be fatal.  
Figure 9: Heatplot for Heat Index Heat Risk 
Categorization (SSP2-4.5) – Belize 
24
26
28
30
32
1950
1980
2010
2040
2070
2100
Hist. Ref. Per., 1950-2014
SSP1-2.6
SSP2-4.5
SSP3-7.0
SSP5-8.5
Figure 8: Projected (CMIP6) changes in average annual 
temperatures in Belize

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
 
 
17 GFDRR (2020). ThinkHazard 
18 World Bank, Climate Knowledge Portal. Heat Risk. 
19 IRENA (2021). Bracing for Climate Impact: Renewable as a climate change adaptation strategy. 
20 Assessment of the country as outlined in the previous sections. 
 
 
 Source: World Bank. Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Information retrieved on February 2024. 
 
The programme is expected to increase the adaptation potential of all three countries by building resilience for 
customers and the grid. The region is expected to experience more frequent and severe storms, 
including flooding, storm surges, and other severe weather events that have the high potential to 
damage power sector infrastructure. Customers who are part of the program to install distributed 
energy resources such as solar rooftops with energy storage will be far more resilient to power 
disruptions from severe weather events. In addition, DER will support grid resilience by alleviating 
pressure on the grid during increased demand for active cooling solutions like air conditioning due to 
high temperatures through localized energy generation and storage. 
 
Table 5: Risk of climate hazard 
 
Risk of climate 
hazard1718 
Examples of adaptation co-benefits19,20 
Climate impact/ Hazard 
Ba 
B 
J 
Key risk 
Energy services 
Temperature 
rise/ 
Extreme heat 
 
 
M 
H 
H 
Heat-related illnesses, 
cardiovascular and 
respiratory problems, 
increased risk of infectious 
diseases, and strain on 
infrastructure and services. 
 
Air conditioning technologies 
can alleviate the risks 
associated with extreme heat 
by providing a cool and 
comfortable indoor 
environment, offering relief 
from heat-related stressors, 
and enhancing overall well-
being, while also providing a 
refuge during heatwaves. 
Natural Disaster/Extreme 
events:  
Cyclone, 
Floods, 
Droughts, Heat waves 
H 
H 
H 
Loss 
of 
power 
due 
to 
infrastructure disruptions on 
the power supply caused by 
infrastructure 
damage, 
Relocatable Distributed off-grid 
renewable energy technologies 
(RETs), mitigate disruptions in 
power supply by decentralizing 
generation, providing islanded 
Figure 10: Projected (CMIP6) changes in average annual 
temperatures in Jamaica 
24
26
28
30
1950
1980
2010
2040
2070
2100
Hist. Ref. Per., 1950-2014
SSP1-2.6
SSP2-4.5
SSP3-7.0
SSP5-8.5
Figure 11: Heatplot for Heat Index Heat Risk 
Categorization (SSP2-4.5) – Jamaica

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
 
 
21 Government of Barbados (2010). Barbados National Assessment Report. 
22 Countrymeters (2023). Barbados Population. 
23 PopulationU (2023). Barbados Population.  
24 Nations Encyclopedia (2023). Barbados – Services.  
25 Government of Barbados (2010). National Environmental Summary. 
overload, 
or 
overdemand, 
and load shedding. . 
operation during grid outages, 
reducing the overall demand 
through load reduction and 
peak shaving, and serving as a 
redundant source of power.  
provide 
immediate 
energy 
access. Installation of flexible 
systems, such as solar PV and 
battery storage systems, that 
can be quickly deployed or 
removed in the event of natural 
disasters. 
Labels: H = High, M = Medium, L = Low.  Countries: Ba = Barbados, B = Belize, J = Jamaica 
B.1.15. The IUS Programme aims to facilitate the adoption of renewable energy and energy-efficient 
technologies, supporting countries to address the above-described needs/challenges by: (i) 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and accelerating the transition away from reliance on fossil 
fuels; and (ii) increasing resilience against the mounting risk of heat stress in the Caribbean. 
Additionally, the integration of Distributed Energy Resources (DERs) into the grid will enhance its resilience 
by diversifying the sources of electricity generation and peak shaving the demand. This diversification 
means that the grid will be powered by electricity generated from various energy resources and generation 
facilities. 
 
ii. 
Baseline and context 
B.1.16. Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica, as Small Island Developing States (SIDS) in the Caribbean, face 
common challenges inherent to their geographical and socio-economic contexts. These include 
vulnerability to natural disasters, reliance on tourism and agriculture, and the impacts of climate change, 
such as increasing temperatures, sea-level rise and extreme weather events. Despite varying geographic 
characteristics—with Belize on the mainland and Barbados and Jamaica as islands—all three countries 
strive for sustainable development, environmental conservation, and climate resilience. They also share 
developmental challenges such as resource management, food security, and economic diversification, 
underscored by a collective commitment to overcoming these obstacles through regional cooperation and 
policy initiatives. 
 
B.1.17. A summary of relevant baseline conditions and characteristics in the three participating BMCs 
is included below. More information is available in the Baseline Assessment Report – see Annex 2b. 
Table 6: Context/baseline conditions in the three participating BMCs 
Context of targeted BMCs 
Barbados 
Barbados, located in the eastern Caribbean, is a 34 km long and 23 km wide 21 island nation 
characterized by its limestone composition, which contributes to its renowned white sand beaches 
and clear waters. With a diverse population of approximately 290,000,22 mainly of African descent,23 
the nation boasts a high-income economy, heavily reliant on tourism, finance, and international 
business. 24  Despite its economic success, Barbados encounters environmental challenges like 
climate change, yet maintains a commitment to sustainable practices. The geography, featuring a relatively flat terrain 
rising gently to the central highland region, allows for a concentrated population along the coasts.25

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
 
 
26 From BLPC during virtual stakeholder consultation dated January 25, 2023. 
27 From BLPC during virtual stakeholder consultation dated January 25, 2023. 
28 EMERA 2021 Annual Report. 
29 Barbados Light and Power Company Ltd - Application Pursuant to Section 16 Of the Utilities Regulation Act Cap. 282 Of 
the Laws of Barbados for A Review of Electricity Rates Volume 3.  September 2021 
30 Countrymeters, 2022. Belize Population.  
31 UNFPA (2023). About Belize. 
32 World Bank (2023). GDP per Capita (Current US$)-Belize.  
33 Britannica (2023). Economy of Belize.  
34 GOV.UK (2023). Foreign Travel Advice Belize.  
35 Government of Belize. Belize's Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCsv), United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change. 
36 2021 Annual Report.  Belize Electricity Ltd. 
37 Countrymeters (2022). Jamaica’s population.  
38 Minority Rights (2023). Minorities and Indigenous Peoples in Jamaica.  
 
Electricity sector:  The Barbados Light & Power Company (BLPC) holds a monopoly on electricity 
generation, transmission, and distribution. Since 2018, Independent Power Producers (IPPs) have been 
allowed, enhancing the solar energy contribution.26 As of January 2023, distributed generation systems 
had a capacity of approximately 80 MW, with about 500 MW of renewable projects under 
development.27  As of 2020, BLPC served 131,522 customers, with a peak demand of 141 MW and an installed capacity 
of about 276 MW, predominantly oil-fired.28 Renewable energy contributed 7.20% of total generation in 2021. Efforts to 
expand renewable generation include the addition of solar PV farms and energy storage devices to improve grid stability. 
The energy sector aims for 100% renewable sources by 2030, with distributed generation expected to play a key role. 
The Renewable Energy Rider (RER) and Feed-in Tariff (FIT) programs have been instrumental in increasing solar PV 
and wind contributions.29 Energy efficiency measures and the diversification of the energy mix are ongoing to reduce 
emissions and enhance sustainability. 
Belize 
Belize, located on the Caribbean coast of Central America, is distinguished by its diverse ecosystems, 
including the Belize Barrier Reef, the second largest in the world. With a land area of 22,960 km² and 
a population of approximately 421,754,30 it boasts a multicultural society with a mix of Indigenous, 
Mestizo, Creole, and Afro-Amerindian heritage. 31 Belize's economy is classified as upper-middle-
income by the World Bank, 32 despite facing challenges such as poverty and unemployment. Its 
economy is supported by agriculture, tourism, and services, with significant contributions from the 
barrier reef through tourism and fishing.33 The country is characterized by its tropical climate, experiencing significant 
variability in rainfall and temperatures, which, along with its location, makes it susceptible to climate change and natural 
disasters like hurricanes. Belize's commitment to protecting its natural heritage is evident in its extensive network of 
protected areas, encompassing marine reserves, national parks, and nature reserves. Despite its beauty and 
biodiversity, Belize confronts issues related to food security and safety, with high rates of violent crime in certain areas.34 
Electricity sector:  Belize Electricity Limited (BEL), regulated by the Public Utilities Commission, is 
Belize's sole electricity provider, selling approximately 561 GWh in 2021 with a peak demand of 104 
MW. While Belize has made progress relating to use of alternative energy sources such as biomass 
and hydropower, petroleum-based fuels still represent the main sources of energy. Electricity 
generation witnessed slight increases in the use of petroleum fuels combined with the continuous use 
of biomass, hydropower and electricity importation from Mexico. Despite low solar PV contribution, efforts are being 
made to increase distributed generation, with regulatory frameworks for Distributed Generation (DG) under 
development. BEL, connecting over 170,000 customers across all major municipalities, is expanding its service range 
to include DG, allowing customers to sell excess energy back to the grid. Electricity consumption patterns show 
commercial and residential sectors as primary consumers, with street lighting demand expected to decrease due to an 
ongoing LED replacement program. Belize aims for a 75% renewable energy target by 2030, encouraging solar PV 
adoption despite the lack of a formal interconnection policy.35 Projections suggest an increase in electricity demand, 
with BEL planning to enhance grid electrification, particularly in rural areas, and reduce emissions through increased 
renewable energy use and energy efficiency measures. Electricity rates in Belize are relatively low, with tiered pricing 
to support various customer classes.36 
Jamaica 
Jamaica, located in the West Indies, is the third largest island in the Caribbean, positioned south of 
Cuba and west of Haiti. With a multi-racial population of over 2.9 million,37 Jamaica's demographic 
fabric includes African, European, East Indian, and Chinese ancestries. 38 The island's population 
density stands at 272 persons per square kilometre, reflecting a diverse yet densely settled nation. The 
economy of Jamaica, as of the third quarter of 2022, showcased a 5.6 percent year-on-year

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
 
 
39 Trading Economics (2023). Jamaica GDP Annual Growth Rate.  
40 Britannica (2023). Economy of Jamaica.  
41 Government of Jamaica (2018).  
42 Ministry of Science Energy and Technology (2016). 
expansion,39 evidencing recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic's impacts with contributions from agriculture, forestry, 
fishing, and manufacturing. 40 Despite the economy's gradual recovery, Jamaica grapples with challenges such as 
income inequality and a high vulnerability to climate change, with significant risks including sea level rise and changing 
rainfall patterns impacting its agriculture-dependent economy. Jamaica's natural beauty and cultural heritage, alongside 
its challenges, portray a complex tapestry of development, resilience, and ongoing efforts to mitigate environmental and 
economic vulnerabilities. 
 
Electricity sector:  The Jamaican electricity sector includes the Jamaica Public Services Company 
Limited (JPS) as the primary utility and various privately owned Independent Power Producers (IPPs), 
servicing 98% of the population. JPS, owned by Marubeni and East West Power, alongside the 
Government of Jamaica, holds a monopoly on transmission and distribution with a license until 2027. 
The sector has seen a renewable energy increase to almost 18% by 2022, with the national target set 
at 30% by 2030, potentially increasing to 50% as suggested by the Prime Minister. 41 Despite the shift towards 
renewables, fossil fuels dominate the energy mix, contributing to high CO2 emissions. Electricity demand is expected to 
grow, driven by industrial expansion and increased residential and commercial usage. Distributed generation initiatives 
like the Net Billing Programme aim to enhance renewable energy contributions.42 However, high installation costs and 
financing challenges limit broader access to renewable technologies. The government's efforts to integrate more 
renewables and improve energy efficiency are anticipated to shape future energy demand and supply, aiming for 
significant energy savings and reduced emissions by 2035. Electricity costs, among the highest globally due to reliance 
on expensive fuel sources, are subject to government interventions to alleviate impacts on residential customers. 
 
iii. 
BMCs readiness for programme deployment 
B.1.18. All three countries have expressed a strong interest in implementing IUS to enhance their 
investment in distributed energy, EE, and related sectors. This commitment is evidenced by their 
proactive efforts towards institutionalising and launching IUS frameworks. By adopting IUS, these nations 
aim to scale up their energy initiatives, fostering sustainable development and reducing their carbon 
footprints. In addition, the BMCs are making positive institutional and regulatory improvements, motivated 
to support a strong and effective IUS rollout.  
B.1.19. Many participating BMCs have sought regulatory approval from their respective electricity regulators 
for the approval of an IUS Pilot Programme, supported by GIZ and Caricom, to advance the BMCs’ 
readiness for full-scale programme deployment. The programme design of the IUS Pilot Programme is 
similar to the programme design as elaborated under Section B3 of this funding proposal i.e., the utilities 
funding energy efficiency retrofits and renewable energy installations through an on-bill repayment 
mechanism. However, the regulatory approval in the BMCs is delayed primarily due to capacity constraints 
and the regulatory clarity required for a disruptive and innovative business model for the promotion of 
DERs. The following presents the current readiness status of each BMC studied in terms of their readiness 
to support and implement the IUS programme, specifically in terms of the legal, regulatory and institutional 
frameworks.  Detailed information about the readiness of BMCs can be found in Annex 2, Feasibility Study. 
The TA planned under Component 1 of the IUS Programme is designed to accelerate country readiness 
by providing adequate capacity support to the key stakeholders in the first year of Programme 
Implementation (“Programme Year 1” or “PY1”). 
B.1.20. Barbados:  Our assessment of the level of IUS readiness in Barbados in terms of the legal, regulatory 
and institutional frameworks is outlined below.

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
 
 
B.1.21. Belize: Our assessment of the level of IUS readiness in Belize in terms of the legal, regulatory and 
institutional frameworks is outlined below.  
 
 
B.1.22. Jamaica: Our assessment of the level of IUS readiness in Jamaica in terms of the legal, regulatory 
and institutional frameworks is outlined below.

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
 
 
Related projects and interventions 
B.1.23. National stakeholders and international development partners have been implementing (and are 
continuing to implement) various initiatives to support the sustainable energy transition. Key initiatives are 
summarized below, along with the lessons learnt that have been considered (and informed the design of) 
the proposed IUS Programme as well as a brief description of how it is complementary to these other 
efforts. 
Table 7: Key national initiatives to promote RE and EE in the participating BMCs. 
Country/Programme  
Description 
Lessons learnt  
How the IUS programme 
complements these 
initiatives 
Barbados 
Sustainable Energy 
Investment Programme 
(Energy Smart Fund 1) 
The Energy Smart Fund, 
implemented by EGFL in 
coordination with the 
Ministry, offered technical 
and financial support for 
renewable energy and 
energy efficiency projects, 
including pre-investment 
studies, subsidized loans, 
and rebates for energy-
efficient lighting and Acs. 
From February 2011 to 
June 2017, the $10 million 
program offered technical 
assistance, 
energy-
efficient LED vouchers, 
and AC rebates, benefiting 
businesses with 28 grants 
for 
energy 
studies, 
distributing over 57,000 
LEDs. 
Similar design elements 
have been considered 
when preparing the IUS 
Programme. 
The Energy Smart Fund 1 
concentrated only on 
promoting energy efficient 
technologies through the 
Ministry. The IUS 
Programme on the other 
hand covers wider range 
of both renewable energy 
and energy efficiency 
technologies and 
services, establishes a 
long-term sustainable 
market ecosystem 
through necessary 
reforms, and deploys a 
disruptive, facilitative, and 
inclusive business model. 
Barbados 
Sustainable Energy 
Investment Programme 
(Energy Smart Fund 2) 
The program expands on 
its predecessor to 
enhance renewable 
energy and energy 
efficiency among SMEs 
and the public sector, with 
a focus on project 
implementation, an AC 
rebate program, e-
mobility, and capacity 
The Energy Smart Fund 
2, valued at USD 45 
million, expands on its 
predecessor's work by 
enhancing renewable 
energy and energy 
efficiency in SMEs and 
the public sector, 
introducing e-mobility 
solutions, and 
emphasizing capacity 
The Energy Smart Fund 2 
is supporting SMEs to 
access funding through 
financial institutions – 
whereas the IUS 
programme aims to 
establish a business 
model and service 
offering that will make 
these technologies 
accessible to other

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
 
building for the Project 
Execution Unit. 
building. Approved in 
2019, its design features 
are incorporated into 
the IUS Programme, 
particularly the need to 
support pre-investment 
audits. 
segments of the market 
(i.e. those that are not as 
well served by existing 
financial institutions 
Barbados 
Public Sector Smart 
Energy Programme 
(PSSEP) 
The project provides a 
package of economic 
instruments targeted 
towards SMEs to improve 
renewable energy and 
energy efficiency 
adoption. This includes 
retrofits of government 
buildings, a pilot project 
for converting government 
fleets to EVs, and capacity 
building. 
Need for capacity building, 
institutional strengthening 
and 
public 
awareness 
particularly 
around 
professional and technical 
skills, etc.  
The IUS Programme 
design holistically 
considers these 
elements as part of the 
TA component. 
The PSSEP is focussed 
on improving energy 
consumption in 
government buildings with 
____. The IUS 
Programme on the other 
hand focuses on multiple 
end beneficiaries, multiple 
technologies and 
services, a TA component 
that supports market 
development and 
regulatory policy reforms, 
among other benefits. 
Barbados 
Disaster Risk and Energy 
Access Management 
(DREAM) project 
The program aimed to 
reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and enhance 
disaster risk reduction by 
improving the renewable 
energy policy framework, 
developing clean energy 
capacity, and 
demonstrating solar PV 
feasibility through a model 
tendering process and 
installation. 
The program highlighted 
the necessity for technical 
training 
in 
solar 
PV 
installation, 
public 
awareness, and capacity 
building. 
It 
developed 
procurement 
documents 
and a PV monitoring app 
to 
enhance 
system 
performance 
analysis. 
These insights and tools 
are integrated into the IUS 
program 
design 
for 
Barbados' 
implementation. 
Many learnings form 
this project like the 
need for training, etc. is 
included in the IUS 
Programme design. 
Furthermore, 
documentation and 
tools already developed 
under this project may 
be leveraged by 
Barbados to implement 
its IUS Programme. 
The DREAM project 
compliments the IUS 
Programme in many 
ways. The IUS 
Programme however 
offers more technologies 
and services, provides a 
team of international and 
local experts to support 
key energy sector 
stakeholders through the 
TA component, provides 
access to low-cost 
finance, ensures 
democratization of clean 
energy deployment.  
Belize 
Energy for Sustainable 
Development in the 
Caribbean (ESD) 
Being implemented in 
Antigua & Barbuda, 
Belize, Grenada, St. 
Lucia, and St. Vincent and 
the Grenadines, this 
project aims to improve 
energy efficiency and 
renewable energy 
technologies through 
policy and project 
demonstrations. It 
The IUS Programme both 
complements and 
supplements the multi 
country ESD programme 
in several ways. For 
instance, the IUS 
Programme design 
supports TSPs to 
enhance their service 
offering (moving toward 
being well capacitated 
Belize’s ESF project 
compliments the IUS 
programme in many 
ways. The IUS 
Programme however 
offers more technologies 
and services with the 
possibility to add newer 
technologies as per local 
demand, supports 
stakeholder’s capacity

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
 
involves retrofitting public 
buildings, implementation 
of new energy efficiency 
codes, and establishing 
blended-grant 
mechanisms via 
development banks to 
promote ESCOs. 
ESCOs), empowers end 
users to benefit from 
distributed RE and EE 
solutions, provides 
access to low-cost 
finance, improves the 
legal and regulatory 
environment. 
strengthening through the 
international and local 
experts under TA 
component, addresses 
cross-cutting elements 
such as gender and E&S, 
provides access to low-
cost finance, ensures 
democratization of clean 
energy deployment. 
Belize 
Energy Resilience for 
Climate Adaptation 
(ERCAP) 
The project aims to 
demonstrate solutions to 
enhance resilience of the 
energy system to climate 
change and extreme 
weather events. It 
includes long-term 
planning, demonstration 
measures, and project 
implementation support. 
BEL has already set up 
grievance redress 
mechanism under this 
project which may be 
leveraged / tailored to 
be used for the IUS 
programme.  
The IUS Programme is a 
market ecosystem 
development mechanism 
that also includes 
grievance redressal 
mechanism. The IUS 
Programme focusses on 
behind the meter 
distributed renewable 
energy and energy 
efficiency solutions 
primarily for residential 
and commercial 
customers.  
Jamaica 
Energy efficiency and 
conservation programme 
The programme is being 
implemented by the 
Ministry of Science, 
Energy, 
Telecommunications and 
Transport (MSET) at an 
approved funding of US$ 
20 million. The general 
objective of this program 
is to support the reduction 
of Jamaica’s dependency 
on oil consumption 
through the design and 
implementation of cost 
savings, EE and energy 
conservation (EC) 
measures in the public 
sector and reduce GHG 
emissions. The Program 
also aims at materializing 
the potential for EE and 
EC in public buildings and 
thus subsequently 
reduces energy 
consumption. 
Programme’s objectives 
broadly align with the IUS 
Programme objectives i.e. 
to lower reliance on fossil 
fuel and facilitate EE in 
the public sector. MSET 
can ensure programme 
coordination with the 
IUS Programme and 
leverage any 
frameworks and 
processes developed 
under this programme 
for expedited 
implementation of the 
IUS Programme. 
The energy efficiency and 
conservation programme 
focus on only on one 
sector and beneficiary. 
On the other hand, the 
IUS Programme covers 
both distributed 
renewable energy as well 
as energy efficiency. The 
IUS Programme focusses 
on a range of end 
beneficiaries. More 
technologies, services, 
and end beneficiaries 
may be added as per 
local requirements. 
Jamaica 
Jamaica’s energy 
management and 
efficiency programme 
The programme is being 
implemented by the MSET 
and ended in November 
2023. The programme 
seeks to promote energy 
efficiency in government 
facilities and fuel 
conservation in road 
Jamaica is experienced in 
reducing energy 
consumption in 
government buildings 
through this programme. 
Frameworks, 
processes, and 
procedures developed 
under the programme 
could be tailored and 
Jamaica’s energy 
management and 
efficiency programme 
focussed on reducing 
energy consumption in 
government buildings.  
On the other hand, the 
IUS Programme is 
broader as it covers both 
distributed renewable

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
 
 
43 USTDA. Success in Jamaica: LED Street Lights  
transportation by reducing 
fuel imports. 
used for expedited roll-
out of the IUS 
Programme.  
energy efficiency. The 
IUS Programme also 
focusses on more end 
beneficiaries. More 
technologies, services, 
and end beneficiaries 
may be added as per 
local requirements. 
Jamaica 
Smart LED streetlight 
programme 
JPS is aiming to install 
110,000 LED streetlights, 
as well as intelligent 
controls and metering 
capabilities for revenue 
generation. LED 
streetlights deliver 
enhanced reliability and 
significantly longer 
lifespans than traditional 
streetlights43. As of 2022, 
JPS has reported to have 
installed 105,000 
streetlights 
JPS can leverage its 
experience to deliver 
other distributed 
renewable energy and 
energy efficiency 
solutions as proposed 
under the IUS 
Programme. 
Smart LED streetlight 
programme focussed 
exclusively on installing 
LED streetlights to lower 
energy consumption. The 
IUS Programme, in 
additional to financing 
LEDs, also provides 
residential and 
commercial customers 
the option to avail other 
clean and energy efficient 
technologies and services 
at their premises. 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus 
diagram) 
Climate problem  
B.2a.1 The Caribbean region is currently grappling with two significant challenges: climate change, 
characterized rising temperatures, and an energy sector heavily dependent on imported fossil fuels, which 
substantially contribute to greenhouse gas emissions. Reflecting regional and global trends, the BMCs are 
experiencing severe climate change impacts, including intensified storms, floods, droughts, sea-level rise, 
and increasing temperatures. These changes are affecting not only the availability and supply of energy 
resources but also the transmission, distribution, operations, and energy demand. 
 
B.2a.2 Historical and projected climate change impacts show a trend of rising temperatures, increasing the 
risk of heat stress and severe weather events, which are expected to continue and intensify. For example, 
the International Energy Agency has noted that extreme heat increases the demand for cooling, with 
sustained average daily temperatures of 30°C typically leading to a 16% spike in weekly sales. Additionally, 
the BMCs are committed to ambitious goals to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by increasing the share of 
renewables in their energy mix and improving energy efficiency across all sectors. 
Goal  
B.2b.3 The IUS Programme aims to address the climate problem through a paradigm shift impact in the BMCs 
energy sector. This paradigm shift can be achieved IF the project establishes and operationalizes an innovative 
Integrated Utility Services (IUS) model by facilitating access to concessional financing, capacity building and 
regulatory reforms, THEN a paradigm shift will occur, leading to an accelerated transition to decentralized clean 
energy, increased energy security, and climate resilience across Barbados, Belize and Jamaica, BECAUSE a 
conducive and inclusive ecosystem for DER utilization will have been established that will lower GHG 
emissions, improve energy security and enhance climate resilience. 
 
B.2a.4 The proposed IUS Programme aims to reduce GHG emissions from the energy sector and 
enhance resilience to heat stress (cooling systems coupled with PV generation) in the three 
participating countries by scaling up investment in (and adoption/use of) distributed RE, EE and other 
DER technologies/measures. The Programme will accomplish this by addressing key barriers currently 
inhibiting businesses, homeowners, and other stakeholders from making such investments, including limited

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
 
 
44 Detailed programme design is available B.3. 
awareness, knowledge, and capacity; limited access to financing; limited risk appetite; limited availability of 
qualified ESCOs; and policy and regulatory frameworks that do not sufficiently incentivize investment in DERs.  
B.2a.5. To overcome these barriers to investment, the Programme will support the electric utilities in Barbados, 
Belize, and Jamaica to establish and operate the IUS Model44 as part of their regular business operations.  To 
accomplish this, the Programme will also address key barriers currently preventing utilities from implementing 
this model at scale, including internal capacity constraints; limited access to the concessional financing needed 
for the ‘launch’ phase of the IUS scheme; the need for complementary technical assistance (TA) to successfully 
begin operating such a scheme at scale; and other policy and regulatory barriers. In so doing, the programme 
will directly assist the three national electric utilities to support behind-the-meter investment in distributed RE, 
EE and other DERs among a critical mass of customers (mostly households and businesses, as well as some 
public sector entities), while also equipping the utilities and other stakeholders to continue scaling up 
investment using the IUS Model after Programme closure.  
Paradigm shift 
B.2a.6. The Programme aims to be a long-term sustainable, scalable, and replicable solution to address the 
BMCs, and, by extension the region, climate challenges. The Programme is envisaged to achieve the shift 
impact, as elaborated in the programme’s Goal Statement, by: 
(a) ensuring a robust market ecosystem to accelerate deployment of renewable energy technologies as well 
as energy efficiency solutions; 
(b) strengthening stakeholders’ institutional capacity to advance clean energy in the participating countries and 
help achieve climate targets; 
(c) strengthening the technical capacity of Technology Service Providers (TSPs) to cater to the needs of the 
market; 
(d) providing equal opportunity for women and other social groups (such as low-income households, women 
led households, etc.) to adopt clean energy solutions; and 
(e) providing simplified access to more affordable finance; etc. 
 
B.2a.7. The Theory of Change figure below elaborates the broader goals of the IUS programme.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12: IUS Programme Theory of Change

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
 
Outcomes  
B.2a.8.  To achieve the over-arching goal the Programme aims to deliver the following two main Outcomes 
and a corresponding intermediate Outcome: 
Outcome 1: Reduced GHG emissions through widespread adoption of RE, EE and other DER technologies.  
The Programme is expected to increase reliance on local energy resources to meet its energy needs. Since 
the local energy resources are primarily clean sources of energy, in the long-term the Programme is expected 
to continue to mitigate emissions from the energy sector. 
Outcome 2: Enhanced climate resilience and adaptation of beneficiaries to heat stress. The Programme will 
support energy efficiency solutions such as efficient ACs. The programme therefore provides direct long term 
heat stress adaptation benefits to the end beneficiaries. 
Outcome 3 (intermediate): Increased access to financing for clean energy investments, allowing utility 
customers to adopt RE, EE and other DER technologies at scale. 
 
 
Outputs 
B.2a.10: To achieve the two main Outcomes and one intermediate Outcome described above, the Programme 
will aim to deliver four Outputs. 
1. Output 1.1: Strengthened regulatory and institutional frameworks facilitating the deployment of distributed 
RE, EE and other DER technologies. The Programme will support the partner countries and the key 
stakeholders (i.e., energy ministry and the electricity regulator) to develop the necessary capacity and 
strengthen the regulatory policy environment in the country for smooth implementation and roll-out of the 
IUS programme. The programme will implement two Activities to support Output 1.1: – Activity 1.1.1: 
Immediately address regulatory barriers impeding the implementation of the IUS Model under Component 
2, and Activity 1.1.2: Address broader policy framework to strengthen prospects and incentives for 
investment in distributed RE, EE, and DERs – which are described in more detail in Section B.3 (below). 
2. Output 1.2: Enhanced capacity of customers to invest in distributed RE, EE and other DERs through the 
IUS Model. The Programme will also sensitize the customers in the participating countries to support the 
longer-term societal shift toward activities and investments that contribute to countries’ climate change 
goals and resilience. The Programme will implement three Activities to support Output 1.2: – Activity 1.2.1: 
Raise awareness of RE/EE opportunities and potential savings, Activity 1.2.2: Promote an inclusive and 
just IUS Model and associated services, and Activity 1.2.3: Provide customers with hands-on support to 
identify and develop distributed RE, EE, and DER sub-projects – which are described in more detail in 
Section B.3 (below). 
3. Output 1.3: Increased technical capacity of utilities, TSPs and other stakeholders to deploy and maintain 
distributed RE, EE and other DER technologies. The Programme will enhance regional capacity to promote 
and implement the IUS model. The Programme aims to achieve this through collaborative learning and 
knowledge exchange among participating countries, developing programme guiding documents like 
tailored implementation manuals, developing additional capacity for business development and cross-
cutting areas such as Environmental and Social (E&S) management, Monitoring and Reporting (M&R), 
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI), etc. The Programme will implement five Activities to support 
Output 1.3: Activity 1.3.1: Facilitate knowledge exchange among the targeted BMCs, Activity 1.3.2. 
Enhance Executing Entities’ and other stakeholder capacities to implement the IUS Model in a just transition 
context, Activity 1.3.3: Training for qualified (technology) service providers, notably TSPs, to support 
customers, Activity 1.3.4: Support information exchange with other (non-partner) countries including 
government, regulators, TSPs, and utilities, and Activity 1.3.5: Create a Community of Practice –  which 
are described in more detail in Section B.3 (below).

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
 
4. Output 2.1: Installation of distributed RE, EE and other DER technologies among a critical mass of utility 
customers, including households, businesses and public sector entities. The Programme will support the 
execution of a critical mass of distributed renewable energy and energy efficiency sub-projects at customer 
level that successfully generate or save energy and create cost savings for customers (described in more 
detail in Section B.3 below). There are many financial and non-financial barriers inhibiting the flow of 
financing to local private sector stakeholders for such investments, which the Programme aims to address 
through an accessible and concessional climate financing (Component 2) and complementary technical 
assistance and capacity-building support (Component 1). It is therefore important for the Programme to 
contribute to measurable progress in relation to the provision of sub-loans and adoption rates of eligible 
technologies and practices. 
 
Root causes and barriers 
B.2a.11: Based on a detailed review of available literature, as well as stakeholder consultations that were 
organised during the programme preparation period (between Q3 2022 and Q3 2023), numerous key factors 
were identified that are affecting and limiting the uptake of distributed renewable energy and energy efficiency 
solutions in the residential and small to medium commercial groups in the participating countries. Detailed 
barrier assessment and analysis is elaborated in Section B.3 Project/programme description and Annex 2: 
Feasibility Study. These factors are grouped into a more concise set of barriers, which are described below 
and reflected in the Theory of Change diagram above: 
Figure 13: Key barriers hindering the growth of behind the meter services 
Source: CPCS 
B.2a.12. Figure 16 summarises root causes hindering the growth of behind the meter services like distributed 
RE and EE in the participating BMCs, which include:

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
 
• 
Unclear legal and regulatory framework: BMCs need clearer legal or regulatory guidance on issues 
like DG tariffs/FIT and whether utilities can offer on-bill financing. There is also a lack of a standardized 
application/interconnection process. 
 
• 
Limited customer awareness and capacity: Customers often lack awareness of the benefits of the 
proposed technologies, affecting implementation smoothness. 
 
• 
Limited availability of TSPs providing end-to-end solutions: While there are TSPs with the 
necessary credentials, few can deliver comprehensive solutions. 
 
• 
Limited access to low-cost finance: Difficulty in securing financing due to being considered high-
risk, cumbersome processes for loan applications, and a lack of equitable financial products are 
significant barriers. 
 
• 
Risk adverse stakeholders: Both small electricity customers and financial institutions are hesitant to 
invest in behind-the-meter solutions, partly due to unclear risk assessments and high interest rates. 
 
• 
Limited technical standards: There is a need for globally accepted technical standards to ensure the 
standardization and quality of services. 
B.2a.13. In addition to the typical behind the meter barriers as detailed above, there are other areas specific to 
the BMCs that may impact IUS Programme roll-out. 
 
• 
Capacity constraints and model understanding: Regulatory authorities face capacity issues and 
apprehensions about approving novel business models, requiring additional stakeholder training. 
 
• 
Limited locally-available financing options: High local financing costs and limited access to low-
cost finance make it challenging for utilities to support the financial aspects of distributed RE, EE, and 
other DERs. 
• 
Limited distributed RE and EE ecosystem: A supportive ecosystem development is critical, 
requiring technical assistance for regulatory frameworks, TSP certification, customer engagement, and 
overcoming other ecosystem development barriers. 
 
B.2a.14 The activities of the IUS Programme, described in detail in Section B.3, have been designed to address 
the above barriers by targeting the root causes that have hindered the adoption of RE and EE technologies in 
the targeted BMCs. The following table illustrates how the IUS Programme activities will help overcome the 
identified barriers throughout the 6-year programme implementation period. 
Table 8: IUS Programme responses to barriers and root causes 
Barriers 
Root causes 
How the IUS Programme addresses these barriers and root causes 
Legal 
and 
regulatory 
• 
Unclear 
legal 
and 
regulatory 
framework 
• 
Risk 
averse 
stakeholders 
The programme will address this under sub-component 1.1, building on the 
work and assessments done through the ongoing Pilot Programme 
supported by GIZ and the CARICOM Secretariat, and guided by the 
baseline assessment that was conducted during the programme design and 
feasibility work. The TA that responds to these barriers and root causes 
include: 
• 
Prepare legal and regulatory note on existing laws/framework. 
• 
Assist stakeholders to prepare and secure approval of legal and 
regulatory amendments in the existing framework. 
• 
Support to develop any regulatory framework amendments necessary 
for smooth IUS roll-out (e.g., RE/FIT regulations, etc.) 
• 
Update/draft administrative or interconnection processes. 
• 
Streamline energy accounting and settlement processes. 
• 
Capacity building support to the regulatory authorities to review IUS 
related regulatory matters. 
• 
Support national stakeholders (Ministry, Regulator) to strengthen the 
policy and incentive framework to better support IUS investment.

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
 
• 
TA execution support including contract management supervision, 
reporting, and invoicing, etc. 
• 
Capacity building on matters related to GESI, E&S, M&R. 
Access to 
Finance 
• 
Limited access 
to 
low-cost 
finance 
• 
Risk 
averse 
stakeholders 
• 
The IUS model eliminates the need for households and businesses to 
secure a loan from (often risk averse) financial institutions to invest in 
DERs. The model also minimizes the investment risk to be borne by the 
customer.  The IUS model shifts investment risks from customers as the 
customers can now avail clean energy technologies or services with little 
to no capital investment. Interested customers can avail low-interest 
loans through utilities and install pre-assessed technologies from reliable 
technology providers, making DERs more affordable and secure. This 
reduces the financial burden and exposure to potential losses for 
customers.  
Limited 
customer 
demand 
and 
TSPs capacity 
• 
Limited 
customer 
awareness 
• 
Limited 
availability 
of 
qualified TSPs 
• 
Risk 
averse 
stakeholders 
Under output 1.2, the Programme will engage with a large pool of 
customers to increase their awareness of suitable DERs, as well as how 
the Programme can support them to adopt such technologies/measures. 
The Programme will also engage National Energy Consultants and 
strengthen the utility help desk to assist customers prepare sub-project 
applications. The programme also aims to connect customer with TSPs 
though in-person customer awareness sessions. The customers may 
connect with a TSP of their choice who may also assist in sub-project 
application preparation and submission. 
The TA that will address these barriers and root causes include: 
• 
Develop inclusive outreach strategies – direct to customer, technology 
specific. 
• 
Develop marketing and communication material. 
• 
Organize customer awareness sessions. 
• 
Set-up/strengthen utility customer help desk to address IUS related 
queries. 
• 
Develop basic energy savings calculator for customers and provide 
capacity building support to the TSPs 
Furthermore, IUS model also overcomes the barrier posed by the limited 
availability of qualified ESCOs by capacitating the electric utilities to take 
on similar functions (i.e. providing innovative financing solutions to 
deployment of DERs) – a role that they are already well suited to fulfil 
due to their technical capacity/expertise, as well as their existing 
networks and contractual relationships with households and businesses 
in the participating BMCs. 
Technical and 
institutional 
capacity 
• 
Limited 
technical 
standards 
• 
Risk 
averse 
stakeholders 
• 
The programme will strengthen the capacity of each participating electric 
utility to fully and effectively administer their IUS scheme through output 
1.3. In doing so, the Programme will reinforce the post-programme 
sustainability of these schemes and equip the utilities to expand these 
services to reach additional customers over the medium/long term. 
• 
The programme will address this barrier through output 1.1, which aims 
to support the broader range of policy and regulatory reforms needed to 
unlock investment in distributed RE, EE and other DERs. In doing so, the 
programme will strengthen incentives for additional customers to engage 
with their electric utilities to develop/deliver IUS sub-projects in the BMCs 
after programme closure, thereby strengthening the sustainability and 
transformational potential of this scheme in each country. 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
  
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-
emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry 
and land 
use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, 
well-being, 
food and 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystem
s and 
ecosystem 
services

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
 
water 
security 
Outcome 1 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 2 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
Outcome 3 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
 
Co-benefit 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1: 
Average 
annual cost 
reductions 
(nominal) per 
beneficiary due 
to energy 
savings. 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 2: 
Number of 
female 
beneficiaries of 
the IUS 
Programme  
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
i. 
Programme objectives 
B.3.1 The IUS Model is a mechanism to directly implement demand-side renewable energy and energy 
efficiency through utilities in an open market system. It is a model to support renewable energy and energy 
efficient technology deployment through a financing program that is administered by electric utilities. This 
programme would have the utilities launch and operate the IUS at a country-wide scale by supporting energy 
service companies, educating customers, and financing the installation of renewable energy and energy 
efficiency interventions. This programme funding proposal constitutes the first of two phases for the overall IUS 
Programme in the region; the current Phase I proposal will support three countries (Barbados, Belize, 
Jamaica) to implement IUS, while Phase II will result in a broader implementation and scale-up to other 
borrowing member countries in the Caribbean Region. Throughout the remainder of this funding 
proposal, “IUS Programme” is used to refer specifically to Phase I. 
B.3.2 The Programme aims to address the need for democratizing energy policy, increasing customers 
access to clean energy, reforming the business models of traditionally vertically integrated utilities, 
and enhancing utility capabilities for commercial financing of DERs. The IUS Programme is not only 
expected to foster an ecosystem conducive to sectoral sustainability but also facilitate regional learning and 
knowledge sharing, crucial for a unified approach to energy challenges in the Caribbean. The IUS Programme 
helps develop the much-needed market ecosystem for a sustained behind the meter solutions market in the 
Caribbean. The graphic below summarizes how the IUS Programme can help overcome current challenges in 
the transition towards more sustainable sources of energy.

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
 
Figure 14: Summary of IUS programme rationale 
 
Source: CPCS 
 
 
Source: CPCS

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
 
ii. 
Programme approach 
B.3.3 The IUS Programme will include a “national project” in each of the three countries to be executed 
by the national electric utility and overseen by the Ministry and regulator responsible for oversight of 
the electricity sector. Each project will include a series of sub-projects that supports various renewable 
energy, energy efficiency, and other DER technologies. Utility customers will first receive education and 
awareness about the options available to them and then they will choose to implement the technologies through 
registered qualified service providers that work closely with their electric utility. The utility will provide the upfront 
financing and contract qualified TSPs to procure and install priority technologies at the premises of interested 
customers/consumers, who will then repay the amount owed to the utility for the installation through their 
monthly electricity bill. A major barrier for the uptake of these technologies has historically been the high upfront 
cost to install them, so this Programme is expected to alleviate that pressure. 
B.3.4 The IUS Programme is an innovative solution that fosters collaboration. A typical behind-the-meter 
transaction involving business models like the IUS, involves government ministries, departments and agencies, 
utilities, system operators, independent power producers, technology service providers, customer and 
business associations, other clean energy facilitators and outreach providers, and lenders, among others. The 
following graphic provides an overview of the operational elements of the IUS Programme, including the key 
actors and components.  
Figure 15: IUS Programme Schematic 
Source: CPCS 
As indicated in the above graphic, the Caribbean IUS transaction, like other behind the meter transactions, 
involves several actors. These actors are public entities like the government ministries, electricity regulators, 
and private entities like service providers, customers, etc. The CDB-led IUS programme however is unique 
given the regional nature of the Programme and the involvement of GCF. This uniqueness results in the 
involvement of multiple critical actors, as listed below, to the transaction unlike a typical behind the meter 
transaction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Green Climate Fund 
(GCF)
Caribbean 
Development Bank 
(CDB)
Financing + Financial Oversight 
+ Programme Supervision 
Executing Entity
Beneficiaries
Oversight
Blended 
Lines of 
Credit –
managed 
by CDB
Local 
Service 
Providers/ 
Installers
Consumers
Country
Ministries
Country 
Regulators
Component 1: Establish and promote IUS as a core element of electric utilities’ 
business models.
Utilities
Component 2: Scaling up investment in distributed RE, EE and other DERs by 
implementing the IUS model at scale in the participating BMCs
Utility Pays Upfront For IUS Installation
Customer Repays 
Loan Monthly

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
 
Figure 16: Programme governance arrangements 
iii. 
Programme description 
B.3.5 The IUS Programme is designed in a way that it not only addresses all the key barriers that are 
otherwise inhibiting investment in the transition to a more sustainable and distributed energy system 
(as outlined in Section B.2 and further elaborated in Annex 2: Feasibility Study), but also supports the 
much-needed ecosystem development for sustainable, scalable, and replicable growth of behind the 
meter energy solutions in the BMCs. Figure 20 below outlines the key components of the IUS programme. 
Figure 17: Components of the IUS Programme 
 
Component 1: Establish and promote IUS as a core element of electric utilities’ business models 
1. The Programme, through Component 1, aims to establish and promote IUS as a core element of 
electric utilities’ business models in the BMCs to underpin timely and effective delivery of country-level 
support and enable the BMCs to guide and support one another during and after the Programme. The 
support provided under this Component will build directly on the considerable progress that has already 
been made in the three participating BMCs (as outlined above in Section B.1 and further elaborated in 
Annex 2: Feasibility Study). As a result, Component 1 will address the pending regulatory and 
institutional barriers that need to be overcome to begin financing IUS sub-projects at scale. Component 
2 will then build on this foundation to scale up investments in distributed RE, EE and other DERs

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
 
through widespread use of (and financing of sub-projects through) the IUS model by electric utilities in 
the three participating BMCs. 
2. This component lays down the groundwork for the electric utilities in the three participating BMCs to 
implement IUS at scale. This will ensure that all the key stakeholders have the necessary tools and 
frameworks to facilitate the proposed investments under Component 2 of the IUS programme. 
This component is sub-divided into three Outputs: 
Output 1.1: Strengthened regulatory and institutional frameworks facilitating the deployment of 
distributed RE, EE and other DER technologies. 
3. The Programme will support regulatory authorities in the participating countries to enhance and 
strengthen their regulatory framework through legal and regulatory amendments, update or develop 
new regulatory frameworks specifically for the distributed renewable energy and energy efficiency 
sector, update or develop a timebound sub-project approval and administrative process, increase 
access to global experience and learnings, provide regulatory authorities the opportunity to apply 
lessons learnt for sub-project appraisal, among others. The regulatory authority will also leverage 
expertise of an international regulatory expert as well as a national regulatory specialist to build and 
strengthen its capacity to cater to the distributed renewable energy sector for long-term sectoral 
sustainability. Furthermore, the Programme will also support the relevant energy ministry in the 
participating countries to strengthen its national policy of climate change and renewable energy and 
develop additional incentive mechanisms to increase clean energy adoption. 
4. The CDB Technical Assistance (TA) Execution Team (a regional TA Executing Entity that will operate 
within CDB in a manner that is separate from the Accredited Entity team) will support key stakeholders 
from the BMCs to address any pending legal and regulatory and/or capacity issues at the institutional 
level that may inhibit the IUS roll-out. These pending matters will be resolved based on the IUS Pilot 
Programme experience and lessons learnt from similar utility-led behind the meter programmes 
delivered in comparable global jurisdictions. It is also informed by the detailed assessments of the 
current policy, regulatory and institutional context in each of the three participating BMCs, which is 
briefly summarized in Section B.1 (above) and further elaborated in Annex 2: Feasibility Study. This 
Output will include two activities. 
5. Activity 1.1.1.: Immediately address regulatory barriers impeding the implementation of the IUS 
model under Component 2:  This TA activity aims to assist national stakeholders in each BMC to 
finalize updates to their legal and regulatory frameworks such that they are fit-for-purpose to support 
effective roll-out of IUS. In particular, this activity will facilitate the process of preparing and approving 
legal and regulatory amendments that are needed to operationalize and institutionalize IUS in each 
country, while also strengthening the capacity of the regulators in each country to oversee and regulate 
IUS activities. This will be done by contracting external consultants/specialists who will directly assist 
national counterparts to address these pending barriers. Additionally, this activity will provide external 
expert advice to help the relevant stakeholders in each participating BMC to strengthen at least one 
aspect of their broader regulatory framework, such as Renewable Energy Feed-In Tariff (RE/FIT) 
regulations, grid codes, or other relevant areas. 
Furthermore, this activity will provide support for updating or drafting key documents related to 
administrative procedures of the utility to receive, review, and approve sub-project application, energy 
accounting and settlement processes of the customers electricity bill availing benefits under the IUS 
Programme. These procedural documents are necessary to ensure a streamlined process for all the 
customers irrespective of their customer group, demography, etc. Standardised processes flow also 
helps increase efficiency and transparency. For instance, once the regulator or utility publishes the 
administrative procedures, a customer becomes fully aware about all application processing stages, 
the official responsible to review and approve the application at each stage, among others. 
Executing Entity: CDB (via the TA Execution Team) 
Source of funds: GCF grant financing

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
6. Activity 1.1.2 Address broader policy framework needs to strengthen prospects and incentives 
for investment in distributed RE, EE and other DERs: The activity will assist national stakeholders 
(including the energy ministry, regulatory authority, and others as needed) in strengthening the national 
policy and incentive framework to support investment in priority technologies, including those to be 
supported/financed under the IUS programme. This will be done by contracting external 
consultants/specialists to directly assist the national counterparts with these reform processes. This 
support will align with NDCs and promote sector sustainability. Additionally, under this the activity, the 
CDB TA Execution Team will contract external consultants/specialists to develop TSP qualification 
guidelines to ensure quality installation of clean energy technologies, working in close collaboration 
with the utilities, energy ministries and regulatory authorities. This is needed to ensure that a minimum 
technical competence benchmark could be established in the BMCs to help reduce/eliminate sub-par 
sub-project installations. 
Executing Entity: CDB (via the TA Execution Team) 
Source of funds: GCF grant financing 
Output 1.2: Enhanced capacity of customers to invest in distributed RE, EE and other DERs through 
the IUS Model. 
7. One key barrier inhibiting investment in sustainable energy and energy efficiency solutions is the lack of 
customer awareness, and limited outreach regarding the energy and cost saving potential associated 
with these technologies. Under this sub-component, each participating utility, National Designated 
Authority (NDA), the energy ministry, and other key actors will engage in customer outreach and 
knowledge sharing activities. Through the CDB TA Execution Team, these stakeholders will receive 
direct support from external service providers to assist in planning, preparing and delivering these 
outreach efforts. Customer outreach will be delivered through various mechanisms, for instance 
newspaper advertisements, webinars, public events, etc. The modalities of customer outreach and 
building awareness will be BMC- and stakeholder-specific. These awareness and outreach initiatives 
will serve multiple purposes, including: (a) informing customers about the benefits of behind the meter 
solutions; (b) explaining the modalities of the IUS Programme and how it is delivered; (c) the amount 
of public support available for sub-project enrolment, etc. As part of these outreach efforts, a particular 
emphasis will be placed on underserved customer groups like women, etc.   The support provided 
under this Output will include developing clean energy technology and IUS Programme specific 
marketing material, developing inclusive marketing, communications and outreach strategies, 
conducting in-person outreach sessions for customer awareness, facilitating customers’ access to 
available TSPs, helping customers understand the benefits of the priority technologies (i.e., lowering 
their electricity bill), helping customers understand the administrative/approval process, strengthening 
utility’s capabilities to handle customer queries, facilitating free/low-cost energy audits for eligible 
customers, among others. This Output will include three activities: 
8. Activity 1.2.1 Raise awareness of RE/EE opportunities and potential savings:  Under this activity, 
the CDB TA Execution Team will contract external consultants/specialists to work with national 
counterparts (led by the energy ministry) in each of the three countries to develop and execute a 
marketing and outreach strategy to bolster demand for sustainable energy technologies. The 
consultants will first assist the national counterparts in each country to define and develop their 
marketing and outreach strategy. Once the strategies have been prepared, the consultants will also 
(guided by the priorities identified in the strategy) develop engaging, technology-specific content 
(including infographics, posters, pamphlets and other multimedia materials) that will showcase the 
benefits and functionalities of clean energy solutions. The national counterparts will then use these 
materials to deliver the outreach activities outlined in their respective strategies. This approach aims 
to reach a broad audience, including vulnerable groups, ensuring accessibility and inclusivity. 
Under this activity, the CDB TA Execution Team will also (through a suitable service provider) work 
with the national counterparts to organize six outreach sessions (1 per country in PY1 and 1 per country 
in PY3) to educate end beneficiaries—both residential and commercial consumers—on the 
advantages/benefits of clean energy solutions. These sessions are also expected to cover information 
about the IUS Programme, including the sub-project preparation and application process. The 
outreach sessions will therefore contribute to Activities 1.2.1 and 1.2.2, but the costs have been 
clustered under Activity 1.2.1 to facilitate smooth implementation. These efforts will be championed by 
the national counterparts (with support from local NGOs and industry/business associations), and aim

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
 
to both catalyse demand for sub-projects under Component 2 as well as foster long-term clean energy 
market development and enhance Programme sustainability. 
Executing Entity: CDB (via the TA Execution Team) 
Source of funds: GCF grant financing 
9. Activity 1.2.2 Promote an inclusive and just IUS model and associated services: Through this 
activity, the programme will aim to increase demand for IUS services both during and beyond the 
Programme implementation period, thereby reinforcing sustainability. The CDB TA Execution Team 
will contract a suitable service provider to assist national counterparts (led by the electric utilities) to 
develop a Programme-/IUS-focused communications action plan. Similar to Activity 1.2.1, the service 
provider will then also develop specific outreach materials to be used by the electric utilities when 
delivering their respective communications action plans. Both the plans and the associated outreach 
materials will be inclusive and cater specifically to vulnerable groups to ensure wide-reaching benefits. 
By making the Programme's information accessible to everyone, including those who are blind, deaf, 
or from marginalized groups, the strategy seeks to raise awareness, encourage participation, and drive 
the Programme's long-term success. 
Executing Entity: CDB (via the TA Execution Team) 
Source of funds: GCF grant financing 
10. Activity 1.2.3 Provide customers with hands-on support to identify and develop distributed RE, 
EE and other DER sub-projects: Under this activity, each electric utility (as a national Executing 
Entity) will receive resources with which to contract a National Energy Consultant who will assist the 
utilities with business development and customer outreach/support, as well as other programme-
related responsibilities (e.g. monitoring and reporting). In so doing, the National Energy Consultants 
are expected to contribute to both fostering a pipeline of suitable sub-project proposals in each country 
as well as helping improve the quality of the submitted proposals. As part of these efforts, the CDB TA 
Execution Team will also engage a consultant to assist each utility to establish or strengthen their 
helpdesk/customer support services to efficiently address queries from customers related to sub-
projects applications. Among other responsibilities, the National Energy Consultants are expected to 
assist the utilities in responding to such help-desk requests in a timely manner. In addition, CDB-
contracted consultants will also assist the utilities to develop simple, user-friendly energy savings 
calculators that customers can use for self-screening purposes. In so doing, this activity will enhance 
accessibility to energy-saving information and empower program participants to make informed 
decisions about their energy usage. Finally, under this activity, the Programme will also develop 
eligibility criteria to be used to guide the selection of specific beneficiaries (lower-income residential 
customers and vulnerable groups) who will receive free energy audits. Once the eligibility criteria are 
developed, the Programme will facilitate access to such energy audits. CDB estimates that a total of 
300 low-income households will receive free energy audit services financed through the Programme, 
with 20 selected annually per country from PY1-5 based on the eligibility criteria. 
Executing Entity: CDB (via the TA Execution Team) 
Source of funds: GCF grant financing 
Output 1.3: Increased technical capacity of utilities, TSPs and other stakeholders to deploy and 
maintain distributed RE, EE and other DER technologies. 
11. Enhance technical and institutional capacity: Insufficient technical and institutional capacity has 
been identified as a key barrier. This is attributable to several factors, notably that IUS constitutes a 
material shift from the conventional electric utility business model to more innovative approaches which 
are not common in the BMCs. Post IUS roll-out, the BMCs will actively promote behind the meter 
solutions resulting in a radical shift from the status quo. This sub-component aims to improve capacities 
and information exchange at the national and regional level to enable the partner utilities (and other 
stakeholders, both in and beyond the targeted countries) to make this transition, institutionalize the 
IUS model and learn from one another as they work to scale up IUS and transform their energy 
systems. In addition to the CDB, regional stakeholders like the CARICOM Secretariat, CARILEC, and

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
 
the CCREEE would play an active role to promote regional learning and ensure programme replicability 
and scalability. This Output will include five activities: 
12. Activity 1.3.1 Facilitate knowledge exchange among the participating BMCs:  Under this activity, 
the CDB TA Execution Team will work with an external service provider and national counterparts to 
document and disseminate good practices and lessons learnt related to programme 
implementation/execution among the stakeholders in the three countries. This will include developing 
knowledge exchange materials, such as presentations and briefing notes, and holding online/virtual 
knowledge-sharing sessions. The knowledge materials will be developed in consultation with (and 
using inputs from) the utilities, regulators and energy ministries, allowing them to learn from one 
another and support/strengthen each other’s efforts to successfully implement IUS. 
Executing Entity: CDB (via the TA Execution Team) 
Source of funds: GCF grant financing 
13. Activity 1.3.2 Enhance Executing Entities’ and other stakeholders’ capacities to implement the 
IUS model in a just transition context:  The roll-out of IUS by the three participating electric utilities 
will require them to adjust their business operations and establish new (or adjust existing) internal 
systems and procedures. The associated costs – particularly in the start-up phase of IUS 
implementation – can be significant and a risk to the utilities. This activity therefore focuses on 
enhancing the capacities of the electric utilities (as National Executing Entities) to implement the IUS 
model. As part of this support, the CDB TA Execution Team will contract a service provider to work 
with each electric utility to develop a tailored operations manual. These country-specific operations 
manuals will build on the overall Programme Operations Manual (see Annex 21), and will include clear 
guidance on: financial management and organizational matters; KYC, AML/CFT and other compliance-
related risks; product/service offerings; reporting requirements; environmental & social risk 
management; and GESI -related actions. To further equip each utility to implement IUS, this activity 
will support the preparation of an IUS business development strategy for each national Executing 
Entity.  Furthermore, the CDB TA Execution Team will contract an IT firm to assist each utility to 
develop a web-based digital application system to facilitate the receipt and processing of sub-project 
applications, leveraging existing utility-operated platforms to the extent possible. As utilities are 
processing sub-project applications, they will also have access to external consultant support to assist 
during the appraisal process, particularly for sub-projects that propose to use non-preapproved 
technologies (described in more detail under Component 2, below). Finally, under this activity, CDB-
contracted specialists will support each utility to strengthen their internal policies, procedures and 
systems to better advance GESI goals and manage E&S risks – efforts that will be complemented by  
targeted trainings on E&S, GESI, and the mitigation/management of compliance-related risks (e.g. 
KYC, AML/CFT) for relevant utility staff (one for each utility in PY1, and a refresher training for each 
utility in PY2). This multifaceted approach aims to equip stakeholders with the necessary tools and 
knowledge for the successful execution of the IUS model. 
Executing Entity: CDB (via the TA Execution Team) 
Source of funds: GCF grant financing 
14. Activity 1.3.3 Train qualified (technology) service providers, notably TSPs, to support 
consumers: This activity aims to enhance TSPs’ capabilities through specialized training modules, 
designed to support long-term market growth within the IUS programme. The training will cover a wide 
range of topics, including IUS programme requirements, technical and legal aspects, E&S risk 
mitigation/management, GESI, and M&R. Additional subjects such as contracts, customer outreach, 
quality standards, and familiarity with third-party certifications may also be included. Tailored to the 
specific needs of each BMC, the trainings will be delivered by CDB-contracted service providers, who 
are expected to deliver one training session in each country in PY1 and one additional training in each 
country (with a particular focus on E&S risk management) again in both PY2 and PY4. These trainings 
will collectively boost TSP expertise and their contribution to the sustainable energy transition. Indeed, 
better-capacitated TSPs are key to the long-term success of the energy transition, as the efficiency 
and effectiveness of their services are important determinants of whether/to what extent sustainable 
energy solutions are cost competitive.

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
 
Executing Entity: CDB (via the TA Execution Team) 
Source of funds: GCF grant financing 
15. Activity 1.3.4 Support information exchange with other (non-partner) countries, incl. 
governments, regulators, TSPs and utilities:  Under this activity, the CDB TA Execution Team (with 
support from external consultants) will develop and disseminate outreach materials to key stakeholders 
in BMCs across the region. These materials will share insights, challenges, and opportunities 
encountered in clean energy deployment through the IUS model. The goal is to provide BMCs across 
the Caribbean with a comprehensive understanding of the IUS model and its potential customization 
for their jurisdictions, thereby laying a strong foundation for scaling up and replication under Phase II 
of the IUS programme. To further support these efforts, under Activity 1.3.4 CDB will host four (4) 
virtual information exchange and knowledge-sharing sessions – two (2) sessions in PY2 and two (2) 
additional sessions in PY5. These sessions will offer an overview of the progress, challenges, and 
solutions identified in participating BMCs, enriched by firsthand experiences shared by key 
stakeholders. Each session will feature a Q&A segment to foster interaction and engagement. Finally, 
this activity will support three (3) representatives from each of the three (3) participating BMCs to attend 
an in-person knowledge sharing summit in PY3 to promote IUS and the Caribbean’s experience in 
implementing this innovative model, covering travel and logistics costs. 
Executing Entity: CDB (via the TA Execution Team) 
Source of funds: GCF grant financing 
16. Activity 1.3.5 Create a Community of Practice (COP) in the BMCs, inviting governments, 
regulators, utilities, TSPs and NGOs to participate: This activity focuses on creating a Community 
of Practice (COP) to enhance peer-to-peer and south-south learning among stakeholders of the IUS 
programme. The COP aims to bring together TSPs, Executing Entity staff, and technical experts from 
different jurisdictions to share knowledge and experiences, thereby facilitating the advancement of the 
IUS Programme. The initiative will include virtual sessions with international experts on distributed 
energy and utility-led distributed energy models akin to IUS. Furthermore, an in-person field mission 
will be organized, hosted by one of the participating BMCs for stakeholders from the other participating 
BMCs. This mission will feature site visits to key IUS sub-projects and enable in-person, multi-
stakeholder discussions, enhancing collaborative learning and the sharing of best practices within the 
IUS Programme framework. 
Executing Entity: CDB (via the TA Execution Team) 
Source of funds: GCF grant financing 
Component 2: Scaling up investment in distributed RE, EE and other DERs by implementing the IUS 
model at scale in the participating BMCs. 
17. This component builds on the work done under Component 1 to finance behind the meter technologies 
and services for participating customers. This component is also the core investment component of 
the IUS Programme. Participating utilities, in their capacity as national Executing Entities, are 
responsible for managing timely execution of the loan component of the IUS Programme in each BMC, 
including screening and approving sub-projects, disbursing to TSPs, collecting and processing 
repayments/reflows, monitoring and reporting, etc. In addition, the utilities/national Executing Entities 
will work in parallel to invest in the deployment of smart meters/advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) 
that is needed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of customer-level investments in RE, EE 
and other DERs, and thereby support the broader transition toward a more sustainable, resilient and 
distributed energy system in the three countries. This component includes one Output. 
Output 2.1: Installation of distributed RE, EE and other DER technologies, as well as complementary 
smart meters/AMI, among a critical mass of utility customers, including households, businesses and 
public sector entities. 
Participating utilities, in their capacity as national Executing Entities, will receive, review, screen, and 
approve sub-project proposals, as well as finance the approved sub-projects and monitor (and report

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
 
on) their timely implementation. In parallel, they will invest in smart meters/AMI. This Output includes 
one activity: 
18. Activity 2.1.1 Prepare, finance and implement sub-projects utilising distributed RE, EE and 
other DERs among households, businesses and public sector entities, while supporting 
complementary investments in smart meters/AMI: This activity aims to deploy the loan component, 
enabling utility clients to obtain financing for sub-projects in BMCs. The national Executing Entities 
(electric utilities) will review sub-project proposals and only approve those that comply with the 
programme eligibility criteria, which are summarized in Paragraph B.3.11 (below) and further 
elaborated in Annex 21: Programme Operations Manual. If a sub-project proposal uses the pre-
approved technologies – namely LED/efficient lighting, efficient AC/cooling, solar rooftop PV (with or 
without storage), and solar water heaters – the utility will not have to assess the technology eligibility 
as part of its review. Utilities will also be able to finance sub-projects that utilize other (non-
preapproved) RE/EE/DER technologies, as per their local demand, but will have to undertake 
supplementary due diligence before approving such applications, as outlined in Annex 21. Note that 
CDB tentatively expects the funding under the lines of credit to be structured as follows: 
USD11,667,000 for BLPC in Barbados; USD9,667,000 for BEL in Belize; and USD15,666,000 for JPS 
in Jamaica. These figures include GCF financing and co-financing, and constitute initial estimates that 
are subject to change during the final CDB appraisal of each line of credit. 
In parallel to their support for sub-projects financed through the IUS model (using their blended GCF-
CDB lines of credit), the national Executing Entities (i.e. the three participating electric utilities) will 
make complementary investments in smart meters/AMI at the premises of their customers. This is 
expected to include customers that benefit from sub-projects under the IUS Programme as well as 
other customers that may not benefit from such sub-projects during the Programme implementation 
period. These investments in smart meters/AMI will be led by the electric utilities independently of the 
blended GCF-CDB lines of credit, and thus these contributions are reflected in the Programme as in-
kind co-financing. The deployment of smart meters/AMI will improve the efficiency and effectiveness 
of investments in RE, EE and other DERs, and are critical to the long-term success of the broader 
transition toward a more sustainable, resilient and distributed energy system that the Programme is 
helping to catalyze. By increasing the use of smart meters/AMI broadly in their respective jurisdictions, 
the utilities will lay a foundation for the long-term sustainability of the IUS model and the priority/eligible 
technologies. 
Executing Entities: Barbados Light and Power, Belize Electricity Limited, Jamaica Public 
Service Company 
Source of funds: 
Blended lines of credit for IUS sub-projects: GCF loan financing, CDB loan financing 
Investments in smart meters/AMI: In-kind contributions from the national Executing Entities 
(i.e. the three participating electric utilities) 
B.3.6 The IUS Programme design detailed above will directly address the root causes and barriers described 
in Section B.2a through a dedicate TA component that enables a market ecosystem development by 
strengthening the legal, regulatory, and procedural framework in the participating BMCs as well as increasing 
customer awareness and access to finance, among other benefits. 
iv. 
Technologies alternatives and selection criteria 
B.3.7 At the start of the programme design stage, programme stakeholders identified a set of potential 
technologies and services that could be financed under the Caribbean IUS Programme (subject to further 
review):  
• 
LED lighting and controls 
• 
Solar PV 
• 
Solar water heating 
• 
Surge protection at the meter 
• 
E-mobility (partly as a demand response 
measure) 
• 
HVAC (AC retrofits, sensors, low investment 
insulation) 
• 
Building/energy management systems

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
 
45 Technologies classified as ‘preapproved’ are those that provide direct mitigation and adaptation benefits, are cost 
effective, scalable and relatable with the IUS Programme. These are the technologies/services that the utility may start 
financing without additional technology-focused due diligence once the Programme is officially launched.  
• 
Meter socket base changeout programme 
• 
Battery storage 
 
• 
Motors and drives 
• 
Combined heat and power 
• 
Power-factor correction and other ancillary 
power quality services 
B.3.8 During the detailed design and feasibility stage, the programme preparation team developed a set of 
criteria (see Table 5 below) with which to further assess the potential technologies and ultimately develop a list 
of preapproved45 technologies that could be prioritized under the Programme and more easily/rapidly approved 
by the participating electric utilities (as national Executing Entities). The preapproved technologies are the most 
likely and most viable options based on prevalent market conditions, capacity of local TSPs, legal and 
regulatory framework, historical and envisaged demand, among others.  
Table 9: Technology assessment 
Technologies 
(A) 
 
Provides 
direct 
mitigation 
and 
adaptation 
benefits 
(B) 
 
Capital cost 
low Enough 
to be 
Financially 
Feasible 
(C)  
Established/proven 
technology with 
likelihood of local 
capacity to 
implement 
(D) 
Scalable 
and 
Replicable 
(E) 
Relatable to the 
IUS Programme 
LED/efficient 
lighting  
 
 
 
 
 
Efficient A/C, 
cooling/ HVAC 
 
 
 
 
 
Solar rooftop PV 
(with or without 
storage) 
 
 
 
 
 
Solar water 
heater 
 
 
 
 
 
Surge protection 
at the meter 
 
 
 
x 
 
Battery storage 
(grid scale) 
 
x 
 
 
 
E-mobility (partly 
as a demand 
response 
measure) 
 
x 
 
 
 
Building/energy 
management 
system 
 
 
 
 
 
Motors and 
drives 
 
x 
 
x 
 
Combined heat 
and power (CHP) 
 
x 
 
x 
 
Power factor 
correction and 
other ancillary 
 
 
 
x 


=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
 
power quality 
services 
Source: CPCS 
Legend: 
 
High potential 
x 
Not suitable at this stage 
 
Situation and market dependent 
 
Preapproved technologies 
B.3.9 Based on the assessment, four technologies have been preapproved for the IUS Programme, namely: 
LED/efficient lighting, efficient air conditioning/cooling, solar rooftop PV (with or without storage), and 
solar water heaters. Based on the current market conditions and the applicable legal and regulatory 
frameworks as highlighted in the earlier chapters, the overall ecosystem is relatively conducive for these 
technologies in the participating BMCs. 
B.3.10 There are however associated services that may be bundled in a packaged service offering by the 
utilities with the four preapproved technologies. This includes surge protection, motors and drives, power factor 
correction and other ancillary power quality services, and building/energy management systems. As such, 
additional services/products could be unlocked for utilities by advancing the four preapproved technologies.  
Eligibility criteria 
B.3.11 The electric utilities will finance sub-projects that utilise one or more of the pre-approved technologies 
as long as the applications comply with the programme eligibility criteria, which are outlined below. 
 
 
Category 
Criterion 
Number 
Criterion 
Description 
Metric(s) 
How 
utilities 
should 
document 
this 
Additional Notes or 
Conditions 
Beneficiaries 
1.1 
Eligible 
residential 
customers 
This criterion 
should be used to 
determine if a 
household is 
eligible to receive 
support, subject 
to fulfilling the 
other eligibility 
criteria as 
outlined below. 
There are no 
limitations based on 
household size or 
income, or based on 
whether they rent vs. 
own the property. 
N/A 
In the event that the 
applicant/prospectiv
e beneficiary is a 
renter, the property 
owner must also 
consent to the 
transaction. 
The household must 
have been a utility 
customer (at their 
current or previous 
Check the 
number of 
months for 
which billing 
None.

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
 
address) for at least 
the last 12 months. 
records are 
available. 
Any investments that 
the household 
previously made in 
the specific 
technology/ies for 
which they are 
applying for support 
through the IUS 
Programme cannot 
exceed the value/cost 
of their sub-project 
application. 
Self-
certification 
by the 
applicant, to 
be reviewed 
by the utility. 
The accuracy of these 
self-certifications will 
be checked/verified 
for a sample of 
beneficiaries as part 
of the monitoring and 
reporting process for 
the Programme. 
The household must 
have fulfilled their 
payment obligations 
to the electric utility 
(i.e. paid on time, and 
in full) in at least 9 of 
the 12 months prior 
to the submission of 
the application. 
Check the 
customer’s 
payment 
history and 
track record. 
If a customer has 
recently moved, the 
utility may either 
assess the customer’s 
payment history from 
their previous 
address or check 
their credit score. 
1.2 
Eligible 
commercial 
customers 
This criterion 
should be used to 
determine if a 
local business is 
eligible to receive 
support, subject 
to fulfilling the 
other eligibility 
criteria as 
outlined below. 
There are no 
limitations based on 
the size or annual 
revenue of the 
business, or based on 
whether they rent vs. 
own the property. 
N/A 
In the event that the 
applicant/prospectiv
e beneficiary is a 
renter, the property 
owner must also 
consent to the 
transaction. 
The business must 
have been a utility 
customer (at their 
current or previous 
address) for at least 
the last 12 months. 
Check the 
number of 
months for 
which billing 
records are 
available. 
None. 
Any investments that 
the business 
previously made in 
the specific 
technology/ies for 
which they are 
applying for support 
through the IUS 
Programme cannot 
exceed the value/cost 
of their sub-project 
application. 
Self-
certification 
by the 
applicant, to 
be reviewed 
by the utility. 
The accuracy of these 
self-certifications will 
be checked/verified 
for a sample of 
beneficiaries as part 
of the monitoring and 
reporting process for 
the Programme. 
The business must 
have fulfilled their 
payment obligations 
to the electric utility 
(i.e. paid on time, and 
in full) in at least 9 of 
the 12 months prior 
to the submission of 
the application. 
Check the 
customer’s 
payment 
history and 
track record. 
If a customer has 
recently changed 
address, the utility 
may either assess the 
customer’s payment 
history from their 
previous address or 
check their credit 
score. 
1.3 
Eligible 
public 
This criterion 
should be used to 
determine if a 
There are no 
limitations based on 
the size of the public 
N/A 
None.

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
 
sector 
customers 
public sector 
utility customer is 
eligible to receive 
support, subject 
to fulfilling the 
other eligibility 
criteria as 
outlined below. 
sector utility 
customer. 
The public sector 
entity must have been 
a utility customer for 
at least the last 12 
months. 
Check the 
number of 
months for 
which billing 
records are 
available. 
None. 
Any investments that 
the public sector 
utility customer 
previously made in 
the specific 
technology/ies for 
which they are 
applying for support 
through the IUS 
Programme cannot 
exceed the value/cost 
of their sub-project 
application. 
Self-
certification 
by the 
applicant, to 
be reviewed 
by the utility. 
The accuracy of these 
self-certifications will 
be checked/verified 
for a sample of 
beneficiaries as part 
of the monitoring and 
reporting process for 
the Programme. 
The public sector 
utility customer must 
have fulfilled their 
payment obligations 
to the electric utility 
(i.e. paid on time, and 
in full) in at least 9 of 
the 12 months prior 
to the submission of 
the application. 
Check the 
customer’s 
payment 
history and 
track record. 
If the public sector 
entity is moving to a 
new location or 
opening a new office, 
their broader 
payment track can be 
reviewed. 
Pre-
approved 
technologies 
2.1 
Solar PV 
This criterion 
should be used 
when assessing a 
sub-project that 
includes solar PV 
(with or without 
battery). 
Individual solar PV 
installations may not 
exceed: 10 kW for 
residential customers; 
and 100 kW for 
commercial and 
public sector 
customers. 
Check 
installation 
size relative 
to customer 
type. 
Utilities may request 
permission to exceed 
these limits. CDB no-
objection will be 
required. 
All solar PV installed 
must be 
new/additional (i.e. 
no replacement of 
existing solar PV 
installations). 
Check and 
confirm 
(Y/N) 
compliance 
with this 
requirement. 
 
For applications that 
include batteries, the 
battery size must not 
exceed: 20 kWh for 
residential customers; 
and 100 kWh for 
commercial and 
public sector 
customers. 
Check 
battery size 
relative to 
customer 
type. 
Utilities may request 
permission to exceed 
these limits. CDB no-
objection will be 
required. 
The utility must 
determine that the 
sub-distribution 
infrastructure that 
connects the 
customer to the grid is 
Check and 
confirm 
(Y/N) 
compliance 
with this 
requirement. 
Utilities will be given 
flexibility to make 
this determination, as 
they manage the sub-
distribution 
infrastructure and 
will review/ appraise

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
 
able to accommodate 
the additional load. 
the sub-project 
application. 
2.2 
Efficient 
AC/cooling 
This criterion 
should be used 
when assessing a 
sub-project that 
includes efficient 
AC/cooling. 
When an existing 
AC/cooling 
technology is to be 
replaced, the new 
technology must be 
expected to result in 
an overall reduction 
in the customer’s total 
consumption of 
electricity from the 
grid. 
Check and 
confirm 
(Y/N) 
compliance 
with this 
requirement. 
 
When a new 
AC/cooling 
technology is to be 
installed (i.e. not 
replacing an existing 
AC/cooling 
technology), the new 
AC/cooling 
technology must not 
be expected to 
increase the 
customer’s overall 
consumption of 
electricity from the 
grid by more than 
20%. 
Check and 
confirm 
(Y/N) 
compliance 
with this 
requirement. 
 
Only AC/cooling 
technologies that 
utilize modern 
coolants are eligible 
(i.e. no use of R-22 
refrigerant). 
Check and 
confirm 
(Y/N) 
compliance 
with this 
requirement. 
 
2.3 
Efficient 
lighting 
This criterion 
should be used 
when assessing a 
sub-project that 
includes efficient 
lighting. 
When existing lighting 
is to be replaced, the 
new lighting must be 
expected to result in 
an overall reduction 
in the customer’s total 
consumption of 
electricity from the 
grid. 
Check and 
confirm 
(Y/N) 
compliance 
with this 
requirement. 
 
When new lighting is 
to be installed (i.e. not 
replacing existing 
lighting), the new 
lighting must not be 
expected to increase 
the customer’s overall 
consumption of 
electricity from the 
grid by more than 
20%. 
Check and 
confirm 
(Y/N) 
compliance 
with this 
requirement. 
 
Only LED lighting is 
eligible. 
Check and 
confirm 
(Y/N) 
compliance 
with this 
requirement.

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
2.4 
Solar water 
heater 
This criterion 
should be used 
when assessing a 
sub-project that 
includes a solar 
water heater. 
When an existing hot 
water technology is to 
be replaced, the new 
technology must be 
expected to result in 
an overall reduction 
in the customer’s total 
consumption of 
electricity from the 
grid or consumption 
of other primary 
energy (e.g. LPG). 
Check and 
confirm 
(Y/N) 
compliance 
with this 
requirement. 
 
When a new hot 
water technology is to 
be installed (i.e. not 
replacing an existing 
hot water 
technology), the new 
hot water technology 
must not be expected 
to increase the 
customer’s overall 
consumption of 
electricity from the 
grid by more than 
20%. 
Check and 
confirm 
(Y/N) 
compliance 
with this 
requirement. 
 
Additional 
(non-pre-
approved) 
technologies  
3.1 
Climate 
change 
relevance 
This criterion 
should be used to 
determine 
whether a 
technology that is 
not included in 
the list of pre-
approved 
technologies 
would be eligible 
for support 
through the 
Programme. 
Additional 
technologies can only 
be financed if they 
deliver climate change 
mitigation benefits at 
a rate of USD85 per 
tCO2e 
reduced/avoided or 
lower (i.e. 20% above 
the average for the 
Programme). 
Record the 
USD cost per 
tCO2e 
reduced or 
avoided. 
This criterion is only 
applicable when a 
sub-project 
application includes a 
technology that is not 
included in the list of 
pre-approved 
technologies. 
 
No-objections will be 
required from both 
CDB and the GCF 
Secretariat before a 
utility can finance a 
sub-project that 
includes a non-pre-
approved technology. 
Once this no-
objection has been 
granted, the utility 
can continue 
financing other sub-
projects that include 
this technology. 
Other 
criteria 
4.1 
Sub-project 
cost 
This criterion 
should be used 
when assessing 
the total cost of a 
sub-project 
application. 
Maximum sub-project 
cost is USD400,000, 
including ancillary 
technologies. 
Record the 
sub-project 
cost. 
Utilities may finance 
larger sub-projects 
subject to receiving a 
no-objection from 
CDB. 
 
This limit is the 
overall limit that will 
be applied across the 
Programme. CDB may 
establish lower 
utility-specific limits

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
if/as needed when 
finalizing the 
appraisal of each line 
of credit. 
4.2 
Ancillary 
services 
This criterion 
should be used 
when assessing 
the proportion of 
a sub-project 
application that is 
allocated for 
emissions-
reducing 
technologies vs. 
ancillary services. 
The cost of ancillary 
services should not 
exceed 30% of the 
total sub-project cost. 
Record the 
cost of 
ancillary 
services. 
‘Ancillary services’ 
includes any 
technologies or 
services that do not 
deliver direct climate 
change mitigation 
benefits. 
4.3 
Customer 
exposure 
This criterion 
should be used 
when assessing 
sub-project 
applications from 
customers that 
have 
already/previousl
y secured sub-
project financing 
through the 
Programme. 
No individual utility 
customer shall receive 
more than USD1 
million in financial 
support through the 
Programme. 
Record the 
costs of the 
new sub-
project 
application 
and those of 
any/all 
previously-
approved 
sub-projects 
with the 
customer in 
question. 
 
4.4 
TSP 
exposure 
This criterion 
should be used 
when determining 
which TSP will be 
contracted to 
procure and 
install the 
requested 
technology/ies at 
the premises of 
the applicant. 
No individual TSP 
shall receive more 
than 20% of the total 
value of the contracts 
in each country. 
Record the 
cost of the 
new sub-
project 
application 
and those of 
any/all 
previously-
approved 
sub-projects 
with the TSP 
in question. 
 
4.5 
E&S 
This criterion 
should be used to 
determine 
whether potential 
E&S risks have 
been properly 
considered, and if 
suitable risk 
mitigation and 
management 
measures have 
been identified 
(as relevant). 
All sub-projects must 
comply with the E&S 
due diligence 
requirements as 
outlined in Annex 6: 
ESMF. 
Y/N 
 
4.6 
M&R 
This criterion 
should be used to 
determine 
whether sufficient 
data is available 
to establish a sub-
project baseline 
for M&R 
purposes. 
All sub-projects must 
have a clearly defined 
baseline for M&R 
purposes. 
Y/N 
Sub-project baselines 
should be set in 
accordance with the 
requirements and 
methodologies 
described in Annex 
22.

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicative administrative process 
B.3.19 Sub-project applications will be received by the National Executing Entity from eligible beneficiaries 
seeking to access programme funding. The sub-project application is then appraised by the relevant 
department/unit of the Executing Entity that is leading the IUS programme. The Executing Entity may seek 
support or advice from the TA Implementation Support Consultant while reviewing / appraising the sub-project 
application. Each Executing Entity, however, may not engage their National Energy Consultant in the sub-
project application review / appraisal process. The three National Energy Consultants (1 per utility/national 
Executing Entity) will rather focus on supporting business development and sub-project origination, as well as 
monitoring and reporting. If these individuals were to also support the review/appraisal of submitted 
applications, this could lead to a potential conflict of interest as they may ultimately be supporting appraisal of 
applications that they helped originate and guide.  
B.3.20 The Executing Entities will review if (a) the applicant meets the applicable Know Your Customer (KYC) 
criteria for each country; (b) the applicant satisfies the definition of final beneficiaries; and (c) the technology is 
preapproved.   After the preliminary checks, the Executing Entities will undertake an in-depth review of the sub-
project application, including but not limited to, (a) is the application made for one or more than one eligible 
technology/service, (b) historical energy consumption and bill payment frequency of at least three preceding 
years from the date of application, (c) in case of grid connected renewable energy sub-project the Executing 
Entity needs to check if there is enough available hosting capacity in the distribution feeder connecting the 
applicant with Executing Entity’s grid, (d) has a TSP already been identified by the application, (e) assess 
creditworthiness of the applicant, (f) socio-economic background of the applicant (for inclusivity under the 
programme), (g) E&S and/or GESI considerations etc. A more detailed description of the eligibility criteria is 
included in Section 3.3.2 of this Operations Manual, refer to Annex 21. 
B.3.21 After this review, the National Executing Entity will decide to either approve, reject, or undertake 
additional review of the sub-project application.  The TA Implementation Support Consultant will assist the 
Executing Entity in sub-project application appraisal, as needed. Based on the results of the assessment at 
this stage, the Executing Entity will process the sub-project financing under the programme if all the conditions 
are fulfilled.  
The generic flow to guide the Executing Entities has been presented in Figure 21 below. Detailed, time-bound, 
and tailored step-by-step procedures, along with the personnel responsible at each stage, will be developed 
and included in the Executing Entity-specific Operations Manuals that will be developed during the inception 
phase (PY1) of the programme implementation period. 
Knowledge management 
B.3.22 CDB will be responsible for knowledge management under the IUS Programme. In addition, the National 
Energy Consultants will be tasked with collecting and transmitting all the documents developed in their 
respective BMCs to the TA Execution Team on a quarterly basis. The CDB TA Execution Team will then share 
these documents and information with the CDB AE Team. The CDB AE Team may then also develop a 
knowledge sharing portal to disseminate knowledge with other stakeholders.

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
Figure 18: Application screening process flow 
 
Source: CPCS

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
Implementation arrangements 
B.4.1. The CDB is the Accredited Entity for this programme. CDB has been operating in the Caribbean Region 
for over 50 years and has a strong track record of providing financial and technical assistance to support 
the regional energy sector and sustainable energy transition. CDB has also worked with electric utilities 
throughout the region, including BLPC, BEL, and JPS. As the Accredited Entity, CDB will lead programme 
implementation, supervision, reporting, evaluation and closure. Different areas within CDB will contribute 
to fulfilling these functions, as outlined in Figure 22 (below). 
• 
TA component: CDB, through its dedicated TA Execution Team, will directly execute most activities 
(and associated contracts and consultancies) under the TA component. The only exceptions are the 
National Energy Consultants, which will be procured and contracted by the national Executing Entities 
using GCF grant financing. This grant financing will be allocated and disbursed to the national 
Executing Entities by CDB and governed by subsidiary grant agreements between the Bank and these 
Executing Entities.  
• 
Under this Component, the Programme will facilitate capacity building and execution capabilities of the 
regulatory body, the Executing Entities, and other key stakeholders through the TA grant financing.  
• 
It will do so by addressing capacity, knowledge and awareness gaps that are inhibiting the flow of 
financing towards climate investment. Among others, the key outcome of the TA support would be an 
established distributed clean energy market and business ecosystem in the three BMCs which is self-
sustainable beyond the GCF programme funding. The TA support will also aim to establish the IUS 
model as a viable option for accelerating utility led distributed clean energy deployment in other 
Caribbean nations. Furthermore, this Component will support the effective delivery of the financing and 
investments under Component 2 and help catalyse the broader process of transforming Caribbean 
finance – and the targeted productive sectors and energy systems – over the medium/long term.  
B.4.2. CDB will support the partner BMCs, Executing Entities, and other stakeholders to better understand 
the links between their business operations and climate change, as well as apply this understanding when 
developing, appraising, financing, and implementing climate change-related sub-projects. The flow of 
activities is depicted in the figure below.

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
 
Figure 19: Flow of TA funds 
 
Source: CPCS 
• 
Loan component: CDB, through its Accredited Entity Team, will be responsible for managing 
relationships and credit lines with the National Executing Entities. Administration of the lines of credit 
will be done in accordance with relevant CDB policies and procedures. As is standard operating 
procedures of the CDB, the GCF loan resources will be deposited in a CDB-managed bank account 
(IUS Programme Account) and a unique identification code assigned to those resources. Aligned with 
the terms and conditions of the FAA and CDB’s AMA, all transactions associated with GCF resources 
for the IUS Programme will be tagged with this unique identification code, allowing for ease for 
monitoring and tracking via an account ledger.  
• 
CDB will extend a concessional line of credit to each national Executing Entity that includes both 
concessional GCF resources and CDB co-financing. CDB will enter into a subsidiary agreement with 
each national Executing Entity that governs the use of the loan resources, including the GCF resources 
and CDB resources which are expected to rank pari-passu. 
• 
Disbursement requests from the national Executing Entities will be submitted to, and processed by, 
CDB in accordance with the Bank’s OPPM. All disbursements from CDB and the IUS Programme 
Account will be made to the Executing Entities in pari-passu terms (funding will be disbursed 
simultaneously in the agreed proportion).  The first disbursement of the loan will only be made once 
the Executing Entity has fulfilled all Conditions Precedent (CPs) as outlined in the relevant subsidiary 
agreement between CDB and the Executing Entity. Subsequent disbursements will be made once 
other programme-specific CPs have been satisfied. These may include, inter alia:  
• Compliance with Financial Covenants that CDB may require of Executing Entities; 
• Completion of programme-related reporting for the previous period; 
• Confirmation of the projected demand for financing for sub-projects in the forthcoming period.

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
 
National Executing Entities will be responsible for channeling resources provided by CDB to support/finance 
eligible sub-projects for eligible beneficiaries. To this effect, the National Executing Entities will enter into 
agreements with both the eligible beneficiaries and the TSPs to be contracted to provide the requisite services 
to the eligible beneficiaries.  
B.4.3. The National Executing Entities will also be responsible for collecting repayments from the eligible 
beneficiaries, through an on-bill financing mechanism, where the amount of loan payment is collected by 
each Executing Entity through its regular billing cycle. The national Executing Entities will also be 
responsible for repaying their loans to the CDB (including CDB resources and GCF resources) in 
accordance with the subsidiary agreement.  
Figure 20: Flow of line of credit 
 
Source: CPCS 
B.4.4. In addition to the above-described flow of funds and support for the IUS sub-projects to be financed 
and implemented under Activity 2.1.1, the electric utilities will also deploy and install smart meters/AMI at 
the premises of their customers. This may include the customes that will benefit from IUS sub-projects 
and/or other customers that do not benefit from IUS sub-projects during the Programme implementation 
period. These investments are not captured in the flow of funds diagrams because the investments are 
expected to be in-kind contributions by the participating electric utilities. 
Contractual arrangements 
B.4.5. The relationship between CDB and the GCF will be guided by the Accreditation Master Agreement 
(AMA) between these two organizations, as well as the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) that will be 
developed specifically for this programme. The FAA will reflect the fact that the GCF loan financing would 
be provided to the three national borrowers/Executing Entities through a CDB-managed trust. CDB will in 
turn enter into a subsidiary agreement46 with each Executing Entity (i.e. electric utility) that will address, 
inter alia, their responsibilities as Executing Entities and their obligations as borrowers vis-à-vis their 
respective blended GCF-CDB lines of credit. 
 
46 This is tentatively expected to be two agreements per national Executing Entity: a subsidiary loan agreement for each line 
of credit; and a subsidiary grant agreement to provide the grant financing with which each national Executing Entity can 
procure and contract their National Energy Consultant.

=== PAGE 56 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
B.4.6. For each sub-project that is financed by a national Executing Entity (i.e. utility), the Executing Entity 
will enter into an agreement the eligible beneficiary (i.e. utility customer) and the Technology Service 
Provider that is contracted to provide the requisite services (i.e. installation of eligible technologies) to the 
eligible beneficiary. These sub-project-level agreements will cover the obligations of all parties including, 
inter alia: installation of the eligible technologies and ensure they are in good working order (TSP); 
adherence to appropriate environmental and social standards when installing the eligible technologies 
(TSP); providing the data/information needed to verify the timely execution of the sub-project (TSP); 
providing the data/information needed to monitor benefits arising from sub-projects (customer); and 
repaying the investment cost to the utility (customer), among others. Based on consultations during the 
programme preparation phase, CDB generally expects that most utilities will opt to structure these as 
tripartite agreements between the utility, TSP and customer. 
B.4.7. Specifically with regards to the TA component, the CDB TA Execution Team will directly procure and 
enter into contracts with almost all service providers, and will do so in line with CDB’s Procurement 
Framework and using its standard forms of contract. The only exception will be the National Energy 
Consultants, one of which will be procured and contracted by each Executing Entity (i.e. utility). The 
nationally executed procurement processes will also be managed in line with CDB’s Procurement 
Framework. 
B.4.8. These contractual arrangements are summarized in the diagram below. 
 
 
 
Key programme actors 
B.4.9. Below we provide an overview of the role of each of the types of institutions which will be involved in 
the Caribbean IUS programme within each participating BMC. 
 
The GCF 
GCF is accountable to the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and is guided by the principles and provisions of the 
UNFCCC.

=== PAGE 57 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
 
The CDB 
As the Accredited Entity, the CDB will provide financing, financial oversight, overall 
programme supervision, and ensure the executing entities abide by the policies and 
standards of the GCF and CDB. CDB will also manage the blended lines of credit, ensure 
timely credit recovery, and ensure robust programme monitoring, reporting and 
evaluation. 
Environmental Sustainability Unit (ESU): The ESU is the Focal Point for the Green 
Climate Fund in the CDB. It will bear overall responsibility for supervising all programme 
activities, including: the TA support to be executed by the national Executing Entities; the 
TA support to be executed by the TA Execution Team; and the execution of the Lines of 
Credit by the Executing Entities (for which the ESU will collaborate closely with other 
relevant CDB staff, notably from the SEU). The ESU will compile all relevant programme 
information to draft reports for the GCF and its stakeholders. 
Board: The Board of Directors of the Caribbean Development Bank is the ultimate 
supervisory authority within the Bank and has the responsibility to ensure Management is 
administering the Bank’s operations according to policy. The Board may, at its discretion, 
request/receive updates on the programme. Board decisions or resolutions will be 
executed by CDB management, who will then direct the ESU and other divisions/unit to 
follow through on Board decision or resolution. 
Management: Includes the President, as well as Vice Presidents, Departmental Directors 
and Division/Unit Heads. Management acts upon Board decisions or resolutions, as well 
as on-demand of internal areas. Management will take action on programme-related 
activities if the Board or the ESU require this level of decision. 
Other involved areas within CDB that will support the programme through oversight are 
the following: 
Office of Independent Evaluation: The CDB Office of Independent Evaluation will be 
involved in supporting/quality-assuring the independent mid-term and final evaluations of 
this programme. 
Procurement Policy Unit (PPU): The Procurement Policy Unit (PPU) will be involved in 
supporting CDB-managed procurement processes, including those managed by the TA 
Execution Team and Accredited Entity Team. The PPU also includes a Claims team that 
will support the processing of invoices and payments to consultants contracted by CDB 
(both in its Executing Entity and Accredited Entity roles). 
Risk Management: The Risk Management Department monitors the Bank’s exposure to 
operative, financial and portfolio risk. For the programme, the Risk Department will receive 
periodic reports on loan performance from the Accredited Entity Team and may request 
corrective actions to ensure financial good standing by the utilities. 
 
 
Government 
Government ministries, departments and agencies are pivotal in shaping energy policy 
and overseeing energy market participants. Decision-making authority is often delegated 
to respective ministries, oversight bodies like public utility commissions, etc. to ensure the 
underlying sectoral goals and objectives are met. For instance, in the case of DER, RE, 
and EE, the government establishes legal and regulatory frameworks for the sector, 
broader policy goals and objectives like the NDCs, etc., regulations for private sector 
involvement, sets renewable energy goals, defines codes and standards for energy asset 
operations, and determines tariff rules. 
The success of a behind-the-meter RE/EE market is grounded in the government’s 
policies that act as a facilitator for both market development and growth. Without

=== PAGE 58 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
government intervention to eliminate obstacles, the underlying business models may be 
unviable.  
The governments of the BMCs, through their energy ministries and departments, will be 
responsible to ensure facilitative legal and policy support as well as address policy, legal, 
and regulatory hurdles.  
Relevant Government Ministries   
 
Ministry 
of 
Energy 
and 
Business 
 
Ministry 
of 
Public 
Utilities, Energy, and 
Logistics – Energy 
Unit 
 
Ministry 
of 
Science, 
Energy and Technology – 
Energy Division 
 
NDAs 
National Designated Authorities are government institutions that serve as the interface 
between each country and the GCF. NDAs provide broad strategic oversight of the GCF’s 
activities in the country and communicate the country’s priorities for financing low-
emission and climate-resilient development. 
The respective NDAs will ensure various programme requirements like (a) the 
programme’s alignment with the local context, (b) stakeholder engagement, (c) liaison 
between key stakeholders, (d) support with GCF M&R, etc.  
GCF NDAs 
 
Economic 
Affairs 
and 
Investment 
Division Ministry of 
Finance 
– 
Economic 
Affairs 
and Investment 
 
Ministry of Finance, 
Economic 
Development 
& 
Investment 
 
Ministry of Economic 
Growth and Job 
Creation 
 
Regulator 
Newer utility models such as the IUS create new lines of revenue for utilities. To integrate 
this revenue stream into the utility’s established regulated business, regulatory 
interventions and clear guidelines are necessary. The regulators in all the participating 
BMCs will ensure that (a) the regulated business model does not violate or contradict any 
existing legal and regulatory framework; (b) the appropriate regulatory framework such as 
DER regulations like net metering/billing, etc. are well defined; (c) there is clarity regarding 
energy transactions, accounting, and compensation; (d) a well-defined customer focused 
and business-oriented interconnection/application process is in place; and (e) robust 
technical and grid standards are followed for equipment; etc.  
Electricity Regulators 
 
Fair 
Trading 
Commission 
 
Public 
Utilities 
Commission 
 
Office of Utilities 
Regulation 
 
Utilities (Executing Entities) 
There are three participating national Executing Entities under the IUS programme who 
are already familiar with DER and behind the meter RE and EE to a varying degree. For 
instance, the BLPC has been delivering the “buy-all, sell-all” initiative. JPS is among the 
leading Caribbean utilities delivering net-billing models. As a result, the utilities are already 
experienced with DER initiatives. 
Under the IUS governance structure, the Executing Entities will ensure a fair and 
transparent programme delivery to their customers equitably. To support the programme 
roll-out the Executing Entities will facilitate (a) all the programme related regulatory

=== PAGE 59 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
approvals, (b) changes in the billing system for on-bill financing, (c) adoption of a 
standardized and timebound application process, (d) programme outreach material, (e) 
customer’s creditworthiness, among others.   
Additionally, the Executing Entities will (a) review and approve sub-projects with the 
support of the TA implementation consultant(s), (b) administer their respective Line of 
Credit, finance eligible sub-projects to support eligible  beneficiaries, collect and process 
repayments/reflows from beneficiary customers and (in turn) to CDB, (c) procure, contract, 
and manage, a full-time support staff – including a National Energy Consultant to be paid 
through the IUS programme budget – with expertise in distributed renewable energy and 
energy efficiency to support on day-to-day activities, customer outreach, business 
development, etc. under the IUS programme, (d) provide periodic updates and information 
to the CDB as per the monitoring and reporting framework, (e) set up/strengthen customer 
support centres, etc. 
Each national Executing Entity will be required to nominate a programme focal point who 
will lead on communications with other programme stakeholders (notably CDB) and will 
share this individual’s contact information with the CDB Accredited Entity Team and the 
TA implementation consultant during the start of the programme implementation period. 
Participating Utilities 
 
Barbados 
Light 
and Power 
 
Belize 
Electricity 
Limited 
 
Jamaica Public Services 
Company Limited 
 
Technology Service Providers 
TSPs are private entities in the sector capable of providing various services like EE, solar 
rooftop, solar water heaters, battery storage for optimizing time-of-use, and operation and 
maintenance initiatives geared towards lowering customers' energy expenses, among 
others.  
TSPs will play a wider role in the IUS programme. TSPs will not only provide both 
distributed generation installations and EE services but also support broader efforts to 
enhance customer outreach and assist customers to navigate the IUS application 
approval.  
TSPs will enter into an agreement with customers and utilities to provide their services as 
per the technical, regulatory, and commercial specifications of the respective BMCs.  
TSPs will also be receive additional training(s) on the technology, legal and regulatory, 
and commercial aspects of the programme through the TA support. By engaging with (and 
benefiting from) the IUS Programme, local TSPs will become capacitated to provide 
additional – and better – services, thereby transitioning toward being able to serve 
households and businesses in ways that are similar to the more comprehensive sets of 
energy services provided by ESCOs in other jurisdictions. 
 
Other regional stakeholders 
• 
CCREEE: It has been associated with the development of the IUS programme 
since it was conceived. During the programme implementation and roll-out, 
CCREEE will leverage its unique regional position to help the BMC institutions 
with expert inputs to develop IUS conducive regulatory policy frameworks and 
facilitate in programme outreach, among others. 
• 
CARILEC: The Caribbean Electric Utility Services Corporation is an association 
of electric energy solutions providers and other stakeholders operating in the 
electricity industry in the Caribbean region, Central and South America and 
Globally. The CARILEC Secretariat plays a leading role in electric utility advocacy, 
growth, and sustainability in the Region. As a regional organisation CARILEC 
members include utilities, service providers, and training institutes. Consequently,

=== PAGE 60 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
CARILEC can be a regional platform for knowledge sharing, capacity building, 
and training to strengthen the IUS programme’s supply side ecosystem. 
 
Business Associations 
Association like Barbados Renewable Energy Association (BREA), Barbados Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry (BCCI), etc., are key institutions that represent industries, service 
providers, and business. Such organisations will be leveraged by the respective energy 
ministry, NDAs, and TA implementation consultant for customer outreach to promote the 
IUS programme. 
 
Customers 
The key beneficiary of the IUS programme in all BMCs reaping benefits like self-
generation and energy independence, lower electricity costs, efficient use of energy, and 
contributing to BMCs’ climate goals, among others. Customers will prepare and submit 
sub-project applications to their respective electric utilities. 
 
TA Execution Team 
The TA Execution Team will be established within the CDB and will execute most of the 
TA activities under the programme (and by extension, manage most procurement 
processes). The only exception is the National Energy Consultant, which will be contracted 
directly by the National Executing Entities (utilities). The TA Execution Team will include 
a full-time TA Lead who will provide overall technical leadership with regards to the 
execution of the TA component and will also include a TA Support Specialist to assist the 
TA Lead. The TA Execution Team will procure, contract, manage, monitor, and report on 
progress achieved by the other consultants that will be contracted under the TA 
component. The TA Execution Team will be established within the CDB Sustainable 
Energy Unit and will report directly to the Unit Coordinator. The TA Execution Team will 
also maintain a close dialogue with the CDB Accredited Entity Team to keep them updated 
on progress that is relevant to their overall programme supervision responsibilities, 
including supervision of the national Executing Entities’ progress in executing their 
respective lines of credit. 
 
TA Implementation Support Consultant 
The TA Implementation Support Consultant will be procured, contracted, managed and 
monitored by the TA Execution Team. The TA Implementation Support Consultant will 
include a multi-disciplinary team comprised of international experts (tentatively expected 
to include a Technical/ Clean Energy Expert, Legal/ Regulatory Expert, Energy Policy 
Expert, Gender and Social Inclusion Expert, Environmental and Social Risk Management 
Expert, Monitoring and Reporting Expert, Capacity Building Expert, and Marketing and 
Outreach Expert) and national expertise (tentatively expected to include a National 
Regulatory Expert). 
The TA Implementation Support Consultant will work in close consultation with three key 
national stakeholders in each country, namely the energy ministry, the regulatory 
authority, and the national Executing Entity. They will directly report their progress and be 
directly accountable to the TA Execution Team. 
 
National Energy Consultants 
One National Energy Consultant will be procured, contracted, and managed by each 
national Executing Entity, with financial support from the programme’s TA budget. The 
National Energy Consultant will be stationed at the Executing Entity’s office and will report 
to the appropriate department/ unit/ or office of the Executing Entity that leads the IUS 
service delivery. The National Energy Consultant will support day-to-day activities related 
to the IUS programme, customer support, business development, etc. The National

=== PAGE 61 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
Energy Consultant, however, is not responsible to support the national Executing Entity 
with sub-project appraisal due to possibility of conflict of interest.  
Figure 24 below provides a detailed stakeholder mapping for the IUS programme.

=== PAGE 62 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
Figure 21: Detailed stakeholder mapping for the IUS programme 
 
Source: CPCS

=== PAGE 63 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
B.5.1. While the Caribbean region has embarked on significant efforts to enhance financing options 
for RE and EE projects, access to financing remains constrained, highlighting notable challenges 
across Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica. While some public and private financing exists in Barbados, 
Belize, and Jamaica, it is primarily focused on businesses and does not cover the diverse technologies 
included in the IUS programme. Additionally, there is a shortage of commercial banks offering loans for 
distributed RE, and those that do often charge high interest rates due to the perceived high risk of lending 
to local households and businesses (particularly the types of lower-income groups and smaller businesses 
that the IUS model and Programme are particularly well suited to support) to invest in these technologies. 
EE projects, in particular, are rarely considered for financing. One significant gap is the upfront cost barrier 
versus long-term savings, which is particularly challenging for lower-income households and businesses. 
Although RE and EE technologies promise substantial savings over time, the initial investment required 
can be prohibitively high. This financial challenge is a major deterrent for both public and private investors, 
who may not have the capital or willingness to invest heavily without immediate returns.  
On the public side, capital is often constrained and must be allocated to competing priorities, leaving limited 
resources for RE and EE projects. Governments in these countries face numerous pressing needs, making 
it challenging to prioritize and fund energy transitions without substantial external support. Additionally, the 
lack of a clear regulatory framework and successful demonstrative cases further deters private investment.  
Funding structure 
B.5.2. To make the proposed programme (and its underlying projects and sub-projects) feasible, CDB is 
requesting concessional financing from the GCF. These concessional resources are needed in part 
because the programme will assist electric utilities to launch and institutionalize IUS – a new and innovative 
approach to supporting investment in distributed RE, EE and other DER technologies/measures among 
the utilities’ customers – as part of their core business models. The process of launching an IUS scheme 
in each participating BMC and implementing it at scale involves risks and associated costs that the utilities 
and partner governments are not able to bear on their own. The following types of GCF financing are 
therefore critical to the success of this programme. 
 
B.5.3. Line of credit/Loans: To launch and sustain their initial IUS schemes, partner utilities will need 
concessional loans to make RE/EE sub-projects appealing to customers, and to enable a more inclusive 
set of sub-project beneficiaries (including lower-income and vulnerable/marginalized groups). Despite the 
strong savings and short payback periods associated with distributed RE, EE, and other DERs, Caribbean 
households and businesses, wary of risk and often financially constrained, might hesitate to invest— a 
situation exacerbated by COVID-19's economic fallout. Recognizing this, CDB aims to encourage 
investment in DERs by ensuring initial modest on-bill rates to demonstrate value. Given the region's utilities' 
similar aversion to risk, introducing the IUS model with affordable rates and favourable terms is crucial. 
CDB will thus facilitate the transfer of GCF's concessional benefits to utilities, ensuring they, in turn, offer 
customers more accessible costs for RE, EE, and DER technologies than market rates. Note that several 
mechanisms are included in the programme design to ensure transfer of this concessionality to the end 
beneficiaries, including by establishing maximum spreads that can be charged by the electric utilities. 
 
That being the case, CDB is proposing that the GCF Secretariat provide a concessional line of credit 
amounting to USD 20.8 million. CDB in turn expects to blend the GCF resources with USD 16.2 million in 
co-financing. As outlined in the Integrated Financial Model (see Annex 3), this would enable the Bank to 
extend a concessional line of credit to each electric utility/national Executing Entity. Even after the utilities 
have placed a spread on these resources to cover overhead costs and a risk premium – rates that will be 
determined jointly with national counterparts, notably the regulators during PY1 – the concessional GCF-
CDB blended lines of credit will enable the utilities to provide financing to customers/end-beneficiaries at 
rates (tentatively 4.5-6.0%) that are competitive relative to the financing provided by traditional/commercial 
banks (whose products on average start at around 6.5%) while remaining strategically balanced – low 
enough to support greater social inclusion and incentivize investment, yet not so low as to distort the local 
markets. Additionally, this financing will allow access to funding for EE technologies, which are not as 
readily available as those for renewable energy.

=== PAGE 64 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
B.5.4. Grant financing: The programme will facilitate capacity building and strengthen the execution 
capabilities of the regulatory authorities, the Executing Entities, and other key stakeholders through the TA 
grant financing.  CDB will support the partner BMCs, Executing Entities, and other stakeholders to better 
understand the links between their business operations and climate change, as well as apply this 
understanding when developing, appraising, financing, and implementing climate change-related sub-
projects.  These non-revenue-generating activities are only viable at full concessionality. CDB is therefore 
requesting grant financing to support the implementation of these activities. 
B.5.5. The GCF is uniquely suited to provide the above-mentioned types of financing for the IUS programme. 
CDB is not able to provide the necessary package of financing through its own resources. The Bank has 
modest concessional financing at its disposal through its Special Development Fund (SDF) window, and 
cannot use these resources to provide the volumes of financing that the three participating countries need 
to launch and implement IUS at scale. CDB also works with other partners to mobilize funds for climate 
action – including bilateral development partners – but they are typically unable/unwilling to provide such 
large amounts of funding for new/innovative approaches such as IUS. Indeed, many partners have a lower 
risk appetite than is required for the proposed programme. Given its risk appetite, emphasis on innovation 
and ability to provide large-scale financing (including grant financing), the GCF is therefore uniquely 
positioned to provide financial support to the proposed IUS programme alongside CDB co-financing. 
Without the GCF’s support, the proposed programme could not be financed/approved – and without this 
programme, the participating countries would not be able to launch and implement IUS. Indeed, their fiscal 
space (while already historically constrained) has become even more limited since the onset of the COVID-
19 pandemic, as well as the subsequent geopolitical instability and macroeconomic developments – 
notably the worldwide increase in interest rates that have significant increased debt servicing costs in 
almost all developing countries. Discretionary resources with which to address the financial and non-
financial barriers outlined in Section B.2 are simply not available. 
B.5.6. Co-financing: The CDB expects to provide co-financing amounting to about USD 16.2 million as part 
of the blended line of credit facility that will be available to the BMCs for sub-project installations. 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
B.6.1. The programme includes several elements that will help ensure services, benefit streams and 
outcomes are sustained after programme closure. 
(1) Project level:  Through this programme, key stakeholders in the participating countries will have 
established and operated the IUS model at scale over a multi-year time horizon, thereby providing them 
with valuable experience and a track record that can be leveraged to continue administering IUS after 
programme closure. Through the TA component, the programme will also strengthen the capacity of 
national stakeholders – notably the electric utilities and regulators – to continue implementing the IUS 
model without the need for external support. Furthermore, the programme will connect the participating 
electric utilities with commercial financiers and sensitize them about the potential and benefits of lending 
to the utilities to enable further financing of IUS sub-projects after the GCF and CDB financing have been 
fully utilized. In this sense, the proposed programme is seen as a ‘bridge to bankability’. Having established 
a strong track record of successful projects that generate reflows and enable a profitable IUS business for 
the utilities, these key stakeholders will also have a strong incentive to continue implementing their 
respective IUS schemes – scaling up and out – after programme closure. 
(2) Sub-project level.  The programme promotes investments in financially viable renewable energy 
technologies and energy efficiency services that are economically beneficial for the end beneficiaries. 
Given the direct financial benefits that are expected to be accrued by the beneficiaries, these households 
and businesses are expected to continue utilizing these technologies and practices for their entire 
productive lifespan. This extent to which this expectation holds will be assessed by the national Executing 
Entities and broader programme implementation team, in line with the Theory of Change, logical framework 
and monitoring and reporting framework (see Annex 22). Given these direct financial incentives, the sub-
project beneficiaries are also expected to properly operate and maintain their programme-supported 
technologies/assets and cover the associated O&M costs The anticipated returns from these investments 
will further ensure that the end beneficiaries have the necessary resources to meet these O&M costs. 
(3) TSPs and other financial services providers.  The programme incorporates a comprehensive TA and 
capacity-building element designed to enhance the capabilities of TSPs and other financial service 
providers in all three participating countries. As a result, these entities will be able to better assess climate-

=== PAGE 65 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
related risks and opportunities and engage in supporting/financing the sustainable energy transition – 
including by working with the electric utilities to continue administering IUS services after programme 
closure. By doing so, the programme aims to tackle significant knowledge and capacity barriers that 
currently hinder the financing flow for climate-related projects. This is especially crucial for certain customer 
segments, such as residential customers, who typically struggle to secure affordable financing for such 
investments.  
(4) End beneficiaries. The TA and capacity-building component of the programme places a significant focus 
on increasing awareness and capacity among potential sub-project beneficiaries (i.e. local households and 
businesses). This is expected address key barriers that are inhibiting demand for both the prioritized 
technologies and IUS-type services, thereby increasing the potential uptake of IUS-type services over the 
medium/long term. Notably, the programme intends to reach a wide range of eligible customers, both 
residential and commercial, through its outreach and awareness-raising activities. While the programme 
will only be able to finance sub-projects for a portion of these eligible customers, the broader group of 
beneficiaries is expected to be more aware of the benefits of the prioritized technologies, more inclined to 
borrow and invest in them, and have enhanced opportunities to do so. This heightened awareness is 
anticipated to stimulate demand for financing across a larger customer base during and after the 
programme. To reinforce this effect, the programme will also support eligible final beneficiaries in crafting 
high-quality sub-project proposals. This will enhance the overall quality of financed sub-projects, leading 
to better investment performance. Consequently, the programme aims to generate a strong demonstration 
effect in partner countries, especially considering their relatively small economies. Furthermore, the costs 
of many promoted technologies and energy efficiency solutions are expected to decrease over time, further 
driving demand. Coupled with the TA activities that aim to address supply-side barriers (i.e. by 
strengthening the capacity of electric utilities and regulators, as well as financial institutions and TSPs), the 
customer-focused support should help ensure that the benefit streams of the IUS model are sustained and 
scaled up after programme closure.

=== PAGE 66 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
26.74 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
20.8 million USD 
20 years 
05 years 
% 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity 
return 
(iv) Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
5.94 million USD  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-based 
payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
42.0 
million USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financia
l 
instrum
ent 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniorit
y 
Caribbean 
Development Bank 
Senior 
Loans 
11.2 
million USD 
($)  
20 years 
05 years 
Variable47 
pari 
passu 
Senior 
Loans 
5.0 
million USD 
($) 
20 years 
05 years 
Fixed 
pari 
passu 
 
In-
Kind 
0.8 
million USD 
($) 
N/A 
Electric utilities 
In 
kind 
25.0 
million USD 
($) 
N/A 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
68.74 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements and 
contributions 
(max. 250 words, 
approximately 0.5 
page) 
Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any 
type of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).  
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax 
exemptions and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme (refer 
to the co-financing policy).  
N.A. 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
47 CDB Ordinary Capital Resources (OCR), which are market-rate resources provided at a variable rate that is 
set by the CDB Board of Directors and adjusted on an as-needed basis.

=== PAGE 67 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
 
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and 
disaggregate by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or 
output. Provide the summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.  
 
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Component 
1 
Output 1.1 
1,547,600 
1,547,600 Grants 
0 
0 N.A. 
Output 1.2 
2,015,000 
2,015,000 Grants 
0 
0 N.A. 
Output 1.3 
789,750 
789,750 Grants 
0 
0 N.A. 
Component 
2 
Output 2.1 
62,000,000 
20,800,000 
Senior 
loans 
16,200,000 Senior 
loans 
CDB 
25,000,000 In-kind 
Electric 
utilities 
(BLPC, 
BEL, JPS) 
PMC and 
M&R 
Audit costs 
261,000 
261,000 Grants 
0 
0 N.A. 
PMC 
1,780,445 
970,445 Grants 
810,000 In-kind 
CDB 
Supplementary 
data collection 
to support 
M&R 
352,500 
352,500 
Grants 
0 
0 
N.A. 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
68,746,295           26,736,295 
       42,010,000 
 
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in 
other annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.  
 
In case of a multi-country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each 
country in annex 17, if available. 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, 
please provide a brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for 
these activities, to the extent possible. 
Component 
Output 
Activities 
GCF financing 
Amount 
USD ($) 
Capacity 
Building 
Output 1.1 Strengthen 
the enabling 
environment for IUS in 
each of the three 
participating BMCs 
Capacity building and technical assistance 
support to address regulatory barriers, 
strengthen policy framework, etc. 
1,547,600 
Output 1.2 Enhance 
targeted outreach to 
Capacity building and technical assistance 
support to raise customer awareness on the 
2,015,000

=== PAGE 68 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
 
customers to stimulate 
demand for renewable 
energy and energy 
efficiency and interest in 
the IUS model 
opportunities and benefits; promote the IUS 
model and associated services; provide 
customers with hands-on support to develop 
sub-projects, etc. 
Output 1.3 Enhance 
regional capacity, 
knowledge exchange 
and networks to promote 
IUS and accessible 
distributed renewable 
energy, energy 
efficiency, and DERs. 
Capacity building and technical assistance 
support to facilitate knowledge exchange 
among participating and regional (non-
participating) countries; train TSPs; create 
community of practice, etc. 
789,750 
Technology 
Development 
Output 2.1 Accessible 
and inclusive financing is 
provided for sub-projects 
for different customer 
groups under IUS model 
Low-cost interest financing is provided to the 
end-beneficiaries through participating 
utilities to prepare and implement sub-
projects in the participating countries. 
20,800,000

=== PAGE 69 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Mitigation impact potential 
D.1.1. The analysis on mitigation impact potential accounts for key differences in the national context in the partner 
countries, including i) the estimated carbon intensity of electricity generation based on the Harmonized Grid 
Emission Factor data set published by United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, as well as ii) the 
anticipated changes to the emissions trajectory based on the countries’ unconditional targets for climate change 
mitigation. A detailed analysis is provided in Annex 2: Feasibility Study and Annex 3: Integrated Financial Model. 
Detailed methodology to assess the mitigation impact potential is provided in Annex 22: Assessment of GHG 
emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting. 
  
D.1.2. The climate change mitigation impact for the sub-projects may arise from the grid electricity 
consumption avoided due to the electricity generation of solar PV and the energy savings of the more 
energy-efficient technologies.  The IUS programme has the potential to avoid a total of 601,550 tCO2e in GHG 
emissions over the productive lifespan of the priority/preapproved technologies that were used as a basis for 
preparing the impact potential estimates. The assumed lifespans are: 25 years for solar rooftop PV; 7 years for 
batteries; 15 years for efficient A/Cs; 5 years for efficient lighting; and 20 years for solar water heaters. The following 
table shows the total GHG emissions avoided under the IUS programme dis-aggregated by country and type of 
sub-project/technology. Detailed calculations are further elaborated in Annexes 3 and 22.  
Table 10: GHG emissions avoided, dis-aggregated by country and sub-projects 
Type of subproject 
GHG emissions avoided over the sub-project’s useful life (tCO2e in 000’) 
 
Barbados 
Belize 
 Jamaica 
Mitigation impact  
Solar rooftop PV 
20,687 
11,756 
53,140 
Solar rooftop PV with batteries 
4,398 
1,606 
7,786 
Efficient A/C 
144,488 
16,415 
219,654 
Efficient lighting 
13,798 
4,323 
19,054 
Solar water heater 
31,849 
11,034 
41,562 
Total 
215,219 
45,134 
341,197 
Source: CPCS 
Overall, the mitigation impact potential for commercial sub-projects is higher than that of residential sub-projects 
because of the larger size of sub-projects (e.g. larger system size of solar rooftop PV). The only exception is for solar 
water heaters where the size of commercial sub-projects is smaller than that of residential sub-projects based on water 
usage assumptions determined according to local contexts. The differences between countries are due to differences 
in the carbon intensity of grid electricity. 
 
Adaptation impact potential: 
D.1.3. The direct beneficiaries are expected to include the occupants of buildings in households, businesses and other 
utility customers who develop (and secure financing from their utility for) sub-projects that enable investments in 
efficient cooling systems. As a result of such investments, these utility customers will become more resilient to the 
increasing risk of heat stress that is outlined in more detail in Annex 2b: Baseline Assessment Report. The estimated 
number of direct beneficiaries is approximately 10,655, including approximately 5,328 women and 5,327 men. This 
is based on the estimated number of residential customers who are expected to implement sub-projects through 
which they would invest in efficient ACs (multiplied by the average household size in each country) and the number 
of commercial customers who are similarly expected to implement such sub-projects under the programme. A more 
detailed breakdown is included below. 
 
Table 11: Estimated number of direct beneficiaries 
Type of sub-project 
Number of beneficiaries  
(individuals or businesses) 
 
Barbados 
Belize 
Jamaica

=== PAGE 70 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of beneficiaries – Residential 
Efficient A/C 
                           3,101  
                           1,226  
                           5,117  
Number of beneficiaries – Commercial 
Efficient A/C 
                              436  
                              131  
                              644  
Source: CPCS 
Indirect beneficiaries 
Indirect beneficiaries are those individuals or entities who, although not directly participating in the programme, 
demonstrate a significant interest in the priority adaptation technologies and are likely to invest in or adopt these 
technologies independently or engage with related initiatives post-programme. These beneficiaries reflect the broader 
impact and awareness generated by the programme, contributing to market development and demand stimulation. The 
estimated number of indirect beneficiaries is approximately 30,000. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
D.2.1. The proposed programme aims to contribute to the process of transforming the electricity systems and 
energy sectors in the three participating countries toward low-emissions and climate-resilient 
development pathways. The IUS model serves as both an "implementation mechanism" for demand-side RE, 
EE, and DER projects and a novel business model for utilities within a rapidly changing landscape. In 
implementing this innovative model, the programme will support sector transformation by changing the way 
utilities and customers think about, engage in and shape the energy sector. In particular:  
 
a. Utilities: The programme will assist each of the three participating electric utilities to offer a new and 
innovative DER-focused service as part of their business model. The utilities will fundamentally change (and 
expand) their role in the energy sector of their respective countries, shifting from primarily being a provider 
of energy to also becoming a provider/facilitator of energy services. In so doing, the utilities will become 
catalysts in the transition toward a more decentralized electricity grid. This is a fundamental (and necessary) 
step in the broader process of decarbonizing the electricity system and propose alternative solutions to the 
increasing demand associated from cooling systems in the participating countries – a process that the 
programme will equip the utilities to champion in the years to come. 
  
b. Customers: The programme also aims to reshape attitudes about energy (and associated behaviours 
and decision-making) and energy resilience and increase adaptation to heat stress among utility customers 
in the participating countries. By working with customers to better understand their energy use/needs and 
the significant potential of distributed RE, EE and other DERs (i.e. to generate savings, contribute to 
mitigating climate change, increase resilience and improve local air quality), and provide them with a simple 
and low-risk way to invest, the programme will empower these individuals to play a more active role in their 
respective electricity systems. This shift toward more active and engaged households and businesses is 
fundamental to changing the broader patterns of electricity generation, transmission, distribution, and 
consumption such that they make the greatest possible contribution to decarbonizing and enhancing the 
resilience of the energy sector over the medium/long term. This requires that distributed RE, EE and other 
DER technologies/measures be regarded not simply as consumer goods but rather as critical elements of a 
country’s energy infrastructure – a shift in views and behaviour that the programme will actively support.  
 
D.2.2. While aiming to change the ways that utilities and customers view (including their own roles in) and support the 
energy transition, the programme also includes other measures to help ensure a profound and lasting market 
transformation. This includes: 1) strengthening legal and regulatory frameworks in the participating countries 
to better support IUS roll-out as well as enhance the broader enabling environment for DERs; 2) enhancing 
customer outreach and knowledge sharing to stimulate demand over the medium/long term; and 3) improving 
technical and institutional capacities of key energy sector stakeholders (including utilities, regulators and TSPs) 
to ensure IUS services can continue to be provided – with increasing efficiency – beyond programme closure.

=== PAGE 71 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           Source: CPCS 
More specifically, the programme will aim to address legal, regulatory, and operational challenges by 
supporting the preparation and amendment of legal and regulatory documents to facilitate IUS implementation, 
the development of necessary regulatory frameworks, the modernization of administrative processes, and the 
optimization of energy accounting procedures. It will also prioritize capacity building for regulatory authorities 
and national stakeholders, aiming to refine policies, incentive frameworks, and investments related to IUS. 
Furthermore, the programme will boost customer awareness, create customer-friendly tools such as energy 
savings calculators, and produce marketing materials. Critical efforts also include hosting knowledge sharing 
sessions, developing digital application platforms for IUS, ensuring adherence to environmental and social 
standards, and encouraging regional cooperation to exchange insights and best practices. 
 
D.2.3. The programme has considerable potential to be scaled up within the participating BMCs and replicated across 
the Caribbean region in a way that would allow each country to prioritize the RE, EE and other DER 
technologies that will be most beneficial within their local contexts. To actively support these efforts, the 
programme will facilitate regional learning and knowledge sharing among Caribbean governments, the 
CCREEE, and other regional organizations. As countries adapt the model to their specific contexts, they can 
exchange insights and best practices, accelerating the transition to sustainable energy solutions across 
the region and contributing to global efforts to combat climate change. Furthermore, CDB plans to develop 
and submit a ‘Phase II’ IUS programme proposal over the coming years through which the Bank will actively 
support additional BMCs to implement and operate IUS at scale.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
D.3.1. The programme is expected to deliver significant sustainable development co-benefits. It will not only make 
important contributions to achieving Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 7 (affordable and clean 
energy) and 13 (climate action), but also SDGs 3 (health and well-being), 5 (gender equality), 8 (decent 
work and economic growth), 9 (industry, innovation & infrastructure), and 17 (partnerships for the 
goals). These co-benefits are described in more detail below. 
 
D.3.1.1. Economic: The IUS model will enable utilities in the BMCs to diversify their revenue streams, engage in new 
business models, and adapt to a changing energy landscape. Sub-projects will generate savings for the 
utilities’ customers, which can in turn be used to repay the investment costs to the utilities and cover other 
consumption and/or investments needs as required. As outlined in Annex 3: Integrated Financial Model, the 
estimated net financial savings (NPV) for the final beneficiaries/utility customers are expected to amount to 
over USD230 million over the full productive lifespan of the technologies to be supported through 
programme-financed sub-projects. These sub-projects will also generate revenue for (and potentially lead to 
employment creation among) TSPs in the participating countries. The broader process of decarbonizing the 
electricity systems and energy sectors (to which the programme will make an important contribution) also 
holds significant potential to generate income and employment over the medium/long term. Indeed, available 
evidence suggests that considerable (generally local) labour will be required to support widespread 
installation and maintenance of distributed RE, EE and other DERs – jobs that will continue to be in demand 
as the utilities expand IUS after programme closure. Economic co-benefits will also be accrued by the central 
governments in the participating BMCs, as existing energy imports are a significant drain on foreign 
exchange (FX) reserves – a challenge that the programme will help address by reducing the demand/need 
for imported fossil fuels.

=== PAGE 72 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D.3.1.2. Environmental: The transition to an electricity system and energy sector based on renewables can 
significantly reduce the potential for environmental damage associated with the importation, handling, and 
combustion of fossil fuels. Moreover, this shift can greatly enhance air quality in participating countries, given 
that burning diesel and other fuels generates substantial particulate pollution. In this context, it is also 
important to note that the nature of the investments to be made under the programme are not expected to 
result in negative ecological impacts (e.g. from ground-mounted renewable energy installations). Due to the 
small-scale nature of the envisaged investments, sub-projects are expected to have little/no detrimental effect 
on land use and biodiversity. 
 
D.3.1.3. Social: Decreased particulate pollution, resulting from reduced reliance on diesel fuel for electricity 
generation, can improve health outcomes for residents of participating countries. These social co-benefits 
may, in turn, lead to additional economic advantages, as healthier populations are often more economically 
productive. In addition, the IUS programme presents a significant opportunity for groups that have had limited 
access to traditional financing opportunities, including entrepreneurs, youth, individuals facing gender 
discrimination, and low-income individuals. As current utility customers, the IUS programme will allow them to 
bypass these hurdles by leveraging their existing contracts with the utility. By utilizing on-bill financing, the 
IUS model will enable these otherwise marginalized groups to invest and obtain RE and EE technologies 
without the need for conventional credit-based financial products. This inclusive approach not only promotes 
widespread adoption of sustainable energy technologies but also fosters social equity and facilitates a more 
inclusive and ‘just’ sustainable energy transition. To further support these efforts at greater inclusivity, the TA 
component will offer free energy audits to eligible utility customers (e.g. low-income residential customers). 
 
D.3.1.4. Gender: The programme will take a proactive approach to supporting gender-equitable development. This is 
guided by the programme-level Gender Action Plan (GAP) and informed by a comprehensive Gender 
Assessment. Specific actions to be taken by the programme include: (i) working with policymakers to 
mainstream gender considerations into energy sector policy development and planning, including by 
developing gender mainstreaming guidelines, conducting gender sensitization training for policymakers and 
regulators, and establishing a working group among the participating countries’ gender bureaus to empower 
them to learn from one another as it relates to integrating gender more prominently into energy sector 
planning and development; (ii) supporting women and other vulnerable and marginalized groups to directly 
engage with/benefit from the Programme, including by administering free energy audits for low-income 
customers, and by preparing and delivering outreach and awareness-raising campaigns that are specifically 
tailored to the needs of marginalized groups; (iii) supporting the electric utilities/national Executing Entities to 
utilize the IUS model to better serve and empower women and other vulnerable and marginalized groups, 
including by conducting gender-sensitivity training for the utilities participating and TSPs, supporting the 
utilities to develop Ius products/service offerings that are specifically tailored to the needs of marginalized 
groups, and supporting the utilities to adopt/strengthen systems for capturing and analyzing beneficiary data 
disaggregated by sex, age, income, location and household type; and (iv) directly (and independently) 
monitoring the number of Programme beneficiaries who are female-headed households (FHH), persons with 
disabilities (PWD) and low-income households in accordance with the target set in the GAP. The emphasis 
on supporting gender-equitable development is also reflected in the logical framework for the programme, 
which includes gender-specific and gender-disaggregated indicators where relevant/appropriate. 
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
D.4.1. The BMCs are acutely vulnerable to climate risks due to their geographic exposure to increasing temperatures 
and extreme weather events, and their economic dependence on climate-sensitive sectors like tourism and 
agriculture. These risks are exacerbated by high reliance on fossil fuels in their electricity sectors, contributing 
to significant emissions and compromising climate resilience. The IUS programme directly addresses this 
vulnerability by promoting the adoption of renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies, thereby 
aligning with each country's commitment to reduce emissions through their NDCs. Moreover, by advancing the 
installation of DERs, such as solar rooftops, the project contributes to enhanced energy security, resilience to 
heat stress, and grid resilience in the face of increasing climate threats. 
 
At an economic and social level, the three participating countries are grappling with significant fiscal constraints 
and high debt-to-GDP ratios. Although the countries are all classified as ‘middle income’, this categorization 
masks significant social and income inequality within the countries. Such income-focused classifications also 
fail to account for the countries’ pronounced vulnerability to climate change and other hazards, all of which can

=== PAGE 73 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
 
leave the public and private sectors less well-resourced to address future needs/challenges (including the 
sustainable energy transition) than other middle-income countries that are less vulnerable. Indeed, in all three 
participating countries, governments' restricted fiscal space limits their ability to offer the necessary 
concessionality to launch and implement the IUS model – including by stimulating initial customer engagement 
and addressing other non-financial barriers. Furthermore, local capital markets lack the depth and history 
needed to support the sustainable energy transition (including through the IUS model) without external 
assistance. To address these challenges, the programme will provide external financial assistance to address 
the range of financial and non-financial barriers that (as outlined in Section B.1 and B.2) are inhibiting the launch 
and implementation of IUS. 
 
D.4.2. It is also important to note that within the participating countries, lower-income households, smaller (and more 
informal) businesses and marginalized groups have thus far mostly been unable to participate in (and benefit 
from) the sustainable energy transition. The programme has provisioned for over 300 free energy audits for 
such customer groups. These energy audits will ensure that the programme is able to provide a just energy 
transition opportunity for these customers. Furthermore, the countries are all classified as ‘middle income’ but 
are simultaneously grappling with significant social and economic inequality - dynamics that are described in 
more detail in Annex 8: Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan (GAP). To the extent that households 
and businesses have thus far been able to invest in DERs, this has mostly been limited to those that are on the 
upper end of the socio-economic distribution. Unless concerted action is taken to address the specific barriers 
faced by lower-income and marginalized groups, this dynamic is unlikely to change. The IUS programme 
therefore responds to these challenges, in part by providing a more accessible and inclusive way for utility 
customers to access the financing needed to invest. The IUS model (and the way it will be deployed under the 
programme) is designed to overcome barriers to entry into the sustainable energy sector for marginalized 
groups, such as women, PWDs, the LGBTQIA+ community, and indigenous peoples. The Gender Action Plan 
(GAP) under this programme seeks to provide targeted interventions to improve governance, participation, and 
access to resources and information. This will enable these groups not only to benefit from the prioritized 
technologies but also to become key players and entrepreneurs in this space, fostering economic development 
and social empowerment. The programme will simultaneously provide training and capacity-building initiatives 
to: (i) ensure that energy sector stakeholders (including utilities) are more adept at identifying, mitigating, and 
managing environmental & social risks; and (ii) support the participating electric utilities to be inclusive and 
responsive to the needs of marginalized groups and to reinforce their policies for the successful rollout of the 
model. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Alignment with national priorities 
 
D.5.1. As outlined in Section B.1, the proposed programme is closely aligned with the priorities identified in the NDCs 
submitted by Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica. All three countries assign considerable importance to reducing 
GHG emissions from the energy sector by scaling up investment in renewable energy and energy efficiency. 
The proposed programme will therefore make important contributions to achieving countries’ NDC targets and 
priorities, as well as those stipulated in the policies, strategies and plans that underpin their NDCs. This 
includes, inter alia: 
 
a. Barbados: National Energy Policy (2019-30); National Climate Change Policy Framework. 
b. Belize: Horizon 2010-2030; National Energy Policy Framework; Sustainable Energy Strategy and Action 
Plan (2014-2033); National Climate Change Policy, Strategy and Action Plan. 
c. Jamaica: National Energy Policy (2009-2030); Climate Change Policy Framework; Vision 2030 Jamaica – 
National Development Plan. 
 
D.5.2. National stakeholders have also been actively involved in efforts to get their countries ‘ready’ for IUS, including 
by working with GIZ and the CARICOM Secretariat to implement upstream (pre-investment) IUS institutional 
support activities over the preceding years. These same stakeholders – including the utilities, energy ministries, 
regulators, and National Designated Authorities (NDAs) – have been working closely with CDB and the 
programme preparation team to develop the programme proposal. This is indicative of their commitment to 
launch and implement IUS and contribute to programme implementation as outlined in Section B.4. 
 
Capacity of executing entities to deliver

=== PAGE 74 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
 
D.5.3. All three participating electric utilities (as National Executing Entities) are already experienced with DER 
initiatives. The National Executing Entities will build on/draw from this experience when executing their ‘projects’ 
(portfolios of sub-projects) using their blended GCF-CDB lines of credit, and will do so in a fair, transparent and 
equitable manner. With support from the TA component, the National Executing Entities will also: (a) facilitate 
all necessary related regulatory approvals; (b) change their billing systems as needed to enable on-bill 
financing; (c) adopt and implement a standardized and timebound application process; and (d) utilize and 
distribute programme-generated outreach materials, among other responsibilities. CDB and the programme 
preparation team have assessed the utilities’ policies and procedures to confirm that they have sufficient 
capacity to fulfil their Executing Entity roles (see Annex 2: Feasibility Study). These assessments also identified 
specific areas where additional capacity and support would be needed – all of which has informed the design 
of Component 1 of the programme. 
 
The role of NDAs and other (regional) stakeholders  
D.5.4. Similar to other 'behind the meter' transactions, the IUS programme involves a complex process with multiple 
actors. These include public entities such as government ministries and electricity regulators, as well as private 
entities like service providers and customers. However, the IUS programme facilitated by the CDB stands out 
due to its regional scope and the involvement of the GCF. This uniqueness necessitates the participation of 
various critical actors not typically found in standard ‘behind the meter’ transactions. For example, NDAs will 
play a pivotal role by ensuring the programme's alignment with the local context, engaging stakeholders, and 
acting as liaisons between key parties, among other roles’. The NDAs have also been closely involved in the 
programme preparation process, often directly supporting data gathering and stakeholder consultations. All 
NDAs firmly support the final programme proposal, as evidenced by the No-Objection Letters that are included 
in Annex 1. 
D.5.5. Moreover, the programme places a strong emphasis on engaging with regional stakeholders such as CCREEE 
and CARILEC, along with other national stakeholders including national energy agencies, business 
associations, and customers. Particular emphasis is placed on engaging underserved communities, as 
described in prior sections. 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
D.6.1. The IUS programme is poised to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the three participating BMCs, 
with an estimated avoidance of 601,550 tCO2e. This results in an estimated total cost of about USD 70 per 
tCO2e avoided for the overall programme (including GCF financing and CDB co-financing).48 The cost-
per-tonne for the GCF is lower, at approximately USD 43 per tCO2e avoided49 as outlined in Table 8 below. 
These are considered to be competitive cost-per-tonne rates in a SIDS context, where emissions 
reductions are often more costly than in larger countries. 
 
Table 12: Mitigation impact estimates 
Mitigation impact estimates 
Total GHG avoided 
tCO2e 
601,550 
Estimated cost per tCO2e avoided 
US$ / tCO2e 
$70 
Estimated GCF cost per tCO2e avoided 
US$ / tCO2e 
$43 
 
D.6.2. The programme will also deliver important adaptation benefits. As outlined above in Section D.1, 
approximately10,655 people, including approximately 5,328 women and 5,327 men, are expected to directly 
benefit from enhanced resilience to the increasing risk of heat stress. The cost per direct beneficiary would 
therefore be about USD 3,938. Although this figure seems high when compared to adaptation-focused projects 
financed by GCF, it needs to be evaluated within the context of the broader programme. In particular, it is 
important to bear in mind that: (i) the programme is not strictly focused on climate change adaptation, and will 
also produce considerable mitigation benefits as outlined above; and (ii) the programme focuses not only on 
scaling up investment during its implementation period but also aims to catalyse (and equip national 
 
48 Estimated cost per tCO2e avoided refers to the total programme cost (USD39.9 mil) divided by the total GHG emissions 
avoided. 
49 Estimated GCF cost per tCO2e avoided refers to the total GCF cost (USD28.7 mil) divided by the total GHG emissions 
avoided.

=== PAGE 75 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders to lead) the sustainable energy transition over the medium/long term, during which the utilities will 
continue to deliver IUS services and thereby support many more customers to invest in technologies that 
enhance resilience and reduce GHG emissions. Moreover, the programme is expected to develop or strengthen 
awareness on technologies to increase resilience to heat stress for approximately 30,000 indirect beneficiaries 
 
D.6.3. Another important metric is the level of co-financing mobilized under the programme. As outlined in Section C, 
the financial contribution from the GCF is expected to directly mobilize additional resources from the CDB. In 
particular, the GCF’s USD 20.80 million contribution to the loan component of the programme is expected to be 
blended with approximately USD 16.2 million in financing from the CDB. Furthermore, the participating electric 
utilities/national Executing Entities are expected to mobilize an additional USD 25 million as in-kind contributions 
in the form of investments in smart meters/AMI. This constitutes a favourable co-financing ratio, particularly for 
this type of programme (wherein new and innovative business models are being established) in a SIDS context 
– all of which requires a higher overall level of concessionality than may be needed for other types of projects 
in other jurisdictions.  In this context, it is also important to note that metrics such as the co-financing ratio do 
not fully capture the benefits of the IUS programme. As outlined above, the sub-projects to be financed during 
programme implementation are simply an initial round that will provide the utility with a strong track record while 
also providing a strong demonstration effect within the local markets. Considerable additional investments are 
expected to occur downstream from the programme, which is regarded as a ‘bridge to bankability’ that will equip 
the utilities to secure other (less concessional) sources of financing for follow-on rounds of IUS sub-projects 
after the programme implementation period has ended. 
 
D.6.4. Other important performance and efficiency-related metrics are outlined below and further elaborated in 
Annex 3: Integrated Financial Model. These are the estimatesd (aggregate) portfolio-level results that 
may be achieved through the programme, which are based on reasonable assumptions about the number 
of different types of sub-projects to be financed by the electric utilities using their respective lines of credit. 
Table 13: Estimated IUS programme performance 
Metric 
Notes/Explanation 
Estimated IUS programme 
performance 
Net financial benefit for customers 
(NPV) 
This is the Net Present Value (NPV) of the total 
financial benefits that CDB estimates may be 
accrued by customers over the productive 
lifespan of the technologies in which they may 
invest through the Programme. 
USD 263,024,251 
Installed capacity of rooftop solar 
PV 
This is the total amount of new generating 
capacity of the rooftop solar PV that CDB 
estimates may be installed in the three countries 
during Programme implementation.  
5,622 kW 
Amount of renewable energy 
generated 
This is the total amount of electricity that CDB 
estimates may be generated from the newly 
installed solar PV (above) attributable to the 
Programme over the course of the productive 
lifespan of these technologies. 
220,511 MWh 
Electricity consumption avoided 
through EE measures 
This is the total amount of electricity consumption 
that CDB estimates may be avoided over the 
productive lifespan of the efficient ACs that may 
be installed during Programme implementation. 
1,166,259 MWh 
Installed capacity of energy 
storage 
This is the total storage capacity that CDB 
estimates may be installed in the three countries 
as a result of the support provided by the 
Programme. 
1,083 kWh 
 
 
D.6.5. Furthermore, as detailed in Section B.3 and further elaborated in Annex 2: Feasibility Study, the technologies 
that have been preapproved under the programme were prioritized because they fulfil the following important 
performance-related criteria: they provide direct mitigation and adaptation benefits; their capital cost is low 
enough to ensure financial feasibility; they are established technologies with a likelihood of local capacity; they 
are scalable and replicable; and they are relevant to the IUS programme, aligning with existing legal or 
regulatory frameworks.

=== PAGE 76 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the 
project/programme contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the paradigm shift described in section D.2 
above by applying three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the current state (baseline) and the 
potential scenario (target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point-scale rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also 
describe how the project/programme will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In 
doing so, please refer to section B.2(a) (theory of change).        
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
Currently, adoption of 
distributed clean energy and 
energy efficiency is hindered 
due to several barriers 
including high cost of 
financing, regulatory hurdles, 
limited capacity of the service 
providers, limited capacity of 
customers to fully understand 
technologies and their climate 
and cost benefits, among 
others. Stakeholders also lack 
Low 
Paradigm shift will involve a 
tangible increase in the 
availability and uptake of loans 
for customers, increase 
stakeholders’ and service 
providers’ capacity, 
standardize regulatory policy 
framework thereby developing 
a conducive market system 
that facilitates continued 
investment in the clean energy 
The paradigm shift requires a change in the way the distributed 
clean energy market functions in the participating countries. 
There is a need to provide accessible, affordable, and inclusive 
financial products for eligible customers, develop regulatory 
policy framework, create customer awareness, strengthen 
service providers capacity, etc.  
To contribute to this, the programme will design capacity 
building tools and procedures and deliver awareness-raising 
training to the key stakeholders including customers, etc. The 
programme will also invite global experts to share their 
experience on behind the meter energy solutions, support 
development of regulatory policy documents, connect customers

=== PAGE 77 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
necessary tools, procedures, 
and capacities to integrate 
clean energy investment into 
their operations.  
Furthermore, access to finance 
is still difficult for many 
customers as local commercial 
lenders lack tools to assess 
customers creditworthiness of 
low-income and vulnerable 
demographics, among other 
socio-cultural reasons.  
solutions beyond programme 
period.   
with service providers, among others. Detailed outreach 
strategies will be developed to ensure customers can be made 
aware of both the technologies and the programme offerings. 
The programme will also conduct outreach sessions with local 
commercial banks to help them understand how they can 
facilitate programme scale-up through tailored financial products 
and services for the distributed energy sector.  
The programme efforts coupled with the strong demonstration 
effect that is expected as a result of strong sub-project 
performance under the programme (attributable in part to the 
direct support that will be provided for sub-project preparation), 
this is expected to increase interest in these 
technologies/practices both during and beyond the programme 
implementation period, and thus similarly stimulate demand. 
Replicability 
At present, distributed energy 
adoption in the three 
participating countries and the 
broader Caribbean region is 
still in nascent stages. 
Moreover, due to limited 
customer awareness, difficulty 
in accessing finance, high cost 
of finance combined with 
limited technical and regulatory 
capacity of the participating 
countries, there is significant 
scope of sub-project 
replicability as a direct result of 
programme intervention. The 
programme will enable robust 
sectoral development and 
establish a strong foundation 
for replication. 
Low 
If adequate customer 
awareness, strengthened 
regulatory policy environment, 
institutional, and service 
providers’ capacity could be 
achieved as envisaged, the 
programme can help 
strengthen the overall market 
ecosystem and successfully 
deploy clean energy sub-
projects in the participating 
counties.  
Furthermore, with the lessons 
learnt from this programme, 
the success story could then 
be replicated seamlessly in 
other Caribbean countries as 
the they are facing similar 
climate change and energy 
The programme will support the participating countries, 
particularly the regulator and the utility, to develop, market and 
deploy distributed renewable energy and energy efficiency 
solutions. At the same time, the programme also aims to 
establish a robust regulatory policy framework that governs 
behind the meter distributed energy sector for the long-term. 
Furthermore, the programme has also envisaged technical skill 
enhancement of the local TSPs, strengthen the existing 
institutional landscape through trainings/workshops on E&S, 
GESI, M&R, etc. that enables long-term sectoral development. 
The tools and procedures developed as part of the programme 
can be leveraged to deploy similar programmes and/or 
technologies beyond the programme period. Adequate local and 
regional stakeholder outreach has been planned to share 
lessons learnt, global and local best practices, potential hurdles 
and remedies during programme implementation which will 
demonstrate a successful model for scaling up fit-for-purpose 
financing for climate-related investments, while also helping to 
establish strong branding for such financial products. This in turn 
will provide a strong foundation for replication in multiple ways:

=== PAGE 78 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenge. The programme’s 
approach and financial 
solutions can support more 
widespread adoption of 
climate change mitigation and 
adaptation technologies/ 
practices.  
- 
Customers outside the programme scope – many 
customer groups such as industrial, large commercial and 
institutional customers are outside the ambit of the current 
programme. Although these customers do not necessarily 
face financial challenges to adopt or implement behind the 
meter energy solutions, however may face issues or 
administrative delays due to the lack of a robust regulatory 
policy framework for the sector. The programme 
addresses this barrier by developing a long-term market 
ecosystem through the planned TA support. This will 
increase the likelihood of large customers increasing their 
investments in distributed clean energy solutions due to 
regulatory policy certainty.  
- 
Local commercial banks currently outside the 
programme scope – as elaborated in the barrier 
assessment, accessing low-cost finance and availability of 
financial products to service the behind the meter 
distributed energy solutions is limited. Among other 
reasons, 
perceived 
technology 
risks, 
assessing 
customer’s creditworthiness, etc. may be attributed for the 
current state. The programme has envisaged outreach 
sessions and material for the local commercial banks to 
help them understand the IUS model and its benefits, 
technology awareness, etc. This understanding of the 
model, technology, and risk will increase the likelihood 
that local banks will similarly integrate considerations into 
their lending operations. 
- 
CDB can easily replicate the programme in other 
Caribbean countries, drawing on the developed 
elements, including the established programme brand, as 
well as the programme approach, tools and capacity-
building materials. 
Sustainability 
Currently, the regulatory policy 
framework, availability of 
affordable finance, streamlined 
application procedures, among 
Low 
Paradigm shift involves 
establishing long-term 
solutions such as digital tools, 
transparent and accountable 
The programme aims to build a robust market ecosystem in the 
participating countries to ensure distributed clean energy 
capacity addition using a utility centric and led business model. 
This ensures that a streamlined capacity addition could be 
planned through a programme that not only promotes various

=== PAGE 79 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
others is limited in the 
participating countries. 
Furthermore, there is a need 
for institutional strengthening 
on cross-cutting areas such as 
E&S, GESI, among others.  
processes, developing robust 
regulatory policy frameworks, 
strengthening institutional 
capacity, and ensuring 
adequate and accessible low-
cost financial products for the 
distributed clean energy 
solutions. 
clean energy technologies but also provides the customers with 
necessary capacity building and tools for decision making. The 
programme also envisages to lower TSPs customer acquisition 
costs, increase market competition, as well as quality of service 
and customers’ experience.  
In addition, the programme also aims to ensure that end 
beneficiaries in partner countries will have positive experiences 
with their programme-supported sub-projects (i.e. achievement of 
the expected energy cost savings), in part because of the 
support provided for sub-project preparation. This in turn will 
contribute to ensuring that the programme-supported 
technologies/practices are sustainably utilized beyond 
programme closure, and that the interest in such 
technologies/practices among other local private sector 
stakeholders is similarly sustained.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators 
may be selected as applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable 
to measure any given project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific 
indicators).  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final50 
All mitigation results 
areas 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Utilities, with the help of 
National Energy 
Consultant, will collect, 
aggregate and report 
sub-project information 
as per the programme 
0 
Average CO2 
saving 
(tonnes/year): 
24,062 
 
Average CO2 
saving 
(tonnes/year): 
24,062 
 
Quantity of GHG emissions 
associated with a unit 
(MWh) of electricity 
generated in the respective 
 
50 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective. 
Total lifespan period (here and below) – is defined as 25 years for solar PV (lifespan of technology), 20 years for solar water heaters, 15 years for efficient ACs, and about 5 
years for efficient lighting.

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring & reporting 
requirements (either 
digitally or in an excel 
file), drawing on the 
following (non-
exhaustive) list of 
methods which will vary 
depending on the sub-
project type: 
• Equipment/technology 
data sheets 
• Equipment/technology 
purchase/service 
contracts 
• Project technical 
assessment reports 
(in case of complex 
projects involving 
more than one 
technology) 
• Energy audit reports 
(were necessary) 
• On-site visits if 
necessary 
Information gathered 
through the above-listed 
methods will be 
independently verified 
through baseline, mid-
term and endline surveys 
CO2 saving 
(tonnes) – 
cumulative: 
72,186 total, 
including: 
Barbados 
(25,826) 
Belize (5,416) 
Jamaica 
(40,944) 
 
Mid-term 
period (here 
and below) is 
defined as the 
end of the 3rd 
year after 
initiation of the 
programme 
 
Targets for 
GHG emission 
reduction are 
presented per 
year, as well as 
cumulative at 
the end of the 
period. 
CO2 saving 
(tonnes – 
cumulative: 
144,372 total, 
including: 
Barbados 
(51,653) 
Belize (10,832) 
Jamaica 
(81,887) 
 
CO2 saving 
(tonnes – 
cumulative 
during total 
lifespan of 
technologies): 
601,550 
 
Final period 
(here and 
below) is 
defined as the 
end of the 6th 
year (end of 
programme 
implementation 
– period during 
which all funds 
shall be 
allocated) 
 
Targets for 
GHG emission 
IUS country and provided to 
customers via the grid. 
Ex-ante mitigation 
estimation: For the 
purpose of the IUS 
programme, the GEF for 
each country has been 
modelled across the years 
of the IUS implementation. 
The modelling was done to 
account for the possible 
increase share of 
renewable energy in the 
national grid of the 
respective country over the 
years. Hence, the value of 
the GEF per country and 
per year was used in 
computing the ex-ante.  
 
Ex-post mitigation 
estimation: For ex-post 
emissions estimation, 
current and updated GEF 
values will be employed. 
 
Source of data: 
• 
UNFCCC IFI values 
and IUS Financial 
Model (modelled 
values for ex-ante) 
• 
Utilities (for ex-post)

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduction are 
presented per 
year, as well as 
cumulative at 
the end of the 
period. 
Latest UNFCCC IFI values 
published GEF values (for 
ex-post); currently 
Harmonized IFI Default Grid 
Factors 2021 v3.251 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Utilities, with the help of 
National Energy 
Consultant, will collect, 
aggregate and report 
sub-project information 
as per the programme 
monitoring & reporting 
requirements (either 
digitally or in an excel 
file), drawing on the 
following (non-
exhaustive) list of 
methods which will vary 
depending on the sub-
project type: 
• Equipment/technology 
data sheets 
• Equipment/technology 
purchase/service 
contracts 
• Project technical 
assessment reports 
(in case of complex 
projects involving 
more than one 
technology) 
0 
Average CO2 
saving 
(tonnes/year): 
3,975 
 
CO2 saving 
(tonnes) – 
cumulative: 
11,925 total, 
including: 
Barbados 
(3,010) 
Belize (1,603) 
Jamaica 
(7,311) 
 
Mid-term 
period (here 
and below) is 
defined as the 
end of the 3rd 
year after 
initiation of the 
programme 
 
Average CO2 
saving 
(tonnes/year): 
3,975 
 
CO2 saving 
(tonnes – 
cumulative: 
23,849 total, 
including: 
Barbados 
(6,020) 
Belize (3,207) 
Jamaica 
(14,622) 
 
CO2 saving 
(tonnes – 
cumulative 
during total 
lifespan of 
technologies): 
99,373 
 
Quantity of GHG emissions 
associated with a unit 
(MWh) of electricity 
generated in the respective 
IUS country and provided to 
customers via the grid. 
Ex-ante mitigation 
estimation: For the 
purpose of the IUS 
programme, the GEF for 
each country has been 
modelled across the years 
of the IUS implementation. 
The modelling was done to 
account for the possible 
increase share of 
renewable energy in the 
national grid of the 
respective country over the 
years. Hence, the value of 
the GEF per country and 
per year was used in 
computing the ex-ante.  
 
Ex-post mitigation 
estimation: For ex-post 
 
51 https://unfccc.int/climate-action/sectoral-engagement/ifis-harmonization-of-standards-for-ghg-accounting/ifi-twg-list-of-methodologies

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Energy audit reports 
(were necessary) 
• On-site visits if 
necessary 
Information gathered 
through the above-listed 
methods will be 
independently verified 
through baseline, mid-
term and endline surveys 
Targets for 
GHG emission 
reduction are 
presented per 
year, as well as 
cumulative at 
the end of the 
period. 
Final period 
(here and 
below) is 
defined as the 
end of the 6th 
year (end of 
programme 
implementation 
– period during 
which all funds 
shall be 
allocated) 
 
Targets for 
GHG emission 
reduction are 
presented per 
year, as well as 
cumulative at 
the end of the 
period. 
emissions estimation, 
current and updated GEF 
values will be employed. 
 
Source of data: 
• 
UNFCCC IFI values 
and IUS Financial 
Model (modelled 
values for ex-ante) 
• 
Utilities (for ex-post) 
• 
Latest UNFCCC IFI 
values published 
GEF values (for ex-
post); currently 
Harmonized IFI 
Default Grid Factors 
2021 v3.252 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
Supplementary  1.2: 
Installed energy 
stoarage capacity 
At the time of 
commissioning of the 
installed solar PV (with 
battery storge) by the 
utility, the installed 
capacity of the system 
will be recorded – this 
will be an ongoing 
process within the life of 
the IUS programme.  
Each customer will be 
issued a unique ID/Code 
against which the 
0 
Total 
estimated 
installed 
storage 
capacity: 0.54 
MWh total, 
including: 
Barbados 
(0.068 MWh) 
Belize (0.09 
MWh) 
Total 
estimated 
installed 
storage 
capacity: 1 
MWh total, 
including: 
Barbados 
(0.137 MWh) 
Belize (0.181 
MWh) 
The estimated energy 
storage capacity is based 
on the estimated numbers 
of subprojects or customers 
that can benefit from the 
financing of the IUS 
programme. These numbers 
are calculated using the 
estimated country-level 
financing allocation, project 
level financing allocation, 
estimated average unit 
 
52 https://unfccc.int/climate-action/sectoral-engagement/ifis-harmonization-of-standards-for-ghg-accounting/ifi-twg-list-of-methodologies

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
installed capacity will be 
recorded in an Excel 
spreadsheet. 
Jamaica (0.382 
MWh) 
 
 
Jamaica (0.765 
MWh) 
 
costs, and assumptions on 
the size of subprojects. 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
Supplementary 1.3: 
Installed renewable 
energy capacity 
At the time of 
commissioning of the 
installed solar PV by the 
utility, the installed 
capacity of the PV 
system will be recorded 
– this will be an ongoing 
process within the life of 
the IUS programme.  
Each customer will be 
issued a unique ID/Code 
against which the 
installed capacity will be 
recorded in an Excel 
spreadsheet. 
0 
Total 
estimated 
installed 
capacity: 2.2 
MW total, 
including: 
Barbados (0.5 
MW) 
Belize (0.5 
MW) 
Jamaica (1.2 
MW)  
Total 
estimated 
installed 
capacity: 5.6 
MW, including: 
Barbados (1.3 
MW) 
Belize (1.3 
MW) 
Jamaica (3 
MW) 
 
The estimated capacity is 
based on the estimated 
numbers of subprojects or 
customers that can benefit 
from the financing of the 
IUS programme. These 
numbers are calculated 
using the estimated country-
level financing allocation, 
project level financing 
allocation, estimated 
average unit costs, and 
assumptions on the size of 
subprojects. 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
Supplementary 1.4: 
Renewable energy 
generated 
Meter readings from the 
solar PV sub-projects, 
will be obtained at the 
time of normal meter 
reading as per the 
existing billing cycle and 
approach of the utilities 
for meter readings.  
The National Energy 
Consultant embedded in 
the utility of each country 
will be responsible for 
compiling the renewable 
energy data obtained by 
the utility into an Excel 
spreadsheet in a user-
friendly manner. The 
0 
Total 
estimated 
renewable 
energy 
generated:  
26,461 MWh 
total, including: 
Barbados 
(6,203 MWh) 
Belize (6,118 
MWh) 
Jamaica 
(14,139 MWh)  
 
Total 
estimated 
renewable 
energy 
generated:  
52,922 MWh 
total, including: 
Barbados 
(12,406 MWh) 
Belize (12,237 
MWh) 
Jamaica 
(28,278 MWh) 
 
The estimated renewable 
energy generation is based 
on the estimated numbers 
of subprojects or customers 
that can benefit from the 
financing of the IUS 
programme. These numbers 
are calculated using the 
estimated country-level 
financing allocation, project 
level financing allocation, 
estimated average unit 
costs, and assumptions on 
the size of subprojects.

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consultant will transmit 
the data to the CDB 
annually or at any other 
frequency to be agreed 
upon. 
Cumulative 
estimated 
renewable 
energy 
generated 
(over total 
lifespan of 
technologies): 
220,511 MWh 
total, including: 
Barbados 
(51,969 MWh) 
Belize (50,990 
MWh) 
Jamaica 
(117,826 MWh)  
 
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Utilities, with the help of 
National Energy 
Consultant, will collect, 
aggregate and report 
sub-project information 
as per the programme 
monitoring & reporting 
requirements (either 
digitally or in an excel 
file), drawing on the 
following (non-
exhaustive) list of 
methods which will vary 
depending on the sub-
project type: 
• Equipment/technology 
data sheets 
0 
Average CO2 
saving 
(tonnes/year): 
20,087 
 
CO2 saving 
(tonnes) – 
cumulative: 
60,261 total, 
including: 
Barbados 
(22,816) 
Belize (3,813) 
Jamaica 
(33,632) 
 
Average CO2 
saving 
(tonnes/year): 
20,087 
 
CO2 saving 
(tonnes – 
cumulative: 
120,523 total, 
including: 
Barbados 
(45,632) 
Belize (7,625) 
Jamaica 
(67,265) 
 
Quantity of GHG emissions 
associated with a unit 
(MWh) of electricity 
generated in the respective 
IUS country and provided to 
customers via the grid. 
Ex-ante mitigation 
estimation: For the 
purpose of the IUS 
programme, the GEF for 
each country has been 
modelled across the years 
of the IUS implementation. 
The modelling was done to 
account for the possible 
increase share of 
renewable energy in the

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Equipment/technology 
purchase/service 
contracts 
• Project technical 
assessment reports 
(in case of complex 
projects involving 
more than one 
technology) 
• Energy audit reports 
(were necessary) 
• On-site visits if 
necessary 
Information gathered 
through the above-listed 
methods will be 
independently verified 
through baseline, mid-
term and endline surveys 
Mid-term 
period (here 
and below) is 
defined as the 
end of the 3rd 
year after 
initiation of the 
programme 
 
Targets for 
GHG emission 
reduction are 
presented per 
year, as well as 
cumulative at 
the end of the 
period. 
CO2 saving 
(tonnes – 
cumulative 
during total 
lifespan of 
technologies): 
502,178 
 
Final period 
(here and 
below) is 
defined as the 
end of the 6th 
year (end of 
programme 
implementation 
– period during 
which all funds 
shall be 
allocated) 
 
Targets for 
GHG emission 
reduction are 
presented per 
year, as well as 
cumulative at 
the end of the 
period. 
national grid of the 
respective country over the 
years. Hence, the value of 
the GEF per country and 
per year was used in 
computing the ex-ante.  
 
Ex-post mitigation 
estimation: For ex-post 
emissions estimation, 
current and updated GEF 
values will be employed. 
 
Source of data: 
• 
UNFCCC IFI values 
and IUS Financial 
Model (modelled 
values for ex-ante) 
• 
Utilities (for ex-post) 
Latest UNFCCC IFI values 
published GEF values (for 
ex-post); currently 
Harmonized IFI Default Grid 
Factors 2021 v3.253 
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
Supplementary 1.1: 
Annual energy savings 
Meter readings will be 
obtained as per the 
existing billing cycle and 
0 
Total 
estimated 
energy 
Total 
estimated 
energy 
The meter readings will be 
obtained by the utility in 
each country as per their 
 
53 https://unfccc.int/climate-action/sectoral-engagement/ifis-harmonization-of-standards-for-ghg-accounting/ifi-twg-list-of-methodologies

=== PAGE 86 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach of the utilities 
based in meter readings. 
The difference of a 
customer’s meter 
reading for a current 
billing cycle and that of 
the previous cycle 
represents the change in 
the quantity of units 
(kWh) consumed. 
 
The National Energy 
Consultant embedded in 
the utility of each country 
will be responsible for 
compiling the data 
obtained by the utility 
into an Excel 
spreadsheet in a user-
friendly manner. The 
consultant will transmit 
the data to the CDB 
annually or at any other 
frequency to be agreed 
upon. 
consumption 
avoided from 
energy 
efficiency 
services and 
appliances:  
139,951 MWh 
total, including: 
Barbados 
(49,322 MWh) 
Belize (19,111 
MWh) 
Jamaica 
(71,517 MWh) 
consumption 
avoided from 
energy 
efficiency 
services and 
appliances:  
279,902 MWh 
total, including: 
Barbados 
(98,644 MWh) 
Belize (38,223 
MWh) 
Jamaica 
(143,034 MWh) 
 
Cumulative 
estimated 
energy 
consumption 
avoided from 
energy 
services and 
appliances 
(over total 
lifespan of 
services):  
1,166,259 
MWh total, 
including: 
Barbados 
(411,019 MWh) 
Belize 
(159,263 MWh) 
respective billing cycle. To 
estimate the quantity of 
avoided emissions, the 
measured energy 
consumption will be 
compared with the baseline 
consumption prior to the 
implementation of the sub-
project – this will be 
determined using three 
years historical data for the 
customer/premises, if 
available or by using 
historical data for similar 
premises. 
 
Annual energy savings 
estimates only includes the 
expected energy 
consumption avoided from 
energy efficiency initiatives 
under the IUS programme.

=== PAGE 87 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jamaica 
(595,976 MWh) 
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
The following sources of 
information and methods 
can be used (but not 
limited to) for collection 
of data to measure the 
progress against the 
targets: 
• Loan files and 
technical support 
documentation.  
To ensure timely and 
accurate reporting, 
required data obtained 
via above-mentioned 
should be stored in 
dedicated reporting tool. 
0 
Total 
estimated 
direct 
beneficiaries: 
3,729 (of whom 
at least 50% 
women), 
including: 
Barbados 
(1,237) 
Belize (475) 
Jamaica 
(2,016) 
 
Total 
estimated 
indirect 
beneficiaries: 
14,921 (of 
whom at least 
50% women) 
Total 
estimated 
direct 
beneficiaries:  
10,655 (of 
whom at least 
50% women), 
including: 
Barbados 
(3,537) 
Belize (1,357) 
Jamaica 
(5,761) 
 
Total 
estimated 
indirect 
beneficiaries: 
29,752 (of 
whom at least 
50% women) 
Direct beneficiaries = total 
number of individuals in 
residential settings 
benefiting from AC sub-
projects combined with the 
number of AC sub-projects 
for commercial customers. 
Average household sizes 
are: 2.85 in Barbados; 3.75 
in Belize; and 3.18 in 
Jamaica. 
Indirect beneficiaries =  
Number of beneficiaries 
attending workshops, 
conferences, training 
sessions, accessing IUS 
helpdesk, availing low-cost 
energy audits, etc. Detailed 
breakdown included in 
Section E.5. 
 
ARA3 Infrastructure 
and built environment 
Supplementary 2.6: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) living in 
buildings that have 
increased resilience 
against climate hazards 
The following sources of 
information and methods 
can be used (but not 
limited to) for collection 
of data to measure the 
progress against the 
targets: 
0 
Total 
estimated 
beneficiaries: 
3,266, 
including 
• Barbados 
Total: 1,117; 
Males: 558; 
Total 
estimated 
beneficiaries: 
9,444, 
including 
• Barbados 
Total: 3,101; 
Males: 
1,550; 
Beneficiaries = total 
number of individuals in 
residential settings 
expected to benefit from 
efficient AC sub-projects 
split across females and 
males (i.e. number of 
residential beneficiary 
customers x average

=== PAGE 88 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Loan files and 
technical support 
documentation.  
To ensure timely and 
accurate reporting, 
required data obtained 
via above-mentioned 
should be stored in 
dedicated reporting tool. 
Females: 
559 
• Belize Total: 
302; Males: 
151; 
Females: 
151 
• Jamaica 
Total: 1,847; 
Males: 923; 
Females: 
924 
Females: 
1551, 
• Belize Total: 
1,226; 
Males: 613; 
Females: 
613 
• Jamaica 
Total: 5,117; 
Males: 
2,558; 
Females: 
2,559 
household size). Average 
household sizes are: 2.85 in 
Barbados; 3.75 in Belize; 
and 3.18 in Jamaica. 
 
 
      
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome 
against the respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. 
Describe how the project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section. 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country-
driven manner 
The IUS model is a 
novel model to 
accelerate distributed 
clean energy adoption in 
the participating 
countries by anchoring 
the programme delivery 
at the utility. 
Consequently, the 
institutional and 
regulatory landscape in 
the participating 
countries needs to be 
updated to cater to the 
medium 
Key stakeholder’s i.e., 
the ministry, regulatory 
authority, and the utility 
will have strengthened 
their capacity to 
implement the IUS 
model and by extension 
serve the distributed 
clean energy market in 
the participating 
countries. Key 
stakeholders will have 
also developed 
additional capacity to 
The target scenario will 
be achieved by:  
• 
Addressing 
regulatory 
barriers 
impeding the 
implementation 
of the IUS model 
(Activity 1.1.1) 
• 
Addressing 
broader policy 
framework 
needs to 
strengthen 
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 89 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programme needs as 
well as facilitate long 
term market 
development. All the 
participating countries 
are making positive 
institutional and 
regulatory 
improvements, there are 
a handful of outstanding 
issues that needs to be 
addressed to achieve 
complete legal, 
regulatory and 
institutional 
preparedness for 
seamless execution of 
the IUS programme. For 
instance, enhancing 
regulators capacity to 
wholistically understand 
IUS transactions its 
impact on the power 
sector landscape, 
process IUS related 
regulatory applications, 
establishing regulatory 
jurisdiction, etc. 
Furthermore, there is 
also the need to update 
and/or develop 
regulatory framework 
such as distributed 
energy regulations, 
feed-in-tariffs, etc. 
address cross-cutting 
areas of programme 
delivery i.e., gender and 
social inclusion, 
environmental and 
climate change, among 
others. 
 
The regulatory 
framework for distributed 
renewable energy and 
energy efficiency will be 
strengthen in the 
participating countries. 
This will directly impact 
the sector’s growth as a 
robust long-term market 
ecosystem is developed. 
prospects and 
incentives for 
investment in 
distributed 
renewable 
energy, energy 
efficiency, and 
DERs (Activity 
1.1.2) 
• 
Enhance 
Executing 
Entities’ and 
other 
stakeholders’ 
capacity to 
implement the 
IUS model 
(Activity 1.3.2) 
 
Thorough the above-
mentioned activities, the 
IUS programme aims to 
address a key barrier 
i.e., streamline the legal 
and regulatory 
environment in the 
participating BMCs. 
Additionally, the TA 
activities planned under 
these activities will not 
only help facilitate a 
robust market 
ecosystem development 
to fast-track distributed 
clean energy

=== PAGE 90 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deployment under the 
IUS programme but also 
ensure a facilitative 
institutional, legal and 
regulatory environment 
for distributed clean 
energy post the 
programme period. 
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation 
Distributed renewable 
energy and energy 
efficiency uptake in the 
participating countries is 
increasing; however, 
lack of standardized 
processes and 
framework, inequitable 
access to low-cost 
finance, limited capacity 
of the stakeholders, 
limited customer 
awareness, and high 
customer acquisition 
cost for the service 
providers etc. are some 
challenges that have 
resulted in a relatively 
slow technology 
deployment. 
 
medium 
All the participating 
BMCs develop the 
necessary framework(s) 
to ensure a robust 
market development, 
potential customers 
become aware about 
benefits of available 
technologies, customer 
acquisition cost for the 
TSPs is reduced, and 
there is a steady 
increase in the rate of 
adoption for behind the 
meter clean energy 
solutions. 
The target scenario will 
be achieved by:  
• 
Raising 
awareness of 
renewable 
energy and 
energy 
efficiency 
opportunities 
and potential 
savings among 
customers 
(Activity 1.2.1) 
• 
Promoting the 
IUS model and 
associated 
services (Activity 
1.2.2) 
• 
Providing 
customers with 
hands-on 
support to 
identify and 
develop sub-
projects (Activity 
1.2.3.) 
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 91 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Enhance 
Executing 
Entities’ and 
other 
stakeholders’ 
capacity to 
implement the 
IUS model 
(Activity 1.3.2) 
• 
Training for 
qualified TSPs 
(Activity 1.3.3) 
• 
Prepare, finance 
and implement 
sub-projects 
(Activity 2.1.1) 
 
Through the above-
mentioned activities, the 
IUS programme aims to 
sensitize customers on 
the benefits of 
distributed clean energy 
solutions and increase 
demand. The 
programme also 
ensures adequate 
support to the customers 
to avail programme 
benefits, improve 
technical competence of 
the service providers. 
 
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Key institutions and 
stakeholders in the 
low 
Key institutions and 
stakeholders in the 
The target scenario will 
be achieved by:  
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 92 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level 
participating countries 
are aware of the climate 
risks as well as 
understand the 
opportunities available 
for low-carbon 
technologies; however, 
there is a lack of 
inclusivity and 
understanding of cross-
cutting areas such as 
gender and social 
inclusion, etc. 
 
Furthermore, there are 
several pending issues 
hampering the market 
development for 
distributed renewable 
energy and energy 
efficiency solutions in 
the participating 
countries, such as (a) 
lack of accountable and 
transparent processes 
and procedures, (b) 
unavailability of 
affordable and inclusive 
financing options, (c) 
limited technical 
capacity of the service 
participating countries 
are more aware on 
improve business 
operations and deliver 
programme services to 
even the most 
vulnerable sections of 
the society through a 
robust market.  
 
The behind the meter 
energy distributed 
energy market in the 
country is developed 
through adoption of 
accountable and 
transparent approval 
and administrative 
processes, locally 
developed affordable 
financing options for 
long term sectoral 
sustainability, adequate 
customer outreach to 
ensure technology and 
programme benefits are 
well understood, 
capacity building training 
of service providers, and 
capacity building 
workshops for key 
stakeholders i.e., energy 
ministry, regulator, etc. 
on cross-cutting areas.  
• 
Addressing 
regulatory 
barriers 
impeding the 
implementation 
of the IUS model 
(Activity 1.1.1) 
• 
Addressing 
broader policy 
framework 
needs to 
strengthen 
prospects and 
incentives for 
investment in 
distributed 
renewable 
energy, energy 
efficiency, and 
DERs (Activity 
1.1.2) 
• 
Raising 
awareness of 
renewable 
energy and 
energy 
efficiency 
opportunities 
and potential 
savings among 
customers 
(Activity 1.2.1) 
• 
Promoting the 
IUS model and 
associated

=== PAGE 93 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
providers, (d) limited 
customers’ awareness 
on cost and climate 
benefits of the proposed 
energy solutions,  
 
services (Activity 
1.2.2) 
• 
Providing 
customers with 
hands-on 
support to 
identify and 
develop sub-
projects (Activity 
1.2.3.) 
• 
Enhance 
Executing 
Entities’ and 
other 
stakeholders’ 
capacity to 
implement the 
IUS model 
(Activity 1.3.2) 
• 
Training for 
qualified TSPs 
(Activity 1.3.3) 
 
The IUS programme is 
designed to address 
both the market needs 
by creating a conducive 
business environment 
and provide low-cost 
finance to install 
technologies and 
services. The above-
mentioned activities 
directly provide the 
much-needed market

=== PAGE 94 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
support through the TA 
component and address 
barriers and root causes 
that have hindered 
sector’s growth in the 
country. 
 
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
The IUS model is a 
relatively newer 
model in the 
Caribbean market. 
Globally, similar, or 
slightly modified 
versions of the 
proposed model 
have been 
implemented in 
many jurisdictions. 
Therefore, the 
participating 
countries are 
relatively well versed 
with the renewable 
energy technologies, 
energy efficiency 
services and their 
climate benefits, 
there is still a need 
for knowledge 
sharing, experiential 
learning, understand 
and implement 
global best 
low 
Stakeholders from the 
participating countries 
will engages with 
international experts to 
understand issues, 
challenges, and 
remedies for smooth 
implementation of the 
programme. This 
experiential learning 
from experts of more 
developed markets will 
enhance stakeholders’ 
knowledge around good 
practices, etc.  
 
Participating 
stakeholders will engage 
with regional 
stakeholders form non-
participating Caribbean 
nations to share their 
experience, lessons 
learnt, implementation 
issues and remedial 
actions, etc. This will 
ensure long-term 
The target scenario will 
be achieved by:  
• 
Facilitating 
knowledge 
exchange 
among targeted 
BMCs (Activity 
1.3.1) 
• 
Supporting 
information 
exchange with 
non-participating 
Caribbean 
countries, 
including 
governments, 
regulators, 
utilities, etc. 
(Activity 1.3.4.) 
• 
Creating a 
Community of 
Practice within 
the CDB 
borrowing 
member 
countries. 
(Activity 1.3.5.) 
 
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 95 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
 
 
 
practices, 
methodologies, and 
standards, for 
smooth 
implementation of 
the IUS programme. 
regional programme 
sustainability.  
 
The knowledge products 
created under the IUS 
programme, such as 
regulatory frameworks, 
digital application tools, 
administrative 
processes, etc. could be 
leveraged by non-
participating countries to 
develop their local 
distributed clean energy 
markets. 
The IUS programme 
design ensures that the 
programme lessons and 
learnings are shared 
among regional 
Caribbean members. 
This will help other 
Caribbean nations to 
leverage the IUS 
programme, adopt good 
practices, and develop 
their own programme to 
accelerate clean energy 
transition. 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down 
tailored indicators to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide against which 
outcomes they would like to set project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add 
and monitor co-benefit indicators under the “Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed. 
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this 
section should correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan). 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ 
outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
Output 1.1: 
Strengthened 
regulatory and 
institutional 
frameworks 
Number of legal 
and/or regulatory 
frameworks 
developed or 
updated, and notified  
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
0 
3 
6 
At this stage it is difficult to envisage if 
there is a need for any regulatory approval 
or amendment for expedited 
implementation of the IUS programme in 
participating countries.

=== PAGE 96 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitating the 
deployment of 
distributed RE, EE 
and other DER 
technologies. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Copy of the 
framework(s) 
developed, 
updated and 
notified 
 
Participating countries have enabling 
regulatory framework(s) to a varying 
degree. For instance, Barbados and 
Jamaica have been publishing renewable 
energy FIT, on the other hand Belize is still 
finalizing them.  
 
Based on the feasibility assessment and 
stakeholder consultations, provision to 
develop the most relevant regulatory 
framework specific to the country’s 
requirement has been provisioned that 
help strengthens enabling environment for 
the IUS. 
Number of updated 
and streamlined 
administrative/ 
application 
procedures 
published 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Copy of the 
procedures 
published  
0 
3 
3 
Currently, some participating countries 
have put in place an administrative 
process that is followed by interested 
customers to avail distributed energy 
services. These administrative processes 
need to be updated to include both 
renewable energies as well energy 
efficiency solutions as envisaged under 
the IUS programme. 
Number of TSP 
technical 
qualification 
guidelines published 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
0 
3 
3 
One qualification guideline document will 
be prepared for each participating country 
during PY-1 and PY-2

=== PAGE 97 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Copy of the 
technical 
guidelines 
published 
Number of staff 
members of the 
Ministry and the 
Regulator trained to 
address cross-
cutting issues such 
as GESI, E&S, etc. 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Copy of the 
training/workshop 
notes 
 
Copy of the 
attendance sheet 
0 
30 
60 
It is assumed that each participating 
country will nominate at least 10 staff 
members (5 each from Ministry and the 
Regulator) per training/ workshop. 
Output 1.2: 
Enhanced capacity 
of customers to 
invest in distributed 
RE, EE and other 
DERs through the 
IUS Model. 
 
Number of 
customers attending 
the renewable 
energy and energy 
efficiency awareness 
sessions 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Copy of the 
workshop notes 
0 
150 (Males: 75; 
Females: 75) 
300 (Males 150; 
Females: 150) 
It is assumed that about 50 customers 
attend each awareness session per 
country. Two session will be organized per 
country, and thus 6 sessions in total.

=== PAGE 98 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copy of the 
attendance sheet 
Number of low-cost 
energy audits 
completed. 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Energy audit 
report by the TSP 
0 
180 
300 
A total of 300 low-cost energy audits (pre-
feasibility) are planned for the most 
vulnerable/low-income residential 
customers at subsidised rates, i.e., 100 
customers per participating country.  
 
One customer eligibility criterion per 
country will also be developed during PY 
1. 
Number of 
customers helped 
through the 
strengthened utility 
helpdesk 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Number of 
customers helped 
by the helpdesk 
(either through 
phone call, email, 
online chat, etc.) 
0 
2,250 
4,500 
It is assumed that a total of 250 customers 
per country per PY, i.e., 750 customers 
per PY across the participating BMCs, 
reach out to the customer helpdesk 
seeking clarification on the IUS 
programme. 
Number of 
downloads 
(knowledge 
products, audience 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
0 
2,250 
4,500 
It is assumed that a total of 250 customers 
per country per PY, i.e., 750 customers 
per PY across the participating BMCs, 
download some programme related

=== PAGE 99 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reached by the 
communication 
strategies, etc.) 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
information from the programme’s website, 
etc.  
Number of IUS 
programme website 
visitors 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Copy of the 
website visit log 
0 
9,000 
18,000 
It is assumed that a total of 1,000 
customers per country per PY, i.e., 3,000 
customers per PY across the participating 
BMCs visit the programme’s website to 
understand more about the programme. 
Output 1.3: 
Increased technical 
capacity of utilities, 
TSPs and other 
stakeholders to 
deploy and maintain 
distributed RE, EE 
and other DER 
technologies. 
 
Number of 
participants 
attending the 
knowledge sharing 
sessions among 
participating 
countries. 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Session reports 
and material 
used 
 
Copy of the 
participation or 
attendance list. 
0 
45 
90 
A total of two virtual knowledge exchange 
sessions are planned over the programme 
implementation period. 
 
Knowledge exchange material, primarily 
presentations and notes, will also be 
developed and shared among stakeholders 
prior to the session. Local Regulatory 
Consultant (part of the TA Implementation 
Firm) and National Energy Consultant will 
provide inputs on the lessons learnt by the 
regulator and the utility respectively during 
programme implementation.  
 
It is assumed that at least 5 stakeholders 
per country (15 total) will participate in 
each knowledge sharing session.

=== PAGE 100 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of capacity 
building strategies 
for business 
development that 
are being utilised. 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Copy of the 
strategy 
0 
3 
3 
One business development strategy and 
action plan will be developed during PY 1 
per utility. 
Number of digital 
application platforms 
that are operational 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Weblink of the 
digital platform 
0 
3 
3 
One digital application submission and 
approval platform will be developed in PY 
1 as per the approved administrative 
process. 
Number of Executing 
Entity’s staff trained 
on cross cutting 
areas 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Training report 
0 
30 
30 
A total of at least six capacity building 
trainings, i.e., 2 per participating country, 
are planned for the Executing Entity on 
cross-cutting topics like environmental and 
social management, gender and social 
inclusion. 
 
It is expected that each Executing Entity 
nominates at least 5 staff members per 
training session, i.e., a total of 10 staff 
members per BMC.

=== PAGE 101 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of TSP 
training 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Training report 
0 
60 
60 
At least three TSP-focussed trainings (1 
per country) are planned in PY 1, with 
refresher trainings in PY2 and PY4. These 
trainings will cover topics such as IUS 
programme design and implementation; 
technical session on design, standards, 
etc.; legal and regulatory session on key 
insights of the local laws and framework; 
E&S risk and mitigation; GESI, M&R, etc. 
 
It is estimated that around 20 TSPs will 
attend a training session per country, i.e., 
a total of at least 60 TSPs across the three 
participating countries. These same TSPs 
are then expected to attend the refresher 
trainings in PY2 and PY4. 
Number of 
participants 
attending the 
regional knowledge 
exchange sessions 
with non-
participating 
countries 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Session report 
0 
80 
160 
A total of four virtual regional exchange 
sessions to be organized to promote 
programme benefits, learnings, and 
experiences. 
 
There are 20 member states and 
associate members of the CARICOM. It is 
assumed that at least 2 participants attend 
the regional session per CARICOM 
member, i.e., about 40 participants per 
session. 
Number of regional 
in-person knowledge 
sharing summits/ 
side events 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
0 
1 
1 
CDB to explore the possibility of 
organizing one regional in-person 
knowledge sharing summit or side event 
on IUS programme at either CDB’s or 
CARICOM’s or GCF’s energy event in the 
Caribbean.

=== PAGE 102 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Session report 
and copy of the 
content/ material 
developed for the 
session 
Outcome 3 
(intermediate): 
Increased access to 
financing for clean 
energy investments, 
allowing utility 
customers to adopt 
RE, EE and other 
DER technologies at 
scale. 
Amount (in USD) of 
financing approved 
for IUS sub-projects. 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Support Firm 
 
Copies of sub-
project 
application 
approvals 
 
Electric utility 
reports, including 
loan files 
0 
Total: USD14.8 
million, including: 
• 
Barbados 
(USD4.67 
million) 
• 
Belize 
(USD3.87 
million) 
• 
Jamaica 
(USD6.26 
million) 
Total: USD37 
million, including: 
• 
Barbados 
(USD11.67 
million) 
• 
Belize 
(USD9.67 
million) 
• 
Jamaica 
(USD15.66 
million) 
These estimates assume full and timely 
draw-down of the three lines of credit, 
which is contingent on there being 
sufficient demand for the financing offered 
through the programme. 
Output 2.1: 
Installation of 
distributed RE, EE 
and other DER 
technologies among 
a critical mass of 
utility customers, 
including 
households, 
businesses and 
public sector 
entities. 
 
Number of new units 
of eligible 
technologies 
installed via the 
implementation of 
IUS sub-projects 
financed/executed 
by utilities. 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Copies of sub-
project 
application 
approval 
0 
• Barbados: 
3,866 
• Belize: 2,848 
• Jamaica: 5,431 
• Barbados: 
10,714  
• Belize: 7,892 
• Jamaica: 15,052 
Estimated number of new units is based 
upon the unit costs and total expected 
CAPEX per type of technology in each 
country. The estimate includes all types of 
customers and all types of preapproved 
technologies.

=== PAGE 103 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of additional 
utility customers 
benefiting from 
smart meters/AMI 
investments during 
the Programme 
implementation 
period 
Electric utility 
reports 
0 
 
 
 
15,000 
 
 
 
50,000 
Estimate is based on the total number of 
existing meters/connections across all 
three countries to be replaced with a smart 
meter/AMI. 
 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit 1: Socio-
economic benefits 
Average annual cost 
reductions (nominal) 
per beneficiary due 
to energy savings 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Sub-project 
reporting  
0 
Residential 
customers: 
USD500 per year 
 
Commercial 
customers: 
USD4,000 per 
year 
 
Residential 
customers: 
USD550 per year 
 
Commercial 
customers: 
USD4,400 per 
year 
Average (nominal) annual cost reductions 
are expected to gradually increase over 
time in line with inflation. 
Co-benefit 2:  Socio-
economic benefits 
Number of female 
beneficiaries of the 
IUS Programme 
Regular progress 
report(s) by CDB 
TA Execution 
Team. 
 
Progress 
report(s) by TA 
Implementation 
Firm 
 
Copy of sub-
project 
0 
Total estimated 
beneficiaries: 
Residential 
• Barbados: 
4,868 
• Belize: 4,607 
• Jamaica: 8,109 
Total estimated 
beneficiaries: 
Residential 
• Barbados: 7,969 
• Belize: 7,354 
• Jamaica: 13,123 
Estimated number of female beneficiaries 
in the residential customer segment 
availing IUS programme sub-project 
benefits either as the sub-project applicant 
or as a part of an IUS sub-project 
beneficiary household.

=== PAGE 104 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application 
approval 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add 
rows as needed. 
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub-
activities as shown below to associate to the related activity. 
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1:  
Immediately 
address regulatory 
barriers impeding 
the implementation 
of the IUS model 
under Component 2  
 
 
Immediately address regulatory barriers 
impeding the implementation of the IUS 
model under Component 2. 
 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.1 Prepare 
a legal and regulatory opinion 
on existing electricity 
laws/frameworks for each 
utility/BMC (i.e. utility as 
financier). 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.2 Assist 
national stakeholders in each 
BMC to prepare and secure 
approval of legal and 
regulatory amendments if/as 
needed. 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.3 Assist 
national stakeholders in each 
BMC to strengthen at least 1 
aspect of the regulatory 
framework (e.g. RE/FIT 
regulations or rules, grid 
codes, etc.). 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.4 
Update/draft administrative, 
energy accounting and 
settlement process. 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.5 Support 
and capacity building of the 
D. 1.1.1.1. Note on legal and regulatory opinion on existing 
electricity laws/frameworks from an IUS roll-out perspective - 3 
Notes (1 for each BMC) 
D. 1.1.1.2 Legal and/or Regulatory amendments (expected - 3 
amendments, one in each BMC) 
D. 1.1.1.3 RE/EE and/or FIT regulations or rules (3 regulations - 
1 in each BMC) 
D. 1.1.1.4 Administrative/application process (1 for each BMC - 
the administrative process will include energy accounting and 
settlement process) 
D. 1.1.1.5 Written inputs/ feedback to the IUS related 
applications/filings. 
D.1.1.1.6 Regular progress reports submitted to the CDB. 
D. 1.1.1.7 Field mission/ stakeholder consultation report(s)

=== PAGE 105 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regulatory authorities to 
review and approve IUS 
related regulatory 
applications/filings. 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.6 Execute 
the TA, including 
procurement, contract 
management, supervision, 
quality 
assurance/enhancement, 
direct reporting and 
invoice/payment processing. 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.7 
Stakeholder consultations, in-
person meetings, etc. 
Activity 1.1.2:  
Address broader 
policy framework 
needs to strengthen 
prospects and 
incentives for 
investment in 
distributed RE, EE 
and other DERs  
 
 
 
Address broader policy framework 
needs to strengthen prospects and 
incentives for investment in distributed 
RE, EE and other DERs. 
 
 
Sub-activity 1.1.2.1 Assist 
national stakeholders 
(notably in the Ministry 
responsible for energy, but 
also the regulatory authority 
and other stakeholders if/as 
needed) to strengthen at 
least one aspect of the 
national policy and incentive 
framework to better support 
investment in priority 
technologies and (by 
extension) IUS programme 
implementation. 
Sub-activity 1.1.2.2 Execute 
the TA, including 
procurement, contract 
management, supervision, 
quality 
assurance/enhancement, 
D. 1.1.2.1 Consultant report summarizing updates/changes in 
broader distributed/behind the meter or associated energy policy 
(both generic and gender compliant update) and/or design of 
additional incentive framework as per local needs to facilitate 
IUS implementation (1 for each BMC) 
D. 1.1.2.2 Regular progress reports submitted to the CDB. 
D. 1.1.2.3 TSP technical eligibility/qualification criteria: 3 sets of 
qualification criteria (1 per BMC)

=== PAGE 106 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
direct reporting and 
invoice/payment processing. 
Sub-activity 1.1.2.3 Develop 
TSPs technical qualification 
guidelines. 
 
Activity 1.2.1: 
Raise awareness of 
RE/EE opportunities 
and potential 
savings  
 
 
Raise awareness of RE/EE opportunities 
and potential savings. 
 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.1 Develop 
technology specific marketing 
material for programme 
sustainability 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.2 Develop 
IUS programme's marketing 
material for programme 
sustainability. 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.3Develop 
a comprehensive and 
inclusive marketing, 
communications and 
outreach strategy for the 
Ministry focussed on the 
priority technologies. 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.4 Develop 
material/content for customer 
awareness/ outreach 
sessions on IUS programme. 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.5 
Outreach sessions to create 
customer awareness of RE 
and EE opportunities and 
potential savings. 
D. 1.2.1.1 Marketing material like technology specific 
infographics, pamphlets, social media posts, etc. to promote the 
IUS technologies (at least 2 infographics per technology/ service 
per BMC) 
D. 1.2.1.2 IUS programme marketing/promotional/outreach 
material like infographics, social media posts, multimedia 
material, etc. (at least 3 infographics/ multimedia material per 
BMC showcasing the programme benefits, high level 
programme design, etc.) 
D. 1.2.1.3 One (1) strategy per BMC - the strategy must also 
cater to vulnerable groups [such as blind, deaf or speak different 
local languages such as the indigenous populations] 
D. 1.2.1.4 Materials for outreach sessions including 
presentations, including awareness campaigns for adaptation to 
heat stress, FAQs, etc. (multiple material as per the 
session/BMC needs - broadly to cover the overall programme 
design and benefits - outreach material must be gender and 
socially inclusive) 
D. 1.2.1.5 Training/workshop reports. 
Activity 1.2.2:  
Promote an 
inclusive and just 
IUS model and 
associated services 
Promote the IUS model and associated 
services. 
 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.1 Develop 
IUS programme's marketing 
material for programme 
sustainability beyond Phase 
D. 1.2.2.1 Marketing material targeted towards identified 
stakeholders i.e., commercial banks, large commercial and 
industry customers, TSPs, etc. to showcase IUS model and its 
benefits (2 infographics/ documents/ multimedia/ other material 
per BMC as per their requirement)

=== PAGE 107 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 beneficiaries and 
stakeholders. 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.2 Develop 
a comprehensive and 
inclusive marketing, 
communications and 
outreach strategy for the EE 
focussed on promoting the 
IUS model 
D. 1.2.2.2 One (1) strategy per BMC - the strategy must also 
cater to vulnerable groups [such as blind, deaf or speak different 
local languages such as the indigenous populations] 
 
Activity 1.2.3:  
Provide customers 
with hands-on 
support to identify 
and develop 
distributed RE, EE 
and other DER sub-
projects 
 
 
Provide 
customers 
with 
hands-on 
support 
to 
identify 
and 
develop 
distributed RE, EE and other DER sub-
projects. 
 
 
Sub-activity 1.2.3.1 Located 
at the Executing Entity’s 
office to support day to day 
activities of the IUS 
programme, support to the 
implementation consultant, 
support outreach events, 
data collection, reporting, and 
reviewing, QA/QC, etc. 
Sub-activity 1.2.3.2 Set-up 
or strengthen utility help 
desk/customer support to 
handle IUS queries 
Sub-activity 1.2.3.3 Develop 
beneficiary eligibility criteria 
to support energy audits for 
lower income residential 
customers by TSPs 
Sub-activity 1.2.3.4 Low-
cost/free energy audits by 
TSPs for lower income 
residential customers 
Sub-activity 1.2.3.5 Develop 
basic energy savings 
calculator for self-screening 
by customers 
D. 1.2.3.1 Monthly progress reports to the Executing Entity 
highlighting project progress, tasks undertaken, planned 
activities for the next month, etc. 
D. 1.2.3.2 Strategy to set-up/strengthen the utility help desk for 
the IUS programme (virtual and in-person) - one for each 
national Executing Entity 
D. 1.2.3.3 Three beneficiary eligibility criteria - one for each 
BMCs 
D.1.2.3.4 300 low-cost free energy audits (100 per BMC) 
D. 1.2.3.5 One (1) energy savings calculator per national 
Executing Entity (three total)

=== PAGE 108 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1.3.1:  
Facilitate knowledge 
exchange among 
the participating 
BMCs 
 
 
Facilitate knowledge exchange among 
the targeted BMCs. 
 
Sub-activity 1.3.1.1 Develop 
knowledge exchange 
material. 
Sub-activity 1.3.1.2 
Organize virtual knowledge 
sharing sessions among key 
stakeholders of the three 
BMCs. 
D. 1.3.1.1 Knowledge exchange materials, primarily 
presentations and notes, to be used for the knowledge sharing 
session (2 to 3 documents to be prepared per BMC). Knowledge 
sharing material to include inputs from the local regulatory 
consultant and national energy consultant on the lessons learnt 
by the regulator and the utility which could be shared with other 
BMCs. 
D. 1.3.1.2 Consultant’s summary report for each knowledge-
sharing session. 
Activity 1.3.2:  
Enhance Executing 
Entities’ and other 
stakeholders’ 
capacities to 
implement the IUS 
model in a just 
transition context 
 
 
Enhance Executing Entities’ and other 
stakeholders’ capacities to implement the 
IUS model. 
 
 
Sub-activity 1.3.2.1 Develop 
utility-/country-specific 
programme operational 
manuals including the final 
financial and organizational 
modalities for the IUS model 
at each national Executing 
Entity. 
Sub-activity 1.3.2.2 Support 
each national Executing 
Entity to develop a business 
development strategy and 
action plan. 
Sub-activity 1.3.2.3 Assist 
each utility/National 
Executing Entity to establish 
a digital sub-project 
application submission and 
approval platform. 
Sub-activity 1.3.2.4 Support 
National Executing Entities 
with sub-project appraisal 
if/as needed (e.g. when 
Executing Entities seek to 
approve sub-projects that 
D. 1.3.2.1 Three operational manuals (one for each national 
Executing Entity/BMC). 
D. 1.3.2.2 One business development strategy and action plan 
per national Executing Entity (3 in total). 
D. 1.3.2.3 One digital application submission and approval 
platform per BMC (3 in total). 
D. 1.3.2.4 Consultant reports summarizing the support provided 
to the sub-project appraisal. 
D. 1.3.2.5 Training reports

=== PAGE 109 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
include non-preapproved 
technologies). 
Sub-activity 1.3.2.5 Deliver 
capacity building trainings to 
National Executing Entities 
on ESMF and Gender, 
monitoring and reporting. 
Activity 1.3.3:  
Train qualified 
(technology) service 
providers, notably 
TSPs, to support 
consumers 
 
 
Training for qualified (technology) service 
providers, notably TSPs, to support 
consumers. 
 
Sub-activity 1.3.3.1 Develop 
training modules for TSPs 
covering the following topics:  
IUS programme design and 
implementation; technical 
session on design, 
standards, etc.; legal and 
regulatory session on key 
insights of the local laws and 
framework; E&S risk and 
mitigation; GESI, M&R, etc. - 
multiple modules to be 
developed for each BMC 
based on local needs  
Sub-activity 1.3.3.2 Deliver 
TSP trainings using the 
modules developed under 
sub-activity 1.3.3.1. 
D. 1.3.3.1 TSP training modules 
D 1.3.3.2 Training reports 
Activity 1.3.4:  
Support information 
exchange with other 
(non-partner) 
countries, incl. 
governments, 
regulators, TSPs 
and utilities 
 
 
Support information exchange with other 
(non-partner) countries, incl. 
governments, regulators, TSPs and 
utilities. 
Sub-activity 1.3.4.1 Develop 
programme specific 
information exchange 
materials. 
Sub-activity 1.3.4.2 Deliver 
(virtual) information 
exchange/ knowledge 
sharing sessions. 
Sub-activity 1.3.4.3 
Organize an in-person 
D. 1.3.4.1 Materials such as pamphlets, leaflets, presentations, 
etc. to be developed as per the programme needs and target 
non-partner stakeholder(s). 
D. 1.3.4.2 Consultant’s summary report for each information 
exchange/knowledge sharing session. 
D. 1.3.4.3 Report summarizing the results of the knowledge 
sharing summit and how the programme-sponsored participants 
contributed.

=== PAGE 110 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regional knowledge sharing 
summit/ side event in 
CARICOM's or CDB's or 
GCF's Energy Events. 
 
Activity 1.3.5:  
Create a Community 
of Practice (COP) in 
the BMCs, inviting 
governments, 
regulators, utilities, 
TSPs and NGOs to 
participate 
Create a Community of Practice in the 
BMCs, inviting governments, regulators, 
utilities, TSPs and ESCOs to participate. 
Sub-activity 1.3.5.1 Set-up 
the regional Community of 
Practice headed by the CDB. 
Sub-activity 1.3.5.2 Promote 
south-south learning / peer-
to-peer learning. 
D. 1.3.5.1 Report summarizing the structure/outline of the 
Community of Practice elaborating the guidelines, rules of 
engagements, etc. 
D.1.3.5.2 Report summarizing the activities and results 
(including how programme-supported participants contributed) 
for each event/trip. 
Activity 2.1.1: 
Prepare, finance 
and implement sub-
projects utilising 
distributed RE, EE 
and other DERs 
among households, 
businesses and 
public sector 
entities, while 
supporting 
complementary 
investments in smart 
meters/AMI 
 
 
Preparation, financing, and 
implementation of sub-projects utilising 
distributed RE, EE and other DERs 
among households, businesses and 
public sector entities. 
 
Sub-activity 2.1.1.1 Finance 
and oversee the 
implementation of IUS sub-
projects through which RE, 
EE and/or other DER 
technologies will be installed 
at the premises of utility 
customers. 
 
Sub-activity 2.1.1.2 Install 
smart meters/AMI at the 
premises of electric utility 
customers. 
D.2.1.1.1 Documentation confirming the completion of sub-
projects. 
D.2.1.1.2 Documentation confirming the installation of smart 
meters/AMI. 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
E.7.1. The implementation of the IUS programme will involve: 
• 
Monitoring and reporting on progress in relation to the programme’s logical framework, as outlined section E.5; 
• 
Monitoring and reporting on financial progress (i.e. approvals/commitments, disbursements, reflows);

=== PAGE 111 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Monitoring and reporting on sub-project compliance with environmental and social risk management requirements, guided by the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) that is included in Annex 6; 
• 
Monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the GAP that is included in Annex 8; 
• 
The consolidation of the above information in regular progress reports; and  
• 
Mid-term and final evaluations to assess implementation progress and challenges and propose corrective actions. 
E.7.2. Additional information about the monitoring and reporting processes is included in Annex 21: Programme Operations Manual. Further information about the 
monitoring and reporting frequency and distribution of roles & responsibilities is also included in Annex 11: M&E Plan. Meanwhile, a detailed overview of the 
methodology for preparing the ex-ante estimates of emissions to be reduced/avoided, as well as the methods to be used to calculate actual emissions reductions 
during the implementation of the IUS programme, is included in Annex 22: Assessment of GHG Emission Reductions and their Monitoring and Reporting. 
E.7.3. Monitoring 
Under Component 1, monitoring will be led by the CDB TA Execution Team, which will be overall responsibility for procuring and contracting almost all consultants 
and other service providers that will deliver support under the TA component. The CDB TA Execution Team will ensure that the consultants/service providers complete 
their assignments in a timely and efficient manner and will gather the data and documentation needed to demonstrate progress (in line with the logical framework for 
the programme) during the implementation of the consultancy and non-consultancy contracts. This will include monitoring to ensure that the ESMF and GAP and are 
being fully and effectively implemented. 
Under Component 2, the monitoring of sub-projects will be led by the electric utilities (as National Executing Entities). Initial data on sub-project implementation (i.e. 
installation of eligible technologies) will be sourced from the contracted TSPs, as will information about adherence to necessary environmental and social risk 
management standards. Specifically with regards to sub-project performance, the electric utilities (with support from their programme-financed National Energy 
Consultants) will utilize the customer’s electricity meter to establish a customer-specific baseline for each sub-project that they have decided to finance. The utilities 
will then continue to use the customers’ meters to monitor progress after the technologies have been installed and throughout the programme implementation period, 
in line with the methods outlined in Annex 22. 
To supplement the meter-based monitoring, the CDB TA Execution Team will also contact a firm to assist with gathering additional data/information from sub-project 
beneficiaries as needed, including through telephone interviews, surveys and site visits. This will enable the utilities and CDB to cross-check the data from the meters 
at regular intervals throughout the programme implementation period, and thus validate the meter data and/or explain anomalies. The firm will gather data from a 
random sample of beneficiary customers each year while also following up with those whose meter data deviates from the changes/benefits that the utility would 
have projected at the time of sub-project approval. 
E.7.4. Reporting 
Reporting from electric utilities (National Executing Entities) to the CDB Accredited Entity Team. CDB will enter into a subsidiary agreement with each electric 
utility that clearly specifies the utility’s reporting obligations. This will include both financial reporting (information on disbursements, reflows, etc.) and progress 
reporting (information on the sub-project pipeline, approvals, implementation status and progress vis-à-vis performance metrics), covering each utility’s full portfolio 
of sub-projects financed using the blended line of credit provided under the IUS programme. The utilities will be required to prepare and submit these reports to the

=== PAGE 112 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CDB Accredited Entity Team at regular intervals to be specified in the subsidiary agreements. The utilities’ reporting to CDB will also include information on compliance 
with environmental and social risk management requirements, as well as GESI requirements, for the portfolio of sub-projects. The utilities will be expected to 
gather/collect the data needed for these reports, including using the methods/processes outlined above. 
Reporting from CDB to GCF. Using the data contained in the reporting provided by the National Executing Entities and the CDB TA Execution Team, as well as 
other sources of data/information as relevant, the CDB Accredited Entity Team will provide the GCF Secretariat with: 
• 
Annual Performance Reports (APRs) that provide detailed information on the status of the programme throughout its implementation period; 
• 
A mid-term evaluation (interim evaluation) report at the midpoint of the implementation period of the programme, which will be prepared by an independent 
external evaluator contracted by CDB; and 
• 
A final evaluation report at the end of the implementation period of the programme, which is expected to be prepared by the same independent external 
evaluator as the mid-term evaluation. 
 
E.7.5. Evaluation 
In line with GCF requirements, CDB will contract an external evaluator to conduct independent evaluations halfway into the programme implementation period (mid-
term review) and at the end of the programme (final evaluation). The CDB Accredited Entity Team will procure the evaluator using an open tender process and will 
supervise and quality-assure the work of the evaluator in close collaboration with the Bank’s Office of Independent Evaluation (OIE). The mid-term and final 
evaluations will be conducted in line with, inter alia, the following principles: independence; competencies and capacities; impartiality; credibility; transparency; integrity 
and gender equality. 
The evaluation methods for the mid-term and final evaluations are to be determined, but are tentatively expected to include: (i) key informant interviews with beneficiary 
customers and institutional beneficiaries (i.e. utilities, regulators, TSPs); and (ii) detailed review of relevant programme documentation, including monitoring data 
provided by the electric utilities and CDB TA Execution Team, additional monitoring data (from interviews, surveys and site visits) collected by the data gathering firm 
contracted by the CDB TA Execution Team, APRs and other project reports, based on an agreed list of evidence to be provided by CDB to the contracted evaluator.

=== PAGE 113 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107 
 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing 
(ML/TF), sanctions, prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from 
being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability 
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact 
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as 
well as fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
Challenges in establishing efficient systems and procedures for IUS service 
delivery 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Medium 
High 
Description 
F.1.1. There is a moderate likelihood that utilities may encounter challenges in putting in place systems and 
procedures to deliver the IUS programme. For instance, there is a risk that utilities may not complete the start-up 
phase during PY1 as envisaged. 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
F.1.2. To mitigate the challenge of establishing efficient systems and procedures for IUS service delivery, the TA 
component focuses on comprehensive support and capacity building for utilities. This includes addressing regulatory 
barriers by assisting national stakeholders in updating legal and regulatory frameworks and strengthening regulatory 
capacity. External consultants will provide direct assistance and expert advice on regulatory enhancements. A digital 
application portal will streamline processes, while training will cover best practices and effective procedural 
frameworks. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
Capacity constraints among TSPs 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
F.1.3. There is a risk associated with the quantity and technical capabilities of technology service providers (TSPs) in 
the participating countries to fully address the high/increasing demand for RE and EE technologies.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
F.1.4. While this risk is noteworthy, the feasibility assessment did not identify it as a major concern. Additionally, the 
TA component includes training for TSPs to help them improve their services/products and enhance the efficiency 
with which they deliver them. The TA component will also help establish a Community of Practice within the BMCs 
through which the TSPs can share knowledge and best practices with one another, as well as with government 
officials, regulators, and utilities. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Regulatory and Policy Barriers 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
High 
Description 
F.1.5. Inconsistent regulatory frameworks and policies across the Caribbean can impede the implementation of the 
IUS programme. Challenges include slow permit processes, lack of supportive policies for renewable energy, and

=== PAGE 114 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108 
 
 
 
 
 
varying standards across countries. Utility regulators in several of the participating BMCs have also indicated that they 
would need additional training and capacity to effectively regulate IUS implementation in their respective countries. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
F.1.6. The IUS programme is a comprehensive initiative that involves collaboration with local and regional authorities 
to create spaces that contribute to the harmonization of energy policies and regulations supporting the deployment of 
RE and EE. Additionally, the TA component will assist the participating countries to develop and implement 
supportive policies. Finally, the programme will provide support to: (i) address pending regulatory barriers in each 
participating country; (ii) strengthen the capacity of the utility regulators in the participating countries to understand 
and regulate IUS; (iii) directly assist the utilities to apply for regulatory approval in PY1 to enable them to implement 
IUS sub-projects starting in PY2; and (iv) establish a process for regular regulatory reviews will be established to 
promptly identify and address potential barriers, ensuring that regulatory frameworks remain aligned with the 
programme’s goals and the evolving needs of the energy sector. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Risk aversion/reluctance to engage among potential beneficiaries 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
High 
Description 
F.1.7. Some potential beneficiaries may be reluctant to adopt/invest in new RE and EE technologies. This often 
stems from concerns over high initial costs, operational disruptions and cultural resistance to change, as well as 
regulatory uncertainties. Potential beneficiaries may also be aware of/interested in sustainable energy technologies 
but (initially) reluctant to invest in them through their electric utility given that the IUS model is new and thus not 
(yet) well established/known. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
F.1.8. The IUS programme includes a robust strategy to increase stakeholder engagement and buy-in. This will 
involve targeted educational campaigns to raise awareness of the benefits and practical applications of RE and EE 
technologies, as well as enhance awareness of (and interest in) the utility-led IUS model. Additionally, workshops 
and seminars will be facilitated to allow stakeholders to interact directly with these technologies, addressing 
concerns and demonstrating efficacy and safety. These sessions will also provide an opportunity for interested 
customers to learn more about the IUS service offering and address any questions/concerns they may have. 
Regular feedback sessions will also be implemented to ensure that stakeholder concerns and suggestions are 
continually incorporated into programme implementation, thereby enhancing acceptance and minimizing 
resistance. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Risk related to compliance, including money laundering/terrorist financing 
(ML/TF) 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
ML/FT 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
F.1.9. The electric utilities will be establishing new business models through which they will interact with 
customers (as beneficiaries) and TSPs (as contractors) in new ways. There are numerous compliance issues to 
be addressed in this context, including KYC due diligence, AML/CFT and environmental & social risk 
management, among others.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
F.1.10. CDB and the programme preparation team have conducted a detailed assessment of the electric utilities’ 
policies, procedures and capacities with a view to determining/confirming their ability to serve as Executing 
Entities without posing unacceptable/unmanageable risks related to compliance issues. These assessments 
included reviews of the entities’ governance and management structures, financial management and accounting 
systems, internal controls and policies/procedures related to prohibited practices and AML/CFT. The two entities 
for which detailed assessments were completed (BLPC and BEL) were all found to be satisfactory in this regard, 
as outlined in Annex 2: Feasibility Study. JPS will be subject to the same type of review during PY1.

=== PAGE 115 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In addition, CDB will enter into subsidiary agreements with the utilities (as National Executing Entities) that 
include provisions related to AML/CFT, as well as other compliance-related risks. This is guided by CDB’s own 
policies and procedures in this area, which were reviewed during the GCF accreditation process and found to be 
satisfactory and consistent with GCF standards and requirements.  
  
In this context, it is also important to note that Jamaica is the only country from the BMCs that is currently in the 
“Increased Monitoring” list (grey list) (FATF (2024). Link) 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Risks related to default/non-payment rates by participating utility customers. 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
F.1.11. Based on the experiences of stakeholders in other jurisdictions that have implemented IUS-type models 
(i.e. utility-based financing for RE, EE and other DERs), CDB has estimated a very low default/non-payment rate 
among Programme end beneficiaries. This is partly because the use of the on-bill financing model ties 
repayment to the electric utilities/national Executing Entities to customers’ regular utility bills, which are a priority 
for most customers given the potential consequences associated with non-payment (i.e. being disconnected). 
Nevertheless, there is a risk that non-payment rates in the three participating countries may be higher than 
expected, particularly in the event of an exogenous shock such as a broader economic downturn. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
F.1.12. To mitigate the risk of higher-than-expected default/non-payment rates, the Programme has prioritized 
technologies that deliver direct and immediate financial benefits to the participating customers. This will ensure 
that savings from these investments help offset the repayment charges immediately. In addition, the use of on-
bill financing will enable customers to see both the savings that they have accrued because of the investment 
and the additional charges associated with financing the investment on the same bill, which will help 
beneficiaries – including those with more limited financial literacy – to understand the real-time benefits of 
continuing to pay these charges and thus meet their repayment obligations. Furthermore, the Programme TA 
component includes activities to support enhanced customer awareness raising and outreach, through which 
customers will be able to better understand the costs and benefits of the investments and how they will produce 
significant economic benefits over the medium/long term as long as they meet their repayment obligations over 
the short/medium term. The user-friendly energy savings calculators to be supported through the TA component 
will similarly help reinforce these efforts to enhance understanding among customers and thereby mitigate the 
risks associated with higher-than-expected default/non-payment rates.

=== PAGE 116 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110 
 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
G.1.1. An ESMF was developed to ensure that the programme adequately identifies, mitigates, manages and monitors 
environmental and social risks and potential impacts during programme implementation, and complies with the 
relevant national legislation and guidelines in the participating countries (Belize, Barbados and Jamaica). By 
extension, the ESMF will ensure compliance with the environmental and social standards of both the GCF and 
CDB.  
G.1.2. The programme is classified as Category B. This is because the nature of the investments to be made through 
the sub-projects have the potential for limited adverse environmental and social impacts and/or risks, all of which 
can be readily identified, mitigated, and managed. Screening was first done at the conceptual phase of the 
programme by the CDB. A more in-depth environmental and social risk assessment and management analysis 
was done during the programme preparation stage, which was also informed by detailed consultations with relevant 
stakeholders in the three countries. The risks and associated risk mitigation/management measures outlined in the 
ESMF will serve as a guide for the National Executing Entities, which will (with support from the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm) each prepare a utility-specific Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and 
corresponding waste disposal plan during the first year of programme implementation (PY1). The ESMPs will 
provide more detailed guidance to the national stakeholders – notably the electric utilities given their roles as 
national Executing Entities – on how to identify, assess, mitigate and manage E&S risks throughout the sub-project 
workflow/cycle. They will also provide/include: 
• 
detailed guidance on the specific E&S risks associated with each type of eligible technology; 
• 
a detailed checklist to be used by the electric utilities when reviewing sub-project applications to ensure such 
risks are clearly identified and sub-projects can be properly categorised, which will be an adapted version of 
the draft checklist that is appended to this ESMF; 
• 
actionable guidance on which associated risk mitigation/management measures should be implemented in 
each country, how they should be implemented, and by whom; 
• 
templates and associated guidance to support the development of the corresponding Environmental, Social, 
Health and Safety (ESHS) plan for any sub-project for which the screening identifies notable E&S risks and 
thus is categorised as a Cat B sub-project; 
• 
templates and associated guidance for TSPs on how to adhere to the E&S requirements outlined in the ESHS 
plans, and how to report to the utilities to demonstrate compliance with such requirements; 
• 
guidance for utilities on how to integrate the ESHS plan implementation and reporting requirements into their 
contracts with TSPs; and 
• 
a utility-specific disposal plan that specifies the requirements associated with the collection, storage and final 
disposal of waste (e.g. old AC units and other technologies that are removed during installation, as well as 
programme-supported RE, EE and other DER equipment after their productive lifespan has ended). 
 
G.1.3. The ESMF that is attached at Annex 6 also includes an initial overview of the sub-project workflow (with clearly 
defined roles and responsibilities for E&S management) to demonstrate when/how the identification and 
assessment of E&S risks, as well as the implementation and monitoring of associated risk mitigation and 
management measures, will be implemented. 
G.1.4. In addition to the ESMF, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been developed to guide the 
development of an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) in Belize and Jamaica – see Appendix C to Annex 6. The IPPs 
will be developed in tandem with the ESMPs for Belize and Jamaica, and in close consultation with indigenous 
groups in the country, and (once finalized and validated) will guide all relevant actors to ensure the execution of 
programme activities in Belize and Jamaica is done in an inclusive and culturally appropriate manner. 
G.1.5. Although the E&S risks and potential impacts associated with the IUS programme are likely to be limited and 
manageable, it will be important to strengthen and supplement the capacity of the National Executing Entities and 
other relevant stakeholders (e.g. TSPs) to enable full and effective compliance with the ESMF (and later, ESMP) 
requirements. The TA component of the programme therefore includes key support measures, including training 
for electric utilities and other relevant stakeholders (e.g. TSPs) on E&S risk identification, mitigation, and 
management monitoring, and reporting during programme implementation. The TA component of the programme 
will also supplement the capacity of the electric utilities (in their role as National Executing Entities) to fulfil their

=== PAGE 117 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 111 
 
 
 
 
 
E&S-related responsibilities, notably by contracting: (i) a National Energy Consultant to work with/in each electric 
utility; and (ii) an Implementation Support Consulting Firm that will include an E&S Specialist.  
G.1.6. To enhance accountability and thereby help ensure that E&S risks are properly mitigated and managed, the 
programme will provide easily accessible avenues for national stakeholders (including sub-project beneficiaries 
and non-beneficiaries who are affected by the programme and/or sub-projects) to submit complaints/grievances. 
This includes: (i) working with each national Executing Entity to establish their own channels through which 
grievances/complaints can be submitted; (ii) CDB’s Projects Complaints Mechanism (PCM), which is further 
described below; and (iii) the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism, which is also elaborated below. 
CDB Projects Complaints Mechanism 
The CDB PCM is managed by the CDB’s Office of Integrity, Compliance and Accountability (ICA). Through this 
PMC, complaints can be submitted through six channels: a webform; a hotline; email; telephone; mail; and office 
visits. Guided by the CDB Projects Complaints Mechanism Policy54, such complaints are reviewed and handled 
independently by the CDB ICA in accordance with its detailed PCM Procedures.  
Allegations may be made by a variety of sources including staff, consultants, contractors, and other people who 
may consider themselves participants in, witness to or victims of wrongdoing. Detailed information about the 
channels through which complaints can be filed anonymously are included in the ESMF and also outlined below 
for ease of reference:  
• 
online through a portal: https://secure.ethicspoint.com/domain/media/en/gui/55678/index.html 
• 
through a whistle blower hotline (770-409-5029), via telephone (246-539-1777), 
• 
via email (ica@caribank.org), and  
• 
via mail to: 
Head, Office of Integrity Compliance and Accountability  
Building A 
Caribbean Development Bank 
P.O. Box 408 
Wildey 
St. Michael 
Barbados, W. I. BB11000 
Complaints 
related 
to 
the 
programme 
can 
also 
be 
filed 
to 
anticorruption@caribank.org, 
Projectscomplaints@caribank.org  
 
GCF Independent Redress Mechanism 
The GCF Independent Redress Mechanism can be used by project workers, communities and other affected 
stakeholders as needed to submit complaints/grievances directly to the GCF. More information about the GCF 
Independent Redress Mechanism is accessible at the following link: 
https://irm.greenclimate.fund/  
 
Specific complaints can be submitted to the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism via the following link: 
https://irm.greenclimate.fund/case-register/file-complaint 
 
G.1.7. The ESMF was developed in close consultation with relevant national stakeholders. The programme 
preparation team consulted with, inter alia, government officials, utility regulators, and the electric utilities via a 
questionnaire-based survey. The team also organized virtual face-to-face interviews with TSPs, whose insights 
were of critical importance given their central role in implementing and monitoring (and reporting on) risk mitigation 
and management measures. Consultations were organized between April and May 2023. Apart from responses 
obtained through questionnaire-based surveys, during interviews, notes were taken, and each interview lasted for 
about thirty-five minutes. To minimize the potential for biased responses, the programme preparation team avoided 
leading the interviewees during the interviews and reacted in a neutral manner by not signalling preferred answers.  
 
 
54 This policy remains in effect and is publicly accessible here: https://www.caribank.org/about-us/policies-and-
strategies/projects-complaints-mechanism-policy.

=== PAGE 118 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 112 
 
 
 
 
 
G.1.8. Stakeholder engagement will be similarly important during programme implementation. The ESMF provides 
clear guidance to the Executing Entities in this regard. The above-described trainings for electric utilities and TSPs 
will also further strengthen their capacity to support inclusive stakeholder engagement in line with ESMF 
requirements. the programme will further supplement the electric utilities’ capacities in this area by contracting (i) 
a National Energy Consultant to work with/in each electric utility; and (ii) an Implementation Support Consulting 
Firm that will include an E&S Specialist. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
G.2.1. The design of the programme has been informed by a detailed Gender Assessment, which focused on four 
key groups as relevant per country i.e. women, persons with disabilities (PWDs), the LGBTQIA+ community, and 
indigenous peoples (specific to Belize). The universal challenge experienced by all groups was the limited access 
to finance and financial services. Although the ways in which this challenge may manifest for each group often 
differ due to unique circumstances such as locality (more specific to indigenous people), discrimination, low 
economic power and lack of capital, the resulting effect is the same across the board - namely that financial and 
non-financial barriers are inhibiting the extent to which marginalised groups can participate in/benefit from the 
sustainable energy transition, and thus will not automatically benefit from the services and opportunities presented 
by this programme.  
 
G.2.2. An additional barrier observed primarily in Belize and Jamaica is the weak enabling environment for the 
adoption of renewable energy technologies. These countries have seen less work and campaigning done around 
promoting the use and uptake of said technologies. This can be a deterrent as persons may be unaware of the 
benefits and may perceive these technologies to be more costly and burdensome to implement. Additionally, 
current attitudes on these technologies may not be the most conducive to the successful implementation of this 
programme.  This information and empowerment gap is a critical one to be tackled through the TA component on 
several levels.  
 
G.2.3. An additional and unique barrier facing indigenous people is that their traditional homes may not be compatible 
with some of the technologies on offer. PWDs and the LGBTQIA community also face access and affordability 
barriers including those shaped by bias and discrimination and that take the form of inaccessibility of services, 
though the reasons for these between the two groups.

=== PAGE 119 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 113 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22: Summary of barriers and constraints experienced by marginalised groups attempting to utilise or 
engage with RE technologies55 
 
G.2.4. Through the Gender Action Plan (GAP), the programme will address the following gender needs specific to this 
programme: governance and participation (through targeted action focused on policies, the utilities and other 
key actors), and access, education and assets (through targeted action focused on the marginalized 
beneficiaries). More specifically, the GAP – the contents of which are coherent with, and have been integrated into, 
the broader programme (notably the TA component) – will support the following types of actions: 
 
(a) Improving the enabling environment: The programme will support electric utilities and energy ministries to better 
understand gender and social inclusion issues in the context of the energy transition and integrate this 
understanding when supporting them to strengthen relevant policies, planning and procedures. In addition, training 
will be provided for utilities, TSPs and other key energy sector stakeholders to (i) improve their understanding of 
the programme GAP, its requirements, etc.; and (ii) enhance their awareness of broader GESI and Sexual 
Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) issues in the energy sector. In so doing, these GAP measures will 
improve the extent to which local (sustainable) energy services are responsive to the needs of marginalized groups. 
 
(b) Enhancing awareness among marginalised groups: The programme will support the development of marketing 
and outreach strategies to promote the prioritized technologies (to be led by the energy ministries) and the IUS 
programme (to be led by the electric utilities). These strategies will place a specific emphasis on reaching, and 
raising awareness among, marginalized groups. The materials to be developed through the programme TA 
component to support implementation of these strategies will similarly emphasize inclusivity, as outlined in Section 
B.3 (above). Furthermore, the programme partners (including energy ministries and utilities) will work with local 
NGOs to implement their marketing and outreach strategies, particularly to help disseminate awareness-raising 
materials among marginalized groups with which NGOs are better connected. In so doing, these GAP measures 
will ensure that marginalized groups are aware of both the prioritized technologies and how the programme can 
assist them to invest. 
 
(c) Promoting a more inclusive model: Complementing the two above-described areas is the fact that the IUS 
model itself provides a more inclusive way to support sustainable energy investments among marginalized groups. 
By eliminating the need for beneficiaries to secure loan financing from a local commercial bank, and by allowing 
repayment on favourable terms through on-bill financing, the IUS model will directly address several of the financial 
barriers that otherwise often prevent marginalized groups from investing in sustainable energy technologies. 
 
(d) Direct sub-project support: While the above-described areas are expected to make meaningful contributions to 
improving the inclusivity of the IUS programme, lower-income households and other marginalized groups may still

=== PAGE 120 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 114 
 
 
 
 
 
find it difficult to identify and develop sub-project ideas/proposals that would be eligible to be financed by their 
electric utility. To help address this, the TA component will: (i) provide free (simple) energy audits for up to 180 
eligible (low-income/marginalized) utility customers in each of the three participating countries; (ii) assist each utility 
to establish and operate a user-friendly help desk and energy savings calculator to support customers with sub-
project application troubleshooting (which is expected to be particularly beneficial for lower-income and more 
marginalized groups that may have more limited technical capacity and financial literacy); and (iii) provide the 
funding needed for each utility to contract a full-time National Energy Consultant who can support business 
development and customer outreach efforts, with a particular emphasis on reaching and supporting more 
marginalized groups. 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
  
Legal arrangements 
G.3.1: CDB will sign a subsidiary agreement with each of the National Executing Entities that will govern the use of 
funds throughout the programme implementation period, as well as the terms and conditions for repayment of their 
respective lines of credit. The agreements will reflect CDB standards and requirements as well as any supplementary 
standards and requirements that may have to be added to account for the provisions in the Funded Activity Agreement 
to be signed between CDB and the GCF. The process of preparing such subsidiary agreements will be led by the CDB 
Legal Department in co-ordination with the CDB Accredited Entity Team. 
Fiduciary standards 
G.3.2: Each electric utility (as a National Executing Entity) will bear overall responsibility for executing its respective 
line of credit under this programme in line with the subsidiary agreement that it will sign with CDB. When doing so, the 
utilities will administer resources using their internal systems and procedures (e.g. for financial management, 
accounting, internal controls, etc.) while also accounting for supplementary programme-specific requirements. These 
are captured in the overall Programme Operations Manual and will be elaborated in more detail in the utility-specific 
Operations Manuals that will be developed during PY1. As outlined in Annex 2: Feasibility Study, the programme 
preparation team has already assessed two of the utilities’ capacities to fulfil their respective Executing Entity roles and 
found them to be satisfactory. A similar assessment will be completed for the third utility during PY1, the satisfactory 
completion of which will be a condition precedent to first disbursement of the line of credit to that entity. 
G.3.3: The overall financial management of the programme will be done in accordance with relevant CDB policies, 
procedures and standards. These policies, procedures and standards are consistent with international standards, as 
evidenced by CDB’s accreditation to the Adaptation Fund and Green Climate Fund, as well as its track record of 
managing resources from bilateral partners (e.g. Government of Canada, Government of Italy, European Commission) 
and other Multilateral Development Banks (e.g. European Investment Bank, Inter-American Development Bank). The 
CDB OPPM will therefore guide all aspects of financial management under the programme, including disbursements 
to each electric utility/National Executing Entity under their respective lines of credit which are generally expected to 
use the CDB ‘float’ approach. 
Procurement 
G.3.4: Procurement under this programme will be managed in accordance with the standards and requirements 
outlined in the “Procurement Policy for Projects Financed by CDB” (2019)56 as well as the “Procurement Procedures 
for Projects Financed by CDB” (2021)57. The CDB Procurement Policy and Procedures are aligned with international 
standards for public procurement, and cover the procurement of Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services and 
 
55 The three turquoise shapes emerging from “Limited access to financial services” are subcategories of this barrier 
experienced by marginalised groups. The one turquoise shape “Women’s reproductive roles leading to time poverty” 
emerging from both “Lack of available capital for investment in RE technologies” and “Limited access to financial services” 
contributes to these barriers. 
56 The CDB Procurement Policy is publicly available here: https://www.caribank.org/sites/default/files/publication-
resources/Procurement%20Policy%20for%20Projects-final.pdf  
57 The CDB Procurement Procedures are publicly available here: https://www.caribank.org/sites/default/files/publication-
resources/Procurement%20Procedures%20for%20CDB%20financed%20projects_Jan%202021-final_0.pdf

=== PAGE 121 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 115 
 
 
 
 
 
Consulting Services. Note that most of the participating utilities are familiar with the CDB Procurement Policy and 
Procedures, although under this specific programme they are each only expected to manage one procurement process. 
Most of the consulting and non-consulting services under the TA component will be procured and managed directly by 
the CDB TA Execution Team, as outlined in Annex 10: Procurement Plan. Note that the act of purchasing specific 
technologies in the context of sub-projects will not constitute a procurement action under CDB’s procurement 
framework, and thus (as outlined in Section 7.1 of the CDB Procurement Policy) will instead by guided by established 
commercial practices as well as the IUS procedures and TSP eligibility criteria. 
Audit 
G.3.5: Auditing under this programme will be managed in accordance with relevant CDB policies and standards, which 
adhere to International Accounting standards, and were reviewed by the GCF Secretariat and Accreditation Panel and 
found to be consistent with those of the GCF. To improve efficiency and economies of scale, the CDB TA Execution 
Team will directly contract independent external auditors to perform annual financial audits of the programme and 
prepare English-language audit reports. Quality assurance of such audits will be performed by the CDB Accredited 
Entity Team. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note that in addition to the full feasibility study being provided for review by the GCF Secretariat, iTAP and Board, CDB 
will provide an updated version of the feasibility study in which some sensitive/confidential information (e.g. about the 
electric utilities’ internal policies and procedures) is redacted. The latter can be published on the GCF website along 
with the funding proposal and all other annexes. 
 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 122 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects)58 
☐

=== PAGE 123 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 117 
 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.

=== PAGE 124 ===
Senator The Hon. Chad J. Blackman 
Minister – Economic Affairs and Investment  
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment 
3rd Floor East Warrens Office Complex,  
Warrens, St. Michael, Barbados, West Indies 
Our Ref.:   I051/1 Vol. I 
     Tel.: (246) 535-1302/17 
September 5, 2024 
Ms. Mafalda Duarte 
Executive Director 
Green Climate Fund 
175 Art-Center Daero 
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA 
Dear Ms. Duarte, 
Funding Proposal for the Green Climate Fund by the  
Caribbean Development Bank regarding Scaling up the  
Deployment of Integrated Utility Services (IUS) to Support 
Energy Sector Transformation in the Caribbean (Phase 1) Programme 
We refer to the programme titled Scaling up the Deployment of 
Integrated 
Utility 
Services 
(IUS) 
to 
Support 
Energy 
Sector 
Transformation in the Caribbean (Phase 1) Programme in Barbados, 
Belize, Guyana, Jamaica as included in the funding proposal submitted by 
Caribbean Development Bank to us on August 9, 2024. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Senator the 
Hon. Chad Blackman, LLB, LLM, ACIArb, the National Designated Authority 
of Barbados. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we 
acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to 
the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)
the Government of Barbados has no-objection to the programme
as included in the funding proposal;
(b)
the programme as included in the funding proposal is in
conformity with the national priorities, strategies and plans of
Barbados; and
GOVERNMENT OF BARBADOS
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 125 ===
- 2 -
(c)
in accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social
safeguards, the programme as included in the funding proposal
is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection 
to the programme as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities 
to be implemented within the scope of the programme 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the 
GCF website. 
Yours sincerely, 
SENATOR THE HON. CHAD J. BLACKMAN, LLB, LLM, ACIArb 
Minister 
and National Designated Authority

=== PAGE 126 ===
GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE 
Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and 
Investment 
Our Ref: IA/GCF/1 (35) 
October 21, 2024 
Ms. Mafalda Duarte 
Executive Director 
Green Climate Fund 
Songdo Business District 
175 Art center-daero 
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004 
Republic of Korea 
Dear Ms. Duarte: 
Subject: Scaling up the Deployment of Integrated Utility Services (IUS) to Support Energy 
Sector Transformation in the Caribbean (Phase I) 
We refer to the programme titled “Scaling up the Deployment of Integrated Utility Services (IUS) 
to Support Energy Sector Transformation in the Caribbean (Phase I),” submitted by the Caribbean 
Development Bank on July 8, 2024. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized National Designated Authority of Belize. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, I 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the above-mentioned GCF proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The Government of Belize has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  
P.O. Box 42  
Ground Floor, Sir Edney Cain Building 
Belmopan City 
Belize, Central America 
Tel:          (501) 880-2526
     (501) 880-2527 
Email:econdev@med.gov.bz

=== PAGE 127 ===
priorities, strategies and plans of Belize; 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as 
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and 
regulations. 
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
 
 
Kind regards, 
 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
Mr. Carlos Pol 
Ag. Chief Executive Officer and National Designated Authority-GCF 
Ministry of Economic Development 
 
C. 
Mr. Jose Urbina, Chief Executive Officer, Ministry of Public Utilities, Energy, Logistics 
& E-Governance 
 
Mr. Dean Molina, Chairman, Public Utilities Commission  
 
Mr. John Mencias, Chief Executive Officer, Belize Electricity Limited

=== PAGE 129 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Scaling up the Deployment of Integrated Utility Services 
(IUS) to Support Energy Sector Transformation in the 
Caribbean (Phase 1) programme 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Private 
Accredited entity 
Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, May 30, 2025 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
English is the official language of the target countries. 
Link to disclosure 
https://www.caribank.org/publication_types/documents/e
nvironmental-and-social-impact-assessments/scaling-
deployment-integrated-utility-services-ius-support-energy-
sector-transformation-caribbean  
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
programme is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, May 30, 2025 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
English is the official language in all three countries. 
Link to disclosure 
https://www.caribank.org/publication_types/documents/e
nvironmental-and-social-impact-assessments/scaling-
deployment-integrated-utility-services-ius-support-energy-
sector-transformation-caribbean  
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
programme is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”. 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A

=== PAGE 130 ===
Remarks 
N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) 
Description of report 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, May 30, 2025 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
While some Indigenous Peoples in the participating 
countries 
(particularly 
in 
Belize) 
speak 
indigenous 
languages, English is also commonly spoken; it is the official 
language in all three countries. 
Link to disclosure 
https://www.caribank.org/publication_types/documents/e
nvironmental-and-social-impact-assessments/scaling-
deployment-integrated-utility-services-ius-support-energy-
sector-transformation-caribbean  
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An IPPF consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
programme is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
From Friday, May 30, 2025 
Place 
Affected peoples may access the ESMF at the premises of 
their electric utilities, where they can request support to 
print a hard copy. In particular: 
 
In Barbados: 
Barbados Light and Power Company (BLPC) 
Highway 7 
Bridgetown, Saint Michael 
Barbados 
 
In Belize: 
Belize Electricity Limited (BEL) 
2 ½ Miles Philip Goldson Highway 
Belize City 
Belize 
 
In Jamaica: 
Jamaica Public Service Company (JPS) 
6 Knutsford Boulevard 
Kingston 5 
Jamaica 
 
Given that households and businesses must opt-in to 
participate in/benefit from this programme, and thus 
specific sites and beneficiaries within the countries are not 
yet known, there are no other specific place(s) or location(s) 
where the ESMF could be printed and made available that 
would be more convenient for potentially affected peoples.  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered

=== PAGE 131 ===
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
TBD 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, June 30, 2025 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 132 
 
 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP275 
Proposal name: 
Scaling up the Deployment of Integrated Utility Services (IUS) to 
Support Energy Sector Transformation in the Caribbean (Phase 
1) Programme 
Accredited entity: 
Caribbean Development Bank 
Country/(ies): 
Barbados, Belize and Jamaica 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Overview  
1. 
This funding proposal, submitted by the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) as 
accredited entity (AE), seeks to establish and scale an Integrated Utility Services (IUS) 
Programme in three Caribbean countries – Barbados, Belize and Jamaica – with the goal of 
accelerating decarbonization and enhancing energy resilience. The proposal represents Phase I 
of a larger regional initiative and is focused on enabling regulated national utilities to evolve 
their business models to provide distributed renewable energy (RE), energy efficiency, and 
other demand-side energy services directly to customers. 
2. 
The IUS model builds on the concept of utilities acting as energy service companies, 
bundling financing, installation and maintenance of clean energy solutions, such as solar 
photovoltaic (PV), battery storage, efficient lighting and appliances, into a service offer that can 
be repaid through on-bill financing. The utilities would serve as key delivery agents, supported 
by regulatory reforms, technical service providers and capacity-building activities. CDB serves 
as the central coordinating entity and lender, channelling GCF resources and co-financing from 
its own balance sheet. 
3. 
The programme is structured around two interlinked components: 
4. 
Component 1 (Technical Assistance) focuses on enabling conditions. It provides grant 
financing to support the creation of regulatory frameworks, institutional readiness, customer 
awareness, and technical capacity among utilities, regulators and technology service providers. 
CDB will establish a dedicated technical assistance team, supported by three national teams, to 
oversee implementation, stakeholder engagement, and knowledge transfer. These upstream, 
non-revenue-generating activities are essential to market formation and require full 
concessionality. 
5. 
Component 2 (Loan Component) provides a concessional financing facility for the actual 
deployment of distributed RE, energy efficiency, and distributed energy resources (DERs) at the 
customer level. A USD 20.8 million loan from GCF will be blended on a pari passu basis with USD 
16.2 million from CDB to establish credit lines to the participating national utilities. Utilities, 
acting as executing entities (EEs),1 will on-lend these resources to eligible subprojects – 
 
1 Barbados Light and Power Limited is a regulated electric utility in Barbados. It is a limited liability company 
incorporated under the laws of Barbados and is a wholly (100 per cent) owned subsidiary of Emera Inc., a Canadian 
utilities conglomerate. 
Belize Electricity Limited is a regulated electricity utility in Belize. It is a limited liability company incorporated under 
the laws of Belize, and is majority owned by the Belize public sector. The Government of Belize owns 32.58 per cent, 
while the Social Security Board owns 31.27 per cent. The remaining shares are owned by Fortis Cayman Inc. (33.3 per 
cent) and 1,500 small shareholders (2.85 per cent).

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 133 
 
 
 
 
residential, commercial and public sector – covering capital expenditures for clean energy 
technologies. The subloans are expected to be offered at interest rates in the 4.5 to 6.0 per cent 
range, which is below prevailing commercial rates and made possible through the concessional 
GCF-CDB blend. 
6. 
Each utility will retain the credit risk associated with the customer loans and is expected 
to mobilize an additional USD 25 million in in-kind contributions, largely in the form of 
advanced metering infrastructure. CDB has committed to entering subsidiary agreements with 
each utility to ensure proper fiduciary controls, eligibility criteria and mechanisms for 
monitoring and reporting. Regulatory engagement will be critical, as the design and terms of the 
on-lending will be finalized in collaboration with national regulators during the first programme 
year. 
7. 
While the Caribbean region has significant technical potential for distributed RE and 
strong public support for energy affordability, uptake has been hampered by high upfront costs, 
credit access constraints, and underdeveloped regulatory environments. This programme 
attempts to address these barriers by empowering the utilities that are trusted and well-
established actors, to become the primary facilitators of behind-the-meter clean energy 
deployment. By integrating concessional financing, technical assistance and regulatory reform, 
the programme is designed to create a replicable, utility-led delivery model for the clean energy 
transition in the context of small island developing States (SIDS). 
8. 
The proposal also positions this initial phase as a pilot for a broader regional roll-out, 
with Phase II expected to extend the IUS model to other CDB borrowing member countries. 
Tools, data systems, regulatory approaches and institutional lessons developed under Phase I 
will be leveraged to reduce costs and streamline future implementation efforts. Knowledge-
sharing and regional cooperation are embedded into the design, with the intention of promoting 
replication and scale. 
9. 
While distributed RE, energy efficiency and other DERs often offer compelling savings 
and relatively short payback periods, uptake in the Caribbean remains constrained. Many 
households and businesses are risk-averse and face limited access to affordable finance. 
Similarly, utilities in the region have historically been conservative in adopting new business 
models. The IUS Programme seeks to address this by ensuring that financing is offered on 
favourable terms, with modest initial on-bill repayment rates that help demonstrate value to 
end users. A key element of the programme design is the structured transfer of concessionality 
from GCF to utilities, and from utilities to customers. Several mechanisms are included to 
safeguard this pass-through, including caps on the spreads that utilities can apply to the 
blended GCF-CDB credit lines. This is essential to making clean energy technologies more 
accessible than traditional financing channels, while maintaining market discipline. 
10. 
In summary, the IUS Programme proposes an innovative model to unlock distributed 
clean energy investments through utility leadership. Its success will depend on several factors, 
including the utilities’ operational readiness, the effectiveness of the regulatory and institutional 
reforms, and the extent to which concessionality is passed through to end users. While the 
approach is novel for the region, it rests on a sound rationale and responds directly to the 
structural barriers facing clean energy deployment in Caribbean SIDS. 
1.2 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
           Scale: Medium
 
 
 
 
  
11. 
The proposed IUS Programme seeks to deliver both mitigation and adaptation benefits 
through the utility-led deployment of distributed RE, energy efficiency and other demand-side 
 
Jamaica Public Services Company Limited is a regulated electricity utility in Jamaica. It is a limited liability company 
incorporated under the laws of Jamaica, and is majority owned by a consortium comprising the Marubeni 
Corporation in Japan and the East-West Power Corporation in the Republic of Korea (combined 80 per cent). The 
Government of Jamaica owns 19 per cent of the shares while a small group of minority shareholders control the 
remaining 1 per cent.

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 134 
 
 
 
 
energy services in Barbados, Belize and Jamaica. These three Caribbean SIDS face increasing 
climate risks such as intensified storms, prolonged droughts, sea level rise and rising average 
temperatures, which are already affecting the reliability and cost of power generation and 
distribution. The programme responds to these structural challenges by enabling households 
and businesses to access and finance distributed energy solutions that are otherwise difficult to 
adopt due to cost, credit constraints and regulatory barriers. 
12. 
Mitigation Potential: The mitigation impact is based on avoided grid electricity 
consumption through the installation of rooftop solar PV devices, solar water heaters, efficient 
air conditioning, lighting and battery systems. The AE estimates that the programme could 
avoid approximately 601,550 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO₂ eq) over the lifetime of 
these technologies, using grid emission factors published by the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change Harmonized Grid Emission Factor data set and adjusted for each 
country’s national context and nationally determined contribution trajectory. 
13. 
This figure reflects differentiated assumptions about technology lifespans, ranging from 
5 years for lighting to 25 years for rooftop solar installations, and incorporates projected 
technology uptake across both residential and commercial users. Importantly, the mitigation 
potential varies significantly by country due to differing grid carbon intensities and market 
baselines. Jamaica, which has a relatively carbon-intensive grid, accounts for over half of the 
projected greenhouse gas savings (341,197 t CO₂ eq), followed by Barbados (215,219 t CO₂ eq) 
and Belize (45,134 t CO₂ eq). 
14. 
The independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) finds the mitigation estimation 
methodology to be sound and in line with Independent Fiscal Institution best practices, as 
detailed in annexes 3 and 22. However, as with many distributed energy programmes, realized 
emissions reductions will depend heavily on the rate of actual subloan uptake, sustained use of 
the technologies, and ongoing maintenance over time. Reliance of the IUS Programme on 
utilities to manage origination, installation and monitoring provides a plausible delivery 
channel, but performance should be closely tracked in implementation. 
15. 
Adaptation Potential: The IUS Programme also articulates a clear, though modest, 
adaptation impact. The primary adaptation impact is framed around increasing access to 
efficient cooling technologies ̵ particularly air conditioning systems ̵ which can help mitigate the 
health and productivity risks associated with intensifying heat stress across the region. Based 
on uptake projections, the AE estimates that approximately 10,655 individuals (5,328 women 
and 5,327 men) will benefit directly from these adaptation measures, primarily through 
improved thermal comfort and energy cost savings in homes and small businesses. 
16. 
An additional 30,000 indirect beneficiaries are projected, based on broader awareness, 
demonstration effects and potential market spillovers. While the indirect beneficiary figure is 
not backed by rigorous market modelling, it is a reasonable proxy for the broader ecosystem 
impacts expected through regulatory reform, stakeholder engagement and replication. 
17. 
The iTAP notes that the adaptation logic is credible but would benefit from a more 
detailed vulnerability analysis and a clearer articulation of the causal pathways linking cooling 
access to resilience outcomes, particularly for marginalized or climate-sensitive populations. 
Annex 2b provides some baseline data but monitoring and evaluation at the implementation 
stage will need to track adaptation benefits more rigorously, ideally with disaggregated 
reporting and engagement of health or resilience-related institutions. 
18. 
Enabling Environment and Structural Impact: Beyond direct mitigation and adaptation 
impacts, the IUS Programme contributes to long-term market development by supporting policy 
reform and institutional strengthening under Component 1. This includes establishing a 
regulatory framework for behind-the-meter solutions, enhancing utility and technology 
provider capacity, and building tools and systems that can be leveraged for future DER 
deployment. The emphasis on local stakeholder outreach and regional knowledge-sharing is

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 135 
 
 
 
 
appropriate and consistent with the goal of scaling the model across additional borrowing 
member countries in a potential Phase II. 
19. 
The AE has also proposed several mechanisms to ensure that concessionality from GCF 
is passed through to end beneficiaries, including limits on utility spreads and regulatory 
oversight of retail interest rates. This is particularly important given the AE’s own limitations in 
offering long-tenor, low-interest financing from its balance sheet. The concessionality is 
expected to bring end-user loan rates down to approximately 4.2 to 6.0 per cent, below 
prevailing commercial offerings in the region, thereby enabling access for customer segments 
that would otherwise be excluded. 
20. 
Risks to Impact Delivery: There are several risks to impact realization. First, the 
financial profile of many potential end users, especially low-income households, raises the 
possibility of loan default despite the economic case for investment. While utilities are 
experienced in customer screening, repayment performance will need to be monitored 
carefully, particularly in the context of inflationary pressure and income volatility. The iTAP felt 
that the responses of the AE concerning the ability of the EEs to perform the role of credit 
underwriters were not entirely convincing. We note that low-income households ̵ those who 
would benefit most from energy efficiency and solar solutions ̵ may present greater credit or 
payment risks. Utilities are not structured like banks and generally do not have strong 
underwriting capabilities. This dynamic can lead to higher default rates and, ultimately, 
regulatory pushback. 
21. 
To mitigate the risk of defaults at higher rates than expected, or non-payment, the 
programme places emphasis on technologies that offer clear, near-term financial benefits to 
customers. This design choice is efficient, as it increases the likelihood that energy cost savings 
will offset repayment obligations from the outset. The use of on-bill financing also provides a 
degree of transparency by presenting both the savings and the repayment charges on the same 
utility bill, which may be particularly useful for customers with limited financial literacy. That 
said, it remains to be seen whether this level of transparency alone will be sufficient to ensure 
sustained repayment, particularly in lower-income segments. The technical assistance 
component includes customer outreach and awareness-raising activities, including the 
development calculators of energy savings, intended to reinforce repayment behaviour by 
illustrating the medium-term financial advantages of participation. These are helpful features, 
though their actual effectiveness in reducing credit risk will depend on the quality and reach of 
implementation. 
22. 
In addition, political changes could disrupt alignment between national designated 
authorities, regulators and utilities. Although upstream work by development partners (e.g. 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit and the Caribbean Community) has 
helped build institutional readiness, the IUS Programme remains exposed to shifts in public 
sector commitment or regulatory support. This risk is partially mitigated by the programme 
design, which includes technical assistance to regulatory bodies and deep utility engagement. 
23. 
The proposal presents a robust mitigation case, a plausible adaptation narrative, and a 
credible enabling environment for long-term structural transformation in energy service 
delivery. While actual outcomes will depend on effective execution, customer uptake and 
institutional continuity, the programme design provides a sound foundation for achieving 
meaningful and scalable climate impact in the Caribbean SIDS context. 
24. 
The iTAP assesses the impact potential of the IUS Programme as medium.  
1.3 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
                             Scale: Medium     
25. 
The proposal offers a well-considered approach to addressing entrenched structural 
barriers in the Caribbean energy sector and exhibits several characteristics consistent with the 
GCF definition of paradigm shift. The IUS Programme is designed to catalyse systemic

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 136 
 
 
 
 
transformation by altering the roles of utilities, consumers and regulators in how distributed 
energy services are delivered, financed and valued. 
26. 
The proposed IUS Programme aims to advance structural transformation in the energy 
sectors of Barbados, Belize and Jamaica by embedding distributed RE, energy efficiency and 
other demand-side technologies within utility operations. The central innovation of the 
programme lies in positioning regulated utilities as facilitators of customer-level DER 
deployment, blending financing, installation and service provision into a single utility-led 
offering. This shift from the traditional supplier model towards a more service-oriented role is 
both operationally novel and aligned with the broader decentralization of energy systems. 
27. 
The IUS Programme also intends to empower customers through simplified access to 
clean energy technologies and behavioural tools, enabling greater participation in the energy 
transition. By integrating on-bill financing and user-facing applications (e.g. energy savings 
calculators), the programme seeks to normalize investment in DERs among households and 
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) that have historically faced high barriers 
to participation.  
28. 
In parallel, the IUS Programme includes a robust enabling environment component 
aimed at updating the legal, regulatory and administrative frameworks governing behind-the-
meter DERs. This includes support for permitting processes, energy accounting modernization, 
and the development of performance-based incentive structures. These reforms are critical for 
anchoring the model in long-term institutional practice and ensuring it can be sustained and 
replicated without ongoing external concessional support. 
29. 
The iTAP notes that while the programme’s absolute scale is relatively modest, both in 
terms of greenhouse gas abatement and financing volume, its design is intentionally structured 
to serve as a model for replication. A future Phase II is envisioned to extend the approach to 
other CDB borrowing member countries. Knowledge-sharing efforts, digital platforms, and 
regional institutional engagement (e.g. through the Caribbean Centre for Renewable Energy and 
Energy Efficiency) are embedded in the design to support regional uptake. 
30. 
However, while the IUS Programme is well-conceived from a distributed energy market 
development perspective, its paradigm-shifting potential must be assessed considering broader 
sector planning trends in the region, particularly in Barbados. Many SIDS, including the target 
countries, have articulated highly ambitious national RE targets. Barbados, for instance, has set 
a goal of reaching 100 per cent RE generation by 2030, and currently has over 500 megawatts of 
new RE capacity in various stages of development. This figure is more than double the country’s 
current installed capacity and over three times its peak demand of ~141 megawatts. 
31. 
In this context, there is a legitimate concern that a programme focused on customer-
level DERs, particularly rooftop PV installations and efficiency, may draw attention and capital 
away from utility-scale RE investments that, in theory, offer greater scale and grid-level impact. 
Moreover, there is a risk that the most financially viable customers – those with 
creditworthiness and high consumption – will exit the grid or reduce their net load via DERs, 
potentially undermining the financial case for centralized RE investments and straining utility 
revenue models. 
32. 
When asked about this, the AE acknowledged that many of the utility-scale RE plans 
articulated by national governments are aspirational and may not materialize due to permitting, 
financing and political constraints. In this light, the IUS Programme is presented as a more 
grounded pathway to climate action with greater ease of implementation. While this may be 
pragmatically valid, it nonetheless raises questions about coherence between distributed and 
centralized planning efforts, and whether the programme might inadvertently exacerbate 
systemic tensions within the power sector, particularly around grid stability, cost recovery and 
equitable allocation of subsidies and incentives. 
33. 
The IUS Programme does include design features intended to mitigate some of these 
risks, such as utility ownership of the DER deployment process and integration with national

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 137 
 
 
 
 
regulatory bodies. However, these alone may not be sufficient to reconcile the divergence 
between bottom-up distributed energy approaches and top-down utility-scale targets.  
34. 
The long-term success of the IUS Programme will depend on how effectively it is 
integrated into broader sector planning, including decisions around tariff structures, capacity 
payments, and the sequencing of new utility-scale capacity additions. For instance, the iTAP 
notes that the distributed approach advanced here can address a distinct set of policy and 
infrastructure objectives that bolster paradigm shift, listed below. 
35. 
Resilience: Distributed systems provide redundancy in the face of climate-related 
disruptions and offer a more granular pathway to energy security, particularly in storm-prone 
regions. 
36. 
Inclusivity: Many Caribbean households and MSMEs have historically lacked access to 
financing for clean energy investments. The IUS model is specifically designed to address this 
gap, offering more equitable participation in the energy transition. 
37. 
Land-use efficiency: In land-constrained island contexts such as Barbados, where siting 
large-scale RE assets is increasingly difficult, rooftop deployment is not only desirable but 
necessary. 
38. 
Energy efficiency: The IUS Programme prioritizes not just RE but also efficient cooling 
and lighting – technologies that are typically underserved by both public procurement and 
private financial intermediaries. 
39. 
Local ownership: Unlike many utility-scale RE projects, which are typically led by 
foreign investors, the distributed model has the potential to foster greater domestic ownership 
of clean energy assets. 
40. 
Taken together, these attributes reinforce the programme’s contribution to broader 
systemic change in how energy is produced, delivered and consumed. However, the success of 
this transformation will depend, to a significant extent, on the capacity of the participating 
utilities to adapt to new roles and business models, the regulatory follow-through in each 
country, and the eventual cost-effectiveness of scaling the model. 
41. 
 For that reason, the iTAP assesses the paradigm shift potential of the IUS Programme as 
medium as it introduces a promising and replicable utility-led model for distributed energy 
deployment and has the potential to alter how utilities, customers and regulators approach 
clean energy investment. However, these gains must be weighed against unresolved tensions 
with national utility-scale RE ambitions, particularly in contexts like Barbados where DER 
proliferation may affect the bankability of planned large-scale projects. Absent clearer 
articulation of how the IUS model complements broader grid expansion strategies, its 
contribution to systemic transformation remains promising but not assured. 
1.4 
Sustainable development potential  
           Scale: Medium to high       
42. 
The funding proposal outlines a range of expected sustainable development co-benefits, 
many of which are plausible and well-integrated into the IUS Programme core design. These 
span environmental, social, economic and gender dimensions, and align with multiple 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), notably SDG 7 (affordable and clean energy) and SDG 13 
(climate action), as well as secondary contributions to SDG 3: good health and well-being; SDG 
5: gender equality; SDG 8: decent work and economic growth; SDG 9: industry, innovation and 
infrastructure; and SDG 17: partnerships for the goals. While some outcomes will depend 
heavily on effective implementation and uptake, the programme includes mechanisms that 
could support meaningful and measurable development co-benefits. 
43. 
Environmental co-benefits: The IUS Programme supports a shift away from fossil fuel-
based generation through the deployment of distributed RE and energy efficiency technologies. 
Unlike utility-scale RE installations, the proposed subprojects – rooftop PV, efficient cooling and 
lighting, and solar water heaters – are small-scale and embedded in existing structures,

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 138 
 
 
 
 
minimizing risks of ecological disruption or land-use conflicts. This is particularly relevant in 
island contexts such as Barbados, where land-use constraints limit the feasibility of large-scale 
RE development. 
44. 
In addition to emissions reduction, the transition to cleaner distributed generation is 
expected to improve local air quality, particularly in urban areas reliant on diesel-based 
generation. These environmental benefits are reasonably substantiated and consistent with 
regional energy and health policy objectives. 
45. 
Economic co-benefits: The IUS Programme presents a credible pathway to delivering 
financial benefits to both utilities and consumers. On the customer side, the estimated net 
present value of savings across subproject lifetimes exceeds USD 230 million, according to the 
AE’s integrated financial model. These savings could be reinvested by households and MSMEs or 
used to offset consumption-related costs. Utilities may also benefit from the diversification of 
revenue streams and the opportunity to develop service-based business lines that may prove 
more resilient in the face of structural changes in the electricity market. 
46. 
At the broader macroeconomic level, the IUS Programme is expected to reduce fossil-
fuel imports, which remain a significant pressure on foreign exchange reserves across the three 
participating countries. Local job creation is another potential benefit, particularly through the 
installation, maintenance and support services associated with DER deployment. While exact 
employment figures are not specified, the focus on distributed solutions may support a more 
geographically dispersed and locally embedded labour market than utility-scale alternatives. 
47. 
Social co-benefits: The IUS Programme aims to improve household-level access to clean 
energy technologies through inclusive financing mechanisms, notably on-bill repayment. This 
feature is particularly relevant in the Caribbean, where access to commercial credit is limited 
and many potential users, especially low-income households and informal businesses, are 
effectively excluded from the clean energy transition. By anchoring repayment in existing utility 
relationships, the programme removes the need for traditional collateral or credit history, 
potentially widening participation. 
48. 
Health-related co-benefits: Albeit indirectly, health co-benefits are also likely from 
reduced diesel usage which may lower particulate matter and other pollutants, with attendant 
benefits for respiratory health. The technical assistance component also includes targeted 
support for low-income households in the form of free energy audits, which could enhance 
equity and ensure greater inclusion in benefit distribution. 
49. 
Gender equality and social inclusion: The proposal is supported by a detailed Gender 
Action Plan and gender assessment and includes gender-disaggregated indicators in its results 
framework. The IUS Programme commits to concrete actions across four areas: mainstreaming 
gender in policy and planning; tailoring outreach to women and other marginalized groups; 
developing inclusive IUS product offerings; and strengthening utility systems for sex-
disaggregated beneficiary tracking. 
50. 
These measures are designed to improve both participation and outcomes for women, 
youth, persons with disabilities, and other underserved populations. However, as with other co-
benefits, their impact will depend on the depth and consistency of implementation. The plan to 
monitor uptake among female-headed households and vulnerable groups is appropriate, though 
this data should be regularly reported and independently verified. 
51. 
The proposal integrates credible pathways to social inclusion, local economic benefits, 
and environmental health improvements, with appropriate attention to gender and equity 
considerations. The inclusion of customer-facing support tools and technical assistance for 
marginalized groups is a strength. While many co-benefits are contingent on implementation 
quality and uptake, the programme design creates a strong enabling framework for their 
realization.  
52. 
The iTAP assesses the sustainable development potential of the IUS Programme as 
medium to high.

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 139 
 
 
 
 
1.5 
Needs of the recipient             
                                           Scale: High    
53. 
Barbados , Belize and Jamaica, the participating countries, face well-documented climate 
and development challenges that align with the GCF prioritization of SIDS and climate-
vulnerable populations. All three are highly exposed to climate risks such as extreme weather 
events, sea level rise, heat stress, and disruptions to key economic sectors like tourism and 
agriculture. At the same time, their energy sectors remain heavily reliant on imported fossil 
fuels, with limited local capacity to self-finance the transition to more resilient and sustainable 
systems. 
54. 
Despite being classified as middle-income countries, this status belies substantial 
underlying vulnerabilities. High debt burdens and restricted fiscal space limit public investment 
capacity, while shallow domestic capital markets constrain private sector financing of 
distributed energy technologies. The IUS Programme directly addresses these structural 
limitations by providing concessional financing and technical assistance that the national 
governments and utilities would not otherwise be able to mobilize at scale. This is particularly 
relevant considering the countries’ stated commitments under their nationally determined 
contributions, which include ambitious emissions reduction and energy access goals but often 
lack credible, funded implementation pathways. 
55. 
Importantly, the IUS Programme targets persistent equity gaps within these countries. 
While DER adoption has accelerated among higher-income customers, lower-income 
households and informal MSMEs, which are often those most exposed to climate and economic 
shocks, have been largely excluded from participation in the energy transition. The 
programme’s inclusive on-bill financing model, combined with free energy audits for lower-
income customers, offers a pragmatic response to these access barriers. By leveraging the 
existing utility-customer relationship, the model bypasses traditional credit-based lending 
channels that have historically disadvantaged marginalized populations. 
56. 
The IUS Programme also integrates a social inclusion and gender framework. Through 
the Gender Action Plan and associated training and outreach, its aim is to improve governance, 
participation and responsiveness among energy sector institutions – including utilities – 
towards groups that have been traditionally underserved, such as women, persons with 
disabilities, LGBTQIA+ communities, and Indigenous Peoples. While the implementation of 
these measures will require close monitoring, the aim  to position these groups as active 
participants and not just passive recipients is well-aligned with the GCF emphasis on a just and 
inclusive transition. 
57. 
The iTAP notes that the geographic targeting is limited to three countries in this first 
phase, and its reach in absolute terms remains modest relative to national populations. 
However, the selection of countries is appropriate given both their acute vulnerability and the 
potential for institutional readiness and scale-up through a planned Phase II. The programme 
design reflects an awareness of the constraints faced by the governments and utilities in 
launching new delivery models without external support, particularly in a high-risk, resource-
limited context. 
58. 
The programme responds directly to structural vulnerabilities in climate exposure, fiscal 
capacity and financial access, particularly for low-income and marginalized groups. While 
limited in geographic scope and initial coverage, the model is appropriately targeted and well-
aligned with GCF priorities for SIDS and inclusive development. The success of the programme 
will depend in part on its ability to meaningfully reach underserved populations and support 
institutional capacity-building that persists beyond the life of the programme. 
59. 
The iTAP assesses the needs of the recipient as high. 
1.6 
Country ownership 
  
 
                                           Scale: High

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 140 
 
 
 
 
60. 
The IUS Programme demonstrates strong alignment with the national climate and 
energy priorities of the three participating countries – Barbados, Belize and Jamaica – all of 
which have issued no-objection letters. The objectives and design of the programme are 
consistent with the countries’ nationally determined contributions, as well as sectoral strategies 
and policy frameworks, including the National Energy Policy (2019–2030) of Barbados, the 
Sustainable Energy Strategy and Action Plan (2014–2033) of Belize and the Vision 2030 
Development Plan of Jamaica. The focus on scaling up distributed RE, energy efficiency and 
DERs corresponds with each country’s stated intention to reduce emissions and enhance energy 
resilience. 
61. 
The proposal reflects broad-based engagement with national stakeholders. Regulators, 
energy ministries, national designated authorities, and utilities were closely involved in 
programme preparation. Previous upstream work, supported by partners such as Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit and the Caribbean Community Secretariat, has 
also contributed to country-level readiness for programme implementation. These engagements 
signal meaningful institutional support and suggest that the programme has been shaped by 
local priorities and context. The regional scope is further strengthened by engagement with 
organizations such as the Caribbean Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency and the 
Caribbean Electric Utility Services Corporation, which are well positioned to support knowledge 
exchange and promote replication. 
62. 
The iTAP also notes positively that all three utilities proposed as EEs have prior 
experience with DER deployment and have undergone a capacity assessment to confirm their 
suitability. Under the programme, the utilities will implement billing reforms, oversee 
subproject execution, and support customer engagement, with targeted technical assistance to 
address identified institutional capacity gaps. 
63. 
That said, the iTAP has some reservations regarding the level and nature of the national 
co-financing contribution. The proposal identifies an in-kind contribution of USD 25 million 
from the utilities, in the form of investments in advanced metering infrastructure (AMI). While 
AMI can support grid modernization and enable more granular DER integration over time, it is 
not directly linked to the financed subprojects nor to the programme’s estimated climate 
impact. As such, there is a legitimate question as to whether this investment constitutes true co-
financing or rather reflects a continuation of business-as-usual capital expenditure. The IUS 
Programme documents assert that the AMI deployment is complementary to the IUS objectives 
and forms part of the broader enabling ecosystem. However, from a concessionality standpoint, 
the iTAP typically looks for more direct financial commitment, ideally with measurable risk-
sharing or matching funds, when substantial concessional financing is requested. 
64. 
While this does not undermine the overall alignment with country priorities, it does 
point to an opportunity for deeper national financial participation in future phases of the 
programme. In particular, there may be scope for governments or utilities to take a more active 
financial role as the IUS model matures, and implementation risks decrease. 
65. 
The iTAP assesses country ownership as high, reflecting strong policy alignment, 
inclusive stakeholder engagement and the active involvement of national institutions in 
programme design and execution.  
1.7 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
          
           Scale: Medium to high         
66. 
The IUS Programme presents a reasonably strong case in terms of cost-efficiency, 
alignment of financial instruments, and structuring of concessionality. This is particularly 
notable given the geographic and structural constraints associated with SIDS, where distributed 
climate mitigation and adaptation solutions often entail higher marginal costs than in 
continental or higher-density settings. 
67. 
Cost-effectiveness metrics: The programme is expected to achieve mitigation benefits of 
approximately 601,550 t CO₂ eq avoided, resulting in an estimated cost of USD 70 per tonne for

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 141 
 
 
 
 
the overall programme and USD 43 per tonne for the GCF contribution. These figures are 
broadly consistent with GCF precedents for distributed energy interventions in SIDS contexts 
and are deemed competitive when compared to mitigation programmes with similar technical 
profiles. 
68. 
On the adaptation side, the estimated cost per direct beneficiary is approximately USD 
3,938, based on the 10,655 direct beneficiaries targeted through improved resilience to heat 
stress. While this is relatively high by GCF adaptation standards, it must be understood within 
the broader context of the dual objectives of the programme. The costs are associated not only 
with direct technology uptake but also with the establishment of institutional models, digital 
tools and customer-facing systems expected to deliver benefits beyond the initial 
implementation window. 
69. 
Importantly, the programme also estimates over USD 260 million in financial savings for 
participating customers over the productive lifespan of the financed technologies. These net 
benefits are expected to accrue through avoided electricity costs from distributed solar energy 
and savings from energy-efficient appliances and systems. This represents a meaningful value 
proposition for both customers and the utilities, although, as CDB acknowledges, actual results 
will depend on technology performance, repayment behaviour and subproject uptake. 
70. 
Concessionality structure and co-financing: The financial structure involves a USD 20.8 
million GCF concessional loan blended with USD 16.2 million from CDB on a pari passu basis. 
Participating utilities will on-lend these funds to end users through structured credit lines, with 
interest rates anticipated to fall in the range of 4.5 to 6.0 per cent, depending on local regulatory 
determinations and risk-sharing discussions during the first year of the programme. These 
terms compare favourably to prevailing market rates in the region, which typically begin at 6.5 
per cent or higher for comparable unsecured loans. 
71. 
In-kind contributions of USD 25 million from the utilities in the form of AMI are also 
included in the co-financing total. While CDB maintains that AMI is a critical enabler of the IUS 
model and aligned with the programme’s theory of change, the iTAP notes that this investment 
may have been pursued independently of the IUS Programme and appears to reflect business-
as-usual utility modernization. As such, its inclusion as co-financing, while defensible, may 
overstate the degree of additionality and direct financial commitment from national 
stakeholders. 
72. 
The IUS Programme is nonetheless likely to catalyse further investment downstream. It 
is framed explicitly as a “bridge to bankability”, designed to establish proof of concept and 
performance track record for utility-led DER delivery, thereby enabling the utilities to secure 
additional  finance with less concessionality in future cycles. This ambition is credible, 
particularly given the integrated capacity-building support and the regional focus on 
replication, but it remains contingent on execution quality and early success. 
73. 
Risk allocation and incentive alignment: CDB will act as both lender and programme 
manager, receiving lending returns while benefiting from substantial GCF-funded technical 
assistance, which comprises over 13.5 per cent of the total GCF contribution. While this 
structure may appear to raise moral hazard risks, whereby CDB captures upside returns while 
GCF bears a disproportionate share of de-risking, the AE has provided a clear rationale. It argues 
that the technical assistance is essential to establish a novel delivery model in the Caribbean, 
where such utility-led energy service offerings have not previously been implemented. 
Furthermore, grant-financed activities include compliance with GCF safeguards, social inclusion 
outreach and programmatic knowledge dissemination, all of which extend beyond direct 
support to the utilities. 
74. 
That said, the iTAP would have preferred to see a more differentiated risk structure, 
such as a subordinated tranche, wherein CDB exposure would be more explicitly aligned with 
performance outcomes. The current pari passu structure may be acceptable, but the rationale 
rests heavily on the need for both financiers to maintain equivalent tenors and exit points. 
While CDB emphasizes that its own lending is not commercially priced and is adjusted to reflect

=== PAGE 142 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 142 
 
 
 
 
its borrowing costs, the absence of a more risk-sensitive capital stack reduces the strength of 
the incentive alignment framework. 
75. 
To mitigate the risk of utilities over-capturing the benefits of concessional financing, 
CDB has indicated that spreads charged to end users will be capped in the subsidiary 
agreements signed with each utility. Regulatory authorities will also play a role in rate-setting 
during the programme’s first year, with CDB monitoring subloan terms through regular 
reporting. These are positive design features, but enforcement over time will require sustained 
regulatory engagement and transparent monitoring of on-lending terms and customer-level 
impact. 
76. 
Customer uptake and delivery risk: A key determinant of programme success will be the 
ability to generate sufficient customer uptake. In other IUS contexts, customers have rejected 
offers when savings from installed technologies did not clearly outweigh the costs of loan 
repayments, or when participation processes were too complex. The programme attempts to 
address these challenges by providing: 
(a) 
On-bill financing mechanisms that combine costs and benefits in a single, transparent 
billing statement; 
(b) 
User-facing tools, including energy savings calculators and online portals, to demystify 
technology performance and financial implications; 
(c) 
Technical assistance for low-income customers, including free energy audits and help 
desk support; and 
(d) 
Prequalification processes and performance standards for Technology Service Providers 
(TSPs) to ensure service quality. 
77. 
While these are thoughtful features, the multi-stakeholder structure and regulatory 
dependencies introduce a degree of complexity that may affect implementation. Customer 
satisfaction and referral effects will be critical to achieving scale, particularly given the 
relatively modest direct beneficiary target (10,655 people) in the initial phase. The programme 
includes provisions to delay or suspend further technical assistance disbursements if uptake 
stalls – an important accountability mechanism that improves delivery discipline. 
78. 
Coordination with other initiatives: The iTAP notes that the IUS Programme does not 
appear to be meaningfully coordinated with other major climate finance initiatives in the region, 
including the GCF-supported Barbados Blue Green Bank . While CDB maintains that these 
initiatives are complementary and focus on more traditional, bank-led financing models, it 
would have been helpful to include more detail on how pipeline sharing will be managed to 
avoid duplication or market distortion, especially in relatively small economies like Barbados. 
79. 
Accredited entity fees: The AE fee of 6.7 per cent is within the range of comparable 
programmes, though slightly higher than the iTAP typically expects for an intervention with a 
large technical assistance component. CDB justifies the fee through a bottom-up costing model 
and points to higher personnel and travel costs in the Caribbean. While these factors are valid, 
the iTAP notes that the programme’s relatively high cost of coordination should be monitored 
and assessed alongside actual disbursement and performance metrics over time. 
80. 
The design reflects a strong understanding of regional delivery constraints and 
incorporates several safeguards to promote cost-effectiveness, manage concessionality and 
enforce performance-based disbursement. However, questions remain around the depth of 
national co-financing, the absence of differentiated risk-sharing between lenders, and the need 
for clearer coordination with parallel financing mechanisms. The programme is well-structured 
to catalyse downstream investments and shift market norms, but sustained execution and 
oversight will be critical to realizing its full potential. 
81. 
The one area we would have preferred to see more ambition involves the feasibility of 
introducing a more risk-sensitive capital structure in the funding proposal, such as a 
subordinated tranche for CDB financing. This would enhance incentive alignment by ensuring 
that CDB retains greater exposure to performance outcomes. If the pari passu structure is

=== PAGE 143 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 143 
 
 
 
 
retained, we would encourage the Secretariat should seek a more robust justification, including 
an assessment of whether alternative structuring options could better achieve alignment while 
preserving the IUS Programme financial viability and implementation timeline. 
82. 
The iTAP assesses the efficiency and effectiveness potential of the IUS Programme as 
medium to high. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
83. 
The funding proposal makes a solid attempt to address a significant climate finance 
need in the Caribbean. The iTAP finds that the IUS Programme presents credible climate 
rationale, addresses structural financing gaps and demonstrates potential for long-term 
paradigm shift.  
84. 
The iTAP recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal.

=== PAGE 144 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.17 
Page 144 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP275) 
Proposal name: 
Scaling up the Deployment of Integrated Utility Services (IUS) to 
Support Energy Sector Transformation in the Caribbean (Phase 1) 
Programme 
Accredited entity: 
Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) 
Country/(ies): 
Barbados, Belize, Jamaica 
Project/Programme size: 
Medium 
 
Impact potential 
The iTAP assessment is noted with thanks. CDB appreciates the favourable review of the 
impact potential of this programme. 
Paradigm shift potential 
The iTAP assessment is noted with thanks. CDB appreciates the favourable review of the 
paradigm shift potential of this programme. 
Sustainable development potential 
The iTAP assessment is noted with thanks. CDB appreciates the favourable review of the 
sustainable development potential of this programme. 
Needs of the recipient 
The iTAP assessment is noted with thanks. CDB appreciates the favourable review with 
regards to the needs of the recipients. 
Country ownership 
The iTAP assessment is noted with thanks. CDB appreciates the favourable review with regards 
to country ownership. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
The iTAP assessment is noted with thanks. CDB appreciates the favourable review of the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the programme. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
CDB appreciates the thorough and constructive review, and thanks the iTAP for 
recommending that the proposal be approved by the GCF Board without conditions.

=== PAGE 145 ===
Scaling up the Deployment of Integrated Utility 
Services (IUS) to Support Energy Sector 
Transformation in the Caribbean (Phase I) 
Programme 
Annex 8: Gender Assessment and Gender 
Action Plan (GAP) 
Gender documentation for FP275

=== PAGE 146 ===
Table of contents 
Acronyms / Abbreviations ...................................................................................................... iv 
1 
Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 1-1 
1.1 
Limitations ................................................................................................................. 1-2 
1.2 
Challenges ................................................................................................................ 1-2 
2 
Methodology .................................................................................................................... 2-1 
3 
Country Level Analysis .................................................................................................. 3-1 
3.1 
Barbados ................................................................................................................... 3-2 
3.1.1 
Policy Environment ............................................................................................ 3-2 
3.1.2 
Usage ................................................................................................................. 3-5 
3.1.3 
Demand ............................................................................................................. 3-9 
3.1.4 
Barriers ............................................................................................................ 3-10 
3.1.5 
Institutional Gender Mainstreaming Capacity .................................................. 3-18 
3.2 
Belize ...................................................................................................................... 3-20 
3.2.1 
Policy Environment .......................................................................................... 3-21 
3.2.2 
Usage ............................................................................................................... 3-24 
3.2.3 
Demand ........................................................................................................... 3-27 
3.2.4 
Barriers ............................................................................................................ 3-28 
3.2.5 
Institutional Gender Mainstreaming Capacity .................................................. 3-33 
3.3 
Jamaica ................................................................................................................... 3-36 
3.3.1 
Policy environment ........................................................................................... 3-36 
3.3.2 
Usage ............................................................................................................... 3-39 
3.3.3 
Demand ........................................................................................................... 3-44 
3.3.4 
Barriers ............................................................................................................ 3-46 
3.3.5 
Institutional Gender Mainstreaming Capacity .................................................. 3-47 
4 
Multi-Country Level Analysis ......................................................................................... 4-1 
4.1 
Comparative Policy Environment Analysis ................................................................ 4-1 
4.2 
Cross-cutting Stakeholder Findings .......................................................................... 4-5 
4.2.1 
Finance .............................................................................................................. 4-5 
4.2.2 
Gender Mainstreaming Capacity ....................................................................... 4-6 
4.2.3 
Employment in the Energy Sector ..................................................................... 4-6 
4.2.4 
Engagement with Vulnerable Groups ................................................................ 4-6 
4.2.5 
Indigenous Persons (Belize) .............................................................................. 4-6 
4.3 
Barriers Across the Region ....................................................................................... 4-7 
5 
Key Conclusions ............................................................................................................. 5-1 
6 
Recommendations .......................................................................................................... 6-1 
6.1.1 
General recommendations ................................................................................. 6-1 
6.1.2 
Stakeholder engagement recommendations ..................................................... 6-2

=== PAGE 147 ===
7 
Gender Action Plan ......................................................................................................... 7-1 
7.1 
IUS Programme Approach to Gender Action Planning ............................................. 7-2 
7.1.1 
Implementing Partners ....................................................................................... 7-3 
7.1.2 
Policy Environments .......................................................................................... 7-3 
7.2 
Gender Action Plan ................................................................................................... 7-3 
Appendix A 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan .................................................................... A-1 
Appendix B 
Stakeholders Consulted .............................................................................. B-1 
Appendix C 
Unconsulted Stakeholders .......................................................................... C-1 
 
 
List of figures 
Figure 2-1: Policy Gender Rating Tool .................................................................................... 2-1 
Figure 2-2: Stakeholder Breakdown By Organisation and Gender .......................................... 2-2 
Figure 2-3: Financial Barriers identified in research ................................................................ 2-3 
Figure 2-4: Gender Mainstreaming Questions for NGOs ........................................................ 2-3 
Figure 2-5: Gender Mainstreaming Questions for Government Stakeholders ......................... 2-4 
Figure 2-6: Understanding the Indigenous Context and their needs ....................................... 2-4 
Figure 2-7: Understanding the needs of PWDs ....................................................................... 2-5 
Figure 2-8: Issues related to Housing ...................................................................................... 2-5 
Figure 3-1: Energy and Gender Policy Environment for Barbados.......................................... 3-2 
Figure 3-2: Showing Annual Rates of Inflation and Disposable Income Growth in 2022 ........ 3-6 
Figure 3-3: Estimate Annual Energy Consumption of Room Air Conditioners in 2040. Source: 
United for Efficiency ................................................................................................................. 3-8 
Figure 3-4: Household Energy Efficiency Trends .................................................................... 3-9 
Figure 3-5: Government Projects Increasing Public Access and Investment Incentives within 
the IUS Model in Barbados .................................................................................................... 3-11 
Figure 3-6: Distribution of Weekly Earnings Intervals by Gender in Barbados. Source ........ 3-13 
Figure 3-7: Alternative and Programmes for Accessing Technologies under the IUS Model 3-14 
Figure 3-8: Vulnerable and Poor Incomes Segregated by Industry and Sex ......................... 3-16 
Figure 3-9: Persons Employed in the Energy Sector............................................................. 3-16 
Figure 3-10: Stakeholder’s Gender Mainstreaming Capacity ................................................ 3-19 
Figure 3-11: Connection Rate by District. Sources Belize MICS ........................................... 3-20 
Figure 3-12: Energy and Gender Policy Environment for Belize ........................................... 3-21 
Figure 3-13: Belize's Energy Sources in 2010 ....................................................................... 3-27 
Figure 3-14: Belize's Renewable Energy Targets ................................................................. 3-28 
Figure 3-15: Projected Cost Benefit of EE Adoption in Belize ............................................... 3-28 
Figure 3-16: Housing Characterics of Urban and Rural Homes in Belize .............................. 3-30 
Figure 3-17: Energy Sector Workforce. Source ..................................................................... 3-33 
Figure 3-18: Belize Stakeholders' Gender Capacity .............................................................. 3-35 
Figure 3-19: Energy and Policy Environment for Jamaica..................................................... 3-37 
Figure 3-20: Jamaica's Projected Energy Demand (2005-2021) ........................................... 3-45 
Figure 3-21: Jamaica's Projected Energy Demand (2021-2030) ........................................... 3-45 
Figure 3-22: Jamaica RE Consumption by sector in 2014 and 2020 .................................... 3-46 
Figure 3-23: Jamaica Stakeholders' Gender Capacity .......................................................... 3-49 
Figure 4-1: Target Countries Comparative Policy Environment .............................................. 4-2 
Figure 4-2: Policy Environment for CARICOM ........................................................................ 4-3 
Figure 4-3: CARICOM Gender Equality Strategy Guiding Principles and Commmitments ..... 4-3 
Figure 4-4: Policy Environment for CDB .................................................................................. 4-5 
Figure 4-5: Key Concerns raised for the target technologies .................................................. 4-6 
Figure 6-1: Summary of Recommendations and associated gender needs ............................ 6-3

=== PAGE 148 ===
Figure A-1: Summary of proposed engagements and type of engagement ............................ A-2 
Figure A-2: Barbados Stakeholders ........................................................................................ A-5 
Figure A-3: Belize Stakeholders .............................................................................................. A-6 
Figure A-4: Jamaica Stakeholders .......................................................................................... A-7 
Figure B-1: Phase 1 Stakeholder Engagment (NGOs) ............................................................ B-1 
Figure B-2: Phase 2 Stakeholder Engagement (Government Agencies and Ministries) ......... B-2 
Figure B-3: Phase 3 Stakeholder Engagement (Utilties) ......................................................... B-2 
 
Figure C-1: List of Stakeholders that were not met during stakeholder engagement ............. C-1 
 
List of Tables  
Table 1:  IUS Programme GAP ............................................................................................... 7-4

=== PAGE 149 ===
Acronyms / Abbreviations 
 
A/C 
Air Conditioning  
AE 
Accredited Entity  
BEL 
Belize Electricity Limited  
BIT 
Board of Industrial Training  
BLP 
Barbados Light and Power  
BMC 
Borrowing Member Country  
BREA  
Barbados Renewable Energy Association  
BZD 
Belize Dollars  
C-COOL  
Caribbean Cooling Initiative 
CARICOM  
Caribbean Community  
CCREEE 
Caribbean Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency 
CDB 
Caribbean Development Bank  
CDR 
Culturally Defined Responsibilities  
CEDAW 
Convention for the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination Against 
Women 
CEI 
Caribbean Energy Initiative  
CHPA 
Central Housing and Planning Authority  
CoC 
Code of Conduct 
DFC 
Development Finance Corporation  
EE 
Energy Efficiency  
ELPA 
Electric Light and Power Act  
EMISDE  
Energy Matrix Diversification and Institutional Strengthening of the 
Department of Energy 
EU 
European Union  
FHH  
Female Headed Household 
FIT 
Feed In Tariff  
FPIC  
Free, Prior and Informed Consent  
GAP 
Gender Action Plan  
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence  
GCCCSAP 
Gender and Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 
GCF 
Green Climate Fund  
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product  
GEPOS 
Gender Equality Policy and Operational Strategy 
GESI 
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion  
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas 
GRM  
Grievance Redress Mechanism  
GSDS 
Green State Development Strategy  
HOPE 
Home Ownership Providing Energy  
HFS 
Hydrofluorocarbons 
HPS 
High-Pressure Sodium  
HVAC 
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning 
HWI 
Hot Water Immersion  
ICT 
Information and Communications Technology 
IDB 
Inter-American Development Bank 
ILO 
International Labour Organisation

=== PAGE 150 ===
IP 
Indigenous People  
ITVET 
Institute for Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
IUS  
Integrated Utility Service  
J-CCCP 
Japan-Caribbean Climate Change Partnership  
JMD 
Jamaican Dollars  
JNCS 
Jamaica’s National Cooling Strategy  
JPS 
Jamaica Public Service  
LCDS 
Low Carbon Development Strategy  
LCP 
Local Content Policy  
LED 
Light Emitting Diode  
LFS 
Labour Force Survey  
LGBTQIA  
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, Intersex, Asexual 
MICS 
Multi-Indicator Cluster Survey  
MOHA 
Ministry of Home Affairs  
N/A 
Not Applicable  
NDA 
National Designated Authority  
NDC 
Nationally Determined Contribution  
NGO 
Non-Governmental Organisation  
NHT 
National Housing Trust  
NOAU 
National Ozone Action Unit  
NPGE 
National Policy on Gender Equality  
NPV 
Net Present Value  
OCC 
Office of Climate Change  
POWA 
Productive Organization for Women in Action 
PUC 
Public Utilities Commission  
PV 
Photovoltaic  
PWD 
Person With Disability  
R2RP 
Roofs to Reefs Program  
RAC 
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning  
RE 
Renewable Energy  
RGA 
Regional Gender Analysis  
SBB 
Small Business Bureau  
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goal  
SIDS 
Small Island Developing State 
STEM 
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math 
SWH 
Solar Water Heater  
TNES 
Transitioning to National Energy Security  
TOR 
Terms of Reference  
UN 
United Nations  
UNICEF 
United Nations Children's Fund 
USD  
United States Dollars  
VAWG 
Violence Against Women and Girls  
WEEP 
Women Empowerment in Energy Programme  
WIRE  
Women in Renewable Energy

=== PAGE 151 ===
1 
Introduction 
 
The Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) is in the process of implementing the “Scaling up the 
Deployment of Integrated Utility Services (IUS) to Support Energy Sector Transformation in the 
Caribbean” (Phase I) Programme in the Caribbean, which is a Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
funded activity. This Phase of the project will have three Borrowing Member Countries (BMCs) 
participating in the programme and they are as follows: Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica. These 
three BMCs have pledged to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions through the adoption of 
renewable energy (RE) to facilitate energy transition and expanding the scale of energy 
efficiency (EE) measures. 
The GCF is committed to maximising the impact of its funding for adaptation and mitigation while 
ensuring environmental, social, economic and development co-benefits are advanced and a 
gender-sensitive approach is taken1. With its updated 2020 gender policy, the GCF is committed 
to promote and integrate gender equality in its investment criteria. The Gender Policy has three 
main objectives which are as follows:  
1. Utilise a comprehensive gender approach applied by the institution and its network of 
partners which include accredited entities (AEs), national designated authorities (NDAs) 
and focal points to support climate change interventions and innovations. 
2. Promote climate investments that advance gender equality and minimise social, gender 
and climate related risks through climate change mitigation and adaptation measures.  
3. Contribute to shrinking the gender gap caused by climate change-exacerbated social, 
economic and environmental vulnerabilities through mainstreaming gender equality in 
climate investments.    
The gender policy’s application to the IUS Project would entail: 
 
Gender inequality is addressed/reduced and through enhanced stakeholder engagement 
can generate sustainable livelihoods opportunities, promote health and wellbeing, and 
increase resilience to climate-induced shocks and risks for men and women.  
 
An enabling environment among GCF stakeholders built on existing policy commitments, 
social and environmental standards and redress mechanisms is supported and sustained in 
order to achieve gender equality. 
 
The comprehensive, systematic, and participatory collection of sex-disaggregated data and 
the execution of qualitative and quantitative gender analysis is supported to effectively 
monitor, report and evaluate project impact.  
 
1 “Gender Policy 2020-2023” retrieved from https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-policy  
In accordance with GCF gender policies and guidance, the gender assessment is done as a critical 
element of the project proposal to outline how the project while attempting to meet its goal of 
supporting the target countries’ transition to renewable energy states, will benefit vulnerable groups 
and how in particular will vulnerable groups be able to participate in this project. The gender 
assessment will elucidate on factors that will impair vulnerable groups’ ability to benefit fully and 
identify areas of entry to address these issues while advancing gender equality and supporting a 
Just Transition.

=== PAGE 152 ===
The Assessment builds on the previous work in the baseline assessment and seeks to provide 
a deeper understanding of how the proposed technologies (solar water heaters, rooftop solar 
photovoltaic, efficient cooling and HVAC, and LED lighting) will impact populations of the target 
countries as well as identify barriers to uptake.  
The Assessment is expected to inform: 
 
the gender mainstreaming approach for the GCF proposal; 
 
capacity-building activities in the overall proposal; 
 
gender-sensitive monitoring and evaluation tools that may be needed; and 
 
Institutional policy, programming and operational actions/steps that may be needed in the 
short, medium and or long-term to support the IUS model implementation in an equal, 
inclusive and just manner.  
1.1 
Limitations 
This assessment utilised a mixed method approach i.e. a desk-based research and stakeholder 
engagement. However, this process was still hindered by a few factors including:  
 
Outdated data – the region has limited human resources funding and infrastructure available 
to execute frequent data collection and analysis activities which results in the use of data at 
least 5 years old in this assessment.  Despite the recent efforts of Caribbean Centre for 
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (CCREEE) to narrow this gap, some of the 
essential questions for the gender assessment still are not generally covered or readily 
available.  
 
Data availability – access to data is a weak point in the Caribbean as many governments 
and agencies possess updated data but have issues with processing, analysing, and 
publishing said data for public access, also due to limited human resources and 
infrastructure. Due to demand also for consultations and engagement, there was limited time 
to follow up in detail with the Statistics Departments of each country to inform this draft 
assessment.  
 
Limited access to critical documents – throughout various engagements with government 
stakeholders, we became aware of policies in development that could affect and possibly 
inform this project but despite our best efforts, we were unable to secure access to these 
documents (drafts included).  This includes the draft Energy Policy for Jamaica as well as 
the new access policy for Belize, amongst others.  
 
Inaccessibility of key stakeholders – some of the Executing Entities (the utilities) did not 
participate in the stakeholder engagement process and in some cases cited other priorities 
or the need to see a project document prior to their engagement on questions relating to 
gender and social issues. The latter suggests a lack of understanding of the requirements 
and the process flow for GCF proposals.  Their engagement, as the proposed executing 
agencies, is critical to obtaining information that would inform aspects of the gender action 
plan that follows the Gender Assessment including technical assistance and capacity- 
building actions as possible elements of more than one Component of the proposed project. 
 
As it stands therefore, the Gender Assessment reflects a few key limits and limitations which are 
also of value to the Assessment itself in terms of indirectly assessing knowledge, practice and 
behaviours on gender, gender mainstreaming, women’s empowerment and social inclusion in 
the sector as well as for this specific project.  
1.2 
Challenges  
This assessment was meant to be informed by desk-based research and stakeholder 
engagement which would give insight into the enabling environment in each country by

=== PAGE 153 ===
identifying the current circumstances the IUS would be operating in while also gaining knowledge 
on key stakeholders’ capacities and practices on gender equality and social inclusion 
mainstreaming in energy sector activities and transformations. Executing the stakeholder 
engagement aspect of the process within the given tight timeframe was greatly hindered by 
various factors. Engaging with key stakeholders was inhibited by time conflicts, limited personnel 
availability and the clearance of engagements of key government stakeholders. Due to the 
difficulty in scheduling meetings and the limited time available to continue consultations and 
complete the assessment, stakeholder engagement was closed off on June 9th to facilitate the 
preparation of this Draft Report.

=== PAGE 154 ===
2 
Methodology 
 
This assessment used a two-step approach. The first step entailed the desk-based research 
which involved gathering existing analysis on energy, renewable energy, energy and gender, 
and renewable energy transformations to obtain information that could shed light on how this 
project may impact persons, identify any possible lessons learned in previous works and 
analysing the existing enabling environment for renewable energy. The research applied a 
renewable energy lens to the current socio-economic conditions within each country to 
understand how varying factors affect renewable energy usage, uptake and appetite for 
renewable energy technologies.   
A gender analysis rating tool was used to assess relevant policies based on how gender-
responsive they are (see Figure 2-1). This diagnosis involved reviewing policies and identifying 
the elements that speak to gender, women, and other marginalised groups and the 
commitments/intent made by those polices on issues of (i) engagement, (ii) equity and justice, 
(iii) inclusion, (iv) protection/mitigation of risks/impacts. This is an important perspective in 
addressing issues of a just transition and in meeting GCF requirements for mitigation 
investments including those with adaptation co-benefits.  
Figure 2-1: Policy Gender Rating Tool 
Gender Rating  
Description  
Gender Neutral (no mention) 
The policy makes no mention or does not reference gender or 
women.  
Gender Aware  
Gender specific norms, roles and issues are acknowledged 
within the policy.  
Gender Sensitive  
Measures are outlined within the policy to ensure gender 
inequalities are not exacerbated as a by-product of the policy’s 
actions.  
Gender Responsive  
The policy acknowledges and identifies differences and 
inequalities between men and women and sets out actions which 
seeks to rectify these issues.  
Gender Transformative  
The policy seeks to resolve fundamental structural inequalities 
and challenges social and cultural norms.   
 
The second step builds on the first step and used those findings to shape the stakeholder 
engagement to follow. Key stakeholders were identified, and a stakeholder engagement plan 
was developed (see Annex A). The findings were used to develop PowerPoint presentations to 
be used with stakeholders that help guide the conversation by providing context and key 
questions for stakeholders to answer (see presentations here). These questions were tailored 
for engagement with non-governmental organisations (NGOs) as well as government 
stakeholders.  Similar presentations were prepared for engagement with utilities. Engagement 
with diverse stakeholders sought to gain an understanding of their engagement on gender and 
Key chapter takeaway  
A diverse range of stakeholders were met, yielding responses from 50/50 split of male and female 
voices. The insights and information gained from these engagements specifically information 
centered around engagement and processes observed and performed by key stakeholders. 
Stakeholder engagement also captures the lived experiences of the stakeholder and raised 
awareness on ongoing work that was not available to the public.

=== PAGE 155 ===
energy and with energy activities, their capacities and experience with gender and gender 
mainstreaming particularly within a renewable energy project and their perspectives on issues 
that need consideration in the proposed IUS model approach. In addition to this, engagement 
with government stakeholders helped to identify existing, past or possible approaches and 
policies used when responding to the needs of the general public and vulnerable groups.   
Executed in three phases, we consulted with twenty-eight organisations in total (13 NGOs and 
09 governmental organisations) across the three countries (see Annex B for the list of 
stakeholders engaged). Phase 1 entailed engaging NGOs who worked with vulnerable groups 
and/or in renewable energy. In Phase 2, outreach was made to government stakeholders 
including energy ministries/agencies, public utilities commissions and gender bureaux. Phase 3 
was intended to target the utilities (the Executing Entities of the project) but was ultimately 
postponed due to a lack of response.  Twenty-eight (44) persons, in total, were consulted – 14 
men and 14 women (see Figure 2-2).   
Figure 2-2: Stakeholder Breakdown By Organisation and Gender 
Stakeholders  
Female  
Male  
Barbados 
NGOs  
3 
2 
Government  
3 
3 
Belize 
NGOs  
2 
4 
Government  
0 
2 
Jamaica 
NGOs  
4 
1 
Government  
2 
2 
Total  
14 
14 
 
Stakeholder Engagement Focus  
From the desk-based research, issues of finance and access to finance were identified as 
barriers to this project, and the engagement sought to explore additional factors that might limit 
a person’s access to finance that may not have been covered in the desk-based 
review/research? (see Figure 2-3). Obtaining information would help to inform possible financial 
strategies that the project may need to adopt to ensure access to those who need financial 
assistance.

=== PAGE 156 ===
Figure 2-3: Financial Barriers identified in research 
 
Key to ensuring the project meets its GCF gender requirements was to identify the existing 
capacities of those who will be charged in delivering and supporting this project and their 
experience with mainstreaming gender throughout their projects as well as identifying potential 
partners to support gaps. This insight will be used to determine whether there will be a need for 
gender sensitisation and capacity-building in the gender action plan to empower key project 
actors. Figure 2-4 and Figure 2-5 provide the questions used to obtain this information from 
stakeholders.    
Figure 2-4: Gender Mainstreaming Questions for NGOs

=== PAGE 157 ===
Figure 2-5: Gender Mainstreaming Questions for Government Stakeholders 
 
One out of the three countries have large indigenous populations, and these groups tend to live 
very differently from regular citizens in their country. It, therefore, became important to gain an 
understanding of the context within which they live as they face unique barriers to their way of 
life and location. Figure 2-6 shows the questions aimed at gaining insight into these areas of 
interest.  
Figure 2-6: Understanding the Indigenous Context and their needs 
 
Persons with disabilities are another special group of interest to be considered within the setting 
of this project as they as traditionally ignored and not consulted in the typical project development 
process, often leaving them unable to benefit from a project due to the lack of consideration 
made on their behalf. Acknowledging this and unique circumstances of PWDs, it was critical to

=== PAGE 158 ===
obtain information that could be used to shape project activities and processes to ensure that 
PWDs are not left behind by this project (see Figure 2-7).  
Figure 2-7: Understanding the needs of PWDs 
 
Housing structure and homeownership issues also emerge from the desk-based research and 
given the nature of the project wherein installations and modifications may be needed for homes, 
it was important to understand factors that might prevent the smooth execution of that process 
(see Figure 2-8). 
Figure 2-8: Issues related to Housing

=== PAGE 159 ===
3 
Country Level Analysis  
 
This section explores the gendered usage and implications of the technologies of focus in this 
project across the three countries and identifies existing and potential barriers that would affect 
the uptake and adoption by these technologies by women and other marginalised communities. 
The assessment will explore the current state of usage of LED lighting, solar rooftop photovoltaic 
(PV), efficient air conditioning (A/C) and refrigeration differentiated by gender and any specific 
gender-differentiated needs. Noting from the project’s TOR that more equitable access to these 
technologies is a goal of this project, the assessment considers/explores factors that may impact 
this outcome.   
In so doing, it considers the following questions:   
 
Are the usage and uptake of these technologies differentiated between men and women? If 
there is a difference, is it related to gender roles?  
 
In what ways do they affect the daily activities of women, and can they bring increased quality 
of life?  
 
Will the increased distribution and adoption of these technologies support a just transition for 
all? 
 
What institutional, social and economic barriers may influence the rate of uptake of these 
technologies by women and other marginalised communities? Will these factors affect the 
benefits women and other marginalised communities will be able to receive from this project? 
Differences based on sex and age are considered as well as other intersectional attributes such 
as income, geography, (dis)ability and ethnicity where relevant. IP issues are expected to be 
considered there in the context of a vulnerable group in the general population rather than the 
specific needs for indigenous and hinterland communities as it may apply in Jamaica and or 
Belize.  
This section also reviews the enabling environment for gender mainstreaming in the energy 
sector and existing efforts to apply a gender lens to renewable energy and energy efficiency 
transformations. The review of existing legal, institutional, policy, strategy and planning 
frameworks that are summarised individually and collectively exposes any major gender gaps, 
barriers and constraints. Additionally, relevant international commitments and regional policies 
are mentioned.  Furthermore, comparisons between countries, key issues as well as common 
and differentiated needs are summarised including any evidence or likelihood of a gender 
inequality of risk that target beneficiaries may be exposed to.  
 
Key chapter takeaway  
Although, the three countries have their own individual cultures, economies and other aspects of 
society, the renewable energy sector in each country and their populations’ interactions with the 
sector are affected by similar factors and barriers. The adoption of the designated renewable energy 
technologies will reap numerous benefits for persons, though barriers that reduce their ability to 
implement do exist.

=== PAGE 160 ===
3.1 
Barbados 
3.1.1 
Policy Environment 
Barbados is a Caribbean leader in the energy sector. Its leadership has seen progress in the 
sustainable transformation of the energy matrix in its ambitious goals of being 100% renewable 
by 2030. This goal has resulted in the acquisition of 49 electric buses and the installation of 
rooftop solar photovoltaic systems across various government buildings.  In achieving its goal to 
be 100% renewable, the Government of Barbados has enacted legislation and policies to 
improve efficiency with LED Lighting and harness the sun’s energy ultimately reducing the need 
for fossil fuel-generated electricity. 
One programme being implemented is the Roof to Reefs project as noted in the country’s 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC). The project accounts for the use of IUS Model 
technologies such as rooftop solar photovoltaic on homes and hopes to improve the social 
development of vulnerable communities through resilience-building, post-disaster cost 
deduction and improving the standard of living and quality of life2. Though this programme 
promotes equity and addresses resilience concerns for vulnerable groups such as women and 
girls, several other policies do not enhance equity and a just transition and transformation of the 
energy sector under the IUS Model. This is a result of policies being gender neutral, or simply 
gender aware, with no mention or reference to gender or women or the acknowledgement of 
gender-specific norms (See Figure 3-1).  
Take, for example, the Barbados National Energy Policy which establishes the roadmap for the 
renewable energy transformation in the country. This policy has no specific mentions of gender 
equality, or how the different uses of energy by women would be considered and or have 
influenced within the roadmap. Figure 3-1 highlights relevant legislation and policies to the 
landscape of Energy and Gender within Barbados, and the gender content and rating of each 
policy. 
Figure 3-1: Energy and Gender Policy Environment for Barbados 
Policy 
Summary 
Gender Content 
Gender Rating  
National Policy on 
Gender (Draft) 
The draft seeks to 
provide the framework 
to improve the status of 
men and women, as 
well as to indicators for 
measurement in areas 
such as gender-based 
violence, women in 
decision-making, 
employment and youth 
affairs.3 
No public draft is 
available. 
N/A 
National Determined 
Contribution (NDC), 
20214  
It provides an update 
on the country’s 
progress and outlines 
actions for meeting its 
commitments to the 
Paris Agreement 
It recognises 
gender plays a role 
in vulnerability and 
commits to 
promoting gender 
equality. 
Responsive 
 
 
2 “2021 Barbados NDC Update” retrieved from https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-
06/2021%20Barbados%20NDC%20update%20-%2021%20July%202021.pdf  
3 “Gender Policy To Be Introduced” retrieved from https://gisbarbados.gov.bb/blog/gender-policy-to-be-introduced/  
4 Under the NDC 2021, the programme Roofs to Reefs is noted. The Programme seeks to build resilience in the most vulnerable 
communities and environmental areas through restoration, and energy and water efficient technologies, highlighting the 
importance of the social and gender impacts, looking at elements such as the quality of life and standard of living of those 
vulnerable persons.

=== PAGE 161 ===
Policy 
Summary 
Gender Content 
Gender Rating  
Electric and Power 
Act 2013 
This act stands as one 
of the governing 
legislation pieces, 
which governs the 
supply and use of 
electricity, promoting 
the use of renewable 
energy. This legislation 
also works hand in 
hand with the Electric 
(Fees) Regulations. 
Amended in 2019, this 
amendment seeks to 
improve the process of 
householder’s 
installation of 
renewable energy 
systems.5 
No mentions of 
gender, women, or 
marginalised 
communities. 
Neutral 
Sustainable Energy 
Framework for 
Barbados (2009)  
This framework under 
the facilitation of the 
Inter-American 
Development Bank 
explores various 
viability opportunities in 
Barbados’s journey to 
improve energy 
security whilst keeping 
core the protection of 
its environment.  
It provides very clear 
analysis on renewable 
energy sources, noting 
their existence and 
availability in the lens 
of the island for 
investments.  
No mentions of 
gender, women or 
marginalised 
communities.  
Neutral 
Electric (Fees) 
Regulations 
This legislation governs 
the fees charged to 
consumers under the 
Barbados Light and 
Power and the 
application and 
licensing fees for 
licenses. 
No mentions of 
gender, women, or 
marginalised 
communities. 
Neutral 
Barbados National 
Energy Policy 
2019- 2030 
 
This Policy seeks to 
showcase the direction 
of the 100% renewable 
energy goal by the 
Barbados Government 
by 2030. It uses dated 
information from 2015 
as many of its baseline 
measurements, 
however, does account 
for the vulnerabilities 
the nation faces as a 
No mentions of 
gender, women, or 
marginalised 
communities. 
Neutral 
 
5 Refer to The Householder’s Right to Renewable Energy Policy

=== PAGE 162 ===
Policy 
Summary 
Gender Content 
Gender Rating  
Small Island 
Developing State, 
mainly its place within 
the International 
Political Economy and 
Climate Change.  
Control of Inefficient 
Lighting Act 2021 
This policy outlines the 
phased approach to the 
elimination of inefficient 
electrical lamps, in the 
country’s approach to 
be energy efficient, 
granting the Barbados 
National Standards 
Institution governance 
in the supervision of 
the outlined within the 
Act. 
No mentions of 
implications of 
gender, women, or 
marginalized 
communities. 
Neutral 
The Householder’s 
Right to Renewable 
Energy Policy 
This policy reduces the 
barriers to entry for 
residents allowing them 
to install up to 10 KW 
of domestic renewable 
energy systems without 
a license. 
No public 
publication is 
available. 6 
N/A 
Employment Rights 
Act  
This policy affords 
employees rights such 
as fair dismissal, equal 
opportunity, and days 
off – sick days. 
In response to pay 
there is no mention 
that a female and 
male employee 
should be paid 
equally. 
Aware 
 
Of the 9 policies assessed, 6 are gender-blind, 1 gender aware and 1, the Barbados NDC, 
gender responsive. Those most directly relevant to the country’s energy sector were all found to 
be gender blind. The NDC, subject to international requirements for gender mainstreaming, 
includes greater provisions for gender than the other policies reviewed. 
As noted in the 2021 NDC for Barbados, there is a commitment by the government towards 
“equality for all, especially as it relates to gender”, as recognised in Barbados’ Constitution. The 
NDC notes this commitment through emphasis on facilitating and supporting female 
entrepreneurship, business development to address unemployment and economic recovery, 
post-pandemic.7 In terms of a more direct focus on the energy sector in Barbados, the NDC 
references gender within the context of the Roofs-to-Reefs Program (R2RP), with a view to the 
positive social and gendered impacts from rooftop solar PV installation programmes. Aiming to 
provide support to low- and medium-income households to become more resilient to climate 
change related events, the programme seeks to protect both private and community roofs from 
the impacts of extreme weather and promotes renewable energy use, including solar, as well as 
rainwater harvesting, and nature-based solutions aimed at reducing runoff into coastal 
environments.8  
 
6 This action of this policy was made possible through the 2019-2020 Electric and Power Act (Amendment) 
7 “Barbados 2021 Update of the First Nationally Determined Contribution” retrieved from 
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-06/2021%20Barbados%20NDC%20update%20-%2021%20July%202021.pdf  
8“Roofs to Reefs” National Resilience Plan. Barbados: 2021” retrieved from https://www.climate-laws.org/document/roofs-to-reefs-
national-resilience-plan_fb59

=== PAGE 163 ===
Beyond overarching national and international policies and agreements, a recently implemented 
policy, at the Ministry level through the Ministry of Energy and Business, is the ‘Right to 
Renewable Energy Policy’. This policy gives householders, more generally those intending to 
use domestic renewable energy systems, the right to own and install renewable energy systems 
(up to a total of 10kW) without requiring a formal application and license under the Electric Light 
and Power Act (ELPA). The purpose of the policy is primarily timesaving, with a simplified and 
assured process for individuals wishing to use this service. The act makes no notable mention 
of female-headed households or provisions for women using the service, however, the direct 
link toward time saving and improved renewable energy systems can indirectly positively benefit 
women in terms of household tasks, time allocation and potential cost savings depending on the 
return from investment in adopting renewable energy grid technologies.  
3.1.2 
Usage 
Patterns and Trends  
Culturally, women carry out three times (3x) as much unpaid care and domestic work as men, 
including household chores and cooking; both unpaid and invisible9. These culturally defined 
responsibilities are closely tied to energy and energy access. Energy access saves time and 
allows for some of these tasks to be carried out simultaneously and with planning and 
preparation while still ensuring safety. Moreover, through energy access, technologies employed 
by many women reduce the physical burden that may be otherwise required for these tasks. 
When electricity is not available either due to a blackout or to affordability challenges these daily 
required activities are more likely to become a burden to women.10  
Men, on the other hand, carry out protective as well as economic and decision-making roles 
within the household. These are linked to gender stereotypes and norms which dictate that a 
man should: (i) not do unpaid domestic work, (ii) have the final say in household decisions, (iii) 
control household assets, and (iv) protect and exercise guardship of women in the household.11 
In the Barbadian context, often times these classical gendered roles are mixed with those of 
women (cooking and cleaning).Such traditional norms, provide only a shared level of control 
over the acquisition of energy resources and energy access, as equal acquisition of assets is 
noted with the country scoring 100 in the WBL Index 2023.12 
LED Lighting  
Culturally defined responsibilities (CDRs) such as caretaking, may lead to an increased use of 
LED Lighting in matrifocal households. LED lighting enables women to perform these CDRs 
alongside their economic responsibilities, such as employment), often taking up these CDRs 
during times of inactive work (before or after work, during periods of no sunlight e.g. early 
morning or late evening)13 or even during remote or hybrid work arrangements.  
As seen in Figure 3-2, the increase in consumer price inflation exceeds the amount of household 
disposable income real growth in developing countries like Barbados.  
 
9 (UN Women as cited in Energia, 2021) 
10 “How clean energy can empower women in rural communities” retrieved from https://www.theigc.org/blogs/gender-
equality/how-clean-energy-can-empower-women-rural-communities  
11 “Man Enough? Measuring Masculine Norms to Promote Women’s Empowerment” retrieved from 
https://euneighbourseast.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/oecd-masculinity-1.pdf  
12 “Women, Business and the Law” retrieved from https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/b60c615b-
09e7-46e4-84c1-bd5f4ab88903/content 
13 As noted within Stakeholder Engagements

=== PAGE 164 ===
Figure 3-2: Showing Annual Rates of Inflation and Disposable Income Growth in 2022 
 
This translates into an increase in the need for employment as a means of (additional) income 
to meet basic needs (food, clothing, shelter, essential services, access to drinking water, 
sanitation, education, health care facilities and public transport).14 The increased demand for 
employment can lead to the increase in non-traditional working hours (outside of 8 AM – 5 PM) 
which would, in turn, increase the demand for LED Lighting for safety and security as women 
(and others) journey to and from work or school, whether using public transportation, or private 
vehicles.  
As women generally feel less safe in a public environment than most cis-heterosexual men 
(especially when it is dark outside), women often adjust their schedule, considering ways of 
transport and daily routes with safety in mind.15 There is a need for better lighting on Barbadian 
roads, on which 24, 250 existing high-pressure sodium (HPS) streetlights have been replaced 
with LED streetlights in a partnership with the Government of Barbados and the Barbados Light 
and Power Limited.16 Additionally, the Government’s acquisition of electric buses, can not only 
improve access to public transportation at non-traditional times of work but provide a 
comfortable, monitored and Wi-Fi-accessible place for women and members of the disabled 
community to traverse during these non-traditional working hours.17 
Men share some similarities in LED Lighting usage when compared to women18.  The 2010 
Census notes that there are 41,335 male-headed households, with 48, 036 children dependents. 
Similar safety concerns are a factor in the provision of LED Lighting, whilst journeying after 
daylight hours. Road safety is a possible area of need for the usage of LED Lighting by men, 
with the island reporting an upward trend in road fatalities (before the COVID-19 pandemic) of 
 
14 “Basic Needs” retrieved from https://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007/978-94-007-0753-
5_150#:~:text=Typically%2C%20the%20list%20includes%20basic,facilities%2C%20and%20to%20public%20transportation.  
15 “Public Lighting” retrieved from https://thisisgendered.org/entry/public-lighting/  
16 “The LED Streetlight Project” retrieved from https://www.blpc.com.bb/index.php/company/our-projects/led-streetlight-project  
17 “Electric Vehicles are Accelerating Barbados’ Energy Transition” retrieved from https://ifc.shorthandstories.com/electric-
vehicles-are-accelerating-barbados-energy-transition/index.html#group-section-The-Shift-to-E-Buses-fiIDeSTOJQ  
18 Women’s safety remain higher than men due to gender norms

=== PAGE 165 ===
which men are often the victims. However, the use of LED Lightning is far more expanded than 
just the use of road fatalities.  
Solar Water Heating 
The island is commonly applauded for its use of solar water heating in households and 
businesses, with over 50,000 solar water heaters (SWH).19 SWH technology combines the use 
of energy, and water in a highly water-scarce country to provide heated water used within 
households for bathing, cleaning, cooking, and washing. Outside of the benefits hot water has 
for CDRs such as cooking, cleaning and caretaking such as easy removal of stubborn stains 
such as dirt and grease and aid in the provision of safe and nutritious meals for the household, 
the use of SWH improves the sanitary hygiene of women.20  
The ageing population (60+) in Barbados amounts to 18% of the population, according to the 
2010 Census. This group within the population remains vulnerable to illnesses such as 
diabetes21 and rheumatoid arthritis.22 Consequently, warm water baths generate added health 
benefits for the island’s seniors giving them the added ability to combat low-grade non-chronic 
inflammation, reduce blood sugar, better circulation and soothing of the muscles and joints.23 
better circulation and soothing of the muscles and joints.  Particularly, as it relates to blood sugar, 
Hoekstra et al noted within their study that, observations of a lowering in fasting glycosylated 
hemoglobin and blood glucose concentrations following hot water immersion (HWI) in individuals 
with type 2 diabetes support the notion of improved insulin sensitivity following HWI (33), the 
mechanisms that underlie this beneficial effect are currently unclear. better circulation and 
soothing of the muscles and joints.24 Particularly, as it relates to blood sugar, Hoekstra et al 
noted within their study that, observations of a lowering in fasting glycosylated hemoglobin and 
blood glucose concentrations following HWI in individuals with type 2 diabetes support the notion 
of improved insulin sensitivity following HWI (33), the mechanisms that underlie this beneficial 
effect are currently unclear.25   
  These benefits can allow the elderly who have fixed incomes to continue to support positive 
health practices at a reduced cost (as the island benefits from yearly sunshine). These savings, 
in turn, allow for further investments in their diet (particularly, healthy food consumption) which 
can be costly to these individuals as the region experiences the highest cost of a healthy diet 
when compared to other world regions.26 
Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic  
Rooftop solar photovoltaics remain niche across genders, because of the economic barriers for 
a rooftop solar photovoltaic system (See Economic Barrier Section) as well as physical barriers 
due to rooftop types. With no specific data on how rooftop solar photovoltaic may be used 
differently across vulnerable groups within the country, it is generally presented as a cost-saving 
benefit to local households across the island. 
 
19 “Solar Water Heaters” retrieved from https://smartenergybarbados.com/smart-products/solar-water-heaters/  
20 “Menstrual Hygiene” retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/hygiene/personal-hygiene/menstrual.html  
21 “The Barbados Health of the Nation Survey: Core Findings” retrieved from 
https://extranet.who.int/ncdccs/Data/BRB_C7_HotN_report_FINAL2.pdf  
22 “The Aging Caribbean: 20 Years of the Madrid Plan of Action” Retrieved from 
https://www.cepal.org/sites/default/files/events/files/mipaa20_subregional_review_rev2_0.pdf  
23 “The Importance of Warm Water for Elderly Bathing” retrieved from https://showerbay.com/importance-warm-water-elderly-
bathing/  
24 “The Importance of Warm Water for Elderly Bathing” retrieved from https://showerbay.com/importance-warm-water-elderly-
bathing/  
25 “Acute and chronic effects of hot water immersion on inflammation and metabolism in sedentary, overweight adults” retrieved 
from https://journals.physiology.org/doi/epdf/10.1152/japplphysiol.00407.2018  
26 “Regional Overview of Food Security in Latin America and the Caribbean” retrieved from 
https://www.fao.org/3/cc3859en/cc3859en.pdf

=== PAGE 166 ===
The installation of a rooftop solar PV system provides collective savings to Barbadian users, 
over USD 2.5 million a year on their electricity bills (equivalent to 5,000 barrels of oil, or over 
2,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions).27 As women reinvest 90% of their income in their families and 
communities, this extra income can aid in the reduction of poverty locally28 and expand the scope 
of investment in other forms and more complex RE, EE and DER technologies. 
Efficient Cooling and Refrigeration 
The island has two weather seasons due to its geographic location. These include the dry 
season from December to May and the wet season from June to November. Increasing rates of 
climate change have caused intensified storms and extreme heat during dry periods29, but the 
use of cooling remains mostly equal between men, women, and the elderly population. During 
these high dry periods, temperatures can be high temperatures with the Barbados Met Office 
predicting temperatures of 34 to 35 degrees Celsius in September 2023.30 his extreme heat 
causes an increased need for hydration and cooling.  
Figure 3-3: Estimate Annual Energy Consumption of Room Air Conditioners in 2040. Source: 
United for Efficiency31 
 
Under three scenarios, the UNEP United for Efficiency programme estimates that room air 
conditioners will consume 600 GWh with business as usual, 472 GWh with minimum ambition 
and 359 GWh with high ambition.32 Business as usual considers that the energy efficiency of the 
technology improves at 1% per year, further increasing market share of variable speed models 
is assumed to improve overall efficiency at an additional 2% per year until new sales are entirely 
from that product type (see Figure 3-3).33  
 
27 “Consumer Guide Solar PV” retrieved from https://brea.bb/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/BREA-Solar-guide.pdf  
28 “The case of a gender perspective on energy access” retrieved from https://www.energia.org/case-gender-perspective-energy-
access/  
29  “Country Profile – Barbados” retrieved from https://rcc.cimh.edu.bb/files/2018/06/Country-Profile-Barbados.pdf  
30  “Barbados Meteorological Services Weather Update – April 2023” Retrieved from https://gisbarbados.gov.bb/blog/barbados-
meteorological-services-weather-update-april-
2023/#:~:text=Of%20high%20interest%20is%20the,%CB%9AC%20observed%20in%202022.  
31 “Country Assessments” retrieved from https://united4efficiency.org/country-assessments/barbados/  
32 United for Efficiency. 2017. “Barbados” retrieved from https://united4efficiency.org/country-assessments/barbados/  
33 UNEP United for Efficiency Programme. 2017. “Barbados” retrieved from https://united4efficiency.org/country-
assessments/barbados/

=== PAGE 167 ===
The usage of technologies such as efficient air conditioning and refrigeration can aid in women’s 
cooking responsibilities and within their natural ageing journey including menopause. The use 
of an efficient refrigerator, for example, allows women to better balance their CDRs and job 
responsibilities by facilitating meal preparation in advance and reducing the time burden of these 
activities.  At home, efficient air conditioning and cooling also stand to benefit 28 to 63% of 
middle-aged women who are affected by sleep disturbances such as hot flashes and night 
sweats.34 This technology allows women to get a good night’s sleep at home, which is key to 
physical and mental health. Within the workforce, air conditioning can aid in the management of 
job tasks allowing women to better cope with menopausal symptoms at work and provide these 
women with fulfilment, self-esteem, identity, and social needs.35 
With benefits from using efficient air conditioning and cooling during menopause (which 
traditionally occurs between the ages of 45 to 55), the use of these technologies creates an 
important demand cohort of over 20,000 thousand women within the age range of 45 to 59 years 
old, based on the 2010 Census, that may not currently be considered in terms of energy use 
and demand.  
3.1.3 
Demand 
The demand for energy in Barbados over the last 10 years is characterised by a declining trend, 
with an average demand for primary and secondary energy estimated at 11,297 BOE per day.36 
This trend has been partially attributed to the improvement of household energy efficiency 
through the usage of IUS Model technologies like SWH and rooftop solar PV as seen in Figure 
3-4.37 
Figure 3-4: Household Energy Efficiency Trends 
 
At the macro level, demand for IUS Model technologies is influenced by the Government of 
Barbados’ efforts to reduce the import fuel bill to improve the country’s energy security and 
stability in achieving two of the following goals: (1) To convert 75% of the island’s energy supply 
to renewable sources by 2030 and (2) reduced consumption of electricity by 22% by 202938. 
Though there is no data measuring the degree to which barriers noted in the Barrier Section of 
 
34 “Women’s Health Concern Fact Sheet – Menopause and Insomnia” retrieved from https://www.womens-health-concern.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/12/17-WHC-FACTSHEET-Menopause-and-insomnia-NOV2022-B.pdf  
35 “Menopause and work. What does one have to do with the other?” retrieved from 
https://menopauseintheworkplace.co.uk/articles/menopause-and-work-its-important/  
36 “Barbados National Energy Policy 2019 – 2030” retrieved from https://biblioteca.olade.org/opac-tmpl/Documentos/cg00883.pdf  
37 “National energy efficiency monitoring report for Barbados” retrieved from 
https://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/45053/S1900970_en.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y  
38 “National energy efficiency monitoring report for Barbados” retrieved from 
https://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/45053/S1900970_en.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y

=== PAGE 168 ===
this report have influenced demand, it can be noted that barriers noted in the section below have 
impacted macro demand to some degree.  
Notably, the island is also prone to natural hazards such as hurricanes. Using a mix of RE, EE 
and DER technologies can offer resilience, particularly through self-efficiency. For example, the 
Reefs to Roof Programme (noted in the Policy Environment Section) where the installation of 
rooftop solar PV systems can provide electricity independent of the grid, which provides 
households with electricity in the event of power outages caused by hurricanes or any other 
natural disaster39. With these capabilities, households can maintain a source of energy that may 
be required for the care of members of the disabled community and enable key functions such 
as lighting and communications to (reliable sources of) media in a post-disaster scenario. 
3.1.4 
Barriers 
This small island developing state (SIDS) has been taking steps in reducing its dependence on 
fossil fuel-generated electricity since the uptake of solar water heating in 1974. In its formal 
declaration to be 100% renewable, the Government of Barbados, and its local (private sector 
e.g., Barbados Light, and Power Limited), bilateral and multilateral partners (e.g., Inter-American 
Development Bank) have been actively reducing some barriers in accessing the renewable 
energy and reducing the country’s reliance on fossil fuel generated electricity. 
These barriers range from gaps in legislation addressing inefficient air conditioning to social and 
cultural influences on women’s education and experience within the renewable energy sector 
and should be addressed to promote an equitable and just transition in this goal. 
Institutional 
The island has reduced institutional barriers in the uptake of the target technologies of the IUS 
project, for the most part. Legislation and policies have provided some reduced barriers for solar 
water heating LED Lighting, and solar rooftop photovoltaic, as the Government of Barbados 
journeys towards its goals through the NDCs and the Barbados National Energy Policy.   
Though tax incentives and the streamlining of services have been used as tools to reduce 
barriers, other barriers exist. Tax incentives through the Fiscal Incentive Act of 1974, caused a 
30% increase in the cost of electric water heaters 30% and a 20% decline in the cost of solar 
water heating.40 However, this tax rebate failed to address the consumer awareness (consumers 
were not aware of the SWH technology, as it was new to the region) at the time. 
The streaming line of services is addressed with the Electric and Power Act (Amendment) 2019 
and the Household Right to Renewable Energy41 with an online application process for 
householders. Though still a form of licensing, the online application process - which requires 
roof dimensions, the type and size of the renewable energy system and PV Diagrams42 - 
improves the rate of approval for a landowner to have their 10 KW system within the Barbados 
Grid.  This process, however, brings about a CDRs-related barrier linked to gendered 
stereotypes (See Social Barrier Section).  Specifically in reference to the skillset required for 
the technical creation of blueprints being predominantly held by men as seen in the 
Barbados Labour Survey 2022 where there are 10.9 thousand men within the construction, 
mining and quarrying industry in comparison to 0.4 thousand women, enabling men to 
benefit more from this barrier than women. 
 
39 “More Than Just Cost Savings: How Rooftop Solar Energy Can Improve the Resilience of Local Energy Systems” Retrieved 
from https://energy5.com/more-than-just-cost-savings-how-rooftop-solar-energy-can-improve-the-resilience-of-local-energy-
systems  
40 “Seizing the sunshine: Barbados’ thriving solar water heater industry” retrieved from 
https://cdkn.org/sites/default/files/files/Barbados-InsideStory_WEB_1.pdf  
41 This legislation and policy work hand in hand. 
42 “Householders’ Rights to RE” retrieved from https://energy.gov.bb/licensing/householders-right-to-re/

=== PAGE 169 ===
Another barrier at the institutional level is the absence of legislation requiring landlords to 
implement IUS Model technologies such as solar water heating, and rooftop solar on their 
properties. Currently, as noted from stakeholder engaged as part of this assessment, renters 
who may be willing to install and use rooftop solar PV, solar water heating and efficient air 
conditioning can be blocked by the landlord from installation and usage. As of  2010, the 
Barbados Census reported 16,316 renters, with an increasing need for rental units43 seeing the 
National Housing Corporation receiving over three thousand applications for rental 
accommodations during a seven year period.44 Such legislation would require conversations 
between representatives of the community, landlord, IUS model technology experts and 
government to determine best practices accounting for any unforeseen cost, such as water 
damage and fire.  
In addition, the absence of legislation governing the use of inefficient air conditioning and 
refrigeration sector is also a barrier, as noted by the Barbados Renewable Energy Association 
(BREA). Additionally, a lack of enforcement of the existing legislation and regulation also create 
a barrier. These barriers currently enable the use of air conditioning systems which are 
consuming heavy amounts of electricity (as noted in the Usage Section). This gap in legislation 
and lack of enforcement could hinder the adaptation of the IUS Model and reduce mitigation 
efforts on fossil fuels with inefficient systems using more energy than an efficient system. 
Notably, the Government of Barbados has been making strides to implement projects that 
improve access and investment incentives within the island. Two of these actions and projects 
include the HOPE Project and the acquisition of electric buses. Figure 3-5 shows partnerships 
and projects implemented with or by the Government of Barbados which can aid in the transition 
to and within the IUS Model.  
The introduction of Electric Mobility into Public Transportation Project is one such example. 
These buses attract riders with air-conditioning, wi-fi, and wheelchair lifts, all of which the old 
diesel buses lack. There are now 49 electric buses, with about a dozen on the way, and the 
government has requested pricing for even more.45 This project aims at reducing the fossil fuel 
reliance on the transportation sector (which is responsible for 33% of energy consumption46) 
whilst providing more accessibility in the island’s transportation system for members of the 
disabled community. 
Figure 3-5: Government Projects Increasing Public Access and Investment Incentives within the 
IUS Model in Barbados 
Programme  
Programme Summary  
Associated Partner 
Targeted 
Technologies 
Public Sector 
Smart Energy 
Programme 
The programme is designed to 
promote and implement the use of 
viable Renewable Energy and 
Energy Efficient measures in the 
public sector47. The programme also 
financed 2 electric buses.  
IDB and EU 
LED Streetlights 
and Solar 
Photovoltaic 
Systems 
Energy SMART 
Fund 
Programme I 
and II 
Programme provides financial and 
technical support to renewable 
energy and energy efficiency 
projects in Barbados. 
Government of 
Barbados and IDB 
LED Lightning and 
Solar Photovoltaic 
Systems 
 
43 Confirmed within Stakeholder Enagagemts 
44 “Special Audit on the National Housing Corporation High Rise Apartment at the Grotto and Valeris” retrieved from 
https://www.barbadosparliament.com/uploads/document/f5e2f92770000faa74584e72ca8742b2.pdf  
45 “Electric Vehicles are Accelerating Barbados’ Energy Transition” retrieved from https://ifc.shorthandstories.com/electric-
vehicles-are-accelerating-barbados-energy-transition/index.html#group-section-The-Shift-to-E-Buses-fiIDeSTOJQ  
46 “Barbados National Energy Policy” Retrieved from https://biblioteca.olade.org/opac-tmpl/Documentos/cg00883.pdf  
47 “Public Sector Smart Energy Programme (PSSEP)” retrieved from https://energy.gov.bb/our-projects/public-sector-smart-
energy-programme-pssep/

=== PAGE 170 ===
DREAM Project 
This project seeks to reduce GHG 
emissions from fossil fuel-based 
power generation by demonstrating 
the exploitation of renewable energy 
sources for electricity generation in 
Barbados. 
Government of 
Barbados and 
Global 
Environmental 
Facility 
Solar Photovoltaic 
Systems 
Smart Energy 
Building – Demo 
The project seeks to deploy Smart 
Energy Buildings on islands, 
reducing the power consumption 
and peak local demand and the 
concomitant reduction in CO2 
emissions. 
Government of 
Barbados and the 
Republic of Korea 
EMS  
The Accelerated 
Investment 
Premium 
Programme 
The programme provides a 25% 
premium for investments made in 
solar (and wind) technology systems 
above 1 MW and up to 3 MW, and a 
20 % premium for investments made 
in solar (and wind) technology 
systems above 3MW and up to 
5MW. 
Government of 
Barbados 
Solar Technology 
Systems 
 
The Home Ownership Providing Energy Project (HOPE) Project seeks to protect households 
with a gross net income of around USD 2,500 (BBD 5048) per month4849, however, the most 
vulnerable and those who are more vulnerable to poverty and those in poverty unfortunately are 
unable to benefit from such a project as the average person makes just 10% of the amount 
required to be a part of the HOPE Project. Concern for young people, in this context, arises from 
their lack of adaptive capacity – economically and financially – due to low-income status or 
underemployed status.  
More generalised vulnerability is further exacerbated by post-disaster shocks such as rapid 
increases in house insurance premiums and increased house costs from damages and loss of 
homes. An example is the passing of Hurricane Elsa in 2021, with reports indicating 1,333 roofs 
were damaged, 326 other houses damaged otherwise, and 145 houses collapsed.50 
Economic 
Due to its geo-political position i.e., Latin America and the Caribbean, Barbados like other 
Caribbean SIDS has been identified as being at risk to money laundering and the use of funding 
for and from terrorism and gangs. Consequently, the number of protocols and requirements for 
access to finance and to international funding flow create an even higher barrier to both men 
and women in applying for and establishing a local bank account. This is also conditioned by the 
fact that most banks in the region are of Canadian origin with some of these pre-conditions built 
in. These layers of review and risk factors act as a potential barrier to accessing financing for 
the installation and usage of all technologies under the IUS model, as an account will most likely 
be required at a recognised financial institution.  
This problem of creating a bank account further intensifies when there is no law mandating equal 
remuneration for work of equal value.51 With no law, employers can discriminate based on 
gender within the workforce, which may lead to women being paid less. This is noted in Figure 
 
48 “HOPE Programme” retrieved from https://www.hopebarbados.com/  
49 If it is a double-income household, the net income cannot exceed USD 5,000 per month. 
50 “DEM Reports on Damage from Hurricane Elsa” retrieved from https://gisbarbados.gov.bb/blog/dem-reports-on-damage-from-
hurricane-elsa/  
51 “Women, Business and the Law: Barbados” retrieved from 
https://wbl.worldbank.org/content/dam/documents/wbl/2022/snapshots/Barbados.pdf

=== PAGE 171 ===
3-6 where there are more women being paid within low-income ranges in comparison to their 
male counter parts.  
Figure 3-6: Distribution of Weekly Earnings Intervals by Gender in Barbados. Source52 
 
This provides difficulty in having the required income level required to be considered for a loan 
from these financial institutions as was confirmed within stakeholder engagements.  
Although LED Lightning is generally affordable, with the bulb costing approximately USD 4.42 
to USD 17.70 at one of the main hardware stores on the island and streetlighting remaining a 
public good,53 the use of solar water heating, rooftop solar photovoltaic and air conditioning is 
more of a middle-class phenomenon. Persons within this economic and social class usually 
more easily take up and sustain the use these technologies (SWH and rooftop solar PV) within 
their homes. A 3.78 Litres solar water heating system costs USD 2,000 (BDS 4,000),54 a rooftop 
solar photovoltaic system55 starts at around USD 5,000 (BDS 10,000)56 and a 12,000 BTU air 
conditioning unit costing at about USD 546 (BDS 1,092).57 
This high cost of entry is more likely to serve as a barrier to uptake for low-income women and 
women-headed households – limiting their capacity in accessing these technologies – as well 
as vulnerable households within the low-income category of USD 100 to USD 250 a week. These 
are the realities for the 21% of females who are experiencing poverty and the 24, 800 women 
whose income is USD 100 (BDS 200) to USD 250 (BDS 500) per week or less.58  
Though financing through commercial banks is an option, the interest rates and the biases 
towards stable income sources when granting loans act as a determinant to financing outside of 
credit unions. Credit unions have lower interest rates than commercial banks and its member-
based organisational structure allows members to have a greater say in its operations.  
It is known that commercial banks tend to favour stability, and secure employment for loans, 
excluding, or having less favourability to the 3,800 female entrepreneurs on the island.59 These 
 
52 “Gender Earnings Gaps in the Caribbean: Evidence from Barbados and Jamaica” retrieved from 
https://publications.iadb.org/publications/english/viewer/Gender-Earnings-Gaps-in-the-Caribbean-Evidence-from-Barbados-and-
Jamaica.pdf  
53 “LED Bulbs” retrieved from https://www.cartersonline.bb/electrical/bulbs/led-bulbs.html  
54 “Get the facts right about Solar Heating Systems” retrieved from https://sunpowr.com/the-facts/ 
55 These systems start at 2.5 kW and go up to 10kW for residential purposes. 
56 “Photovoltaic in Barbados – The Rise” retrieved from https://terrared.com/photovoltaic-in-barbados-on-the-
rise/#:~:text=Currently%20the%20installation%20costs%20for,the%20system%20and%20equipment%20installed. 
57 “Air Conditioning” retrieved from https://www.shopcourts.com/barbados/products/home-appliances/air-conditioning.html 
58 “2022 Annual Statistical Bulletin - Continuous Household Labour Survey” retrieved from https://stats.gov.bb/subjects/social-
demographic-statistics/labour-market-statistics/  
59“2022 Annual Statistical Bulletin - Continuous Household Labour Survey” retrieved from https://stats.gov.bb/subjects/social-
demographic-statistics/labour-market-statistics/

=== PAGE 172 ===
barriers limit women and other vulnerable communities such as youth and low-income earners 
from accessing these technologies.  As a result, low-income earners tend to focus on covering 
core needs60 in comparison to enhancing lives through solar water heating or rooftop solar 
photovoltaics, perceiving the high cost and difficulty in accessing finance as determinants  in the 
uptake and usage of these IUS Model technologies, particularly women as female income is 
significantly lower when compared to a man as seen in Figure 3-8).  
However, there are some options for women and other vulnerable groups to reduce these 
barriers to better promote a just transition and sustainable adaption to the technologies within 
the IUS model including collaborations through community projects or cooperatives (See Figure 
3-7).  
Figure 3-7: Alternative and Programmes for Accessing Technologies under the IUS Model 
Alternative or 
Programme 
Programme Summary 
Associated Partner 
Targeted Technologies 
Credit Union Loans61 
These loans under 
various names such as 
Green Loans, and 
Green Energy Loans 
provide more favourable 
rates than commercial 
banks when accessing 
financing for these 
projects. 
City of Bridgetown, 
Credit Union Limited 
 
Barbados Public 
Workers Cooperative 
Credit Union 
 
Barbados Worker’s 
Union  
Rooftop Solar 
Photovoltaic, Efficient 
Cooling and 
Refrigeration, LED 
Lightning, Solar Water 
Heating62 
Hire Purchase or 
Long-Term Financing  
This allows customers to 
make payment medium 
to short-term 
arrangements for the 
payments for these 
items  
Solar Dynamics Ltd,  
Massy Stores 
Barbados, Unicomer 
Barbados Limited 
(Courts) 
Solar Water Heating, 
LED Lighting, Efficient 
Cooling and 
Refrigeration 
Home Ownership 
Providing Energy 
(HOPE) Inc. 
This provides land to 
potential owners with 
land at no cost to the 
potential owner. The 
house construction is 
paid for by the 
landowner with HOPE 
arranging a 100% 
mortgage loan. 
Government of 
Barbados and Private 
Sector 
Rooftop Solar 
Photovoltaic Systems 
Community Projects 
This enables a group of 
up to 15 persons to work 
together on a renewable 
energy project and 
obtain a special rate 
tariff of 10% premium. 
Government of 
Barbados 
Solar Photovoltaic 
Systems 
Energy Cooperative 
Provides reduced risks 
through grouped 
investment. Membership 
barriers remain relatively 
low seeing an 
application fee of USD 
Barbados Sustainable 
Energy Cooperative 
Society Ltd. 
Solar Photovoltaic 
Systems 
 
60 “How Do Low-Income Families Spend Their Money?” Retrieved from https://econofact.org/how-do-low-income-families-spend-their-
money  
61 Credit Unions are membership-based institutions seeing loans and other financial services being tailored to its membership. In 
the 2023 Budget, Prime Minister Mottley describes these institutions as the embodiment of poor people money. 
62 Though not under some green loan coverage, IUS Model technologies such as Solar Water Heating and Efficient Cooling and 
Refrigeration can be granted alone through the credit unions regular loaning system.

=== PAGE 173 ===
Alternative or 
Programme 
Programme Summary 
Associated Partner 
Targeted Technologies 
50 and a minimum 
share requirement of 
USD 500. 
Grouped Investment 
through associations 
such as BREA 
Provides a group 
investment into 
renewable energies, 
reducing some 
insecurities to 
investment. 
Barbados Renewable 
Energy Association 
Solar Photovoltaic 
Systems 
 
These alternatives help to reduce the cost of investing and the purchase of these technologies, 
however, all these technologies within the IUS Model require the correct roof structure as was 
noted by the BREA. Even with these alternatives the investment and being a part of the 
economic side of the adaptation of technologies for the IUS Model remain biased towards a 
specific level of income earner.  
Heavy economic barriers affect a just transition and have been reinforced by key stakeholders' 
consultations with the Bureau of Gender Affairs – Barbados, the Business and Women’s 
Professional’s Club, the Ashley Lashley Foundation, and the Ministry of Energy and Business – 
Energy Division. Today, a large portion of Barbados’ energy transition remains in the hands of 
those who are not low-income earners.  
Social 
The 2010 Census highlights that 48,860 out of 79,300 or 61.61% of women had children, with 
73.5% of children found in households experiencing poverty, where females are the 
breadwinners. Moreover, many of these women make up most low-income workers across many 
sectors (see Figure 3-8) with 21% of women facing poverty.63 
 
63 “COVID-19 Macroeconomic and Human Impact Assessment Data” retrieved from 
https://caribbean.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/Field%20Office%20Caribbean/Attachments/Publications/2020/Human%20and%20Economic
%20Impact%20Assessment%20-%20Barbados.pdf

=== PAGE 174 ===
Figure 3-8: Vulnerable and Poor Incomes Segregated by Industry and Sex 
 
Education allows people to emerge from poverty, reduces inequalities and creates a climate of 
peace and tolerance in each society. Education remains subsidised by the Government of 
Barbados up to the tertiary level providing equal access to all, however, there are some areas, 
or fields of study that may require some cost inputs from the student. This subsided cost enables 
vulnerable communities to have a chance at accessing education up to tertiary level. However, 
with limited data on poverty, the 21% of women facing poverty in Figure 3-8, will experience 
some level of opportunity cost should they opt to pursue any form of tertiary level education. A 
woman facing poverty may have to reduce payments on a bill or defer a payment.64 
Figure 3-9: Persons Employed in the Energy Sector.65 
Another factor of consideration is the volatility of the industry, women are mostly employed in. 
Take for example, the accommodation and food services industry which employ the second 
highest number of women after wholesale and retail totalling 9.100 thousand women, exposed 
 
64 However, it must be noted that they are scholarships available at tertiary levels to offset or reduce this cost.  
65 Barbados Energy Report Card for 2021” retrieved from https://cekh.ccreee.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/01/ERC_Barbados_final_002.pdf

=== PAGE 175 ===
to the external shocks of the global economy, for example, the COVID-19 pandemic.66 This 
volatility increases financial stress for women, particularly those in matrifocal households to 
provide for their dependents in down seasons of the industry.  
Gendered stereotypes are a barrier to the uptake of these technologies as women continue to 
be underrepresented within the technical capacities of these technologies67 (See Figure 3-9) and 
enrolment into courses and programmes for these technologies are under-enrolled by young 
women and women (as noted within Stakeholder Engagements).  
Gender stereotypes affect the enrolment of women in technical areas related to these 
technologies seeing 1,500 men within the electric, gas, steam, water, and air conditioning supply 
in comparison to 1,000 women of the 2022 Labour Force Survey (LFS). Moreover, they limit 
women’s employment opportunities, access to resources, and agency in decision-making 
processes.68 These stereotypes act as a major barrier for women being able to benefit from the 
employment opportunities that arise with the increased use and demand for these technologies. 
This reduces the ability for a just transition within this sector, as men continue to disproportionally 
be able to reap the rewards of employment and knowledge of these technologies.  
Women in male-headed households can find themselves dependent on men for the 
maintenance and upkeep of these technologies. This could lead to an increase of gender-based 
violence cases due to the power dynamics within these households as the male head of 
household takes on more financial stress by purchasing these relatively high upfront costs for 
RE technologies wherein they are the sole income generator.69 Such dynamic is highlighted 
amongst several men who thought that women’s lack of economic power made them vulnerable 
to abuse.70  
The use and demand for technologies under the IUS model, i.e., solar water heating, rooftop 
solar photovoltaic, efficient cooling, and refrigeration, remain differentiated by gender due to 
gender norms such as caretaking and cooking.71 Though there is a notable need for the 
technologies and the movement of the Government of Barbados to reduce barriers to these 
technologies, there are some gaps in legislation, high economic barriers and gender 
stereotypical barriers affecting the adaptation and the just transition of these technologies.  
Some of these gaps illustrate the following key issues within the adaption and just transition for 
the IUS Model: 
 
Indirect gender inequality within loan accessibility for women, persons with disabilities and 
other vulnerable groups with a low income. 
 
The absence of gender-responsive and transformative policies and capacity strengthening 
in gender mainstreaming across government and other key stakeholders. 
 
Strong gender stereotyping affects women’s participation at technical levels within the 
energy sector. 
 
Suitable roofs for the installation of these technologies, i.e., solar water heating and rooftop 
solar photovoltaic.  
 
66 “Labour  Force Survey Annual 2022.” Retrieved from https://stats.gov.bb/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/LFS-Bulletin-Annual-
2022.pdf  
67 Barbados Energy Report Card for 2021” retrieved from https://cekh.ccreee.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/01/ERC_Barbados_final_002.pdf  
68 “More than Words: Dismantling the Gender Myths that Hinder Women’s Leadership” retrieved from 
https://womendeliver.medium.com/more-than-words-dismantling-the-gender-myths-that-hinder-womens-leadership-8a12051d787d  
69 “Associations of financial stressors and physical intimate partner violence perpetration” retrieved from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4771826/  
70 Joseph and Jones. 2022. “Understanding Violence Against Women in the Caribbean Through an Exploration of Men's 
Perspectives”. Retrieved from https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/10778012221104845 
71 In same examination, with LED Lightning gender norms play a role in the use of the technology differentiated by gender norms 
and responsibilities.

=== PAGE 176 ===
 
The unclear relationship between a renter and the landowner, with the lack of legislation. 
The rights of both landlord and tenant is needed to be addressed within legislation.  
  
To ensure a just and fair transition in adapting these technologies, there is a need for the 
strengthening of centralised gender mainstreaming institutions in Barbados, improving the 
organisational and institutional gender mainstreaming capacities. Educational and economic 
empowerment is also needed for women to take up these capacity-building and decision-making 
level opportunities. This empowerment can address the culturally defined roles and 
responsibilities such as caretaking, better-improving participation, and engagement of women 
within the sector, which may act as a barrier to participation. 
3.1.5 
Institutional Gender Mainstreaming Capacity  
Institutionally gender mainstreaming capacity remains limited. The main organisation/body with 
established gender mainstreaming capacity the Bureau of Gender Affairs in Barbados, has been 
faced with limited capacity and has taken efforts to address this gap by the hiring of consultant(s) 
and through non-governmental organisation (NGO) partnerships. Presently, the two ways of 
boosting capacity at the Bureau has intersected with a member of an NGO being hired as a 
consultant for the Bureau.  
Similarly, most stakeholders also highlighted the use of consultant(s) in strengthening their 
gender capacity due to their current limited or no existing capacity. This becomes an area of 
concern, particularly in achieving an equitable and just transition of the IUS Model as gender 
mainstreaming in energy projects supports business models that aid women and other 
vulnerable groups to go beyond their traditional roles and work; as job-creators, employees, 
entrepreneurs, and leaders, in the energy sector.72  Such support at a macro level enables equal 
participation and equal distribution of benefits of women and vulnerable groups would see the 
reduction in poverty especially the feminisation of poverty from unequal access. 
 
72 “The blackbox of gender mainstreaming in the energy sector” Retrieved from https://www.energia.org/the-blackbox-of-gender-
mainstreaming-in-the-energy-sector/

=== PAGE 177 ===
Figure 3-10: Stakeholder’s Gender Mainstreaming Capacity 
Stakeholder  
Does your 
organisation have any 
experience with 
mainstreaming gender 
in its past work? 
Does your organisation 
have the capacity to 
execute gender 
mainstreaming 
activities or provide 
gender sensitisation 
training/gender-related 
technical inputs? 
Does your 
organisation 
possess a gender 
policy or is it in the 
process of 
developing a 
gender policy? 
Has your organisation ever 
been engaged by 
government 
ministries/agencies or 
development partners to 
support in the development 
or implementation of 
energy/renewable energy 
projects? 
Does your 
organisation utilize 
a grievance 
redress 
mechanism for 
projects? 
The Ashley Lashley 
Foundation 
Yes 
No73  
No 
Yes 
No  
Business 
and 
Professional 
Women’s 
Club 
(Barbados) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Barbados 
Council 
for the Disabled 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No  
No 
Barbados 
Renewable Energy 
Association 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
Barbados Light and 
Power Limited74 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Bureau of Gender 
Affairs 
Yes 
Yes  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Ministry of Energy 
and 
Business 
– 
Energy Division 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 75 
 
 
 
 
 
73 Organisation noted while internally, they do not have the capacity, the organisation does utilise the support of consultants.  
74   Consultant was unable to meet with the BLP and as such will not be able to provide answers for the gender mainstreaming questions for this organisation (N/A will be applied in response to the 
questions). 
75 External Capacity (Consultancy)

=== PAGE 178 ===
3.2 
Belize  
Belize, a small developing country, is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. Adapting 
to and mitigating the impacts of climate change will require large expansive financial investments 
at the governmental level and individual level. In 2022, Belize achieved a gross domestic product 
(GDP) of 6.7 billion USD, noting recovery from the financial impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic 
but despite this recovery, the country is experiencing an inflation rate of 6.3% which is almost 
double the inflation rate of 2021 (3.2%).76. This has implications for the capacity and ability of 
the population to implement climate change adaptation measures as the cost of food and other 
essentials will rise. This means also that persons will have tough decisions to make as they 
balance having their needs met while still investing in mitigation measures. Female- headed 
households, particularly those in rural communities, will be hit harder by the rising cost of living 
due to various factors such as women earning 10% less than men77, these women bearing the 
brunt of childrearing on their own and being employed in the informal sector.  
In 2021, the Belize Statistical Office released the findings of a poverty study it undertook in 2018 
and it found that 52% of the population is living in poverty which is an 11% (41% poverty rate) 
increase from the last study done in 2009.78  The study notes that 9% of the population is critically 
poor and 11% of the population is vulnerable to falling into poverty. The Maya and Garifuna 
ethnic indigenous groups saw the highest rates of poverty at 78% and 52% respectively and 
these groups primarily reside in the Stann Creek and Toledo districts (noting that these two 
districts have the lowest electricity connection rates as seen in Figure 3-11). 79,80  Toledo 
possessed the highest poverty rate at 82% while the remaining districts rate ranged from 45-
57%. The findings of the study suggest there is a link between the level of education attained 
and poverty status as households with the head of the household having no formal education 
saw a rate of 64% while households with the head of household possessing tertiary or post-
secondary education having a rate of 12%.  
In 2020, 97.1% of the population enjoyed access to electricity81 which indicates significant work 
being done to provide all Belizean with reliable access to electricity because as seen in the 
UNICEF 2015 Multi-Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS), only 91.8% of the population had access 
to electricity with 96.9 of the urban population and 87.5% of the rural population having electricity 
access.82 As seen in Figure 3-11, of the 6 six districts Toledo district had the lowest rate of 70.8% 
in 2015.83  
Figure 3-11: Connection Rate by District. Sources Belize MICS84 
District  
 % of Population with Access to Electricity  
Corozal  
93.5 
Orange Walk  
93.2 
Belize City  
97.6 
Cayo  
91.3 
Stann Creek  
90.5 
Toledo  
70.8 
 
76 “Belize Staff Concluding Statement of the 2023 Article IV Mission” retrieved from  
https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2023/02/17/belize-staff-concluding-statement-of-the-2023-article-iv-mission    
77 “Average Salary in Belize 2023” retrieved from https://worldsalaries.com/average-salary-in-belize/  
78 “Poverty Study 2018/2019” retrieved from https://sib.org.bz/press-release-2021-06-30/  
79 “History Of The Garifuna People” retrieved from https://belize.com/history-of-the-garifuna-people/  
80 “Belize Maya Culture & History” retrieved from https://www.cahalpech.com/belize-maya-culture-history/  
81 “Access to electricity (% of population) – Belize” retrieved from 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?locations=BZ  
82 “Belize Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2015-2016, Final Report” retrieved from 
https://www.unicef.org/belize/media/936/file/Multiple%20indicator%20cluster%20survey.pdf      
83 Data from 2015 is used as more recent data with this level of breakdown is available. However, this data provides insight into 
which areas in Belize that requires more resources to enhance residents’ access to electricity.  
84 “Belize Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2015-2016, Final Report” retrieved from 
https://www.unicef.org/belize/media/936/file/Multiple%20indicator%20cluster%20survey.pdf

=== PAGE 179 ===
Noting Toledo as the area with the lowest connection, the district has been the target of many 
projects aimed at increasing access. Renewable energy is playing an important role in tackling 
this problem as renewable energy technologies are being utilised as the means of providing 
energy to rural communities while playing a part in the country's efforts to address and adapt to 
climate change. For example, in 2020, a solar plant was installed in Indian Creek Village in 
Toledo District which will also benefit Medina Bank and Golden Stream villages as well. This 
work was a part of the emPOWERing Rural Electrification Project funded by the government of 
the United Arabs Emirates.85  
3.2.1 
Policy Environment  
Energy policies in general, in Belize, did not possess strong content that spoke to empowering 
women in the sector or implementing measures to address their needs; however, mention is 
made of health risks faced by women with the usage of fuelwood. At the same time, women’s 
low participation within the sector is acknowledged (see Figure 3-12). The national gender policy 
seeks to expand opportunities for all and could serve as a good starting point when initiating any 
revisions or policy developments that would need to be specific to the energy sector. 
Figure 3-12: Energy and Gender Policy Environment for Belize 
Policy  
Summary  
Gender Content  
Gender Rating  
NDC, 2021  
It provides an update on the 
country’s progress and outlines 
actions for meeting its 
commitments for the Paris 
Agreement.  
It recognises gender as a 
factor in vulnerability and 
sets out to assess and 
address issues that result 
from gender inequality. 
Responsive 
Revised 
National 
Gender 
Policy 2013  
The policy identifies and 
examines the inequities 
experienced by both men and 
women and suggests strategies 
to correct gender disparities as 
well as gives direction for the co-
ordination and implementation of 
the policy  
Policy speaks to promoting 
and facilitating the equitable 
access and distribution of 
resources, services and 
opportunities for men and 
women. 
Transformative 
National 
Energy Policy 
Framework  
This framework sets out a 
recommended roadmap that 
directs Belize to achieving 
energy efficiency, sustainability 
and transformation to renewable 
energy.  
It noted the health risks 
posed to women and 
children using burning wood 
fuel at home.  
Aware 
Sustainable 
Energy 
Strategy  
This strategy highlights Belize’s 
unrealised sustainable energy 
potential and sets forth 
recommendations to address 
barriers preventing the full 
utilisation of this potential.  
No mentions of gender, 
women or rural 
communities.  
Neutral 
Nation 
Energy Policy 
2011  
This policy outlines key areas 
the nation needs to develop and 
support to attain a secure and 
sustainable energy supply.  
Policy notes the lack of 
education and promotion on 
energy issues affecting the 
public. It raises awareness 
on the lack of skilled and 
trained women in the energy 
sector.  
It also notes that gender-
balanced training is 
Aware 
 
85 “Ministers Break Ground for Rural Electrification Project in Toledo District” retrieved from 
https://www.pressoffice.gov.bz/ministers-break-ground-for-rural-electrification-project-in-toledo-district/

=== PAGE 180 ===
Policy  
Summary  
Gender Content  
Gender Rating  
constrained by cultural and 
traditional influences.  
It recognizes that men and 
women have different 
energy needs given based 
on their different socio-
cultural and traditional roles. 
It notes that women are 
underrepresented at all 
levels of energy generation, 
transmission and 
distribution. Gender 
imbalance exists at various 
levels of planning and 
decision-making.  
 
It notes the burden on 
women especially rural 
women related to searching 
for energy (specifically wood 
fuel). Fuel wood is the main 
source of energy for most 
households in rural areas. 
Noting the need for access 
to sustainable, secure 
fuelwood supplies and 
renewable energy 
technologies as energy 
greatly influences the socio-
economic states of rural 
communities.  
The National 
Gender 
Based 
Violence Plan 
of Action, 
2010 
 
The plan provides a framework 
to guide action and work around 
GBV with goals, objectives, and 
activities to address the issue of 
gender-based violence in the 
country.  
 
The plan outlines 4 key 
goals and associated 
objectives for responding to 
GBV and supporting 
survivors of GBV. The Plan 
addresses provisions for 
legal support to survivors 
and legal action toward 
perpetrators. It also 
addresses the need for 
greater public awareness of 
the root causes of GBV and 
greater awareness and 
understanding by men of 
the root causes of GBV.  
Responsive 
Belize 
National 
Child Labour 
Policy and 
Strategy 2022 
to 2025 
The policy and strategy lays out 
a plan to remove children from 
harmful and hazardous work, 
increase social protection and 
economic resilience for families, 
and increase school attendance.  
The strategy utilizes gender 
disaggregated data and 
denotes the need to build 
awareness of legal access 
and support while tackling 
gender and social norms 
which place boys at much 
higher risk for child labour 
participation. 
Transformative

=== PAGE 181 ===
Seven policies were analysed, those most directly relevant to the energy sector and including 
the National Gender Policy (all are summarised in Figure 3-12). Of the 7, 2 are transformative, 
1 responsive and transformative, 1 responsive, 2 aware and one blind. The existence of the 
Gender Policy and the NDC in combination provide a solid foundation or defining gender and 
social dimensions for a just transition in the context of the IUS model implementation in Belize. 
The updated NDC86 of 2021 for Belize, was developed using a gender and vulnerable group 
analysis which provided recommendations for improving the gender sensitivity of both medium 
term and long-term strategies that exist within the commitments and activities outlined within the 
NDC. NDC targets and actions in the document were developed with the participation of the 
public, including consultations with local communities and indigenous persons, in a gender-
responsive manner. Actions and targets in the updated NDC were submitted after undergoing a 
gender and vulnerable group scoring analysis. This aided in providing recommendations for 
improved gender sensitivity in NDC implementation and the longer-term low-emissions strategy. 
While gender responsiveness is imbedded within the strategy for the updated NDC, there exists 
only one direct reference to women in the document which falls under the targets outlined for 
the agricultural sector. This mention directs specific action toward increasing public awareness 
that targets women, youth and communities on reducing GHG emissions through alternate 
production methods.  
In terms of consideration for indigenous persons within the actions of the NDC beyond 
consultations, specific references to indigenous groups include promoting the monitoring and 
stewardship of indigenous lands, as well as indigenous coastal lands, to be sustainably 
managed toward the goal of producing net carbon sink areas in over 10,000 hectares of 
indigenous land. The document also notes the development of area-specific strategies for 
adaptation that pay attention to indigenous communities more generally while also promoting 
and enhancing policies and frameworks that consider climate (and water) sensitive development 
and use of lands. In doing so, the NDC notes the need to enhance and encourage current 
practices in land stewardship that exist in indigenous communities. The document also notes 
the need to be inclusive of gender, indigenous communities, PWDs, and youth in a way that is 
balanced and inclusive in terms of climate financing. These efforts are supported by climate 
finance strategy developed and implemented for the period 2021 – 2025.  
Belize’s Revised National Gender Policy87, updated in 2013, is focused on building upon and 
continuing the country’s efforts to achieve and sustain gender equality and equity. It includes 
objectives for supporting efforts toward ‘human-centered development’, with equal participation 
of men and women, with equal co-benefits being distributed. The policy also includes the 
objective to encourage and facilitate the equal access to, and control over productive resources, 
services, and opportunities between men and women.  The revised national gender policy is 
based on the vision, whereby there exists:  
“A society in which all men and women, boys and girls are able to achieve their full potential 
through the enjoyment of their human rights; live together in mutual respect, dignity and 
harmony; and are equal partners as they participate in services and resources for realizing and 
sustaining their economic, social, political, and cultural development for equal enjoyment of all.” 
 
86 “Belize Updated Nationally Determined Contribution” retrieved from https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-
06/Belize%20Updated%20NDC.pdf  
87 “Revised National Gender Policy” retrieved from https://oig.cepal.org/sites/default/files/belize_2013national_gender_policy.pdf

=== PAGE 182 ===
Two additional policies were reviewed that give mention to women and vulnerable persons, 
specifically children within the country. These were the National Gender-Based Violence Plan of 
Action 2010-201388 and the Belize National Child Labour Policy and Strategy 2022-2015.89   
Both policies were shown to be gender transformative, while the GBV Plan of Action provides 
several specific gender-responsive actions in its framework. The policy outlines four key goals 
and associated objectives for responding to GBV and supporting survivors of GBV. The Plan 
addresses provisions for legal support to survivors and legal action toward perpetrators. It also 
addresses the need for greater public awareness of the root causes of GBV and greater 
awareness and understanding by men of the root causes of GBV. The National Child Labour 
Policy and Strategy (2022-2015) utilises significant gender disaggregated data in its 
development of actions and denotes the need to build awareness of legal access and support 
while tackling both gender and social norms that place boys at much higher risk for child labour 
participation. The policy and the plan provide a framework in which the protection and safety of 
these two vulnerable groups can be safeguarded in the project and avoided possible exploitation 
and harm that may arise intentionally or unintentionally.  
A new energy policy is currently in development for the country as the previous energy as noted 
in the table above has limited mentions of gender and there exists opportunities to improve on 
that area for the new policy (access to the draft has not been received yet)90.  Additionally, New 
Service Access policy91 is a new policy being launched by Belize Electricity Limited (BEL) which 
aims to reduce the cost of electricity connections by removing the additional connection setup 
fees when connecting homes in areas with existing connections. This helps support low-income 
persons to gain access to electricity. In cases of areas with no existing connections, the policy 
has provisions for persons to pay a deposit instead of the entire connection setup cost upfront. 
3.2.2 
Usage  
Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic 
Within the Maya indigenous communities in the Toledo district (found in the southernmost part 
of the country) exist technical capacity to deploy solar energy technologies. Three Maya women 
were trained in solar energy technology at the Barefoot University in India.92 From their 
experience, the benefits of women being involved in the field could be seen.  With this capacity 
gained and material support, they were able to provide the community of Santa Teresa solar 
power over a two-year timespan. Additionally, through a project called Indigenous Female Solar 
Engineers Scaling up Solar Energy to Machakilha and Graham Creek, a collaboration between 
Plenty Belize and the Ministry of Rural Transformation, these women will be helping to provide 
these communities with solar powered electricity while also equipping these communities with 
the knowledge to maintain the technologies on their own.  
This ongoing project has a strong emphasis on ensuring all residents of the community are 
empowered through skills-building and other capacity building workshops made available to all. 
Another emphasis of this project is the promotion of and support women in non-traditional roles 
with women who were trained at Barefoot University serving as models for other women and 
girls of the nation. The solar electrification provided by this project generate several direct 
household benefits for all members. These benefits address children’s need for education 
through the provision of light and power for technologies that aid in education. For the adults in 
 
88 “The National Gender-Based Violence Plan of Action 2010-2013” retrieved from http://www.humandevelopment.gov.bz/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/GBV-PlanOfActionGBV-FINAL-revised-August-2010.pdf  
89 
“Belize 
National 
Child 
Labour 
Policy 
and 
Strategy 
(2022-2025)” 
retrieved 
from 
https://www.ruraltransformation.gov.bz/docs/50/NationalChildLabourPolicy-BELIZE-
HighResolutionWithoutCropMarks_sNO45qE.pdf  
90 Information on this policy was shared during stakeholder engagement held on May 19th.  
91 Information on this policy was shared during stakeholder engagement with Mr. Austin Castro from BEL on June 2nd, however 
access to the policy has not yet been obtained.  
92 “Indigenous Engineers Provide Solar Solution for South” retrieved from https://www.7newsbelize.com/sstory.php?nid=57240

=== PAGE 183 ===
the household, access to electricity provide them with new opportunities for their livelihoods or 
enhancements to their livelihoods which in turn, enhances their ability to make decisions to 
increase their quality of life and implement climate change adaptation measures.93 Alongside 
the direct household benefits, the project provides these communities with communal benefits 
such as 1) small shops with the ability to run a refrigerator/freezer ran by one or two systems 
and these refrigerators serve to enhance food security and food safety through the ability to store 
foods and extend food’s shelf life, 2) a medium size power system installed at the primary school 
which would enhance the school’s ability to provide quality education to these children,  and 3) 
a solar water pump to provide potable water which would improve the quality of health in these 
areas by providing clean water and reduce the time spent by primarily women in fetching water 
for household use.  
Access to electricity provides numerous benefits to those living in rural communities. It provides 
cleaner energy to use for lighting and other tasks and reduces exposure to smoke and other 
pollutants released from the burning of coal, firewood and kerosene that are the typical biomass 
or fossil-fuel-based energy sources typically used in rural communities. This allows them to save 
money as the need to purchase fuel is reduced and the savings can be used to increase the 
quality of their lives in other ways. With reliable access to electricity, persons in very remote 
areas are now able to utilise mobile/satellite phones and this provides many benefits to the 
community as it increases their security to an extent as calls for help can be sent out faster than 
persons having to journey out of the community, and this also applies to requesting medical aid. 
Additionally, having enhanced communication increases their access to information which would 
ideally expand their capacity for participation and to exercise rights in the context of energy as 
well as climate change mitigation.  Similarly, the Garifuna communities in the Stann Creek 
District also utilize the combustion of fuels to meet their energy needs as well and face similar 
issues.  
The abovementioned issues and concerns primarily affect those living in Toledo and Stann 
Creek districts. Those living in Cayo, Orange Walk, Corozal and Belize City districts which 
constitute the more urban areas of the country, enjoy better connections to electricity, thus 
reducing their need to rely on the burning of fuels to provide energy to carry out domestic duties 
or to support their livelihoods. In turn, they are less likely to be exposed to harmful pollutants 
released from the combustion of these fuels. A notable exception to this would be for the island 
of Caye Caulker with 1,700 persons residing on the island that would have utilised a diesel 
generator to supply the island with power. The island imports 730, 000 gallons of diesel annually 
to provide electricity for the entire island, however, in 2019, CDB approved a loan to fund the 
connection of the island to the national grid via a submarine cable.94 This result in the island 
utilising renewable energy for 50% of its energy and reduces electricity costs from USD 0.26 per 
kWh to USD 0.11 per kWh. The submarine cable adds the benefit of being more reliable and 
resilient to storm surges and hurricane winds.  
LED Lighting  
In 2019, the energy unit of the Ministry of Public Service, Energy and Public Utilities launched 
an initiative in collaboration with electrical students at the Institute for Technical and Vocational 
Education and Training (ITVET) to install LED lights in public buildings.95 The initiative saw the 
installation of 185 tubes across four locations in Stann Creek with the aim of promoting EE in 
public building and energy conservation measures to the public while also developing the 
 
93“Indigenous Female Solar Engineers Scaling up Solar Energy to Machakilha and Graham Creek Villages- Belize`s Most Rural 
and Remote Communities” retrieved from https://sgp.undp.org/spacial-itemid-projects-landing-page/spacial-itemid-project-search-
results/spacial-itemid-project-detailpage.html?view=projectdetail&id=29729  
94 “CDB to connect island of Caye Caulker to Belize’s national electricity grid, making gains in environment, energy security” 
retrieved from https://www.caribank.org/newsroom/news-and-events/cdb-connect-island-caye-caulker-belizes-national-electricity-
grid-making-gains-environment-energy  
95 “Energy Conservation Measures by Installing LED lights in Public Buildings” retrieved from 
https://www.publicservice.gov.bz/index.php/medias/news-and-events/item/130-energy-conservation-measures-by-installing-led-
lights-in-public-buildings

=== PAGE 184 ===
technical knowledge and skills of the ITVET students. The initiative noted that over a 5-year 
period, the cost of using fluorescent lighting would have amounted to USD 27,311.90 USD (BZD 
55,302.91) while the use of LED lighting for the same period would only cost USD 13,655.95 
(BZD 27,651.46). The switching of traditional (fluorescent) bulbs to LED bulbs can result in a 
reduction in electricity consumption which in turn, means households can save additional money 
on monthly basis as their electricity bill would be reduced. This reduction in monthly expenses 
can provide single income especially female-headed homes with some relief as their financial 
burdens are lessened which could possibly translate to better mental health as persons would 
have less issues to worry about. At the same time, these savings though small, could be utilised 
to improve other aspects of the household.  
BEL carried out a renewable energy project nationwide, aimed at replacing 31,000 streetlights 
with LED lights in 2016.96 This project benefited areas across the country that did not have well 
lit streets, noting that some lights were installed in strategic areas frequented by people on their 
way to work or home to help deter criminal activities. Residents of San Mateo (located on the 
island of Ambergris Caye) expressed satisfaction over the activity as recent crime in the area 
had residents fearful as many streets were not properly lighted. Lighting can be used as a 
passive measure to reduce crime as persons would feel less inclined to commit criminal acts 
when their identity is more exposed.97 Additionally, women would feel a bit more empowered to 
participate in society, particularly in sectors that may have them working late at night as the light 
provides a sense of safety.  
Solar Water Heating  
The Development Finance Corporation (DFC) has partnered with the Belize Biltmore Plaza to 
promote the adoption of renewable energy in businesses. In 2019, they provided the plaza with 
resources to setup a solar water heating demonstration project.98 The demonstration project was 
aimed to raise awareness of financial instruments that can be utilised to invest in SWH as well 
as other RE technologies and demonstrate the benefits of switching to renewable energy. This 
demonstration was targeted at hotels as they use a large amount of hot water for laundry and 
guest usage. Caribbean Regional Energy Development Programme of the CARICOM 
Secretariat hosted two one-day seminars in Belize aimed at introducing hoteliers to the benefits 
of using SWH in their businesses as well as promote CARICOM region SWH manufacturers and 
explore business opportunities.99  
While a lot of the promotion and awareness efforts for SWH has been targeted at the tourism 
sector, SWH can also be beneficial to the domestic household. The use of a SWH can lead to 
the reduction of electricity consumption as less electricity is used to heat water needed for 
showering and other domestic tasks. Through this reduction, persons could possibly save up to 
USD 597.58 (BZD 1204) per year depending on the usage.100  This could lead to increased 
financial ability through the savings made from using a SWH. Additionally, it could lessen the 
domestic work performed by women by speeding up the process of heating water when needed.  
Efficient Cooling and Refrigeration  
The country experiences a moist tropical climate that slightly differs from other Caribbean 
Countries. The wet season occurs from May to October and its dry season occurs during 
November to April. The country sees a mean annual temperature range from 23-27°C, noting 
 
96 “San Mateo Sub-Division gets LED street lights” retrieved from https://www.sanpedrosun.com/community-and-
society/2016/12/02/san-mateo-sub-division-gets-led-street-lights/  
97 “Can Enhanced LED Lighting Contribute to Reduce Violent Crime” retrieved from https://newarkcollaborative.org/blog/can-
street-lighting-reduce-crime  
98 “The DFC & The Belize Biltmore Plaza Partner On A Solar Water heating Demonstration Project” retrieved from 
https://www.ambergristoday.com/news/2019/02/11/dfc-belize-biltmore-plaza-solar-water-heating-demonstration-project  
99 “Press Releases Caricom To Facilitate One-Day Seminars On Solar Energy” retrieved from https://caricom.org/caricom-to-
facilitate-one-day-seminars-on-solar-energy/  
100 “Frequently Asked Questions” retrieved from https://www.swhbelize.com/faq

=== PAGE 185 ===
that mean annual temperatures have increased by 0.45°C at an average rate of 0.10°C per 
decade since 1960.101 As the effect of climate changes begin to hit harder and affect more 
persons, there is an increased need for cooling and thus efficient cooling for the cost saving 
aspects. Relief from rising temperatures is necessary as looking at forecast data from Belize’s 
meteorological office shows temperatures from 31.9-34.5°C across the country with maximum 
temperatures reaching 38.8°C.  
No data could be found on the differential usage of cooling between men, women, children and 
the elderly. It is important to understand that efficient cooling will be important in coming days to 
combat heat strokes as they may become common and rising temperatures may exacerbate 
discomfort women experience during menopause. Heat stress can be disruptive to productivity 
and quality of life. Caribbean Climate Outlook Forum warns that Belize among other Caribbean 
countries will be expected to deal with increased heat stress in the third quarter of 2023.102  
3.2.3 
Demand 
The demand for renewable energy and renewable energy technologies has been rising steadily 
over the years which has been supported by the government as it works towards achieving its 
renewable energy targets. Looking at the Belize’s energy sources in 2010 43% came from fossil 
fuels (see Figure 3-13), the government has been working to develop policies103 and strategies 
to guide the country towards more renewable energy sources and increase the adoption of EE 
to reduce energy consumption.104  
Figure 3-13: Belize's Energy Sources in 2010 
 
Noting from the country’s energy targets presented in 2021 (see Figure 3-14), the country is 
aiming to hit 70% of energy coming from renewable sources by 2030 and by 2021, the country 
sat at 43.3%.   
 
101 “Climatology” retrieved from https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/belize/climate-data-historical  
102 Belize among regions forewarned of intensified heat stress in the upcoming three months” retrieved from 
https://www.breakingbelizenews.com/2023/06/25/belize-among-regions-forewarned-of-intensified-heat-stress-in-the-upcoming-
three-months/  
103 In August 2023, the Ministry of Public Utilities, Energy, Logistics, and E-governance has concluded consultations on the Belize 
National Energy Policy 2023-2040 and is in the process of finalising before presenting it to Cabinet.  
104 “Sustainable Energy Roadmap 2021-2040” retrieved from https://energy.gov.bz/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/ENERGY-PLAN-
ROADMAP-1.pdf

=== PAGE 186 ===
Figure 3-14: Belize's Renewable Energy Targets105 
 
Outlined in the Sustainable Energy Roadmap 2021-2040 were benefits Belize could reap 
through the adoption of EE (see Figure 3-15). The Ministry of Public Utilities, Energy, Logistics 
& E-Governance through the Energy Unit has been collaborating with international partners and 
local stakeholders to foster RE, EE and DER awareness, as well as develop a market for these 
technologies in the country. Outlined in the roadmap is the projected savings the country could 
gain by 2033 by having at least 90% of consumers utilizing EE technologies with the project 
savings being USD 74.5 million (BZD 150 million) as seen in Figure 14.  
Figure 3-15: Projected Cost Benefit of EE Adoption in Belize 
 
3.2.4 
Barriers  
3.2.3.1 Financial Considerations 
Rising costs of living is not the only factor that inhibits the financial ability of Belizean people, 
particularly women to afford a range of energy sources and technologies. Employment greatly 
impacts the finances available to persons whether they are employed in seasonal sectors, 
working in underpaid jobs or working in the informal sector. Many persons operate in the informal 
sector, particularly in rural areas as they may lack qualifications (education) or fail to meet 
requirements (possessing a valid form of national identification) or simply unable to afford the 
costs of travel. Many places of employment require persons to possess a valid form of national 
identification, however, it must be noted this could be a barrier of entry to low-income persons 
as the national identification card costs USD 2.48 (BZD 5106) to issue for the first time and USD 
12.91 (BZD 26)  to replace107 while the driver’s license costs USD 44.68 (BZD 90) to issue and 
 
105 “Energy Report Card 2021 – Belize” retrieved from https://www.ccreee.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/01/ERC_Belize_final_002.pdf  
106 The conversion rate used is 1 BZD equals 0.49 USD as of June 2023. 
107 “Card Information” retrieved from https://www.socialsecurity.org.bz/card-information/

=== PAGE 187 ===
USD 29.79 (BZD 60) to renew yearly.108 These costs may be untenable for some as they balance 
costs for themselves and unemployed dependents.  
The UNICEF 2015 Multi-Indicator Cluster Survey for Belize found only 37% of women and 40% 
of men have a secondary level education.109 It also notes that two in five women (2 in 5) have 
only obtained a primary school level of education and a similar rate can be seen in men. These 
factors alone or working in conjunction together leave a noted proportion of persons (35.3% or 
64, 268 persons out of the 182, 084 employed persons110) with only informal work as a means 
of generating income.  
Working in the informal sector may provide persons with opportunities and certain freedoms 
particularly rural women who may not have the ability to access more formal employment due 
to ineligibility or conflicting responsibilities (such as family care). Despite these benefits, informal 
sector work can lack the security and integrity afforded to formal employment. This can have far-
reaching consequences for persons as the lack of an employment letter or self-employed forms 
could pose as a barrier to accessing loans and other financial tools from financial institutions.  
Having access to additional finance will be important to purchase renewable energy 
technologies. The average  cost of a solar water heater in Belize ranges from USD 992.25 (BZD 
1998.71) to USD 1984.50111 (BZD 3,997.42) which is 7-14.1% of the average yearly income 
(USD 14,112112/BZD 28,426.13) in Belize. Noting this level of expense, access to financial aid 
will be a necessity for low-income female- headed households and other vulnerable groups to 
access these technologies, without which they would otherwise be left behind in the transition to 
green energy.  
Similar barriers are experienced by indigenous communities, especially those in rural parts of 
the country. These communities, particularly the Maya, are located in areas that are quite difficult 
to access, often without fully developed roads and telecommunication infrastructure and/or 
coverage. These conditions pose a significant hindrance to the economic empowerment of 
indigenous people. The barriers posed by limited transportation options and long travel times 
severely limit economic opportunities, be it seeking employment or selling goods as examples 
of how livelihoods could be impacted. This leaves formal and informal agriculture as a source of 
livelihood for many and depending on the way agricultural activity is managed, many may be 
ineligible to apply for loans from financial institutions. Obtaining loans could entail needing valid 
identification, financial records, business plans, marketing plans113 and some rural indigenous 
farmers, especially female farmers, may not have the capacity to develop these critical 
documents to meet the scope of the institutions.   
Persons with disabilities (PWDs) face their own unique barriers and plight when it comes to 
access to finance and the cost of living. Some PWDs live in squalor114 as they subsist on 
whatever aid they receive from relatives or organisations or government subvention. Many 
PWDs are unable to work due to (i) a lack of accommodations in the workplace to meet the 
needs of their disability and (ii) their limited access to education because of their disability thus 
the lack of necessary qualifications. Some PWDs live with relatives on whom they are entirely 
dependent financially, thereby creating an additional set of possible challenges to caregivers. 
 
108 “Types of License” retrieved from 
https://belizecitycouncil.org/services.php?service_id=10#:~:text=Here%20are%20the%20License%20costs,%2460.00%20BZ%3A
%20for%20annual%20renewal   
109 “Belize Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2015-2016, Final Report” retrieved from 
https://www.unicef.org/belize/media/936/file/Multiple%20indicator%20cluster%20survey.pdf    
110 “Labour Force Survey Summary Findings, October 2022” retrieved from https://sib.org.bz/statistics/labour-force/  
111 “Belize Technology Needs Assessment” retrieved from https://c2e2.unepccc.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2020/06/solar-
water-heater.pdf   
112 “Belize Salary” retrieved from https://www.averagesalarysurvey.com/belize  
113 “Agriculture Loans” retrieved from https://www.dfcbelize.org/loans/agriculture-loans/  
114 “Living With a Disability in Dire Conditions” retrieved from https://edition.channel5belize.com/archives/251267

=== PAGE 188 ===
Given this financial dependence, PWDs have limited economic power. In addition to the lack of 
finances due to unemployment, the cost of caring and treating for disabilities can be quite 
expensive - this could range from the price of obtaining mobility aids to requiring frequent medical 
treatments and/or the price of medicine to treat chronic conditions. PWDs’ ability to implement 
renewable energy technologies is thus lowered due to these financial demands as they form 
additional financial hurdles that PWDs must deal with.    
3.2.3.2 Housing 
The state and quality of housing has been an issue identified in Belize even within urban areas 
of the country in relation to the implementation (installation) of RE/DER technologies identified 
for the IUS project particularly for solar water heaters, and rooftop solar. It must be noted that 
the project entails rooftop solar (although there is a possibility of this technology being 
implemented in other ways) and efficient cooling through air conditioning, there exists a 
requirement for homes to meet certain standards in order for these technologies to be effective. 
Figure 3-16 shows the characteristics of housing across the country derived from the MICS 
survey. From the MICS survey it can be seen that a low but still significant number of households 
would not be able to support some of these technologies efficiently and would require 
adjustments or support to bring their houses up to standard.  Only 95.7% of urban households 
and 88% of rural households have finished floors, roofing and walls. 7.9% of urban households 
and 12% of rural households have rudimentary roofing which is of concern due to these types 
of roofs being unable to support the solar water heaters or solar photovoltaic and may even 
suffer damages from them.  
From the survey, 67% of households are headed by men with the remaining 33% headed by 
women.115 The Mestizo/Spanish/Latino ethnic group accounts for the largest ethnic group for 
household heads at 49.1%, followed by Creole at 25.5% while the indigenous ethic groups of 
Maya and Garifuna account for 9.1% and 5.7% respectively.116  
The state of housing quality is especially of concern for PWDs in situations where they are living 
on their own and typically lack the finances to secure proper housing or to maintain and upkeep 
their homes.117 Another group of major concern, because of housing quality and housing 
infrastructure, is indigenous communities living in rural areas, especially those who live in 
traditional housing. Traditional indigenous housing structures are not typically suited to RE, EE 
and DERs and require an adapted approach (either installation or the technology itself). Rooftop 
solar, in particular, may compromise the structural integrity of the roofing over time without 
adjustments. 
Figure 3-16: Housing Characterics of Urban and Rural Homes in Belize118 
Housing Condition  
Urban Households  
Rural Households   
Access to electricity  
96.9% 
87% 
Household with finished floors, roofing and walls 
95.7% 
88% 
Rudimentary roofing 
7.9% 
12% 
Possess air conditioning 
13.2% 
7.1% 
 
 
115 Information on the distribution of these households across the six districts is not available nor is data on breakdown of these 
households by ethnicity and sex.  
116 “Belize Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2015-2016, Final Report” retrieved from 
https://www.unicef.org/belize/media/936/file/Multiple%20indicator%20cluster%20survey.pdf 
117 “Living With a Disability in Dire Conditions” retrieved from https://edition.channel5belize.com/archives/251267  
118 “Belize Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2015-2016, Final Report” retrieved from 
https://www.unicef.org/belize/media/936/file/Multiple%20indicator%20cluster%20survey.pdf

=== PAGE 189 ===
An additional housing-related issue to be considered is the ownership of the home. 68.9% of all 
households are owned by a household member with 59.3% of urban households and 77.2% of 
rural households being owned by a household member.119 For persons in urban areas, this 
suggest more than 35% of persons are  renting or living in a house owned by another relative 
outside of the home. For persons living in homes they do not own, there are likely limitations on 
what modifications they are allowed to make to the house without the consent of the property 
owner based on the rental agreement/lease they signed. The Landlord and Tenant Act does not 
have provisions120 that would prevent renters acting on their own volition, this means the extent 
of modifications a renter is allowed would be dependent on the stipulations made in the legal 
contract between the landlord and tenant. Implementing rooftop solar photovoltaic, solar water 
heaters and air conditioning in rented homes may require having to navigate the power dynamics 
between renter and property owner and the legal requirements in place as they may require 
infrastructural work to be installed unlike LED lighting which is a simple installation.  
With regard to leadership and decision-making within homes, it is notable that 67% of 
households are male-headed while only 33% are female-headed.  Given that men and women 
have different energy needs and uses due to division of labour121, it is important to consider 
whoever is making the decision on the sources of energy to be used by the household as there 
can be implications for the household’s energy costs and consumption patterns. Women in male-
headed households may spend more time at home performing domestic work and will benefit 
more from the use of solar water heaters in assisting with their household tasks than the male 
head would, whom may have less use for hot water. Likewise, women in male-headed household 
would spend more time at home and would benefit more from the cooling provided by air 
conditioning, gaining relief from the rising temperatures than the male head who may spend a 
third or more of the day out of the home for work. Given these possibilities, the male head may 
deem these technologies as low priority as they do not directly see the immediate benefits. 
On the opposite spectrum, female-headed households may have the same needs of the solar 
water heater and other technologies as women in male-headed households, however they must 
contend with conflicting responsibilities. In a male-headed household, there is a possibility for 
multiple income sources in cases such as married couple, common law couple or other types of 
relations. For female-headed households122, these are typically single income homes with a 
woman caring for children or other dependents. In this situation with more limited resources, 
women must weigh their needs and chose according to their priorities wherein acquiring solar 
water heater or the other technologies may be designated as a low priority action in favour of 
other pressing needs.   
Livelihoods  
A critical element to consider when assessing the barriers and the capacities of persons to 
implement the target technologies is understanding the source of their income generation. 
Livelihood plays a major role in a person’s ability to build capacity and empower themselves and 
would have implications for the climate change adaptations, in this case the implementation of 
RE/EE/DER technologies they can afford and are capable of implementing.  While livelihoods 
could be impacted by a person’s ability to access education and opportunities, it influences the 
other barriers to accessing these technologies such as housing and finance. Income from 
livelihoods would then determine what technologies a person can afford, what loans they are 
 
119 “Belize Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2015-2016, Final Report” retrieved from 
https://www.unicef.org/belize/media/936/file/Multiple%20indicator%20cluster%20survey.pdf 
120 “Landlord and Tenant Act” retrieved from https://www.belizejudiciary.org/download/LAWS-of-Belize-rev2011/Laws-of-Belize-
Update-2011/VOLUME%209B_2/Cap%20189%20%20Landlord%20and%20Tenant%20Act.pdf  
121 “Energy” retrieved from https://eige.europa.eu/gender-mainstreaming/policy-
areas/energy#:~:text=From%20a%20gender%20and%20human,heating%20and%20indoor%20air%20quality.  
122 Due to gender norms present and exhibited in the Caribbean, when speaking of female-headed households this usually entails 
a lone woman leading the household with no adult males (excluding her children) present in the household.

=== PAGE 190 ===
eligible and what other related measures they are able to adopt for the successful and effective 
implementation of the target technologies.   
One of the biggest factors that affects a person’s livelihood and their options for livelihood is their 
ability to access education and assets.123 Having access to necessary resources and education, 
empowers one to capitalise on opportunities and enhances their ability to participate in climate 
change adaptation measures in this instance. From the highest education level attained by 
heads of households, it could be seen that almost half (49.2%) heads of households have only 
primary school level of education as their highest form education, 26.7% with a secondary school 
level, 16.9% with a tertiary school level and 7.2% with no formal education.124 It is critical to 
acknowledge that affects the kinds of livelihoods persons engage in and it is reflected in the 
occupations held by persons as seen in the Belize Labour Force Survey. From the 2022 survey, 
services and sales workers had the largest share of employed persons at 58.1 and generally 
female-dominated (39.7% females to 18.4% males) while elementary occupations followed with 
35.5, still male-dominated (21.5% males to 14% female).125 A large percentage of services and 
sales jobs are associated with the tourism sector (with it accounting for 28% of employed 
persons) which, in turn, has significant implications for income generation for those tied to the 
sector.  The seasonal nature of the tourism sector is of concern due persons’ sources of income 
decreasing during the off-peak season which receives less visitors to the country (the high 
season for tourism in Belize is from December to April which coincides with its dry season126) as 
this will affect the level of loan they might qualify for, the financial decisions they need to make 
during and before the off-season and other issues that may result from the lowered economic 
ability during this time. 
Traditional gender norms are at play in the share of men and women in the tourism sector. 
Despite it being one of the more important sectors in the country, women still dominate this 
sector as jobs related to catering to and providing services to persons which are typically 
perceived as activities for women. This perception of some jobs being deemed for women, and 
some being deemed for men continues to perpetuate the labour market segmentation and 
impacts career/livelihood choices for men and women. This is seen above with the share of 
women employed in sales and services jobs accounting for double the number of men in this 
field. This implies that these traditional gender norms still hold root in society with the way 
persons choose careers. The domination of women in this field has one major consequence 
which is on a yearly basis; many women see reduced income between May to November when 
the country receives less visitors and business slows down. The gender division of labour can 
also be seen in the share of women and men in clerical support worker roles (13.5% for women 
and 5.6% for men). Meanwhile, in more technical/physical fields, men dominate more as seen 
in the following breakdown: plant and machine operators 9.1% men to 0.6% women, craft and 
related trades works 19.3% men to 3.8% women and skilled agricultural and forestry workers 
7.8% men to 0.8 women%127. Noted in 2020 Energy Report Card, women only accounted for 
30.3% of the energy sector workforce which is comprised of the energy unit, BEL and the public 
utilities commission (PUC) (see Figure 3-17), further exhibiting the traditional division of labour 
seen in the country.128  
 
123  “Education and Livelihood” retrieved by https://govdocs.in/education-and-livelihood/  
124 “Belize Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 2015-2016, Final Report” retrieved from 
https://www.unicef.org/belize/media/936/file/Multiple%20indicator%20cluster%20survey.pdf  
125 “Labour Force Survey 2022” retrieved from https://sib.org.bz/statistics/labour-force/  
126 “Best Time to Visit Belize” retrieved from https://www.belizeadventure.ca/travel-tips/when-is-the-best-time-to-visit-
belize/#:~:text=the%20low%20season.-,High%20Tourism%20Season,for%20amazing%20weather%20in%20Belize.  
127 “Labour Force Survey 2022” retrieved from https://sib.org.bz/statistics/labour-force/  
128 “2020 Energy Report Card – Belize” retrieved from https://www.ccreee.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/CCREEE-ERC-
BELIZE-2020.pdf

=== PAGE 191 ===
Figure 3-17: Energy Sector Workforce129. Source130 
 
Men enjoy more stable sources of income which would allow them to amass finances and be 
able to buy into the services more easily being offered via the IUS project and model. Issues of 
affordability would be less of a concern for many as they should be able to outright afford 
payments or be able to acquire loans. Investments into RE, EE and DER would pose less of a 
risk and liability to men.  This is the case for the more immediate reality but also likely in the 
medium term as well. For women, challenges may exist due to the nature of their work and other 
responsibilities they bear particularly as single heads of households. For women outside of 
formal employment, unemployed and informally employed, family care and duties were identified 
as the main cause of those not actively seeking work in the 2022 LFS.  The traditional division 
of labour would see men benefiting more from the IUS project in terms of employment 
opportunities as men are represented more in the associated engineering and energy fields. The 
three indigenous women who were trained in solar technology do represent an opportunity for 
more women to get involved in the sector.  
3.2.5 
Institutional Gender Mainstreaming Capacity 
A limited gender mainstreaming capacity assessment was performed with stakeholders as part 
of the stakeholder engagement process conducted to support the gender assessment of Belize. 
These series of questions were designated to obtain some insight into the capacity of 
stakeholders to perform gender mainstreaming as well as delve into what institutional 
frameworks within their organisations exist for gender. Meeting with country’s main body 
charged with gender would have been pivotal to understand its capacity and ongoing work that 
may be able to inform or feed into this project.  
From the government institutions, it can be seen in Figure 3-18, there is no gender 
mainstreaming capacity131 and limited experience with gender mainstreaming capacities, 
highlighting a need for gender sensitisation and capacity- building. It is important to note that 
NGOs particularly Productive Organization for Women in Action (POWA) has capacity to support 
gender mainstreaming activities and capacity- building, given their history with supporting 
renewable energy initiatives from another Belizean NGO, Plenty Belize.   
Noting from the Ministry of Energy that while projects they have carried out in the past had 
substantial participation from women, the ministry has never analysed these projects from a 
gender perspective. A competency-based approach is used in hiring and procurement. 
Important to flag is the limited gender mainstreaming capacity of the Executing Entity (BEL) as 
they will be charged with executing and handling various aspects of the project. Their limited 
 
129 The workforce consists of the staff of BEL, PUC and the energy unit and does not provide a breakdown of the roles, men and 
women occupy.  
130 “2020 Energy Report Card – Belize” retrieved from https://www.ccreee.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/CCREEE-ERC-
BELIZE-2020.pdf  
131 Noting that the consultants were unable to meet with the Women and Family Support Department.

=== PAGE 192 ===
capacity will need to be a priority to address and resolve as early as possible in the project’s 
lifespan.

=== PAGE 193 ===
Figure 3-18: Belize Stakeholders' Gender Capacity 
Stakeholder  
Does your 
organisation have 
any experience with 
mainstreaming 
gender in its past 
work? 
Does your 
organisation have the 
capacity to execute 
gender mainstreaming 
activities or provides 
gender sensitisation 
training/gender-related 
technical inputs? 
Does your 
organisation 
possess a gender 
policy or is it in the 
process of 
developing a 
gender policy? 
Has your organisation ever been 
engaged by government 
ministries/agencies or 
development partners to support 
in the development or 
implementation of 
energy/renewable energy 
projects? 
Does your 
organisation 
utilize a grievance 
redress 
mechanism for 
projects? 
POWA  
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
NO 
PETAL  
YES 
YES 
NO 
YES 
NO 
Plenty Belize  
YES132  
NO  
NO 
YES 
NO 
Belize 
Assembly 
for 
Persons 
with 
Diverse 
Abilities   
YES 
YES 
NO 
YES 
NO 
Ministry 
of 
Energy  
YES  
NO  
NO  
YES 
YES 
PUC133  
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Women 
and 
Family Support 
Department 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
BEL  
NO 
NO 
NO 
YES 
YES  
 
 
132 Plenty Belize noted it collaborates with POWA for gender mainstreaming needs in past work.  
133 Consultant was unable to meet with the PUC and the Women and Family Support Department and as such will not be able to provide answers for the gender mainstreaming questions for this 
organisation (N/A will be applied in response to the questions).

=== PAGE 194 ===
Executing Entity Gender Capacity Analysis  
One of the key stakeholders for this project will be the utility, BEL (the Executing Entity). They 
will be charged with executing this project which would entail managing the funds to be allocated 
to support the distribution of the renewable energy technologies to customers and interacting 
with customers in general. Noting this will entail BEL interacting with vulnerable groups such as 
rural, low-income women, indigenous people and PWDs, it was important to understand how 
BEL operates, how they engage with customers, how complaints are handled and the capacity 
of the organisation and staff. Given BEL’s importance to the project, it was key to engage with 
them to gain insight into these areas.  
BEL shows flexibility in meeting and accommodating their customers through policies that allow 
customers to conduct all their business via WhatsApp communication. For those customers who 
do not utilise WhatsApp, BEL will go to their location in order to conduct business with said 
customers.  
BEL frequently participates in trade shows which they use to educate customers on policies and 
procedures in order to boost customers’ ability to engage the utility. It is noted that BEL has no 
specific engagement with PWDs or persons from LGBTQIA+ community but the utility does work 
with indigenous groups to increase access to electricity. BEL is aware of the Free, Prior, and 
Informed Consent (FPIC) and operations with indigenous people are guided by FPIC to a 
degree.  
BEL has a grievance redress mechanism in place for employees, however for customers, 
grievance is handled by the regulator (PUC).  
BEL notes that it is not in possession of a gender policy.   
3.3 
Jamaica  
3.3.1 
Policy environment 
Jamaica’s renewable energy capacity stood at 17.1% in 2020 with solar and wind contributing 
to most of the country's current renewable energy usage, which is means a lot of work needs to 
be done in order to meet the new goal set out.134 
Jamaica’s Integrated Resource Plan 2018 laid out the country’s goal to reach 30% renewable 
energy usage by 2030.135 However, the country has a new goal it is aiming to achieve following 
after Prime Minister Andrew Holness revealed intentions for a new standard of 50% renewable 
energy by 2030 instead.136 The transition towards more energy efficient methods has the 
capacity to greatly minimise the time and labour constraints associated with gender inequality 
while also enhancing community health, income generating opportunities, and capacity-building 
efforts.137 However, Jamaica faces issues of costing, an enabling policy environment and 
barriers to entry, particularly for women.  
Figure 3-19 provides a review of current policies. The policies listed in the Jamaica context 
include no substantive provisions for advancing the area of gender equality for the country and 
can be deemed as negligible in terms of support for any necessary gender mainstreaming 
actions. However, the National Policy on Gender Equality (NPGE), the NDC and the Vision 2030 
 
134 “Jamaica Energy Report Card” retrieved from https://www.ccreee.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/CCREEE-ERC-JAMAICA-
2020.pdf 
135 “2018 Jamaica Integrated Resource Plan” retrieved from https://www.mset.gov.jm/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/2018-Jamaica-
Integrated-Resource-Feb-21-2020.pdf  
136 “Jamaica's Prime Minister Goes Solar [Press Release” retrieved from https://solarheadofstate.org/press-
releases/2018/jamaicasolar 
137 “Industrial Development Report 2011” retrieved from https://www.unido.org/resources-publications-flagship-publications-
industrial-development-report-series/industrial-development-report-2011

=== PAGE 195 ===
all provide a good framework for gender mainstreaming action and could serve as an entry point 
for revisions to relevant energy policies. 
Figure 3-19: Energy and Policy Environment for Jamaica 
Policy  
Summary  
Gender Content  
Gender Rating  
NDC, 2020  
It provides an update on the 
country’s progress and outlines 
actions for meeting its 
commitments for the Paris 
Agreement.  
It notes that will be 
guided by the 
gender equality 
strategy  
Sensitive 
Jamaica National 
Energy Policy 2009-
2030  
This policy sets forth steps to 
creating an enabling environment 
for achieving the goal of “a 
secure and sustainable energy 
supply for our country” that is laid 
out in the National Development 
Plan.  
No mentions of 
gender, women or 
marginalised 
communities.  
Neutral 
National Energy  
Conservation and  
Efficiency Sub-
Policy of 2010  
This policy is intended to support 
the goals of the National Energy 
Policy by calling for the 
improvement of energy efficiency 
in key energy consuming sectors 
of power generation and 
manufacturing extraction and 
production processes.  
No mentions of 
gender, women or 
marginalised 
communities.  
Neutral 
National Renewable 
Energy Sub-Policy 
2009-2030  
This policy is intended to support 
the goals of the National Energy 
Policy by enabling the 
development of a diversified 
renewable energy sector.  
No mentions of 
gender, women or 
marginalised 
communities.  
 
Neutral 
Vision 2030 
Jamaica  
This plan sets forth the goals and 
pathways for Jamaica to achieve 
an internationally competitive 
economy, secure and cohesive 
society, healthy natural 
environment and promoting 
human capital development as 
well as greater opportunities for 
social and economic mobility and 
prosperity.  
The plan recognizes 
inequalities 
experienced by 
women and persons 
with disabilities and 
seeks to rectify 
these issues by 
creating an  
environment that 
ensures future 
policies captures 
these issues while 
also outlining plans 
to address some of 
the underlying 
societal problems.   
Transformative 
National Policy for 
Gender Equality of 
2021  
This policy outlines Jamaica’s 
commitment and actions to 
developing and fostering gender 
equality for the nation.  
The policy 
addresses the 
gender inequalities 
prevalent in society 
but also provides 
actions to resolve 
these inequalities 
while guiding the 
nation to gender 
equality. There are 
no direct mentions 
to energy within the 
Transformative

=== PAGE 196 ===
Policy  
Summary  
Gender Content  
Gender Rating  
policy, but it does 
speak to enhancing 
women’s access to 
resources.  
Jamaica’s Long-
Term Emissions 
Reduction and 
Climate Resilient 
Strategy and 
Operationalisation 
Plan138 
This strategy works in tandem 
with the goals of Vision 2030 
Jamaica to attain sustainable, low 
carbon development and outlines 
targets and actions per sector 
achieve this goal.  
The document 
recognizes that 
vulnerability varies 
across different 
groups and 
recognizes how 
vulnerability impacts 
climate resilience 
and outlines 
principles to be 
incorporated into 
future actions to 
ensure future 
activities are gender 
responsive   
Transformative 
 
Seven policies were identified in Jamaica: 3 neutral, 1 sensitive and 3 transformative.  The latest, 
the LTS, combines several elements and provides a critical long-term vision for where energy 
fits within a broader climate change response and sustainable development pathway. While the 
energy policies are relatively gender-neutral (or gender blind), other broader policies tended to 
be more gender transformative.  
The NPGE is quite detailed and one of the few across the region and among the three countries 
that is detailed across several sectors, including energy. The fact that two of the above-
mentioned policy frameworks are transformative also lays a critical foundation for just transition 
elements of the proposed GCF proposal depending on what is agreed for Jamaica compared to 
other countries. It provides a framework on the country’s commitments toward gender equality 
measures, providing an enabling environment to achieve fairness and socio-economic justice 
for both women and men, in line with the goals and objectives as defined by Jamaica’s Vision 
2030 plan. Within the policy, an overarching goal defines the need to transform existing gender 
ideologies and create transformation within the public sector. The policy’s objectives support 
reducing gender-based discrimination and improving mainstreaming of gender within all cultural, 
social, political, and economic structures and systems. It also encourages the promotion of 
capacity-building and improved organisational behaviour throughout the development, 
implementation, and monitoring of gender responsive activities. Despite the extent of cross-
cutting information across sectors: poverty, education, labour, health, trade, agriculture, and 
social protection systems, and culture, the author noted no specific references to renewable 
energy and women’s involvement or provision of services, noted within the policy.  
Jamaica’s update of their NDC was published in 2020. In preparation of the document, 
consultation was conducted with local communities and indigenous populations in a gender-
responsive way. The document notes the country’s progress towards its measures for reaching 
SDG 5, gender equality. It also notes its commitment to adhering to policies and programmes 
aimed at improving environments for inclusivity and fairness as outlined in the National Policy 
for Gender Equality, 2021.  
Jamaica’s National Development Plan139, Vision 2030, developed in 2010 in intended to provide 
a roadmap for making Jamaica a developed country by 2030. The plan consists of several goals 
and associated outcomes. Within the four main goals are measures for social protection, health, 
 
138 A draft of this document was received by the consultant who participated in a validation meeting for the document.  
139 “Vision 2030” retrieved from https://www.vision2030.gov.jm/

=== PAGE 197 ===
and education; a secure and cohesive society; a prosperous economy; and maintaining a 
thriving natural resource environment. The plan recognises inequalities experienced by women 
and PWDs and seeks to rectify these issues by creating an environment that ensures future 
policies captures these issues while also outlining plans to address some of the underlying 
societal problems. Within the energy sector, the plan promotes improved energy conservation 
within households, but does not make specific reference to gender or women. The same exists 
for promoting a technology-enabled society, while noting a desire to expand knowledge and 
development, creativity and development of products and services, does not specifically 
reference gender or improving the needs and livelihoods of women.  
Jamaica has recently, as of July 2022, developed and launched a gender and climate change 
strategy and action plan (GCCSAP), guided by the results of a national gender and climate 
change assessment.140 The assessment, in part, conducted an analysis of gender and climate 
change linkages, providing recommendations for action in the country going forward. Financed 
by the GCF, the GCCSAP includes provisions for institutional capacity for mainstreaming gender 
in climate finance programming.141 
3.3.2 
Usage  
In general, women tend to face a disproportionate burden of labour compared with men, through 
their responsibilities taking care of children and other household tasks, in addition to any labour 
performed outside the home for earned income142. In terms of women’s abilities to access 
financial assets and resources, infrastructure services can play a role in lessening the added 
burdens placed on women though their dual roles as caretakers and paid employees in the 
labour force.143  
Ensuring proper services through sustainable energy provisions can provide both cost and time-
savings to consumers, especially women who already may be operating in a deficit in each of 
these areas. These economic and time savings may allow women to accumulate capital which 
can have additional benefits in terms of resource allocation toward better health, added income 
and education for women in most contexts. 
LED Lighting 
In recent years, the Jamaican Public Service (JPS) has been working on energy conversion 
projects and initiatives in Jamaica, including those for light-emitting diode (LED) lighting and 
high-pressure sodium (HSP) lamps. Currently, LED lighting and public buildings targeted for 
energy efficiency retrofits consume only 7% of Jamaica’s total generated electricity.144 In 2018, 
the JPS, converted 63% of the island's streetlights over to LEDs. In real terms, this covered a 
total of 67,000 – out of the 105,000 streetlights on the nation’s roads. In 2022, the company was 
also reported to have converted all existing high-pressure sodium (HPS) lamps with LEDs within 
Jamaica. These are more energy efficient, have a longer service life and added intelligent-
technology capabilities. JPS is continuing work on its streetlight general maintenance and repair 
programs in the interim.  
Difficulties with the HPS lighting, including vandalism, have been an issue. These problems are 
confirmed with statistics showing that an average of 620 repairs per month were conducted by 
 
140 “Jamaica launches gender and climate change strategy and action plan” retrieved from https://www.iisd.org/articles/iisd-
news/jamaica-launches-gender-and-climate-change-strategy-and-action-plan 
141 “Jamaica launches gender and climate change strategy and action plan” retrieved from 
https://www.caribbeannationalweekly.com/news/caribbean-news/jamaica-launches-gender-and-climate-change-strategy-and-
action-plan/  
142 “A Quantum Leap for Gender Equality”  retrieved from https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/---
publ/documents/publication/wcms_674831.pdf  
143 “Balancing The Burden? Desk Review of Women’s Time Poverty and Infrastructure in Asia and The Pacific” retrieved from  
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/177465/sdcc-balancing-burden.pdf  
144  “Energy Management and Efficiency in Jamaica” retrieved from https://blogs.iadb.org/energia/en/energy-management-and-
efficiency-in-jamaica/

=== PAGE 198 ===
JPS, due to high rates of maintenance repairs due to crime.145 Efforts by JPS on street lighting 
is a part of Jamaica’s Energy Policy, to facilitate the introduction of energy-saving devices e.g., 
LED, solar panels, and solar street lighting under Goal 1.146 Applications from persons for new 
streetlights can be made to the Ministry of Local Government, as Jamaica Public Service (JPS) 
must be authorized by the Parish Council to install new street lighting infrastructure147 and 
outside of Jamaica’s National Energy Policy148, there are no noted implementing frameworks 
that support the energy transition to LEDs.  
LED Lighting for Support for Women and Vulnerable Groups  
Provision of improved lighting services can support various vulnerable groups, in the urban and 
rural context. Poor lighting services can keep women and girls out of public spaces, exacerbating 
their senses of vulnerability and insecurity, and placing restrictions of their ability to safely pursue 
independent living. Ample street lighting has been seen to reduce the prevalence of crime in 
areas with sufficient lighting.149 Increased Street lighting can offer important economic 
advantages in addition to safety benefits. Better lighting services can enable longer business 
hours in some cases where work hours transition from daylight hours, this is especially the case 
for women who operate in the informal economy in roles such as street vendors.  
By creating safe gathering spaces, lighting services have also been shown to support the 
reduction of social isolation, boost community cohesion, and decrease the number of people, 
especially women who stay indoors during the night.150 For other vulnerable populations, 
improved lighting services has also shown to assist with children’s education in terms of how 
well they perform and function by supporting their visual, cognitive, and behavioural abilities 
through focus, alertness, and mood management.151 It also makes it easier for those with visual 
disabilities to see better and allows a person with hearing impairments to make lipreading easier. 
Problems and challenges, however, do exist in transitioning energy systems and improving 
lighting capacity. In 2021, the theft situation rapidly worsened in Jamaica, hampering 
government efforts to illuminate crime-ridden areas. The power company disclosed in 2019 that 
the thefts were harming its investments in public lighting.152 Within the first 5 months of the year, 
525 streetlights have been stolen. The US Department of State reports that the municipalities of 
Montego Bay and Portmore have some of Jamaica's worst rates of violent crime. These locations 
are where streetlight theft was most prevalent. Theft also occurs in the Northern towns of 
Moneague and Claremont in St. Ann, Jamaica's largest parish.153  
In such environments, the lack of proper public lighting due to theft can further exacerbate 
feelings of insecurity and vulnerability, especially for women who may need to navigate these 
areas during nighttime hours. Moreover, women are often primary caregivers and responsible 
 
145 “JPS Smart LED Street lighting Programme to Improve Lighting Across Jamaica” retrieved from https://jis.gov.jm/jps-led-street-
light-programme-to-be-completed-next-year/  
146 “Jamaica’s National Energy Policy 2009-2030” retrieved from https://www.mset.gov.jm/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Draft-
Renewable-Energy-Policy_0.pdf  
147 “JPS hits 105,000-mark in LED streetlights” retrieved from https://jamaica-gleaner.com/article/news/20220616/jps-hits-105000-
mark-led-streetlights  
148 “Jamaica’s National Energy Policy 2009-2030” retrieved from https://www.mset.gov.jm/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Draft-
Renewable-Energy-Policy_0.pdf  
149 “Reducing Crime Through Environmental Design: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment of Street Lighting in New York 
City” retrieved from 
https://urbanlabs.uchicago.edu/attachments/e95d751f7d91d0bcfeb209ddf6adcb4296868c12/store/cca92342e666b1ffb1c15be63b
484e9b9687b57249dce44ad55ea92b1ec0/lights_04242016.pdf  
150 ” Transformative power of innovative street lighting in Vanuatu” retrieved from 
https://www.undp.org/pacific/blog/transformative-power-innovative-street-lighting-vanuatu  
151 “Impact Of Lighting on Children’s Learning Environment: A Literature Review” retrieved from 
https://www.witpress.com/Secure/elibrary/papers/SC21/SC21031FU1.pdf  
152 “JPS’ Smart LED Streetlight Improvement Efforts Being Impacted by Theft” retrieved from 
http://radiojamaicanewsonline.com/local/thieves-make-off-with-jps-street-lights-in-silversun-estate  
153 “Jamaica Struggling with Constant Theft of Street Lights” retrieved from https://insightcrime.org/news/jamaica-struggling-with-
constant-theft-of-street-lights/

=== PAGE 199 ===
for the safety and well-being of their families. Insufficient lighting in their communities can hinder 
their ability to protect themselves and their children, further compromising their sense of security. 
As most of the country has already been converted to LED lighting, additional challenges can 
also occur during the repair and replacement process of stolen LEDs. The JPS may be reluctant 
to constantly invest in replacement, especially in high-crime areas as mentioned before. It may 
not be deemed feasible to fix streetlights, leaving the areas that need lighting the most, without. 
The safety of JPS employees is also a concern as installing and fixing streetlights in high crime 
areas is another potential constraint as employees become hesitant to enter areas for fear of 
persons stealing the lights from their possession and for their own personal safety.  
Solar Water Heating  
In 2009, it was estimated that more than 5,000 solar water heaters (SWH) were installed in 
Jamaica. As of 2020, Jamaica’s use of renewables accounted for approximately 11 per cent of 
its energy: 6.5% wind, 3.5% hydropower, and 1% solar power.154    
The SWH market in Jamaica has the potential to be expanded due to the high levels of insolation 
and urbanism. The country receives an average daily peak of 4.6 hours of sunlight for solar 
panel absorption.155 The combination of good climatic conditions and Jamaica’s readiness and 
urgency to diversify its energy sector will create favorable demand for SWH. However, there are 
specific barriers to SWH adoption which include limited access to capital, incomplete information 
and data, lack of policies governing the injection and transitions of renewable energy resources 
into the power grid and economic regulatory distortion.156 Each of these factors pose challenges 
to promoting gender equality and women’s empowerment efforts due to the limited access to 
capital available for women, a lack of available sex disaggregated data to inform decision-
making and the limitations on gender mainstreaming in policy across the energy sector more 
generally.   
SWH systems in the Caribbean typically have short payback periods and a high net present 
value (NPV) which means over time, not only will systems pay for themselves but also generate 
profits or in this case immense savings.157 They can also be extended depending on incentives, 
local electricity rates, and system sizing.158 Prices vary based on sizes offered, materials used 
and other factors, but they generally begin at USD1,000 not including installation.159 This cost 
can deter home and business owners from investing. These issues of costing can pose a 
significant barrier for women-headed households who, in general, de facto face income 
constraints. It is estimated that 47% of children live in single-parent homes with their biological 
mothers.160 To address some of the issues around this cost prohibitive barrier to access, financial 
institutions have begun offering segmented renewable energy financing. Although the direct 
purpose of environmentally conscious financial initiatives are typically intended to support 
energy efficiencies more generally, conservation and alternatives, they can be utilised for the 
installation of SWH. The Development Bank of Jamaica, Exim Bank, National Housing Trust and 
 
154 “Jamaica Energy Snapshot” retrieved from https://www.energy.gov/eere/articles/jamaica-island-energy-snapshot-2020  
155 “Jamaica Solar Power Information & Peak Sun Hours” retrieved from 
https://www.turbinegenerator.org/solar/iowa/jamaica/#:~:text=For%20Jamaica%20the%20number%20of,for%20a%202%2Daxis%
20panel.  
156 “Barriers of solar energy uptake and the potential for mitigation solutions in Barbados” retrieved from 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032118303095  
157 “Break-even Cost for Residential Solar Water Heating in the United States: Key Drivers and Sensitivities” retrieved 
https://c2e2.unepccc.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2020/06/solar-water-heater.pdf  
158 “Solar Water Heating in the Tourism Industry” retrieved from https://solardynamicslimited.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/UNEPSWHExtractsSDL.pdf  
159 These cost can range from USD 2 to 4 per Watt with most homes having up to 5kW systems.  
160 “Shifting the narrative of the single parent” retrieved from https://www.jamaicaobserver.com/all-woman/shifting-the-narrative-of-
the-single-parent/

=== PAGE 200 ===
the National People’s Cooperative Bank of Jamaica Limited all offer financial services 
specifically mentioning SWH.161 
Heated water may be considered a luxury for some, but it is a part of many persons’ everyday 
life. While the water is mainly used by everyone in the household for showering, women tend to 
use warm water more for themselves as well as for their children and household chores. As the 
current levels of water heating currently account for up to 30 per cent of a domestic light bill in 
Jamaica162, more sustainable methods of water heating should be considered.  
SWH can provide financial benefits along with environmental sustainability. It lowers the carbon 
footprint and is expected to reduce electricity bills since the fuel is free sunlight.163 Due to low 
operating and maintenance costs, solar water heaters over the long-term cover the huge initial 
fixed cost.164 When all costs for purchase, installation, maintenance and operation are taken into 
account after the payback period. the SWH systems are expected to provide hot water for free 
with bare maintenance costs as sunlight is free.165 Thereafter, electricity bills can be reduced by 
30%, making it a cost-effective option for low-income homes including single-mother homes, 
persons with disabilities and retired persons.166  
Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic 
The transition to a greener and more sustainable future can be facilitated by creating a sector 
for clean energy that is gender inclusive and gives women in rural communities more influence 
as both consumers and producers of clean energy. Targeted policy initiatives concentrating on 
improving loan access, skill development, education, and broader systemic gender issues like 
property and equal access laws, land rights, and political engagement are necessary to support 
women's success in the sector.167 
Women may play a crucial role in the transition to renewable energy by influencing patterns of 
energy use. They directly gain from using clean energy as consumers. With access to clean 
energy technologies, women's exposure to indoor air pollution can be eliminated.168 Additionally, 
the ability to use time-saving appliances (like lighting, cookstoves, fans, and mobile phone 
chargers) are made possible due to increased connection to electricity and this in turns leads to 
a reduction in women’s time poverty.169 This involves running clean energy businesses that use 
energy directly (such as water pumps for irrigation and grain mills), as well as marketing these 
products and services (for example solar panels, clean cookstoves, solar lamps, etc.).170 
Clean energy such as rooftop solar can reduce the load on the electricity grid, increasing the 
rate of access to many.  Jamaica’s urban community enjoys generally full access to electric 
services, whilst those within the rural community have experienced increased access to 
electricity with 96.01% coverage in 2016 up from 94% in 2015. Many positive ripple effects on 
 
161 “Financing institutions offering renewable energy financing” retrieved from https://buildbetterja.com/2020/10/12/financial-
institutions-offering-renewable-energy-financing-brochure/  
162 “Jamaica’s National Energy Policy 2009-2030” retrieved from https://www.mset.gov.jm/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/National-
Energy-Policy_0.pdf  
163 “The Importance of Using Solar Water Heater as an Alternative Eco-Friendly Technology in Global Market: Some Lessons of 
Experiences for Bangladesh Economy” retrieved from https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2928814  
164 “Estimating the Cost and Energy Efficiency of a Solar Water Heater” retrieved https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/estimating-
cost-and-energy-efficiency-solar-water-heater  
165 “Estimating the Cost and Energy Efficiency of a Solar Water Heater” retrieved https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/estimating-
cost-and-energy-efficiency-solar-water-heater  
166 “How much of your Electricity Bill is for Hot Water” retrieved from https://carbontrack.com.au/blog/hot-water-bill/  
167 “How clean energy can empower women in rural communities” retrieved from https://www.theigc.org/blogs/gender-
equality/how-clean-energy-can-empower-women-rural-communities  
168 “How Does Clean Energy Consumption Affect Women’s Health: New Insights from China” retrieved from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9266163/  
169 “Powering Households and Empowering Women: The Gendered Effects of Electrification in sub-Saharan Africa” retrieved from 
https://jpia.princeton.edu/news/powering-households-and-empowering-women-gendered-effects-electrification-sub-saharan-africa  
170 “Applying for Street Lights” retrieved from https://localauthorities.gov.jm/services/%E2%80%8Bapplying-street-lights

=== PAGE 201 ===
women's lives and socioeconomic standing emerge from having access to reliable energy. This 
includes lowering the health hazards associated with some of the present energy practices, 
cutting back on the time and effort required for domestic activities, improving local job prospects, 
raising the standard of living, and boosting productivity. There is a compelling argument for 
empowering women by integrating and employing them as business owners, workers, 
innovators, designers, and even decision-makers at the highest levels of the energy system's 
value chain.171 This would provide women with the opportunity to realise their entrepreneurial 
potential and act as change agents on the front lines.172 
Low-income consumers, generally comprised of female- headed households within Jamaica, 
can use solar energy technology as one of several strategies to lessen their energy costs, but 
up to now, they have not adopted solar at the same rate as other income groups. Since they pay 
a larger percentage of their income toward utilities, low-income consumers are 
disproportionately more vulnerable to the effects of shifting electricity prices.173 The 2017 
Jamaica Survey of Living Conditions provided valuable data indicating that poverty 
disproportionately affects female-headed households. The survey revealed that 14.8% of such 
households experienced poverty. Furthermore, a significant majority of the poorest female-
headed households, approximately 54.8%, were single-parent households.174 These findings 
highlight the vulnerability of these households and individuals to various socio-economic 
challenges, including labour market fluctuations, energy insecurity, and affordability issues.175 
Moreover, they face additional difficulties when confronted with energy rate increases or 
temporary hikes. These circumstances further accentuate the economic pressures faced by 
female-headed households and underscore the need for targeted support and measures to 
address their specific energy-related concerns. 
Efficient Cooling and Refrigeration  
Energy-related behaviours and cooling energy consumption are influenced by gender, noting 
variations in consumption among different genders.176  
A general gender comparison study conducted by researchers in China noted that, particularly 
for women, using the air conditioner frequently is a regular practice that affects cooling energy 
use. However, thermal preferences have more noticeable influence on cooling energy 
consumption for males than females.177 These differences exhibit themselves in common  habits 
such as daily average hours of air conditioning use, the use of electric fans in place of air 
conditioners, and the occupancy ratio in room and these habits have an impact on cooling energy 
consumption for both men and women. Women are more likely to provide unpaid care for young 
children, elderly individuals, and those with disabilities, who spend more time indoors due to 
physical and mental conditions and would therefore require more cooling in poorly ventilated 
homes.178 With this situation, they need to use more energy for cooling. In comparison, men are 
shown to be more likely to labour outdoors or in hot locations, making them more sensitive to 
 
171 “What Is Happening With Gender Equality and How Is Women’s Corporate Situation Today?” retrieved from 
https://youmatter.world/en/equality-men-women-work-performances/  
172 “Solar power for women empowerment” retrieved from https://www.undp.org/lebanon/stories/solar-power-women-
empowerment  
173 “How High Are Household Energy Burdens” retrieved from https://www.michigan.gov/-
/media/Project/Websites/mpsc/workgroups/eaac/aceee_energy_burden_report_2020.pdf?rev=24565d21283d4b70993a6050c805
13d4  
174 “Jamaica Survey of Living Conditions” retrieved from https://www.pioj.gov.jm/product/jamaica-survey-of-living-conditions-jslc-
2017-executive-summary/  
175 “Jamaica Survey of Living Conditions” retrieved from https://www.pioj.gov.jm/product/jamaica-survey-of-living-conditions-jslc-
2017-executive-summary/ 
176 “Typical energy-related behaviours and gender differences for cooling energy consumption” retrieved from 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S095965261932712X  
177 “Typical energy-related behaviours and gender differences for cooling energy consumption” retrieved from 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S095965261932712X  
178 “Gender differences in caregiving among family – caregivers of people with mental illnesses” retrieved from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4804270/

=== PAGE 202 ===
the effects of climate change from an outdoor labour perspective which can also have similar 
implication towards health and livelihood management.179 
A refrigeration and cooling case study conducted in 2020 in Kenya found that the use of cooling 
technology was able to boost productivity and give women more options to earn money and 
more freedom in general. While this study was not specifically directed to the Jamaican context, 
refrigerators can provide women more power by eliminating tedious tasks and providing added 
time savings. The capacity to preserve food can reduce the time needed to shop and prepare 
meals and can save food costs by reducing the need to get rid of food that has spoiled.  
As another method to provide cooling for labour and in the home, fans are a relatively low-cost 
appliance, which can help increase productivity and help those at most risk adapt to climate 
change.180 A study conducted to look at the insights of electricity poverty in urban Jamaica found 
that electric fans were the most common electrical appliance used (at a rate of 94%); followed 
by television (90.8 per cent); and refrigerators (89.2%) in the communities of Kingston and St. 
Andrew, St James, Clarendon, and St Catherine.181 Electrical appliances that consume a large 
amount of electricity such as air conditioners and electric stoves were in use for only 7.8% and 
2.5% of the households, respectively.  
At present, there are currently no approved policies in place to implement and spur the use of 
efficient cooling methods and refrigeration in Jamaica. However, as of 2021, as part of the 
regional Caribbean Cooling Initiative (C-COOL), Jamaica’s National Cooling Strategy (JNCS) is 
currently entering its final stage toward approval, and its subsequent implementation. The 
strategy’s recommendations were refined and were undertaken by various inter-agency working 
groups before submission to the Cabinet. Once approved, would be the second such strategy 
of its kind adopted in the region.182   
3.3.3 
Demand  
In 2021, Jamaica’s demand for energy saw the consumption of 35 terawatts-hours (TWh).183The 
demand for energy was projected to decline by 6 million barrels of oil equivalent in 2020.184 This 
downward trend is the consequence of the implementation of an effective efficiency 
improvement and conversation program as seen in Figure 3-20 and Figure 3-21.185  
 
179 “Case study: conducting a gender impact assessment on urban cooling community education” retrieved from (Efficiency for 
Access, 2020) https://www.genderequalitycommission.vic.gov.au/case-study-conducting-gender-impact-assessment-urban-
cooling-community-education 
180 Case study: conducting a gender impact assessment on urban cooling community education” retrieved from (Efficiency for 
Access, 2020) https://www.genderequalitycommission.vic.gov.au/case-study-conducting-gender-impact-assessment-urban-
cooling-community-education  
181 “Creating Policies that Foreground Appliances in Achieving Gender Equality and Energy Access for All” retrieved from 
https://www.sacreee.org/sites/default/files/documents/files/Creating%20Policies%20that%20Foreground%20Appliances%20in%20
Achieving%20Gender%20Equality%20and%20Energy%20Access%20for%20All%20by%20Marena%20Ireri%20-
%20Efficiency%20for%20Access.pdf  
182 “Jamaica’s National Cooling Strategy Prepared For Cabinet Submission” retrieved from https://united4efficiency.org/jamaicas-
national-cooling-strategy-prepared-for-cabinet-submission/  
183 “Energy”. Retrieved from https://ourworldindata.org/energy/country/jamaica 
184  “Jamaica’s National Energy Policy 2009 – 2030”. Retrieved from https://www.mset.gov.jm/wp-
content/uploads/2019/07/National-Energy-Policy_0.pdf  
185 Ibid.

=== PAGE 203 ===
Figure 3-20: Jamaica's Projected Energy Demand (2005-2021) 
 
Figure 3-21: Jamaica's Projected Energy Demand (2021-2030) 
 
Like Barbados, Jamaica has also noted the benefit of reduction in oil generated energy to 
increase energy from IUS technologies to reduce its oil import bill. The 2009 Strategy projected

=== PAGE 204 ===
US 555 million in the energy import bill in 2020, with an additional US 1.7 billion with the 
implementation of a national diversification program.186 
2019 saw the increase in RE usage particularly from bioenergy (445 [Terajoules] TJ) with 
decreases in the industry, transport and household sectors and a significant increase in other 
sectors as seen in Figure 3-22. However, the country’s capacity in 2021 has seen a different use 
of RE with Wind and Solar Energy capacities of 39% and 36% respectively, signally a shift in the 
demand of RE under the IUS models.  
Figure 3-22: Jamaica RE Consumption by sector in 2014 and 2020187 
 
3.3.4 
Barriers 
Some of the specific challenges women face in terms of access to affordable energy, and more 
specifically with their roles as typically the primary care providers in the home, include  having 
access to energy for maintaining domestic work, access to water and energy options that are 
both safe and affordable, and help ease the burden women already face by taking on more hours 
of labour, through their domestic duties and those outside the home.  Various barriers also affect 
uptake and use of technologies.  
Institutional  
A weak enabling policy environment for SWH also poses a barrier to implementation. While 
Jamaica has multiple policies on renewable energy, there seems to be only one with stipulations 
specifically for SWH. Jamaica’s National Energy Policy 2009-2030 provides incentives for the 
installation of SWH and solar lights in the public and private sectors and communities are 
included under Goal 1: Jamaicans use energy wisely and aggressively pursue opportunities for 
conservation and efficiency.188 The incentives, include concessional loans and import duties on 
EE and RE, and the exemption of lithium-ion batteries from the General Consumption Tax. 
Lack of public awareness also limits the usage of SWH systems. There are currently no specific 
outreach campaigns for SWH in Jamaica. There have been efforts to increase awareness of the 
merits of renewable energy more generally, however, in order for women to have access to this 
renewable source of energy, financial incentives for system installations, as well as low-interest 
rates loan programs, should be implemented. 189   
Another barrier that arises in the administrative process involved when applying for the 
installation of new lights or the replacement of lights. The process includes many steps and can 
take a long time to implement, posing an obstacle to persons applying.190 This process makes it 
more difficult to have consistent street lighting. The lack of street lighting increases the risk of 
domestic violence and other forms of gender-based violence to occur during times where 
 
186 Ibid.  
187 “Energy Profile – Jamaica” retrieved from https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Statistics/Statistical_Profiles/Central%20America%20and%20the%20Caribbean/Jamaica_Central%20
America%20and%20the%20Caribbean_RE_SP.pdf  
188 “Jamaica’s National Energy Policy 2009-2030” retrieved from https://www.mset.gov.jm/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/National-
Energy-Policy_0.pdf 
189 “The Role of Women in Sustainable Energy Development” retrieved from https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy00osti/26889.pdf  
190 “Applying for Street Lights” retrieved from https://localauthorities.gov.jm/services/%E2%80%8Bapplying-street-lights

=== PAGE 205 ===
sunlight is absent. With a high rate of violence within the country, the lack of this infrastructure 
increases the risk and probability of these events occurring and further burden the already 
burdened police and security services  in the country. 
Social 
Without increasing the provision of support through the addition of reliable and sustainable 
services and infrastructure, it is more difficult for women in low-income households to improve 
their positions and livelihoods, their ability to earn decent livelihoods, and to improve their socio-
economic situation and outlook. Without target actions in these areas, the imbalance women 
face in their economic status from abilities to engage in income- generating activities and benefit 
from time time-savings, may consequently lead to further negative impacts across all areas 
mentioned including health, housing, and education for both women and the families they 
provide for.  
As primary consumers and users of domestic energy, for CDRs, e.g. washing, household 
cleaning and personal care, cooking etc., women need to be involved in energy efficiency and 
renewable energy projects from their direct and indirect impacts on levels and usage of 
household energy consumption. Women may also inform their children's future energy 
consumption and conservation practices through their own examples and sustainable 
behaviours in the home. They may also engage children in discussions around energy usage, 
incorporate energy-conscious practices into daily life, or utilise educational resources and 
involve children in energy-saving initiatives.191These means of engaging with their environment 
impacts the way future generations will learn to engage in efficient and sustainable energy use 
and practices in a household. 
There are other barriers faced in implementing rooftop solar, in particular. Due to the lower 
discretionary income in low- to medium-income communities, hefty upfront expenses for rooftop 
solar can be a significant deterrent. Even when upfront costs are decreased, low-income 
persons do not always benefit fairly from such offers. Single-family homeowners also frequently 
encounter housing-related obstacles to implementing rooftop PV, such as unsuitable rooftops, 
and shoddy or outdated electrical wiring. The best roofs for solar have a solid foundation, no 
leaks, and do not require much maintenance when first installed.192 Families with lower incomes 
are more likely to reside in older homes than those with higher incomes, necessitating more 
expensive home renovations to accommodate on-site solar arrays.193 
Renting also can present barriers to accessing solar. In 2008, almost 63% of Jamaicans lived in 
their own homes. Regarding other common household tenure types, the report says 19.1% of 
Jamaicans occupied rented or leased property.194 A survey found that investors consider 
affordability issues to be just as relevant as renters' unwillingness to pay higher rents for 
buildings with solar PV as investment roadblocks. The focus of apartment or townhouse owners 
is one of the structural barriers.195  Moreover, adding to this barrier is the unknown element of 
who bears responsibility for applicable, and any damages that installation or usage may cause 
to the property.  
3.3.5 
Institutional Gender Mainstreaming Capacity 
From Figure 3-23, it can be seen the NGO organisations possess gender mainstreaming 
capacity that can be used to address the noticeable lack of gender mainstreaming capacity held 
 
191 “The Role of Women in Sustainable Energy Development” retrieved from https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy00osti/26889.pdf  
192 “What are the Roof Requirements for Solar Panels” retrieved from https://solarworksenergy.com/what-are-the-roof-
requirements-for-solar-panels/  
193 “Affordable and Accessible Solar for All: Barriers, Solutions, and On-Site Adoption Potential” retrieved from 
https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy21osti/80532.pdf  
194 “Survey Shows Increase in Home Ownership” retrieved from https://jis.gov.jm/survey-shows-increase-in-home-ownership-2/  
195 “Solar for renters: Investigating investor perspectives of barriers and policies” retrieved from 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421523000022

=== PAGE 206 ===
by the government agencies. These NGOs present an opportunity for government stakeholders 
to engage and bolster their own limited gender capacities while fostering relationships between 
the state and representatives of vulnerable groups.  
Lack of information for the Executing Entity (JPS) is of concern ahead of the project development 
stage as understanding their capabilities will be key for designing and developing a gender 
action plan for this project and well as offering inputs into the TA component.

=== PAGE 207 ===
Figure 3-23: Jamaica Stakeholders' Gender Capacity 
Stakeholder  
Does your 
organisation have any 
experience with 
mainstreaming 
gender in its past 
work? 
Does your organisation 
have the capacity to 
execute gender 
mainstreaming 
activities or provides 
gender sensitisation 
training/gender-related 
technical inputs? 
Does your 
organisation 
possess a gender 
policy or is it in the 
process of 
developing a 
gender policy? 
Has your organisation ever 
been engaged by 
government 
ministries/agencies or 
development partners to 
support in the 
development or 
implementation of 
energy/renewable energy 
projects? 
Does your 
organisation utilize 
a grievance 
redress 
mechanism for 
projects? 
J-FLAG  
 YES 
YES 
YES 
NO 
NO 
TransWave Jamaica  YES 
YES 
YES 
NO 
NO 
Her 
Flow 
Foundation  
YES 
YES 
YES 
NO 
NO 
Women's 
Media 
Watch (WMW) 
YES 
YES 
YES 
NO   
NO 
Jamaica Association 
for the Deaf 
YES 
YES 
NO 
NO  
NO 
Ministry of Science, 
Energy 
and 
Technology 
YES 
NO 
NO 
YES 
YES  
Office 
of 
Utilities 
Regulations 
NO 
NO 
NO 
YES 
YES  
Jamaica 
Public 
Service196 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
 
 
 
196 Consultant was unable to meet with the JPS and as such will not be able to provide answers for the gender mainstreaming questions for this organisation (N/A will be applied in response to the 
questions).

=== PAGE 208 ===
4 
Multi-Country Level Analysis  
 
4.1 
Comparative Policy Environment Analysis  
Looking across the three countries, based on the analysis executed, it can be determined that 
Barbados is presently lagging behind the other countries in terms of gender- responsive policies. 
From all the Barbadian policies reviewed, only the Barbadian NDC was found to be gender- 
responsive which may be due to how recently it was developed and the guidelines around NDC 
development and submission. Belize, and Jamaica (following closely behind) are making greater 
strides in incorporating gender mainstreaming into their gender policies to ensure the vulnerable 
are sufficiently covered within their future plans and activities. 
It is important to note that Barbados’s energy policy released in 2019 failed to mention gender, 
women or vulnerable groups at all putting the policy on par with Belize’s and Jamaica’s much 
older energy policies 2011 and 2009, respectively. This has implications for Barbados as the 
policy is meant to drive country’s energy direction until 2030.  
The gender policies reviewed for Belize and Jamaica were all transformative, indicating that 
there exists a good framework for gender-responsive action to occur within these countries.  Two 
out of the 4 NDCs were gender-responsive which would be due to the acknowledgement of the 
differentiated impacts of climate change felt by different groups but as well as the need to outline 
actions that would mitigate and address these issues to ensure the needs of the populations are 
met.  
A major focus of the desk-based research was delving into the policy environment for renewable 
energy and gender for each country to understand the enabling environment that exists within 
each . With this focus and the nature of the project in mind, the policy analysis sought to look at 
the countries’ NDCs (outlines the countries’ actions to combatting climate change which has 
implications for energy use and social impacts on persons), energy policies, gender policies 
(including policies related to the protection or support of vulnerable groups), utilities Acts and 
other development policies that would guide the countries directions.  
Twenty-six policies were reviewed overall and while 12 were gender-responsive or 
transformative, in general, the policy environment was found to be gender-aware at best (See 
Figure 4-1). Specifically looking at the energy policies of the countries which would have major 
influence on the execution of this project, only the Guyanese draft policy was found to be gender- 
responsive.  
Key chapter takeaway  
Though progress has been made across the region on gender equality, women’s empowerment 
and social inclusion generally and in energy access and affordability, progress and sustainable 
progress is uneven. While the policy environment shows encouraging signs, still more needs to be 
done on financial and social barriers as well as instruments designed to improve an even promotion 
of a range of technologies.

=== PAGE 209 ===
Figure 4-1: Target Countries Comparative Policy Environment197 
Policy  
Barbados 
Belize 
Jamaica  
NDC  
Responsive 
Responsive 
Sensitive 
National 
Energy 
Policy   
Neutral 
Aware 
Neutral 
National 
Gender 
Policy  
N/A 
Transformative 
Transformative 
Utility Act  
Neutral 
N/A 
N/A 
Sustainable 
Energy/Energy 
Conservation 
Policy/Framework  
Neutral 
Neutral 
Neutral 
Employment 
Rights/Child Labour  
Aware 
Transformative 
N/A 
GBV Plan/Policy  
N/A 
Responsive 
N/A 
Barbados 
Tourism 
Master Plan 2014 – 
2023 
Neutral 
N/A 
N/A 
Barbados’ Control of 
Inefficient 
Lighting 
Act 2021 
Neutral 
N/A 
N/A 
Jamaica’s National 
Renewable Energy 
Policy 2009-2030  
N/A 
N/A 
Neutral 
Jamaica’s 
Vision 
2030  
N/A 
N/A 
Transformative 
Jamaica’s 
Long-
Term 
Emissions 
Reduction 
and 
Climate 
Resilient 
Strategy 
and 
Operationalisation 
Plan  
N/A 
N/A 
Transformative 
Two policies from CARICOM were also assessed as they pertained to both gender and energy 
within the region i.e., the draft Gender Equality Strategy for the CARICOM region and the 
CARICOM energy policy (see Figure 4-2) and how they could inform multi country projects such 
as the IUS project.  
 
197 N/A used in the comparative means that specific policy was not reviewed for the country, or the country does not possess a 
similar policy. For country specific policies, the countries were mentioned before the policy.

=== PAGE 210 ===
Figure 4-2: Policy Environment for CARICOM 
Policy  
Summary  
Gender Content  
Gender Rating  
Draft 
Gender 
Equality  
Strategy, 
2022  
 
 
A framework of action for achieving 
gender equality and women’s 
empowerment within the greater 
context of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) and 
provides coordination to support 
Member States compliance with 
international commitments, including 
CEDAW.  
The document recognises the 
systemic nature of gender 
inequality that is present in 
political, social, and economic 
institutions and substantiated 
through social/cultural norms, 
values and behaviours.  
Transformative 
Energy 
Policy, 
2013  
The Energy Policy for CARICOM is 
intended to guide the transformation 
of energy sectors in the Caribbean 
Member States , ensuring secure 
and sustainable energy supplies that 
are affordable and accessible to the 
region’s population. 
While the policy refers to the 
need for access to energy of 
poor and vulnerable groups, 
there is no specific reference 
or mention of women or 
gender within the policy.  
Neutral 
 
Consultations were started in 2022 for a draft gender equality strategy for the CARICOM region 
titled ‘Stepping it up: a strategy to achieve gender equality in the Caribbean Community. 198 The 
document comprises a series of strategic actions to achieve gender equality and women’s 
empowerment in the context of the SDGs. The strategy reflects the work of the CARICOM 
Gender Equality Policy which aims to strengthen CARICOM secretariat capacity to promote 
gender equality and women’s empowerment in partnership with member states and international 
and regional partners toward improving social and cultural prosperity while improving efforts to 
mainstream gender.  The CARICOM Gender Equality Strategy is driven by six guiding principles 
and commitments as shown in Figure 4-3.  
Figure 4-3: CARICOM Gender Equality Strategy Guiding Principles and Commmitments 
 
This work centred on a human rights approach, which recognises every person’s right to freedom 
from discrimination and violence while operating in a just and equal society. It also upholds 
respect for diversity and social inclusion, including those most vulnerable: PWDs, elderly, youth, 
and people living with illness. The strategy also prioritises governance which further recognises 
the rights of women and men in terms of equal access and participation in decision-making in 
order to create effective governance that recognises the unique needs, barriers, and 
opportunities for both women and men. The harmonisation principle references the strategy’s 
 
198 “Stepping it up: A Strategy to achieve gender equality in the Caribbean Community” retrieved from 
https://www.cepal.org/sites/default/files/events/files/stepping_it_up_draft_cges_synthesised.pdf.

=== PAGE 211 ===
position within guiding international frameworks including CEDAW and the SDGs, specifically 
SDG 5. These build on 2003 efforts to develop a ‘Plan of Action to 2005: Framework for 
Mainstreaming Gender in Key CARICOM Programmes. This Plan was developed to provide 
more support for mainstreaming gender in CARICOM’s work, including research and policy 
implementation and design. 
The strategy firmly recognises the systemic nature of inequality, as based within social, political 
and economic institutions while sustained through the norms, values and behaviours present in 
society. It also notes the goal toward reaching substantive equality through equal access and 
equal 
benefits 
which 
are 
reached 
through 
sector 
coordination 
in 
order 
to 
influence/inform/support? substantive change. The strategy also calls for greater partnership 
between men and women as a shared responsibility toward gender equality through 
transforming traditional gender roles, in addition to attitudes and behaviours. Finally, the strategy 
calls for a systemic and cross-cutting approach to achieve the desired outcomes, including 
allocation of resources, both human capital and financial resources to encourage capacity 
toward mainstreaming gender in the Caribbean community.   
Based on these guiding principles, the strategy outlines six key areas for action: equality and 
social inclusion, freedom from violence, economic empowerment, good governance, access to 
health services, and inclusive quality education – at least three of which are directly relevant to 
a just energy transition and the others enabling a clean and sustainable economy. While there 
is no specific reference within the policy to access to affordable and renewable energy with 
reference to women or other vulnerable groups, within the context of economic empowerment, 
the policy notes the need for equitable access to productive resources - where renewable energy 
and energy resources could potentially fit.  
The other overarching policy reviewed from a regional perspective is the CARICOM Energy 
Policy.199 The Energy Policy was approved in 2013 at the forty-first special meeting on energy, 
in Trinidad and Tobago. The purpose of the policy is to support the “fundamental transformation 
of the energy sectors of the Member States of the Community through the provision of secure 
and sustainable supplies of energy in a manner which minimises energy waste in all sectors”.  
The Policy also supports ensuring that all CARICOM citizens can access ‘modern’, clean and 
reliable energy resources at prices that are both stable and affordable while ensuring the growth 
and facilitation of regional industries, competitive in the global market with the intention toward 
creating sustainable development for the Caribbean region.  Within the policy’s 15 objectives for 
expanding the energy sector, it recognises the need for having improved access to affordable 
energy for the region’s poor and vulnerable populations. It also notes, as important for this 
project, the need to create strategies for maintaining sufficient energy supplies in the event of 
disasters and improving R and D in terms of clean and renewable energy sources. The policy, 
however, in terms of access to affordable and reliable energy, makes no specific reference to 
gender or women.   
Two policies from CDB were also assessed as they pertained to gender, energy, youth and 
indigenous peoples within the region i.e. Energy Sector Policy and Strategy 2022200 and Gender 
Equality Policy and Operational Strategy.201 These policies were analysed as they outline CDB’s 
operating principles and future plans for working and supporting these areas as well as guiding 
how projects funded/investments supported by the CDB should operate.  
From the analysis done on these policies, it can be determined that CDB’s own enabling 
environment is geared towards fully supporting the implementation of this project (see Figure 
 
199 “Energy Policy – Summary” retrieved from https://caricom.org/documents/9360-energy_policy_nutshell.pdf  
200 “Energy Sector Policy and Strategy 2022” retrieved from https://www.caribank.org/energy-sector-policy-and-strategy-2022  
201 “Gender Equality Policy and Operational Strategy” retrieved from https://www.caribank.org/sites/default/files/publication-
resources/GEPSOS-2019-FINAL%20(1)%20(1).pdf

=== PAGE 212 ===
4-4). It provides an example or even a framework that can be employed within the three target 
countries to facilitate the implementation of this project. The gender equality principles found 
within the gender equality policy should be adopted and applied to the project’s operations and 
development as it would allow for gender equality to be effectively incorporated within the project.  
Figure 4-4: Policy Environment for CDB 
Policy  
Summary  
Gender Content  
Gender Rating  
Energy Sector 
Policy and 
Strategy 2022 
 
The policy outlines the need for 
the transformation of the sector 
within BMCs and the shift 
towards more sustainable 
energy states while addressing 
issues of climate change and 
other factors that will impact 
the sector.  
The document acknowledges 
gender imbalances found 
within the sector and outlines 
principles and actions aimed 
at addressing these issues 
and while further supporting 
gender equality within the 
sector  
Transformative 
Gender 
Equality 
Policy and 
Operational 
Strategy 
The policy seeks to reinforce 
CDB’s commitment to 
advancing gender equality 
among its BMCs and outlines 
principles and actions to 
support this advancement 
The document outlines 
various aspects of society that 
have gender implications or 
are impacted by gender 
inequalities and sets out 
principles and actions aimed 
to address these issues and 
guide actions.  
Transformative 
4.2 
Cross-cutting Stakeholder Findings 
Despite being from different countries and operating in different contexts, stakeholders shared 
similar insights and concerns with regard to the issues discussed during direct engagement via 
key informant interviews and group interviews as well as focus group discussions. Below are 
some key findings that emerged and are applicable across all countries.  
4.2.1 
Finance 
 
A major hurdle to accessing loans particularly for women is time. Banking transactions 
typically require a person to allocate a fair of amount of time and effort to engage these 
services and women especially those from female-headed households are usually 
constrained for time due to their domestic duties and responsibilities. 
 
Location plays a role in hindering access to financial tools, particularly for many who reside 
in rural locations (especially those living in indigenous communities). The nearest financial 
institution is usually very far away from where they reside, and the distance acts a deterrent. 
This particular barrier can also involve time - the time it takes to get to and from the 
bank/financial institution and the cost to get there and back.  
 
Banking processes can be tedious and the requirements to engage in their services such as 
proof of address, form of national identification, lack of collateral often eliminate or 
discourage persons from seeking these options.  
 
Persons working in the informal sector and low-income persons utilise informal saving 
mechanisms such as syndicate, partner202, boxhand, etc. to pool financial resources that 
allow persons to conduct large transactions when they are unable to meet requirements 
imposed by financial institutions203. In some cases, these pooled resources may be used to 
meet downpayments requested by financial institutions.   
 
202 “Jamaica’s ROSCA: The Partner System” retrieved from https://www.gdrc.org/icm/partner-sys.html   
203 “Building Economic Solidarity: Caribbean ROSCAS in Jamaica, Guyana, and Haiti” retrieved from 
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057/978-1-137-60047-9_5

=== PAGE 213 ===
4.2.2 
Gender Mainstreaming Capacity  
 
Efforts are being made by energy ministries to enhance their gender mainstreaming 
capacities. The Ministry of Energy and Business of Barbados noted that work on a gender 
equality strategy and action plan for the electricity sector is being advanced that could have 
bearing on this project (however, access to this document has not been realised).  
 
Many NGOs, particularly the disability-focused NGOs noted that they are rarely consulted 
for any project development or implementation, and it could be seen in the results of the 
project as their vulnerable groups do not benefit fully from these works.  
 
Gender mainstreaming capacity is low among government stakeholders, noting many do not 
possess gender policies and rarely engage with the gender bureaux of their countries. 
However, it must be stated that with increased engagement with international funds which 
require gender to be involved in any work they fund, capacity is slowly being developed and 
more awareness on gender is being raised. 
4.2.3 
Employment in the Energy Sector  
 
The energy sector is traditionally not one in which women participated significantly in the 
past but in more recent years, this has been changing with women involved across several 
areas. Numbers remain relatively low as men still dominate this field. Feedback received via 
stakeholder interviews (both KIIs and FGDs), suggest that a few technical roles in the Energy 
Ministry are now occupied by women.  
4.2.4 
Engagement with Vulnerable Groups  
 
NGOs’, in their responses, indicate that they are rarely consulted by project actors on energy 
projects. 
 
Many government stakeholders noted that there are no explicit policies that guide 
stakeholder engagement to ensure its gender-responsiveness or inclusiveness.   
4.2.5 
Indigenous Persons (Belize)   
 
Many of the indigenous people are found in far/remote or rural areas of the countries and 
exhibit the highest rates of poverty in the country and share similar vulnerabilities and 
challenges with access. 
 
Respect must be paid to governing systems employed within the different communities and 
knowledge of these systems is critical to successfully navigating engagements with local 
indigenous populations.  
 
Recognising and acknowledging that a “one size fits all” approach will not work when 
engaging indigenous communities as they hold varying traditions and practices.   
Exploring the technologies with the stakeholders, many shared similar perspectives and 
information on uses, benefits and demand for the target technologies (see Figure 4-5). The 
inputs gained from stakeholders were fairly aligned with what was discovered through desk-
based research but also provided further country context based on lived experiences. 
Figure 4-5: Key Concerns raised for the target technologies 
Technology 
Use  
Benefits 
Demand  
LED lighting  
Street lighting and 
household lighting 
Street safety 
and safety in 
public spaces 
Small savings 
on monthly 
electricity bills. 
Awareness needed on the cost 
benefits of switching to LED bulbs 
as the less informed may opt to 
continue using fluorescent bulbs 
due to the lower upfront costs.

=== PAGE 214 ===
Technology 
Use  
Benefits 
Demand  
Solar PV 
Rooftop/household 
electricity access 
Expanding 
access to 
electricity for 
persons in 
remote areas. 
Outside of remote areas, demand 
is low as persons in more urban or 
rural areas with adequate 
connection may not see the need 
for this technology and may be 
dissuaded due to upfront costs.  
SWH  
Household cleaning and 
hygiene and sanitary purp 
oses (personal) 
Health benefits 
for elderly 
persons related 
to physical and 
mobility.  
Women’s/girls’ 
hygiene and 
sanitary care 
Thriving market in Barbados but 
other countries, the demand is not 
as high and require some 
education on the benefits and how 
the initial costs will eventually 
return over a period.  
Likewise for SPV above. 
Efficient Cooling 
and 
Refrigeration  
Overall house and room 
cooling reducing ambient 
air temperatures 
keeping food products 
safe and sanitary 
Combat rising 
temperatures 
provide relief to 
persons at 
home or work 
ACs are expensive while there is a 
demand for them due to rising 
temperatures, the cost can be 
prohibitive to many.  
 
From the stakeholder feedback (reflected also in the Table), there is  uniformity in the uses and 
benefits of the technologies across the three countries. While there is demand for each 
technology, Barbados sees the most demand for SWH due to the extensive framework 
supporting the technology in the country  with this framework being supported by the provision 
of incentives such as income tax rebates. Noted across the board by stakeholders is that the 
cost of the technologies being the main prohibitive factor to persons purchasing these items.  
4.3 
Barriers Across the Region  
From the analysis of the three  countries, a pattern of barriers has emerged. Despite differences 
in location, culture, economies, etc. the people particularly vulnerable groups all face similar 
barriers when it comes to accessing renewable energy technologies. While in Barbados, we see 
the most support for the adoption of renewable energy technologies by the population, 
vulnerable groups still encounter comparative issues faced by persons in countries with less of 
a supporting framework.  
There is relatively poor access to and availability of sex and age-disaggregated data across the 
three  countries and the Caribbean region in general, particularly on energy use, demand, needs 
and uptake. This results in challenges in differentiating energy usage among men, women, 
gender-diverse persons, PWDs, indigenous persons, children and the elderly. Current available 
energy data usually is household rather than individual specific and does not engender 
intersectional analysis. Also available to some extent is data/information on implications for the 
design and implementation of energy services, for education campaigns, and about financial 
measures. This means that existing and future actions utilising current data are less effective as 
the approaches would tend to be more generic. A generic approach is not desirable for many 
reasons including the likelihood that investments will not address the practical or the strategic 
gender needs that do exist amongst various groups and that it would make it difficult to also 
differentiate impacts across groups of beneficiaries.

=== PAGE 215 ===
Economic barriers are heavily present in all three countries as strict requirements for loans 
imposed by banks is the norm across the region and women are challenged to enhance their 
access and control of such resources because of reduced economic ability due to traditional 
divisions of labour or burdens imposed by unpaid care work. In Belize, indigenous people exhibit 
the highest rates of poverty while also being located in the most rural areas of their respective 
countries and with the greatest collective need for modern and accessible energy solutions. Not 
only do they have to navigate the loan requirements, but they must also contend with the 
challenges that time and distance imposes on them.  
Socially, we can see in the three countries that work in the energy sector is skewed more towards 
men than women. Even the small percentage of women working in the sector mostly take on 
roles traditionally designated to women such as clerical and administrative work with few women 
taking on technical roles in the field. This gendered division of employment is heavily influenced 
by patriarchal norms204 and patriarchal norms’ influence is not only restricted to formal work. The 
gendered division of labour can be seen in the allocation of domestic work which is skewed 
disproportionately to women and is a common occurrence in the region. This imbalance of 
domestic labour impairs women’s economic ability through the limited finances they are able to 
attain due to the resulting time-poverty that comes from them performing the majority of 
domestic, primarily unpaid care work. 
 
204 “Gender at Work in the Caribbean” retrieved from https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---americas/---ro-lima/---sro-
port_of_spain/documents/publication/wcms_651944.pdf

=== PAGE 216 ===
5 
Key Conclusions 
 
Based on the engagement with stakeholders and the research, there is both appetite and 
increasing need for renewable energy technologies, particularly affordable, easily maintained 
and those that generate multiple co-benefits. From available data and limited consumer analysis, 
demand is primarily rooted in potential cost and income savings and the additional potential for 
income- generation that may arise. As a result, the climate change adaptations benefits derived 
from these technologies are often viewed as additional benefits and does not serve the main 
motivation for driving the interest/desire of households and businesses for technologies. For 
government actors, a combination of these factors appears relevant, including the combined 
mitigation-adaptation co-benefit.  
Despite this demand, many persons across the three focus countries are restricted from 
investing in these technologies primarily due to financial barriers. Uptake of these technologies 
for low-income persons is often restrained by limited financial resources or inability to access 
additional finance from financial institutions due to various factors such as limited collateral, time 
conflicts, and competing priorities. This project’s ability to market and distribute these 
technologies in a way that minimises strain on low-income persons will be key. Doing so in ways 
that respond to social, cultural and livelihoods needs is crucial to meet multiple SDGs.  
Consideration must be given to involving vulnerable groups in the further development and 
implementation of this project. The goal of this project supporting a Just Transition cannot be 
accomplished without involving those typically left behind and who are generally 
underrepresented in the development and expansion of the sector and in reaping the benefits 
from significant public sector and public finance investment. Moreover, the project should be 
actively gender-responsive paying close attention to intersectional gender needs as well as 
intersecting energy demand.   
For Belize with large rural populations and significant indigenous sub-populations, customer 
outreach is crucial. Coupled with the financial issues mentioned, these communities also deal 
with the issues related to their location meaning their isolation and distance from the rest of the 
country and from technology hubs. Likewise, the needs of PWDs require greater attention and 
a specialised response.  
Noting the lack of gender mainstreaming capacity amongst the government stakeholders who 
will be involved in the project and critically the lack of engagement with most of the executing 
entities, there are clear gaps that will need to be bridged. Efforts to boost gender awareness and 
sensitivity in ways that shape implementation, sustainability and scaling-up will be critical in the 
pre-implementation period of the project, as well as the first year of implementation.   
Key chapter takeaway  
While the demand and need for an IUS project is clearly present in the target countries and there 
exist enabling environments of varying degrees to support the project. At present, given the 
capacities of key stakeholders and state of policies, the ability of this project to successfully support 
and promote a Just Transition is highly questionable and will need several high level as well as 
practical interventions to ensure it is able to fulfill this goal. Key opportunities to enable the 
participation of low-income and single-headed households could be tapped into as well, leaving 
fewer persons behind in the energy transition in the short and medium-term. Gender and social 
considerations are relevant in all countries.

=== PAGE 217 ===
6 
Recommendations 
 
Emerging from the gender assessment, some of the recommendations to be explored in this 
section will be based on a 7-point gender needs framework. The recommendations touch on 6 of 
the 7: leadership and decision-making, gender-based rights and participation, governance, 
gender-based education and assets, access to and control over resources, and livelihoods. 
Recommendations are divided into two categories; 1) general recommendations that speak to 
actions that will boost programme actors’ capacities and 2) stakeholder engagement 
recommendations that seek to guide programme actors’ interactions with vulnerable groups and 
overall communication with beneficiaries and enhance the level of ownership and participation at 
the local, community, group, household, and individual level.   
6.1.1 
General recommendations  
These recommendations seek to empower programme actors and address gender 
mainstreaming gaps identified in the assessment. The general recommendations are as follows: 
1. Partnership guidelines aimed to serve as a framework to be used by programme actors 
(government stakeholders) to guide how they interact and form working relationships with 
NGOs.  
2. Partnership building exercises aimed at building strong working relationships between 
government agencies and NGOs as well as between government agencies to eliminate 
potential siloing of activities.  
3. Fostering collaboration between the three countries to enhance knowledge and 
experience sharing.  
4. Execution of an in-depth gender capacity assessment of key government stakeholders 
and utilities involved in the programme. The development of gender sensitisation and 
gender capacity-building training will be based on the results of the gender capacity 
assessment. 
5. More in-depth analysis of the financial tools being offered by the banks, credit unions, etc. 
to ensure the financial tools being offered by the utilities as part of this programme are 
competitive.  
Key chapter takeaway  
Ensuring the project can fulfil its goal of supporting a just transition will require the execution of 
some key general and stakeholder-related capacity building activities, aimed at enhancing and 
addressing existing capabilities and gaps that were found in this gender assessment. Critical gender 
actions have been identified in 6 of 7 gender needs and some actions will be catalytic while others 
are more long-term in also setting a key good practice for other multi-country energy programmes. 
Utilities, less familiar with the requirements of international public finance, will experience a 
somewhat sharp learning curve but one that will boost the scope for multiple and expanding public-
private sector partnership.

=== PAGE 218 ===
6. A review of the programme’s logic framework and the design of gender targets of the prog 
including sex disaggregated indicators.  
7. Development of training programmes that could help persons to seek employment in the 
energy sector while supporting the distribution and installation of technologies.  
8. The IUS programme should provide support designed to address gender inequalities such 
as - gender sensitive repayment terms (no ID required; longer periods; lower collateral 
requirements; etc); special and appropriate technology offers for women in MSME 
business; adjustable rates for female headed households with children, targeted capacity 
building outreach to women-led businesses and other vulnerable groups to support their 
ability to develop sub-projects.  
9. Consideration will need to be given to removing or mitigating inequity imbalances in terms 
of access to technologies including exploring more supportive pay back terms of loans, 
and or special process on AC/SWH for women customers. 
10. Assess lessons learned from existing and past loan and grant programmes that target or 
engage vulnerable groups so that these can inform the GCF programme design and 
implementation and also shape financing options and how these can be accessed 
differently by such groups. 
6.1.2 
Stakeholder engagement recommendations 
Given the outward-facing nature of this programme and the many potential actors that could be 
involved throughout the its activities, there is a need to create a framework for gender-responsive 
engagement with the beneficiaries. The stakeholder engagement recommendations are as 
follows:  
1. Development of a code of conduct for all programme actors to follow when engaging the 
public and particularly direct beneficiaries.  
2. Development of GBV checklist to reduce the potential of GBV occurring within the project 
due to the interactions between programme actors and the public and between different 
publics as well as at the household level.  
3. Development a communication strategy that aims to provide the public with timely updates 
on the programme and ensures that communications including updates and technology 
awareness is crafted to ensure the information is easily understood and accessible to 
those who may be blind, deaf or speak different local languages such as the indigenous 
populations.  
4. Development of a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for the programme that is readily 
accessible and easy to utilise by the public including multiple methods to access and use.  
5. Development of a gender-responsive stakeholder engagement plan to guide all 
programme engagement including inclusive and gender-sensitive communications. 
6. The hosting of townhall meetings or alternative approaches to engage specific vulnerable 
groups to ensure their issues and concerns are considered within the programme.  
Figure 6-1 aligns the recommended actions to gender needs and identified barriers mapping out 
in summary key elements to be further expanded on and programmed through the Gender Action 
Plan (GAP). It responds to three main barriers: institutional, social and economic/financial.

=== PAGE 219 ===
Figure 6-1: Summary of Recommendations and associated gender needs 
Barriers 
identified  
Relevant 
Gender Needs  
Proposed Gender Actions  
Institutional  
Gender-based 
rights and 
participation 
Partnership guidelines aimed to serve as a framework to be used 
by programme actors (government stakeholders) to guide how 
they interact and form working relationships with NGOs. 
Institutional  
Gender-based 
rights and 
participation 
Partnership building exercises aimed at building strong working 
relationships between government agencies and NGOs as well as 
between government agencies to eliminate potential siloing of 
activities. 
Institutional  
Gender-based 
education and 
assets  
Fostering collaboration between the three countries to enhance 
knowledge and experience sharing.  
 
Institutional 
Gender-based 
education and 
assets 
Execution of an in-depth gender capacity assessment of key 
government stakeholders involved in the programme. 
Institutional 
Gender-based 
education and 
assets 
Development of gender sensitisation and gender capacity building 
training based off the results of the gender capacity assessment. 
Economic 
/Financial 
Leadership and 
decision-making  
Analysis of the financial tools being offered by the banks, credit 
unions, etc. to ensure the financial tools being offered by the 
utilities as part of this programme are competitive 
Institutional  
Governance  
A review of the programme’s logic framework and the design of 
gender targets including sex disaggregated indicators. 
Social 
Livelihoods 
Development of training programmes that could employ persons 
to support in the distribution and installation of technologies. 
Institutional  
Governance  
Development of a code of conduct for all programme actors to 
follow when engaging the public. 
Institutional  
Governance  
Development of GBV checklist to reduce the potential of GBV 
occurring within the programme due to the interactions between 
programme actors and the public.  
 
Institutional  
Gender-based 
education and 
assets   
Development a communication strategy that aims to provide the 
public with timely updates on the programme and ensures that 
communications including updates and technology awareness is 
crafted to ensure the information is easily understood and 
accessible to those who may be blind, deaf or speak different 
local languages such as the indigenous populations. 
Social  
Governance 
Development of a grievance redress mechanism for the 
programme that is readily accessible and easy to utilise by the 
public. 
Social  
Governance  
Development of a gender-responsive stakeholder engagement 
plan to guide all programme actors’ engagement with the public. 
Social  
Gender-based 
rights and 
participation  
The hosting of townhall meetings or alternative approaches to 
engage specific vulnerable groups to ensure their issues and 
concerns are considered within the programme.

=== PAGE 220 ===
7 
Gender Action Plan  
 
In the preparation of the proposal for the “Scaling up the Deployment of Integrated Utility Services 
(IUS) to Support Energy Sector Transformation in the Caribbean (Phase I)” Programme, it is 
essential to ensure the programme meets both the Green Climate Fund’s (GCF’s) and Caribbean 
Development Bank’s (CDB’s) requirements for gender equality. As a result, a gender assessment 
was done and from this assessment, emerged areas of concern and weakness that need to be 
addressed to ensure gender is adequately mainstreamed in this programme so it can support a 
Just Transition.  
Gender mainstreaming is the process by which gender equality can be achieved through the 
integration of a gender perspective into key processes, policies and frameworks that usually adopt 
a gender-neutral stance, and by creating the necessary provisions and relevant supporting 
documents to facilitate the removal of gender inequalities. Within the context of the IUS 
programme, this entails ensuring the services and financing models employed by the programme 
are gender-responsive and provide benefits to marginalised groups as it pertains to the 
requirements of the GCF and CDB.   
For the GCF, its updated 2020 Gender Policy (GP) seeks to ensure the institution and its network 
of partners adopt a comprehensive gender approach to support climate change interventions and 
innovations, advance gender equality and minimise social, gender and climate related risks 
through the promotion of climate investments and support the closing of the gender gap through 
mainstreaming gender equality in climate investments.  
Applying the GCF GP to the IUS Programme would involve:  
 
Addressing and reducing gender inequality resulting in sustainable livelihoods 
opportunities, improved health and wellbeing, and increased resilience to climate-induced 
shocks and risks for men and women. 
 
Creation of an enabling environment among programme stakeholders founded on existing 
policy commitments wherein social and environmental standards and grievance redress 
mechanisms are supported and sustained in order to achieve gender equality. 
Key chapter takeaway  
Ensuring the programme can full its goal of supporting a just transition will require the execution of 
some key general and stakeholder-related capacity building activities, aimed at enhancing and 
addressing existing capabilities and gaps that were found in the gender assessment. Critical gender 
actions have been identified in 6 of 7 gender needs and some actions will be catalytic while others 
are more long-term in also setting a key good practice for other multi-country energy programmes. 
Utilities, less familiar with the requirements of international public finance, will experience a 
somewhat sharp learning curve but one that will boost the scope for multiple and expanding public-
private sector partnership.

=== PAGE 221 ===
 
Support the comprehensive and systematic collection of sex-disaggregated data and 
execute qualitative and quantitative gender analysis to monitor, report and evaluate 
project impact.  
GCF’s 2018 Indigenous Peoples’ Policy seeks to guide the institution’s engagement with IP in 
climate change policies and action while acknowledging IP as a distinct stakeholder group that 
needs to be involved. The policy is guided by the following principles: 
 
Develop and implement free, prior and informed consent. 
 
Respect and enhance the rights of IP to their lands, territories and resources. 
 
Recognize key international human rights and principles. 
 
Respect the right of IP under voluntary isolation. 
 
Respect and recognize traditional knowledge and livelihood systems. 
 
Enhance the capacity for IP issues within GCF.  
 
Facilitate access to GCF resources for IP.  
 
Respecting the system of self-governance.  
 
In the context of the IUS Programme and its GAP, the IP policy would apply to the following 
areas:  
 
Programme actors properly seek free, prior and informed consent when engaging with 
IP throughout the programme’s lifespan, and 
 
Ensure that adverse impacts are avoided or minimized and compensate for residual 
impacts.  
 
The CDB’s Gender Equality Policy and Operational Strategy (GEPOS: 2019) outlines CDB’s 
commitment to advancing gender equality through recognising the equal rights, responsibilities 
and opportunities of women, men, girls and boys which include the equal power to shape their 
own lives and contribute to society. The policy seeks to achieve gender equality in BMCs based 
on the following action pillars: 
 
Equitable access to infrastructure services for all,  
 
Economic empowerment of all, 
 
Education and training for all, 
 
Eliminating gender-based violence for all, and  
 
Resilience for all.  
 
The guiding principles of the GEPOS that are applicable in the IUS programme include: 
 
Advocacy, dialogue and partnership, 
 
Intersectionality, participatory and inclusive perspectives and approaches, 
 
Institutional strengthening in BMCs, 
 
Enhancing leadership for and increasing compliance with gender equality, and 
 
Results monitoring. 
 
7.1 
IUS Programme Approach to Gender Action Planning   
Noting that the programme will be implemented in three countries with differing contexts to be 
considered, the action plan will outline actions that are generally applicable to all three countries 
and where relevant, actions that are tailored to a specific country will be indicated.

=== PAGE 222 ===
7.1.1 
Implementing Partners 
The activities outlined in the GAP will be headed and supported by various partners. For clarity, 
the stakeholders who will be involved in the implementation of the GAP are outlined below. In 
the GAP, the specific stakeholders will be allocated to each activity, also specifying whether 
they are the lead or support on the activity.  
 
Stakeholders with responsibilities in the GAP:  
 
Regional Executing Entity (CDB Technical Assistance/TA Execution Team) 
 
National Executing Entities (the electric utilities in the BMCs), 
 
Implementing Partners (government agencies such as ministries of energy, utilities 
regulators, gender bureaus), 
 
The Accredited Entity (CDB Accredited Entity Team), 
 
Consultants (hired for specific activities and roles), and 
 
Other partners (includes NGOs that represent marginalised groups). 
 
7.1.2 
Policy Environments  
The gender assessment (drafted and submitted) which informs and accompanies this GAP 
highlights that the policy environment for energy is relatively gender-neutral for most countries. 
Accordingly, a universal approach or broad-brush strategy based on model policy and/ or 
legislation or even approaches to policy reform are not suitable and unlikely to be successful. Any 
such effort needs to be grounded in capacity-building and behaviour change to be viable, 
sustainable and scalable into other projects in the future. Each country has its own unique societal 
circumstances and existing systems that position them differently in how, where and when 
reforms are suitable, viable and likely to be impactful during the life of the programme and this is 
an important pre-requisite in defining starting points for policy reform.  
 
There is also fertile ground upon which to identify and achieve win-win opportunities via the policy 
placeholders set in place in existing policies and frameworks including NDCs which outline 
operational strategies and guidance for gender mainstreaming in order to achieve tangible gender 
impact and a gender-just transition through mitigation investments in RE/EE. 
 
7.2 
Gender Action Plan  
Given this context, the activities in this GAP are divided into (i) general activities that are 
foundational, required for all countries and critical to creating the right conditions for gender- 
responsive action and (ii) activities critical for delivering specific gender- responsive actions per 
outcome/output based on the programme’s Theory of Change. The second set of activities are 
catalysers that build on the foundational elements to dual effect – resulting in a general paradigm 
shift in utility-led energy transition and investments that is more people-centred and deliver 
adaptation co-benefits and expands the scope and innovativeness of DERs in terms of the design, 
scope and application that are tailored also to the common as well as differentiated needs of 
households, public sector service delivery actors as well as businesses.  
 
Table 1 outlines the GAP in detail including indicators and targets, timelines, responsibilities and 
costs in keeping with GCF requirements for the GAP. It aligns with several key findings and 
recommendations outlined in the Gender Assessment.

=== PAGE 223 ===
Table 1:  IUS Programme GAP  
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD)  
Impact Statement: increased access to clean, affordable energy and access to energy and cost saving technologies for women, 
low-income persons, persons with disabilities, indigenous people and the LGBTQIA community that meets their needs and aids in 
building their climate resilience while improving the quality of their lives and livelihoods.  
General Recommendations 
Develop a Code of Conduct 
(CoC) for engagement with 
the public (i.e. utility 
customers).205  
Indicators:   
Number of CoCs produced. 
 
% of contractors and TSPs that 
sign the CoC. 
  
# of GRM Reports regularly 
produced and actioned.  
 
Target:  
 
3 CoCs prepared within 6 
months of programme start. 
 
100% of contractors and TSPs 
sign the CoC.  
 
1 GRM report per quarter.206 
 
Inception 
/Year 1 
first 
quarter  
Overall:  
CDB Technical 
Assistance (TA) 
Execution Team  
 
Direct:  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
12,000.00 
Develop a GBV Checklist 
for programme actors’ 
engagement with the 
public.207  
Indicators: 
Number of GBV Checklist 
developed and operational   
Inception 
/Year 1 
first 
quarter 
Overall:  
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct:  
4,000.00 
 
205 Given the different national and operational context in each country, a code of conduct will need to be developed for each country for energy projects to mitigate and prevent sexual 
and other forms of exploitation, abuse and harassment, particularly in any engagements involving marginalised groups, vulnerable groups and low-income households where power 
dynamics will be at play. Interesting work out there exists on sextortion (images.transparencycdn.org/images/2020_Report_BreakingSilenceAroundSextortion_English.pdf) and there 
have been some discussions in the Caribbean on this as well.   
206 This report would note that no incidences occurred for that quarter. However, this number will change if there are cases occurring.  
207 One checklist can be used across all three countries but there will be specific provisions for certain groups depending on unique groups such as indigenous people in Belize, and 
Jamaica.

=== PAGE 224 ===
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD)  
# of GRM Reports produced 
and actioned 
# of GBV Incidence Reports  
 
Targets:  
1 GBV Checklist developed 
and operational within 6 
months of programme start 
1 GRM report per quarter  
0 GBV incident reports  
0 Grievances reported  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm  
Develop and implement an 
IP operational engagement 
framework.208 
Indicator:  
Number of Indigenous Peoples 
Plans (IPPs) developed.  
 
Target: 
Two (2) IPPs developed – one 
each in Belize and Jamaica.  
Year 1 
Overall:  
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct: 
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
50,000.00 
Output 1.1: Strengthened regulatory and institutional frameworks facilitating the deployment of distributed RE, EE and other DER 
technologies. 
Develop gender-
mainstreaming guidelines to 
support policy reform in line 
with Activity 1.1.1 and 
1.1.2.209  
Indicators: 
 
Number of country-focused 
gender mainstreaming 
guidelines  
 
Number of policies revised to 
include provisions that advance 
GESI goals 
 
# of SOPs that have been 
updated with GESI elements 
Year 1-6 
Overall:  
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct:  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
12,000.00 
 
208 Two out of the three countries have significant IP population, there is still a significant amount of IPs living in semi-urban and rural areas that may interact with the programme. This 
would link into the marginalized group’s engagement activity.  
209 This activity will be expected to include stakeholder consultation and validation.

=== PAGE 225 ===
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD)  
 
Targets:  
 
2 country focused 
mainstreaming guidelines by 
Year 1, 3 by Year 2 
 
3 revised policies showing 
GESI content by Year 6 
 
2 SOPs by Year 6 
  
Establish a working 
relationship among BMCs’ 
gender bureaus for 
oversight of GAP 
implementation to underpin 
the broader policy-related 
support provided under 
Activity 1.1.1 and 1.1.2. 
 
Indicator:  
Number of meetings held with 
gender bureaus 
 
Target: 
3 meetings held per year, 
starting in PY2 
Year 1-6  
Overall:  
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct:  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
N/A 
Include a review of TSPs’ 
internal policies and 
practices related to gender, 
GBV and SEAH when 
preparing the TSP technical 
qualification guidelines 
under Activity 1.1.2. 
 
Indicator: 
Number of TSP technical 
qualification guidelines that 
cover TSPs’ policies and 
practices related to gender, 
GBV and SEAH. 
 
Target: 
Three (3) TSP technical 
qualification guidelines. 
 
Year 1-2 
Overall:  
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct:  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
3,000.00 
Output 1.2: Enhanced capacity of customers to invest in distributed RE, EE and other DERs through the IUS model.

=== PAGE 226 ===
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD)  
In collaboration with 
relevant NGOs, develop 
and deliver 
outreach/marketing 
strategies and multi-media 
awareness raising 
campaigns that are tailored 
to the needs of 
marginalized groups as part 
of the broader outreach and 
marketing campaigns 
organized under Activities 
1.2.1 and 1.2.2.210  
Indicators:  
Number of outreach/marketing 
strategies developed that are 
tailored to the needs of 
marginalized groups.211 
 
Number of awareness-raising 
materials that are designed to 
target marginalised groups. 
  
 
Targets: 
2 marketing/outreach strategies 
developed per country (6 total) 
that are responsive to the 
needs of marginalized groups 
by Year 2. 
 
2 awareness-raising 
methods/materials per country 
(6 total) that are responsive to 
the needs of marginalized 
groups by Year 3. 
Year 1-3 
Overall: 
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct: 
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
 
Implementing partners: 
NGOs 
National Executing 
Entities 
Energy Ministries 
 25,000.00212  
Conduct free energy audits 
for low-income customers 
under Activity 1.2.3.  
Indicator: 
Number of low-income, 
vulnerable utility customers 
receiving a free energy audit  
 
Target: 
Year 1-6 
Overall:  
CDB TA Execution Team 
600,000213 
 
210 Engagement with representative marginalized groups NGOs for the purpose of tailoring awareness content to meet the needs of their groups.   
211 Cost for this activity would also be inclusive of necessary language translations for developed material.  
212 This cost is associated with the time spent by the Gender Consultant to work with and support the EEs, NGOs and other stakeholders to design and deliver the campaigns, as well 
as the costs of preparing the GESI-related materials.  
213 This cost is based on an estimated USD 2000 per audit for 300 audits (100 per country).

=== PAGE 227 ===
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD)  
300 audits (100 per country) 
done by Year 6 
Conduct a Knowledge, 
Attitudes, Perception and 
Beliefs assessment with 
customers when 
administering free energy 
audits under Activity 1.2.3.  
Indicator:  
% of low income/FHH 
customers who receive free 
energy audits who express 
interest and confidence in 
RE/EE technologies 
 
Target:  
 At least 20% of low income/ 
FHH customers who receive 
free energy audits are 
interested and confident in the 
technologies by the end of 
Year 4 
Year 4  
Overall: 
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct:  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
 
Costs are included in the 
budget for the free 
energy audits (see 
above).214  
Output 1.3: Increased technical capacity of utilities, TSPs and other stakeholders to deploy and maintain distributed RE, EE and 
other DER technologies.  
Host a (virtual) regional 
utilities conference during 
which lessons learnt are 
exchanged regarding 
gender-responsive 
engagement as part of the 
virtual knowledge sharing 
sessions organized under 
Activity 1.3.1.215 
Indicator:  
Number of conferences held 
with utilities to share new 
customer engagement 
practices.  
 
Target: 
1 regional conference 
organized with at least 3 
utilities in attendance. 
Year 2 
Overall:  
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct:  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
 
Implementing partners: 
BEL  
Other electric utilities 
 
10,000.00  
 
214 Focus will be on a broad survey across all countries that allows disaggregation of customers by sex, age, income group and income source.  
215 This conference would focus on sharing the good practices currently employed by BEL when engaging with their customers.

=== PAGE 228 ===
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD)  
Develop and deliver training 
modules on gender, social 
inclusion, and gender-
sensitive engagement 
(including related to GBV 
and SEAH216) for the 
participating electric utilities 
as part of the broader 
trainings organized under 
Activity 1.3.2. 
Indicator:  
Number of utilities whose staff 
have been trained.217  
 
Target: 
Staff from all 3 utilities have 
received training in PY1 and a 
refresher training in PY2. 
 
Year 1-2218  Overall: 
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct:  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
50,000.00219 
Develop and deliver training 
modules on gender, social 
inclusion, and gender-
sensitive engagement 
(including related to GBV 
and SEAH220) for TSPs as 
part of the broader TSP 
trainings organized under 
Activity 1.3.3. 
Indicator:  
Number of trainings delivered.  
 
Target: 
Nine (9) trainings delivered in 
total: 
- 1 training per country in PY1. 
- 1 follow-up training per 
country in PY2. 
- 1 further follow-up training per 
country in PY4. 
 
Year 1-4. 
Overall: 
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct:  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
30,000.00221 
Support the design and 
development of gender-
Indicator:  
Year 1  
Overall: 
CDB TA Execution Team  
10,000.00  
 
216 Note that this training would pick up elements from the Code of Conduct and GBV checklist (developed in earlier activities) and provide stakeholders with the necessary training to 
utilize those items.  
217 Staff should include all levels of staff (including management/board of directors), this is to ensure that while technical staff may be the ones applying knowledge in their work, 
gender mainstreaming is supported at the higher, ensuring that the enabling environment for gender-responsive engagement is supported at all levels.  
218 Two cycles of training with the second cycle being a refresher as well as to capture new persons that would have joined later on in the project’s lifespan (potentially involving an 
online course).  
219 This cost relates to the support to be provided by the Gender Consultant in the development and delivery of the training modules under Activity 1.3.2, as well as the proportion of 
the total training costs that are estimated to relate to the GESI modules.  
220 Note that this training would pick up elements from the Code of Conduct and GBV checklist (developed in earlier activities) and provide stakeholders with the necessary training to 
utilize those items.  
221 This cost relates to the support to be provided by the Gender Consultant in the development and delivery of the training modules under Activity 1.3.3, as well as the proportion of 
the total training costs that are estimated to relate to the GESI modules.

=== PAGE 229 ===
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD)  
responsive and inclusive 
IUS products when 
developing the IUS 
business development 
strategy for/with each 
national Executing Entity 
under Activity 1.3.2.222  
Number of countries with at 
least 1 IUS product that is 
tailored to marginalized groups.  
 
Target: 
At least 2 countries with IUS 
products tailored to 
marginalized groups by Year 3. 
 
 
 
Direct:  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
 
Implementing partner: 
National Executing 
Entities 
  
Support electric utilities to 
prepare standard forms of 
contract (under Activity 
1.3.2) that include 
provisions that oblige TSPs 
to implement measures to 
mitigate the risk of SEAH 
and GBV during installation 
of RE, EE and other DER 
technologies, and require 
them to report on the 
implementation of such 
measures223. 
 
Indicator: 
Number of standard forms of 
contract that include provisions 
to mitigate risks related to 
SEAH and GBV. 
 
Target: 
At least one (1) standard form 
of contract per country – thus 
three (3) in total. 
Year 1-2 
Overall: 
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct:  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
 
Implementing partner: 
National Executing 
Entities 
 
10,000.00 
Develop and implement 
guidelines for capturing and 
analysing beneficiary data 
disaggregated by sex, age, 
income, location, and 
household type when 
developing the IUS 
Indicator:  
Number of guidelines 
developed. 
 
Number of utilities 
using/applying the guidelines to 
Year 1-4 
Overall:  
CDB TA Execution Team  
 
Direct:  
Gender Consultant from 
the Implementation 
Support Consulting Firm 
10,000.00  
 
222 This could entail incentives, procedures, etc tailored to the marginalised groups which are meant to 1) garner interest and confidence in investing into RE/EE technologies and 2) 
support their ability to invest while considering their economic abilities, constraints and unique needs/circumstances.   
223 For example: daytime installations; 2-person installation teams; communicating/coordinating planned installation times well in advance to ensure beneficiary customers can have 
multiple people at the premises during installation.

=== PAGE 230 ===
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD)  
business development 
strategy for/with each 
national Executing Entity 
under Activity 1.3.2. 
collect disaggregated data on 
customers. 
 
Target: 
 
3 guidelines developed by Year 
2. 
 
3 utilities are utilizing the 
guidelines and collecting 
disaggregated data on 
customers by Year 4. 
 
 
 
Output 2.1: Installation of distributed RE, EE and other DER technologies, as well as complementary smart meters/AMI, among a 
critical mass of utility customers, including households, businesses and public sector entities.  
Receive, process, approve 
and finance sub-projects 
from FHH, PWD and low-
income households under 
Activity 2.1.1.   
  
Indicator:  
Number of FHH, PWD, low-
income households receiving 
financial support to purchase 
RE/EE technologies. 
 
Target: 
At least 40 FHH, PWD and/or 
low-income households in each 
country (120 total) are 
benefiting from programme-
financed sub-projects by Year 
6.  
Year 1-6 
National Executing 
Entities 
 
Based on the target for 
the number of sub-
project approvals as well 
as reasonable 
assumptions about the 
cost/value of different 
types of sub-projects, it 
is tentatively estimated 
that this activity could 
result in total 
investments made by 
FHH, PWD and/or low-
income households of 
around USD650,000. 
Note that this is a rough 
ex-ante estimate that is 
subject to change during 
programme

=== PAGE 231 ===
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD)  
implementation. The 
number of sub-project 
approvals and 
associated values will be 
monitored throughout 
programme 
implementation. 
 
TOTAL 
 
1,476,000

=== PAGE 232 ===
Noting the GCF and CDB’s gender requirements stated earlier, it is critical that much of the 
gender mainstreaming work needed for this project (totalling USD 1,5488,000), occurs as early 
as possible during the project lifespan (Table 1). This is needed to ensure that the necessary 
capacity- building, measures, and systems are in place to support this project’s ability to meet 
these gender requirements while also meeting its own objectives of facilitating access to RE/EE 
technologies and supporting a Just Transition in the target countries. Understanding this, the 
Inception Phase and Year 1 of the project will be when most activities occur. The Inception phase 
activities accrue a cost of USD 16,000 with activities centred on building capacity and developing 
systems to support gender-responsive stakeholder engagement which will be essential in 
developing later actions.

=== PAGE 233 ===
Appendix A Stakeholder Engagement 
Plan  
Background/Introduction to Stakeholder Engagement Process  
Stakeholder engagement is aimed to address gaps emerging from desk-based research. Noting 
the limited work done in the region on gender and energy (particularly gender and renewable 
energy) and the limited online availability of what has already been done, the main goal is to 
address gaps such as qualitative data on gender mainstreaming capacity and experience 
particularly for renewable energy projects, and barriers and constraints to accessing stable, 
reliable and affordable energy.  
This approach builds on the Baseline Assessment and addresses issues considered in the 
outlines for the Gender Assessment and the Gender Action Plan previously submitted to the 
Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) for consideration and comment. In addition to this, we will 
be seeking insight on barriers to and best practices for women’s participation and economic 
empowerment in a just energy transition as well as the requirements for a socially inclusive 
approach, noting the different marginalised communities and the intersection of different 
vulnerabilities. This is in keeping with the policies of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) policy and 
guidelines as well as the CDB’s environment and social review procedures as well as the Terms 
of Reference (TOR) for this assignment.  
Gendered and Socially Inclusive Stakeholder Needs being considered  
While the project will focus on technology types and supply, a gender and social inclusion 
analysis also need to consider demands, needs and interests even in a limited fashion and what 
will or may drive these including uptake of proposed interventions. Accordingly, areas to be 
explored during these more direct consultations include: 
 
Barriers and Constraints to accessing stable, reliable, affordable energy and lessons learnt 
from the Covid19 pandemic.  
 
Gender Mainstreaming Knowledge, Exposure, Experience and Capacity particularly related 
to renewable energy projects (particularly for implementing actors)  
 
Gaps, Barriers and Constraints and Best practices for women’s participation and economic 
empowerment in a just, energy transition 
 
Requirements for an inclusive approach that considers the specific needs of persons with 
disabilities, the elderly, youth, LGBTQIA+ persons, indigenous people and other 
marginalised groups as well as intersecting vulnerabilities224.  
Given the focus of the project, the baseline findings on gender equality and initial gaps as well 
as the economic context of the three countries – Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica, the following 
marginalized groups need to be considered in our engagements in the context of the four 
technologies – rooftop solar, solar water-heating, LED lighting and cooling: 
 
Women, 
 
Young people, 
 
School-aged children for whom alternative and consistent access to energy was a significant 
issue during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
 
The elderly for whom cooling can be a critical asset given the NCDs prevalent in the region, 
 
Persons with Disability,  
 
224 This refers to persons who meet all or some of these groups at the same time.

=== PAGE 234 ===
 
LGBTQIA+ persons or representative groups, and 
 
Indigenous People. 
These inputs, from them directly where possible and from others in terms of how they currently 
engage with these needs, are critical to the quality of analysis as well as the recommendations 
that may emerge from the assignment to inform the design of interventions, the gender 
mainstreaming focus of the project as well as the Gender Action Plan (GAP). 
Stakeholder Engagement Type 
Stakeholder engagement will take three forms, key informant interviews (KII), group interviews 
(GI) and focus group discussions (FGD). All forms will be guided by structured questions or 
presentations and will primarily occur online except in cases where it would be better suited to 
conduct engagement in the country.  
KIIs are planned primarily for government agencies and utilities. These interviews are intended 
to provide the representatives from these organisations with a safe space to speak about the 
topics from their organisation’s perspective without any outside distractions.  
Group interviews are planned for some governmental organisations and non-governmental 
organisations (NGOs) that work in a closely related field and would benefit from being present 
with each other during the interview or may feel comfortable in a limited group setting (e.g. 
LBGTQIA+ organisations). 
Focused Group Discussions are planned for NGO stakeholders with the idea that discussions 
with these organisations working in a similar/the same field would create an engaging, safe 
space that facilitates discussions and possibly elicit different perspectives when presented with 
a talking point that they may relate to but have a different experience with.  
A summary of the number of planned engagements per country and the type of engagement is 
provided in Figure A-1.  
Figure A-1: Summary of proposed engagements and type of engagement 
Country 
Total Number of Engagements  
KII 
GI  
FGD  
Barbados  
8 
3 
5 
0 
Belize 
7 
5 
1 
1 
Jamaica  
8 
4 
2 
2

=== PAGE 235 ===
Proposed Consultation Schedule  
Stakeholder engagements are planned from April 3rd to April 21st. The plan takes note of the 
public holidays of Good Friday and Easter Monday occurring on April 7th and 10th respectively 
for all countries. Each country will be allotted specific days to hold consultations, this will allow 
for following up on information with relevant organisations within the same period as necessary.  
To facilitate scheduling Calendly to facilitate appointment setting and to limit back and forth 
regarding availability. This also allows more control over the stakeholder in identify and selecting 
a time based on availability in the schedule. This will be designated by the country days identified 
below.  
Country Days Designation  
Barbados – 3rd -6th  
Belize – 11th – 13th  
Jamaica – 19th to 21st  
A draft of the email to be sent out to stakeholders follows.  
Draft Email to Stakeholders  
 
Dear Sir/Madam:  
The Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) in collaboration with the governments and utilities of 
three Borrowing Member Countries (BMCs) is preparing a funding proposal to the Green Climate 
Fund (GCF) for the “Scaling Up The Deployment of Integrated Utility Services (IUS) To Support 
Energy Sector Transformation In The Caribbean” programme.  This programme arises out of the 
needs and requests for support from BMCs in transitioning their energy sectors to more 
sustainable, renewable energy sources. This first iteration of the programme focuses on 
Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica. The programme will support these countries to (1) reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) and (2) enhance resilience through the increased uptake of 
distributed renewable energy (RE), energy efficiency (EE) and distributed energy resources 
(DER) among customers of the countries’ electric utilities. The programme also aims to enable 
widespread investment in distributed RE, EE and other DERs while promoting equitable access 
to such technologies and enhancing electric utilities to be able to continue applying the IUS 
model after the end of the programme.  
CDB has contracted CPCS (in collaboration with FOKABS Inc and SAEDI Consulting Barbados 
Inc) to support the development of the full funding proposal that meets the requirements of the 
GCF. SAEDI Consulting’s role is to bring gender and social inclusion expertise to the process. 
This involves conducting a gender assessment and developing a gender mainstreaming action 
plan in compliance with GCF guidelines.   
To accurately reflect the target countries’ gender equality and socio-economic context and 
provide recommendations that deliver meaningful, inclusive results for the benefit of the 
countries, particularly for those most vulnerable, SAEDI Consulting will hold stakeholder 
consultations between April 10th to April 21st. Stakeholders targeted include key governmental 
and community-level actors in the energy transformation and social development space.  
The following days are allocated to the three countries for stakeholder engagement (excludes 
weekends): 
Barbados – 3rd -6th

=== PAGE 236 ===
Belize – 11th – 13th  
Jamaica – 19th to 21st  
The stakeholder consultations will explore the following: 
 
Barriers and Constraints to accessing stable, reliable, affordable energy and lessons learnt 
from the Covid19 pandemic.  
 
Gender Mainstreaming Knowledge, Exposure, Experience and Capacity particularly related 
to renewable energy projects (particularly for implementing actors)  
 
Gaps, Barriers and Constraints and Best practices for women’s participation and economic 
empowerment in a just, energy transition 
 
Requirements for an inclusive approach that considers the specific needs of persons with 
disabilities, the elderly, youth, LGBTQIA+ persons, indigenous people and other 
marginalised groups as well as intersecting vulnerabilities225.  
Your voice counts in this process. We look forward to your earliest response and any information 
the organisation or the identified representatives may be able to provide that is relevant to these 
issues.  
We encourage confirmations by April 2nd as we begin planning for these engagements To 
facilitate this process, we encourage you to use our Calendly link to book a suitable time within 
your country’s allocated days. If you require any assistance or have any queries, please contact 
Kwasi Pierre at juniorassociate1@saediconsulting.com.  Thank you in advance for your kind 
consideration.  
Yours Sincerely, 
SAEDI Consulting Barbados Inc   
 
Stakeholders by Country  
A provisional list of stakeholders per country has been defined and is provided below by country. 
A total of 30 engagements are planned with an average of 7.5 per country. They build on an 
expand engagements carried out in October 2022 and are more specific now with a focus on 
technologies and a just transition.  
 
 
 
225 This refers to persons who meet all or some of these groups at the same time.

=== PAGE 237 ===
Barbados  
Figure A-2: Barbados Stakeholders 
Stakeholder  
Organisation  
Contact  
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Type  
Grouping 
Charmaine 
Gill-Evans 
Barbados 
Light 
and 
Power   
Charmaine.gill-evans@blpc.com.bb  
KII 
N/A 
Stephen 
Worme  
Barbados 
Renewable 
Energy 
Association  
info@brea.bb  
GI 
N/A 
TBC  
Gender 
Bureau  
genderaffairs@barbados.gov.bb  
GI  
Group 1  
TBC 
Business 
& 
Professional 
Women’s Club 
of Barbados 
bpwbarbadosonline@gmail.com  
GI 
Group 2 
Ashley 
Lashley 
The 
Ashley 
Lashley 
Foundation  
executivedirector@theashleylashleyfou
ndation.org  
GI  
Group 2  
  
Barbados 
Council for the 
Disabled  
Tel: 1 246 629-0574 
bcd@caribsurf.com  
GI  
Group 3 
John 
Hollingsworth 
National 
Disabilities 
Unit  
disabilities.unit@barbados.gov.bb  
GI 
Group 3

=== PAGE 238 ===
Belize  
Figure A-3: Belize Stakeholders 
Stakeholder  
Organisation  
Contact  
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Type  
Grouping  
Ryan Cobb  
Ministry 
of 
Public 
Utilities, 
Energy 
and 
Logistics  
 energy@energy.gov.bz  
KII 
N/A 
Dean Molina  
Public 
Utilities 
Commission  
chairman@puc.bz 
KII 
N/A 
Sean Fuller  
Belize Electricity  sean.fuller@bel.com.bz 
KII 
N/A 
Juan Chub   
Plenty Belize  
solarbelize@gmail.com 
KII  
N/A 
TBC  
The 
National 
Women’s 
Commission   
adminassistant.nwc@humandev.go
v.bz  
GI 
Group 1 
Ava Pennill 
Women 
and 
Family Support 
Department, 
Ministry 
of 
Human 
Development  
senior.secretary@humandev.gov.b
z 
GI 
Group 1  
Michelle 
Irving  
POWA 
(Productive 
Organisation for 
Women 
in 
Action) 
powa2grow@gmail.com  
FGD 
Group 2  
TBC 
Belize Audubon 
Society 
info@belizeaudubon.org  
FGD 
Group 2  
Charrice 
Talbert  
PETAL 
petalbze@gmail.com   
FGD  
Group 2

=== PAGE 239 ===
Jamaica  
Figure A-4: Jamaica Stakeholders 
Stakeholder  Organisation  
Contact  
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Type  
Grouping  
Cheryl Lewis  Office of Utilities 
Regulations  
clewis@our.org.jm  
KII 
N/A 
Dionne 
Nugenet 
Jamaica 
Public 
Services Limited  
dnugent@jpsco.com 
KII 
N/A 
TBC 
Consumer 
Affairs 
Commission 
info@cac.gov.jm 
KII 
N/A 
TBC 
Bureau 
of 
Gender Affairs  
srobinson@mcges.gov.jm  
KII 
N/A 
TBC 
WE- CHANGE 
wechangeja@gmail.com   
FGD 
Group 1  
TBC 
Women’s 
Resources 
& 
Outreach Centre  
wroccommunications@gmail.com  
FGD  
Group 1  
Tamisha Lee  Jamaica Network 
of Rural Women 
Producers 
(JNRWP) 
jnrwpnetwork@gmail.com  
jnrwppresident@gmail.com  
 
FGD 
Group 1  
TBC 
Woman 
Incorporated 
w.i.crisiscentre@cwjamaica.com  
FGD 
Group 1  
TBC 
I'm Glad I'm a 
Girl 
Foundation 
(IGIG) 
mshgladgirl@gmail.com  
FGD 
Group 2  
TBC 
Sistren 
Theatre 
Collective  
sistrentheatre@gmail.com  
FGD 
Group 2  
TBC 
Jamaica 
Youth 
Advocacy 
Network (JYAN) 
jyan@youthadvocateja.org  
FGD 
Group 2  
Hellen 
Atkins  
Women's Media 
Watch (WMW) 
wmwjam@hotmail.com  
FGD 
Group 2  
TBC 
Her 
Flow 
Foundation 
embraceherflow@gmail.com  
FGD 
Group 2  
Renae 
Green  
TransWave 
Jamaica  
transwave876@gmail.com  
renae@transwaveja.org  
Nas@transwaveja.org  
GI 
Group 3

=== PAGE 240 ===
Stakeholder  Organisation  
Contact  
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Type  
Grouping  
Glenroy 
Murray  
Jamaica 
Federation 
for 
Lesbian 
And 
Gays (J-FLAG) 
admin@equalityjamaica.org  
GI 
Group 3  
Kimberly 
Sherlock 
Marriott-
Blake  
Jamaica 
Association 
for 
the Deaf 
ksherlock@jamdeaf.org.jm  
admin@jamdeaf.org.jm  
GI 
Group 4  
Gloria Goffe 
Combined 
Disabilities 
Association  
glo.goffe@gmail.com  
GI 
Group 4

=== PAGE 241 ===
Appendix B Stakeholders Consulted 
Figure B-1 to Figure B-3 present the list of stakeholders engaged for each country with Table 29 
additionally presenting stakeholders of that group that were not engaged. These stakeholders 
that were not engaged were due to time constraints and conflicting priorities that made meeting 
difficult. Stakeholders from the stakeholder country that were engaged on the same day were 
done in group interviews. 28 organisations were met during the period of April to June. 
Figure B-1: Phase 1 Stakeholder Engagment (NGOs) 
Stakeholder 
Meeting Date (2023) 
Barbados 
Business & Professional Women’s Club of Barbados 
May 13th  
The Ashley Lashley Foundation 
May 13th  
Barbados Council for the Disabled 
May 5th  
Barbados Renewable Energy Association  
May 10th  
Belize 
POWA (Productive Organisation for Women in Action) 
April 13th  
 
 
PETAL 
April 13th  
Plenty Belize  
April 14th  
Belize Assembly for Persons with Diverse Abilities   
May 16th  
Jamaica 
Jamaica Federation for Lesbian And Gays (J-FLAG) 
April 13th  
TransWave Jamaica 
April 13th 
Her Flow Foundation 
April 13th 
Women's Media Watch (WMW) 
April 13th 
Jamaica Association for the Deaf 
April 24th

=== PAGE 242 ===
Figure B-2: Phase 2 Stakeholder Engagement (Government Agencies and Ministries) 
Stakeholder 
Meeting Date (2023) 
Barbados 
Bureaus of Gender Affairs 
June 1st 
Ministry of Energy and Business 
May 19th 
Fair Trading Commission 
May 19th 
Belize 
Ministry of Energy 
May 19th 
Jamaica 
Ministry of Science, Energy and Technology 
May 8th 
Office of Utilities Regulations 
May 8th 
 
Figure B-3: Phase 3 Stakeholder Engagement (Utilties) 
Stakeholder 
Meeting Date (2023)  
Barbados 
Barbados Power and Light Company 
Unable to meet  
Belize 
Belize Electricity Limited 
June 2nd 
Jamaica 
Jamaica Public Service 
Unable to meet

=== PAGE 243 ===
Appendix C Unconsulted Stakeholders  
Figure C-1 presents a list of stakeholders that the consultant attempted to engage as part of the 
stakeholder engagement process to support the gender assessment. Failure to obtain dates and 
times to meet or a lack of response from stakeholders were the reasons for the inability to meet 
with these stakeholders. This list primarily consists of NGOs and a few government 
organisations from Belize (and excludes the utilities, see Figure C-1).  
Figure C-1: List of Stakeholders that were not met during stakeholder engagement 
Organisation  
Country  
Public Utilities Commission  
Belize  
The National Women’s Commission   
Belize 
National Garifuna Council 
Belize  
Woman Incorporated 
Jamaica  
Women’s Resources & Outreach Centre 
Jamaica  
WE-CHANGE  
Jamaica  
Jamaica Network of Rural Women Producers 
Jamaica 
I'm Glad I'm a Girl Foundation 
Jamaica  
Sistren Theatre Collective 
Jamaica  
Jamaica Youth Advocacy Network 
Jamaica 
Combined Disabilities Association 
Jamaica  
____________________
