=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 25 for Word
producer: Adobe Acrobat (64-bit) 25.1.20521
creationDate: D:20250609164940+09'00'
modDate: D:20250609165211+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
This document is prepared and transmitted for consideration by the GCF Board at a Board meeting. It is published on the GCF public 
website in that context, which does not imply a presumed outcome. Decisions taken in relation to this document and updates to it, if any, 
will be made publicly available in accordance with applicable GCF policies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meeting of the Board 
30 June – 3 July 2025 
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
Provisional agenda item 11 
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
9 June 2025  
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum XIII 
Funding proposal package for FP271 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled “India Green Finance Facility (IGFF)”; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page b 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
91 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
92 
Secretariat’s assessment 
94 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
111 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
126 
Gender documentation 
128 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  
The designations and the presentation of the materials used in this document, including their respective 
citations, maps and references, have been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Green Climate Fund concerning the legal status 
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers 
or boundaries. Also, the boundaries and names shown, and the designations used in this document have 
been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by 
the Green Climate Fund.

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
India Green Finance Facility (IGFF) 
Country: 
The Republic of India 
Accredited Entity: 
Asian Development Bank 
Date of first submission: 
2025/01/15 
Date of current submission  
2025/06/02 
Version number 
[V.10]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference 
to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 
60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service 
standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will 
be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to 
the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited 
Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 0 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS  
ADB 
AE 
AQI 
ARA 
ASEAN 
BAU 
CNG 
CO2 
DRE 
DFI 
ENSS 
ESCO 
ESMF 
ESS 
GBI 
GCF 
GDP 
GFF 
GGC 
GHG 
GW 
HDI 
ICAP 
IDP 
IEA 
IIFCL 
ISSB 
MoPNG 
MNRE 
MRA 
MSMEs 
MT 
NAPCC 
NABARD 
NDC 
NISE 
NIWE 
NSGM 
OMCs 
Asian Development Bank 
Accredited Entity 
Air Quality Index 
Adaptation Results Area  
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Business as Usual  
Compressed Natural Gas 
Carbon Dioxide  
Decentralized Renewable Energy 
Development Financial Institution 
Energy Storage Systems 
Energy Service Company  
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Environmental and Social Safeguard  
Generation Based Incentive 
Green Climate Fund  
Gross Domestic Product  
Green Finance Facility 
Green Guarantee Company 
Greenhouse Gas  
Giga Watt  
Human Development Index 
India Cooling Action  
Information Disclosure Policy 
International Energy Agency 
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited 
International Sustainability Standards Board 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
Mitigation Results Area  
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Metric Ton 
National Action Plans on Climate Change 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development  
Nationally Determined Contribution 
National Institute of Solar Energy 
The Nodal Agency 
National Smart Grid Mission  
Oil Marketing Companies

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 0 
 
 
PAT 
PM 
PPP 
PV 
RE 
REC 
RRB 
RPO 
SATAT 
SDGs 
SECI 
SHG 
SHIP 
SIDBI 
SME’s 
SST 
TCFD 
Perform, Achieve and Trade 
Particulate Matter  
Public-Private Partnership 
Photovoltaic 
Renewable Energy 
Rural Electrification Corporation  
Regional Rural Bank 
Renewable Purchase Obligation 
Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable Transport  
Sustainable Development Goals 
Solar Energy Corporation of India 
Self-Help Group 
Strategic Hydrogen Innovation Partnership 
Small Industries Development Bank  
Small and Medium Enterprises 
Sea Surface Temperature 
Climate Related Financial Disclosure Frameworks

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 1 
 
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or programme 
Programme 
A.2. 
Public 
or 
private sector 
Public 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the Simplified 
Approval Process and REDD+. 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets below. 
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-financers’ 
contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 100% for GCF and 
Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
100% 
100% 
☒  Energy generation and access 
82 % 
83 % 
☒  Low-emission transport 
18 % 
17% 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
Enter number 
Enter number 
☐  Forestry and land use 
Enter number 
Enter number 
Adaptation total 
% 
% 
☐  Most vulnerable people and communities 
Enter number 
Enter number 
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security 
Enter number% 
Enter number % 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core 
indicator 
1: 
GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided 
or removed / sequestered) 
50 million metric tonne CO2e 
over the lifetime of the facility2 
A.6. 
Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached) 
Indicate total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries 
 
Indicate number of 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
 
Indicate % of 
indirect 
beneficiaries vis-à-
vis total population 
A.7. Total financing (GCF + 
co-finance3)  
993 million USD 
A.9. Project size 
Large (Over USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
200 million USD 
 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF 
contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the 
funding proposal. 
2 The GHG emission reductions/mitigation potential assessment has been conducted using the UNFCCC approved CDM methodologies. 
Project boundary and baseline have been defined using the applied CDM methodology. Further, IPCC emission factors for fuels and national 
grid emission factors defined by the CEA, Government of India has been used for estimation of GHG emissions from each project/sub-project 
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 2 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for the GCF 
funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent with A.8.  
☒  Grant  
13 
 
☒  Loan   
187 
☐  Guarantee 
0 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
10 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
27 years  
A.13. Expected date 
of AE internal 
approval 
Date of approval (program-level) *: 
9/30/2025 
 
*Note individual sub-projects approval dates will vary 
over implementation period, subject to FAA 
effectiveness date.  
A.14. ESS category  
I-2  
A.15. Has this FP 
been submitted as a 
CN before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has Readiness or PPF 
support 
been 
used 
to 
prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP 
included in the entity 
work programme? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.18. Is this FP included in 
the country programme? 
Yes ☐    No ☒* 
 
*India does not have a formal 
Country Program; however, it 
is prioritized by the country 
through the issuance of a No-
Objection Letter (NOL). 
A.19. 
Complementarity and 
coherence  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
Throughout the Funding Proposal, Executing Entity (EE) refers to: 
 
(a) any entity that signs a subsidiary loan agreement with ADB to execute, carry out, or 
implement a part of the Funded Activity and which is responsible for channeling 
reimbursable resources provided by ADB (funded by GCF and/or ADB). This may 
include (but not be limited to):  
• 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)  
• 
Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) 
• 
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL); and   
 
ADB, in administering technical assistance (TA) grant resources funded by GCF under 
component 2, in accordance with the ADB’s policies and procedures. 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
India’s energy transition challenge  
1. 
India is the world’s third-largest CO₂ emitter, with over 94% of its primary energy supply in 2023 still derived 
from fossil fuels. This heavy reliance not only drives greenhouse gas emissions but also contributes to severe air 
pollution—most cities exceed WHO air quality standards—and exacerbates public health and climate-related 
vulnerabilities. As climate impacts intensify, including more frequent heatwaves and grid disruptions, fossil fuel 
dependence continues to undermine energy security and environmental sustainability. 
 
2. 
India’s clean energy transition is at a critical juncture. India has committed to 500 GW of non-fossil energy 
capacity by 2030 and net-zero emissions by 2070. While significant strides have been made in scaling utility-scale solar 
and wind, the country’s climate goals demand much broader and deeper decarbonization across multiple sectors. India 
now needs to turn its attention to more complex sectors that are harder to decarbonize - namely the industrial sector, 
agriculture and transportation – and which consume nearly two-thirds of the country’s energy, and underserved regions 
which have not yet benefited from the growth in renewables.

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 3 
 
 
India’s energy transition will not continue at the pace needed without technologies critical to deep decarbonization 
and inclusive development—such as Round-the-Clock (RTC) renewables, green hydrogen, compressed biogas 
(CBG), decentralized renewable energy (DRE), and electric mobility. As India’s share of variable renewable energy 
(VRE) grows, new challenges have emerged—grid curtailment, weak transmission, and limited storage have 
constrained integration. Without affordable RTC, dependence on coal for baseload power will continue. RTC solutions, 
along with green hydrogen and compressed biogas (CBG), are essential for industrial decarbonization but remain 
underfunded due to high capital costs, fragmented supply chains, and uncertain offtake arrangements. At the 
decentralized level, technologies like solar-powered irrigation and cold storage are vital for rural electrification and 
climate resilience. Yet they face barriers including limited consumer creditworthiness, weak banking infrastructure, and 
a lack of customized financial products to support small-scale developers (MSMEs). Likewise, the electric mobility 
transition is slow in rural areas due to high upfront costs, poor charging infrastructure, and constrained consumer 
financing. 
 
3. 
The high initial cost of technologies, lack of long-term in use experience, high risk premiums, and borrowers 
that cannot furnish collateral or need credit enhancement, together also make the above solutions “hard-to-finance” by 
making capital, inadequate, expensive and short-term (Annex 2, Section 2.3). These sectors are held back by the 
absence of affordable, long-tenure, and risk-tolerant capital. Financial institutions remain focused on low-risk, 
utility-scale renewables, leaving smaller borrowers and emerging technologies underserved. To close this gap and 
accelerate India’s clean energy transition, targeted financial instruments, risk-sharing facilities, and institutional 
capacity-building are essential. The India Green Finance Facility (IGFF) is designed to deliver precisely this shift—
unlocking investment in high-impact, underfunded technologies and regions. 
 
4. 
Without strategic interventions, India risks being locked into a carbon-intensive trajectory, with rising 
energy demand outpacing clean energy deployment. By 2030, the country’s energy demand is expected to increase by 
nearly 35%, requiring bold, targeted investments to scale emerging solutions beyond their current niche markets. India 
is poised to play a pivotal role in the global clean energy transition. Building on the momentum of earlier international 
commitments, India's COP29 commitments focus on accelerating green hydrogen deployment, expanding energy 
storage solutions, and enhancing grid resilience to support large-scale renewable integration 
 
Proposed Intervention 
5. 
IGFF, proposed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in partnership with India’s leading development finance 
institutions (DFIs), seeks to catalyze a systemic shift in this landscape. It will leverage $200 million in concessional 
financing from GCF to leverage $1.9 billion from ADB and leading Indian development financial institutions 
(DFIs), catalyzing $2.9 billion in financing for clean energy from private and public sources. By doing so, the 
program aims to accelerate low-carbon development, enhance energy access, and mainstream climate-aligned 
financial practices within India’s banking system. 
 
6. 
The facility will deploy GCF resources in conjunction with ADB financing to extend lines of credit to leading 
Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) such as NABARD, REC, and IIFCL. These funds will be directed towards the 
accelerated deployment of high-impact clean energy solutions, including: 
• 
RTC renewable energy systems with integrated storage to provide reliable, 24/7 clean power; 
• 
Decentralized solar energy applications to enhance rural livelihoods and climate resilience; 
• 
Electric mobility solutions (two-and three wheelers) targeting rural and peri-urban areas to support low-
carbon transport; 
• 
Green hydrogen production for industrial use, enabling the decarbonization of hard-to-abate sectors; and 
• 
CBG for sustainable waste management  
 
7. 
A $65 million risk sharing facility (RSF) will be established under the IGFF to provide partial credit guarantees 
and promote financing for MSME developers for the deployment of CBG. Additionally, technical assistance will be 
provided to build capacities of DFIs, MSME developers, and other financial institutions to institutionalize green lending 
practices within their operations.

=== PAGE 10 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 4 
 
 
8. 
Key highlights of IGFF include:  
• 
Targeting underserved technologies and geographies: IGFF is uniquely positioned to direct capital 
toward clean energy technologies that remain underfinanced despite their mitigation potential—such as 
RTC renewables, green hydrogen, CBG, decentralized renewables, and e-mobility. It also prioritizes 
investments in underserved geographies, including India’s North-Eastern and low-income states. 
• 
Empowering DFIs as climate finance leaders: Anchored in global recognition of development banks’ 
pivotal role—including under the G20 framework—IGFF strengthens the institutional and operational 
capacities of Indian DFIs. It equips them with long-tenure, lower-cost capital and practical tools to embed 
climate considerations into their lending operations, enabling them to take leadership in financing India’s 
energy transition. 
• 
Deploying tailored, catalytic financial instruments: The facility combines concessional lending with a 
RSF that provides targeted credit guarantees, especially for MSME developers in high-risk, early-stage 
markets such as CBG. These instruments are designed to reduce capital costs, address credit access 
constraints, and overcome first-mover disincentives. 
• 
Mobilizing large-scale private and public capital: By de-risking investments and demonstrating 
commercially viable models, IGFF is expected to crowd in over USD 2.8 billion in total investments. This 
multiplier effect ensures IGFF’s financing structure delivers high-leverage, system-level transformation of 
clean energy markets. 
• 
Institutionalizing green finance practices: IGFF mainstreams climate risk management within India’s 
financial architecture by developing green lending taxonomies, credit appraisal frameworks, and disclosure 
tools aligned with India’s Business Responsibility and Sustainability Reporting (BRSR) standards. This 
systemic shift is consistent with the global agenda led by the Network for Greening the Financial System 
(NGFS), which emphasizes steering capital toward sustainable outcomes and managing climate-related 
financial risks. (Annex 2, Section 3.1, Para 43). 
Climate Results/Benefits 
9. 
The IGFF is designed to deliver transformative climate impacts by addressing mitigation needs and supporting 
adaptation as a co-benefit. A key outcome of the facility is the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions, with support 
for 836 MW of new renewable energy capacity expected to reduce 50 million metric tons of CO2e over its lifetime. 
By expanding clean energy access to underserved regions, the program will also enhance energy security, reducing 
reliance on imported fossil fuels and stabilizing power supply for critical sectors. Beyond environmental benefits, IGFF 
is set to generate over 139,234 green jobs, fostering economic growth while improving air quality and reducing 
respiratory diseases, ultimately lowering healthcare costs. Furthermore, IGFF will help build internal systems and 
capacities for 5 DFIs and improve uptake of green lending and climate risk management across another 10 DFIs, 
promoting the greening of India DFIs. IGFF financing will accelerate the scaling of five emerging clean energy 
technologies, enabling economies of scale that drive cost reductions and enhance long-term commercial viability. 
Through these efforts, IGFF will play a vital role in strengthening climate resilience and advancing the clean energy 
transition. 
Paradigm Shift  
10. 
Catalyzing Financial System Transformation: IGFF is designed to address deep-rooted structural barriers 
in India’s clean energy finance landscape by introducing catalytic financial instruments and mainstreaming climate-
aligned practices across DFIs. Through concessional capital, long-tenure loans, and a dedicated RSF, the program 
unlocks private sector financing for high-risk sectors like RTC renewables, green hydrogen, and MSME-scale CBG. 
Technical assistance further equips DFIs with the tools and frameworks needed to assess, structure, and manage 
climate-aligned investments, institutionalizing green lending and setting the stage for long-term capital flows. By aligning 
DFI operations with India’s Business Responsibility and Sustainability Reporting (BRSR) framework, IGFF helps embed 
sustainability into the core of India’s financial system.

=== PAGE 11 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.9.0 | PAGE 5 
 
11. 
Driving Scalable, Inclusive Market Transitions: IGFF serves as a demonstration platform for replicable, 
bankable models in emerging sectors that are otherwise seen as too risky—spurring commercial participation and 
reducing reliance on concessional finance over time. The facility’s gender-responsive design actively supports women-
led energy enterprises and inclusive product development, ensuring the benefits of the clean energy transition reach 
underserved groups. By bridging viability gaps, crowding in private finance, and enabling systemic change across 
energy, transport, and agriculture, IGFF contributes directly to India’s 2070 net-zero target and 2030 NDCs. With a 
projected mitigation impact of 50 MtCO₂e and a lasting shift in how green finance is deployed, IGFF positions itself as 
a foundational intervention in India’s low-carbon, climate-resilient development pathway. 
 
12. 
The core intent is not to create long-term dependence on concessional finance but rather to de-risk markets, 
build institutional capacity, and catalyze private investment in currently underfunded and high-impact clean energy 
segments. In sum, IGFF’s exit is premised on transformation—both of the financial sector and the clean energy 
ecosystem. GCF support is catalytic, not permanent. By shifting DFIs’ lending norms, expanding financing to 
underserved regions and sectors, and crowding in private capital, the facility will lay the institutional and financial 
foundations for sustained, market-driven climate investment across India.

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
 
4 Energy in India today (IEA, 2021)  
5 The Hindu: Energy and Environment (2023) 
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Emissions context for the energy transition 
13. 
India’s rapid economic growth has led to a substantial increase in greenhouse gas emissions, with net emissions 
nearly doubling between 1994 and 2020, driven by the energy sector. Between 1994 and 2020, total CO2e emissions rose by 
144%, while net emissions, including the land use, land use change, and forestry sector as a carbon sink, increased by 98%. 
Between 1850 and 2019, India accounted for only 4% of global emissions, and its per capita emissions, at 2.48 tCO₂ per person, 
are the lowest in the G20. The energy sector, including fossil fuel consumption and fugitive emissions, is the largest source of 
GHG emissions in India. Within this, electricity production alone accounts for 40% of national emissions, making it the highest-
emitting category, followed by road transportation at 9%.  While emissions are growing, India’s historical per capita emissions 
are among the lowest globally, highlighting its minimal contribution to climate change. 
 
14. 
Energy sector emissions are driven by a heavy dependence on fossil fuels. India's energy supply relies on three 
primary fuels: coal, oil, and solid biomass, which collectively account for over 80% of the country's energy demand. Coal plays 
a dominant role in electricity generation and industrial expansion, maintaining its position as the largest single energy source. 
Oil consumption and oil imports have also surged due to increased vehicle ownership and road transportation demands. 
Dominated by road transport, with significant contributions from railways, aviation, and maritime transport, the transport sector 
contributes about 13% of the total GHG emissions.  Industry contributes approximately 15% of overall emissions, primarily driven 
by energy-intensive processes in sectors such as cement, steel, chemicals, and other manufacturing industries. Although the 
use of biomass, primarily fuelwood, is decreasing as a share in the energy mix, it remains a prevalent fuel for cooking. Despite 
efforts to expand the use alternatives in rural areas, a significant portion of the population, approximately 660 million people, still 
rely on traditional cooking fuels, as reported by the International Energy Agency.4 
 
15. 
India’s energy transition is increasingly challenged by climate change, with rising temperatures, erratic 
monsoons, and extreme weather events disrupting power generation, agriculture, and water security. The increasing 
unpredictability of the monsoons in India due to climate change poses a serious risk to food security and water availability.5 
Floods represent the largest source of annual disaster-related losses in India, with an estimated impact of USD 7 billion on the 
GDP annually. India's extensive coastline, spanning over 8,000 km, is characterized by flat coastal terrain, a shallow continental 
shelf, and high population density, making it highly susceptible to the adverse impacts of cyclones and related hazards. These 
events also significantly impact power generation and related infrastructure, and agricultural yield. For instance, the rising trend 
of increasing temperatures and heat stress can significantly lower the efficiency of solar cells, thereby reducing the overall power 
Figure 1: CO2 emissions by sector in India, 1990 – 2020 
 
Source: IEA, 2021 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Electricity and heat producers
Industry
Other energy industries
Transport
Residential
Commercial and public services
Agriculture
Other

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
 
6 According to a Solar PV manufacturer’s datasheet, for every degree above 25°C, the maximum power of the solar panel falls by 0.258%. 
Source: https://www.greentechrenewables.com/article/how-does-heat-affect-solar-panel-efficiencies and 
https://www.greentechrenewables.com/article/how-does-temperature-affect-battery-performance  
7 Projected air quality and health benefits from future policy interventions in India. (Chen, K. et al., 2019) 
8 Bloomberg NEF, “Financing India’s 2030 renewables ambition”, 2022. 
output of solar panels, and reduce the lifecycle of batteries.6 Extreme weather conditions like droughts can severely limit the 
availability of biomass feedstock (such as agricultural waste), which is essential for biogas production. With increasing climate 
change, energy requirements in the residential, commercial, and agricultural sectors in India are expected to undergo significant 
changes– with a large, forecasted increase in the need for space cooling and heating, as well as for water pumping. 
 
16. 
Critical air pollution levels in India call for urgent deployment of cleaner energy. Emissions from thermal power 
plants, tail pipe emissions from vehicles, industrial emissions, and the burning of wood and dirty fuels (e.g. dung) for cooking and 
heating are some of the main causes of toxic levels of air pollutants such as ground-level ozone, particle pollution (also known 
as particulate matter, including PM2.5 and PM10), carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide. The capital city, Delhi, 
ranks as one of the most polluted capital cities in the world. Further, another 62 Indian cities are in the top 100 most polluted 
cities list on a regular basis.7   
 
17. 
Summary of physical climate risks in India. India faces significant climate risks driven by rising temperatures, shifting 
precipitation patterns, hydrological variability, and extreme weather events, leading to disruptions in livelihoods, infrastructure, 
and economic stability. 
• 
Temperatures are rising rapidly, with average annual mean temperatures increasing by 0.62°C per century since 1901, 
and maximum temperatures rising even faster at 0.99°C per century. The northern, central, and eastern regions have 
experienced the sharpest warming over the past three decades, and projections indicate temperatures could rise by up 
to 4.5°C by 2090 (RCP8.5 scenario). 
• 
Shifting precipitation patterns pose additional risks. While total monsoon rainfall has remained stable over the long 
term, recent decades have seen a 27% increase in dry spells (1981–2011 vs. 1951–1980) and a 75% rise in extreme 
rainfall events over central India (1950–2015). Certain states—Bihar, Meghalaya, Nagaland, West Bengal, and Uttar 
Pradesh—have seen significant declines in monsoon rainfall, contributing to drought risks and agricultural stress. 
• 
India ranks among the highest disaster-prone countries globally (32nd out of 191 in the INFORM Risk Index), 
with high exposure to floods, cyclones, and droughts. Extreme floods that were once 1-in-100-year events are now 
expected to occur every 25–50 years, with the Indo-Gangetic Basin—especially Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal—
facing the highest projected population impact. Rising temperatures are also intensifying heatwaves, with frequency 
projected to increase to 2.5–3 events per season by late century (RCP4.5 scenario), particularly along India’s west coast. 
Droughts are becoming more frequent, especially in the Indo-Gangetic Plain, where what was previously a 1-in-100-year 
drought is expected to occur every 40–50 years under 1.5°C–2°C warming and every 20 years under 3°C warming. 
Similarly, cyclones along India’s east coast are increasing in frequency and intensity, with Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, 
Odisha, and West Bengal most affected (refer to Annex 2, Appendix 1 for a detailed discussion on India’s physical climate 
risk profile and Section 1.3 for a synthesis of climate risk in relation to India’s energy security). 
Sector outlook 
18. 
Recognizing the importance of the energy transition, India has made ambitious commitments to reduce 
emissions and scale up clean energy deployment. India’s NDCs commit to reduce the emissions intensity of its GDP by 45% 
by 2030 and ensure that 50% of installed electricity capacity is from non-fossil fuel sources. In its Long-Term Strategy, India 
targets net-zero emissions by 2070, and the National Electricity Plan aims to install 500 GW of non-fossil fuel power capacity by 
2030 (refer to Annex 2, Appendix 2 for further details on India’s climate strategies, action plan, and relevant sectoral programs). 
These commitments have been accompanied by notable progress in expanding renewable energy capacity and advancing policy 
frameworks. These include: 
• 
Rapid expansion of renewable energy. Since 2017, renewable capacity additions have outpaced those from coal, 
signaling a strong shift towards clean energy adoption. Solar energy has led this transformation, growing from less than 
1 GW in 2011–12 to over 81 GW by 2023, with a compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of approximately 50%.8

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
9 How the middle class will play the hero in India's rise as world power (The Economic Times, 2023) 
10 Energy in India today (IEA, 2021) 
11 Business Standard, “India adds record 18 GW renewable energy capacity in FY24, shows data”, 2024. 
12 Renewable Energy (Invest India, 2023)  
13 Government declares plan to add 50 GW of renewable energy capacity annually for next 5 years to achieve the target of 500 GW by 
2030 (Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, 2023).  
14 CEEW, “India Residential Energy Survey (IRES) 2020”, 2020. 
• 
Government programs and policy tools have been adopted to scale up renewable energy, such as waivers of inter-
state transmission charges for solar and wind energy, Uniform Renewable Energy Tariff (URET), and Renewable 
Purchase Obligations (RPO) & Renewable Consumption Obligations (RCO), resulting in scale up of renewables.  
• 
Schemes to improve industry, transport and agriculture emissions. Efforts are being made to increase energy 
efficiency in the industrial sector (e.g. Perform, Achieve and Trade (PAT) scheme), promote renewables deployment in 
the agriculture sector (e.g. PM-KUSUM)) and scale up e-mobility to reduce emissions in the transport sector (e.g. Faster 
Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid and Electric Vehicles (FAME) scheme). 
 
19. 
India’s energy needs are expected to substantially increase to meet its developmental priorities. As a developing 
nation with low per capita energy consumption, expanding energy access is needed to power rural and urban infrastructure, 
support industries, and meet the growing energy demand of a rapidly modernizing population. The middle-income class is a major 
consumer of energy, and constitutes a substantial 31% of the population, with projections indicating it could reach 38% by 2031 
and 60% by 2047.9 With per capita energy consumption increasing as incomes grow, India's total energy demand is rising rapidly. 
For the IEA, this growth in demand positions the country as a major driver in global energy consumption.10 Under current policies, 
India's overall emissions are projected to rise beyond 2030, peaking between 2035 and 2040. According to BloombergNEF’s 
baseline assessment, aligned with a 2.6°C global warming scenario, India’s energy-related emissions are projected to increase 
by 21% between 2022 and 2050, driven primarily by rising energy demand in the industrial sector. While power sector emissions 
are projected to reduce, this is based on the assumption of increasing energy transition at the speed and scale envisioned in 
India’s policies and targets, which will only be realized if financing for emerging clean energy technologies and hard-to-abate 
sectors is accelerated. 
 
20. 
The current momentum on the energy transition will not keep pace with demand. India initially set a goal of reaching 
175 GW of renewable energy capacity by 2022 and 450 GW by 2030 as part of its climate commitments. By February 28, 2023, 
the country had reached 169 GW. In 2022, this target was revised to 50% renewable power and 500 GW of renewable energy 
on the system by 2030. Renewable energy capacity installations have been increasing, with 2023–24 marking a record addition 
of 18.48 GW—a 21% rise from the previous year—driven primarily by solar, which contributed 12.78 GW.11 Despite this ambition, 
India remains behind schedule. A further 82 GW of renewables are under construction, and 41 GW in the process of tendering.12 
To achieve the target, currently installed capacity and capacity under construction would need to more than double over six years, 
and to achieve the 2040 target, it would have to more than double again over the following decade.13 
  
21. 
 While utility-scale RE installations continue to play a crucial role in meeting India's 2070 net-zero target, 
achieving broader clean energy access and economy-wide decarbonization requires complementary solutions that 
enhance grid stability, improve reliability, and reduce fossil fuel dependence in high-emitting sectors.  RTC renewables 
are essential for electrifying industrial sectors, ensuring that energy-intensive manufacturing and processing units can shift away 
from coal and other fossil-based power sources. They also provide firm, dispatchable power in rural and underserved areas, 
expanding reliable energy access where grid infrastructure is weak. Scaling green hydrogen production is needed to decarbonize 
emissions-intensive, hard-to-abate industries, such as steel, cement, and chemicals, where direct electrification is not feasible, 
helping these sectors transition away from fossil fuels. CBG and electric vehicle (EV) expansion offer low-carbon alternatives to 
oil-based transportation.  CBG provides a greener alternative to natural gas, supporting both industrial applications and heavy 
transport decarbonization. Simultaneously, these advancements must address vulnerabilities in regions and sectors where 
energy access and climate risks intersect most critically with livelihood security. For instance, rural areas face persistent energy 
access challenges, with unreliable electricity, voltage fluctuations, and weak last-mile connectivity, especially in North-Eastern 
regions with limited renewable potential. Hence, expanding the scope of India’s clean energy transition requires targeted 
interventions that can address these challenges while broadening access to clean energy for industrial applications and rural 
livelihoods in agriculture and allied sectors. (for more details, please refer to Annex 2, Section 2.1).14

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
15 Ministry of Power, “National Framework for Promoting Energy Storage Systems”, 2023. 
16 The International Council on Clean Transportation, “Understanding the air quality and health impacts of large-scale vehicle electrification 
in India”, 2021. 
22. 
Key sectors and technologies must be targeted to accelerate the energy transition. Supporting India’s clean energy 
transition requires a dual focus on diversification and deep decarbonization interventions, while simultaneously leveraging 
opportunities to promote job creation, livelihood security, and an improved quality of life. The following are key sectoral 
opportunities and areas for intervention to enable this transition: 
• 
Electricity production, accounting for approximately 40% of national emissions, represents the highest priority for 
intervention. Accelerating the transition to renewable energy technologies and expanding energy storage capacity are 
critical.15 
• 
Road transportation, contributing 9% of total emissions, also offers significant opportunities for decarbonization. 
Widespread vehicle electrification and robust power sector decarbonization could prevent 13,300 premature deaths in 
2030 and 16,700 in 2040, saving India USD 10.3 billion and USD 19.1 billion, respectively, in avoided costs.16 
• 
Hard-to-abate industries such as iron, steel, and cement—which rely heavily on fossil fuels for high-temperature heat—
demand tailored decarbonization strategies. For these sectors, solutions like green hydrogen production, carbon capture 
and storage, and electrification where feasible must be prioritized to reduce emissions without compromising industrial 
output. 
• 
Agriculture sector, with 98% of its energy consumption from electricity to power various applications in agriculture and 
allied sectors, coupled with its significant role in the rural and national economy, presents a crucial opportunity for targeted 
clean energy interventions. This includes clean energy generation from diverse sources such as solar, wind, and biomass 
to power on- and off-farm applications in agriculture and allied sectors. 
 
23. 
India’s technology needs assessment (Section 2.2 and 4 in Annex 2) identified key areas where renewable energy 
solutions could have the highest impact for the four sectors above. Following an extensive evaluation process as part of this 
funding proposal, ADB prioritized six key technologies based on their market potential, alignment with India’s climate goals, and 
ability to address existing barriers: RTC renewable energy, compressed biogas, green hydrogen, EV infrastructure, off-grid 
solar pumps, and DRE systems. The selection process was validated through consultations with DFIs, who provided insights 
into sectoral financing gaps and policy challenges. The key rationale for selection of these technologies are as follows: 
 
• 
RTC renewable energy combines solar/wind with energy storage (typically battery or pumped hydro) to provide 
24/7 clean energy and mitigate intermittency challenges inherent in solar and wind power. It is aligned with the 
National Solar Mission and supported by policy frameworks such as the Electricity Rules of 2021, which recognize 
solar as must-run, and competitive bidding guidelines issued in 2020 for RTC procurement. Despite commercial 
availability, it still requires concessional support to offset high storage costs and bridge the tariff gap with coal.  
 
• 
CBG offers a solution for both clean energy generation and waste management. Under the SATAT initiative and 
National Biofuels Policy, India targets 5,000 CBG plants by 2024. However, uptake has been low due to weak market 
structures, unguaranteed offtake, and limited financing. The GCF-funded facility will support risk-sharing mechanisms 
and infrastructure to scale up deployment, particularly by supporting MSME developers and ensuring financial viability. 
Guarantees are particularly critical to address volatile prices and implementation risks that inhibit private financing. 
 
• 
Green hydrogen is in the demonstration and early commercialization phase in India, with production costs still 
significantly higher than fossil-based alternatives. The National Green Hydrogen Mission, launched in 2023, lays 
the foundation for making India a global hub for green hydrogen, including support for electrolyser manufacturing and 
renewable energy use in production. However, current subsidies remain insufficient to make it competitive (USD 3.5–5 
per kg vs. breakeven below USD 2 per kg). GCF’s concessional finance is essential to bridge this viability gap and 
support infrastructure development, supply chains, and policy alignment necessary for early market formation. 
 
• 
India has strong policy backing for EV adoption through the FAME scheme and the National Mission on 
Transformative Mobility. However, consumer finance for EVs remains limited due to high perceived risks, higher 
interest rates, and short loan tenors from banks and non-banking financial companies (NBFCs). Charging infrastructure 
also faces low investor interest due to demand uncertainty. The GCF’s concessional loans will reduce borrowing costs

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
 
17 BloombergNEF. (2023). $223bn investment needed for India to meet 2030 wind and solar goals. BloombergNEF. 
18 India Renewables Financing (bbhub.io) 
19 Optimal_mix_report_2029-30_FINAL.pdf (cea.nic.in) 
20 Landscape of Green Finance in India 2024 - CPI 
and support EV infrastructure build-out, accelerating adoption in high-potential but underserved markets such as two- 
and three-wheelers in peri-urban and rural areas. 
 
• 
Despite schemes such PM-KUSUM, solar pump adoption remains low due to limited access to finance and high 
repayment risk among smallholder farmers. Weak rural banking infrastructure further impedes credit delivery. GCF’s 
concessional finance will be deployed to target these barriers through low-cost capital and technical assistance, enabling 
DFIs to develop products tailored for underserved rural borrowers. Concessional finance allows solar irrigation solutions 
to be deployed in energy-poor regions where private capital remains hesitant. 
 
• 
DRE systems are key to reaching rural and underserved regions that lack reliable grid access. Despite their maturity, 
DRE projects remain “hard-to-finance” due to small scale, limited credit histories of borrowers, and perceived revenue 
risks. The IGFF, with GCF support, offers tailored instruments to overcome these financial challenges and operational 
barriers. It will fund aggregator models, improve DFIs’ capacity to assess small-scale investments, and offer concessional 
debt to catalyze DRE solutions where market financing has not reached. 
Financing context 
24. 
Financing remains a critical barrier to the scale-up of 
renewables. The BloombergNEF estimates that India requires an 
annual investment of USD 293 billion to meet its solar and wind 
targets including storage and transmission between 2020 and 
2030.17 In 2023, India invested only USD 22.6 billion in renewables, 
which is one-third of the annual investment needed to align with the 
Net Zero Scenario. 
 
25. 
Costs of renewable energy generation in India have dropped, 
financing flows for renewable energy have increased, and there is 
increasing private sector participation and investment in the sector. 
India stands out globally with some of the lowest levelized costs of 
electricity for solar energy, ranging from USD 25–43 per MWh, and 
onshore wind energy, ranging from USD 32–51 per MWh, making 
them significantly cheaper than in most other countries, while at the 
same time, the risk profiles for utility-scale projects have improved 
dramatically, with 90% of solar projects achieving investment-grade 
ratings in 2020.18 Despite this, a financing gap exists, with solar and wind projects alone requiring USD 28 billion annually, but 
only securing USD 17.4 billion in asset financing between 2020 and 2021.19 
 
26. 
Clean energy financing must expand beyond large-scale, viable projects to emerging clean energy technologies. 
In 2021-22, clean energy attracted almost half of the total tracked green finance flows for India at USD 23.8 billion, followed by 
energy efficiency and clean transportation. Most of these funds—54% (USD 13 billion)—were allocated to solar projects, including 
both solar PV and rooftop PV, largely driven by growing demand from commercial and industrial consumers. While this represents 
a 75% increase compared to 2019-20, the growth has been primarily fueled by investments in large-scale solar projects that have 
already achieved commercial maturity. On-shore wind and hydro projects accounted for 17% and 16% of clean energy financing 
respectively. In contrast, integrated renewable energy technologies such as RTC solutions received only 13% of total clean 
energy flows, while biofuels, offshore wind, and other emerging technologies, including energy storage, accounted for merely 1% 
(INR 15 billion or USD 0.2 billion).20 This imbalance highlights a critical gap—while utility-scale technologies continue to attract 
significant investment, underfunded sectors such as battery storage, essential for grid stability, and integrated DRE solutions, 
crucial for rural electrification and climate resilience, remain largely overlooked. Research and development across all sectors 
Figure 3: Financing Renewables in India, 2011-2022 
 
 
Source: Financing India’s 2030 renewables ambition, Bloomberg NEF, 2022, 
Dalberg

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
 
21 Renewables Investment Trends in India-June_2022.pdf 
22 Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), India. State-wise (location based) installed capacity of Renewable Power as on 31 Dec 
2024 
23 Climate Policy Initiative, “Landscape of Green Finance in India 2022”, 2022. 
remain minimal, even though it is essential for fostering innovation and scaling next-generation technologies.21 (Annex 2, Section 
2.3) 
 
27. 
Financing is also affected by the range of interrelated challenges that slow progress on clean energy despite ambitious 
targets. For instance, delays in finalizing Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) (Annex 2, #25) create significant financial 
uncertainty and impede project execution.  Such delays have led to 34.5 GW of projects remaining uncommissioned as of June 
2024, with approximately 12.5 GW of solar projects stalled due to domestic manufacturing bottlenecks. Grid stress further 
complicates the picture, with existing transmission infrastructure struggling to manage the variable output of renewable sources 
and resulting in regional imbalances that affect reliability. Additionally, the sector faces financing hurdles, including short loan 
tenors and rising lending rates, which are misaligned with the long-term capital requirements of renewable projects. These 
barriers, compounded by operational and policy challenges that limit the deployment of complementary technologies such as 
energy storage, underscore the urgent need for innovative financing mechanisms and regulatory reforms to accelerate the 
renewable energy transition (Annex 2, Section 2.3 and Section 2.4).  
 
28. 
A diversified approach to 
clean energy financing is especially 
critical for regions with limited 
renewable 
potential. 
 
While 
Rajasthan, Gujarat, and Tamil Nadu 
account for over 70% of India’s solar 
installations and 93% of wind capacity, 
other 
regions—particularly 
the 
Northeastern and Eastern states—lag 
significantly. As per MNRE report22, the 
Northeast contributes just 0.21% of 
total installed renewable capacity, and 
the East is only 1.43%, compared to 
26.7% in the North, 32.66% in the 
West, and 38.92% in the South. This 
uneven 
distribution 
has 
led 
to 
disparities in electrification and subsidy 
uptake, with RE-rich states benefiting 
disproportionately. Punjab, for instance, has implemented equitable subsidy distribution models, while lower-performing states 
have prioritized grid connections for middle- and high-income areas, leaving rural regions in Bihar, Jharkhand, and Odisha among 
the most energy-poor in the country. Inconsistent power supply remains a major challenge, with many households still dependent 
on traditional fuels for cooking and productive uses. In the Northeastern states, power supply is further disrupted by frequent 
natural disasters—floods, earthquakes, and landslides—which damage infrastructure and increase energy costs. Even where 
grid infrastructure exists, high transmission and maintenance costs drive up electricity prices, making energy access unaffordable 
for many (ref. Annex 2, Section 2.1, para 24). Hence, expanding the role of decentralized renewables, storage, and cleaner fuel 
alternatives is essential to improving energy reliability, affordability, and access in these regions aligned with India’s clean energy 
and development priorities. 
 
29. 
DFIs are a critical, but underutilized source of financing for emerging technologies. While domestic financing 
makes up a lion’s share of India’s green finance for the energy sector– 85% in 2019 and 2020 - public sector financing constituted 
only 19% of these flows, with DFIs contributing no more than 10%.23 And yet DFIs remain a critical actor, especially for financing 
of emerging clean energy technologies which may not be viable with market rate financing.  DFIs are essential because they 
have a higher risk tolerance than commercial banks, access to long-term capital, a public mandate to support national 
development goals, and the ability to blend concessional and market-based finance, making them uniquely positioned to finance 
Figure 4: Installed capacity of new renewables, by region, 2011-2022 
 
Source: Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, 2025

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
 
24 https://rmi.org/four-ways-to-jump-start-clean-hydrogen-finance-in-2025 
25 https://sarepenergy.net/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/RE-Finance-Report.pdf#:~:text=,RE%20projects%20in%20India  
26 ICRA ESG Ratings Limited, “India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL): Rating assigned”, January 2025. 
27 from-the-chairman-message.pdf; Stakeholder consultations 
early-stage, high-impact clean energy investments that private lenders find too risky (refer to Annex 2, Section 3.2, para #48 for 
further details on their unique advantage compared to other financing channels). Debt financing remains the dominant instrument 
for financing clean energy, with DFIs participation is confined to balance sheet financing and low-cost project debt, whereas 
commercial financial institutions remain dominant for project-level market-rate debt. DFIs already offer some of the lowest 
financing rates for renewable energy projects compared to private banks. Improving access to concessional financing can enable 
them to increase their green lending, and to further reduce rates for technologies that have yet to achieve commercial viability.  
 
30. 
Limited technical expertise, awareness, and inadequate systems within DFIs hinder their ability to identify, 
appraise and finance projects that involve emerging clean energy technologies. A recent market “roadshow” by RMI found 
that banks’ traditional project finance frameworks are generally too rigid to fund first-of-a-kind hydrogen facilities. Developers 
complained that credit committees demand analogies to past projects. In the absence of proven models, lenders struggle with 
assessing offtake risk, technology performance, and revenue stability for hydrogen ventures.24 USAID’s SAREP program 
identified barriers to financing off-grid rural RE projects, citing small ticket sizes, high transaction costs, and unfamiliar risk profiles 
that deter traditional financiers.25 Similar issues are seen with other emerging sectors: electric mobility and battery storage 
financing in rural or peri-urban contexts, compressed biogas projects, which involve feedstock supply risks and complex 
technology – areas outside most DFIs’ prior experience. Financial institutions remain hesitant to lend to emerging technologies 
(e.g. solar mini-grids and off-grid clean energy projects) due to a rigid credit appraisal templates and inadequate risk assessment 
methodologies which results in delays or rejection of innovative projects. Most DFIs employ standardized project finance criteria 
(debt service coverage ratios, proven cash flows, sponsor track record requirements, etc.) that don’t fit innovative projects. 
 
31. 
DFIs have fragmented pipelines and fewer projects for emerging clean energy technologies. The disaggregated 
and fragmented nature of DRE initiatives which are small scale and distrusted widely across the country complicates due diligence 
costs and processes and makes it harder for DFIs to aggregate and bundle these into a coherent portfolio. CBG projects face 
similar issues, especially due to variability in feedstock being a major challenge, which means there is little performance data on 
such projects further exacerbating the perception of risks within the financial sector. Green hydrogen projects are at a very early 
stage of development, and there is significant variability in maturity, scale and regulations which makes it challenging for DFIs to 
assess and aggregate. Without dedicated technical assistance, these gaps will continue to constrain the speed, scale, and cost-
effectiveness of India’s clean energy transition. 
 
32. 
A lack of standardized green finance taxonomies and evolving climate risk disclosure requirements further 
hinders DFIs ability to scale up green lending. The absence of a unified green taxonomy and evolving climate risk disclosure 
requirements have created ambiguity for DFIs in structuring and scaling clean energy investments. IIFCL, for instance, lacks 
formal policies and targets to evaluate and mitigate its environmental footprint across energy, waste, water, and biodiversity—
both in operations and its lending portfolio—despite its net-zero target for 2030 (currently limited to Scope 1 and 2). It also does 
not adhere to any sustainability framework yet and lacks environmental and social governance (ESG) considerations in 
procurement, primarily due to reliance on the Government e-Marketplace (GEM) portal26 NABARD lacks the internal capacity to 
fully implement its internal green taxonomy, as it is still in the process of tagging its portfolio. It faces challenges in effectively 
monitoring the impact of its current investments for accurate tagging and lacks the capacity to conduct due diligence to develop 
a pipeline of projects in emerging sectors that align with its green taxonomy.27 Some other barriers which were highlighted by 
DFIs during discussions with ADB include, fragmented decision-making, lack of coordination across stakeholders, and limited 
exposure to international best practices and frameworks. This gap in knowledge can hinder their ability to support sustainable 
projects adequately (For a detailed analysis of the target DFIs' current portfolios, targets, capacity gaps, and expressed needs 
for capacity strengthening, refer to Annex 2, Sections 3.3 and 3.4.) 
 
33. 
India’s work on climate finance taxonomy is still underway (only in 2024–25 did the government initiate a taxonomy for 
climate finance, and RBI in 2024 introduced draft guidelines on climate-related risk disclosure for banks and FIs) but when it is 
approved, DFIs will need capacity building to implement it. RBI’s draft Climate Risk Disclosure framework (2024) will mandate 
large banks, NABARD, National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development (NaBFID), Small Industries Development

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
Bank of India (SIDBI), etc., to report climate-related risks in governance, strategy, and risk management. (detailed information 
on current policies in Annex 2 #44, #45). This is a major shift – for the first time, DFIs must internalize climate risk assessment, 
including physical risks (like projects’ exposure to extreme weather) and transition risks. Previously, such analysis was absent 
from credit appraisals. The regulatory gap meant DFIs didn’t price climate risks or integrate resilience. As these guidelines 
become operational, DFIs will need new skillsets (climate scenario analysis, GHG accounting, etc.). Without capacity building, 
compliance and the real benefit – improved risk management leading to more sustainable lending – might not materialize. 
Complementarity and coherence with GCF programs  
34. 
Complementing GCF’s clean energy programs in India. From a sector and thematic perspective, IGFF complements 
and builds on existing programs targeting clean energy and low-carbon transport. The Green Guarantee Company (FP197) 
supports the de-risking of climate investments through guarantees; IGFF complements this by offering risk-sharing tools tailored 
specifically for India’s domestic market with a focus on compressed biogas (CBG) and MSME developers, a market segment 
constrained by high perception of risk by financial institutions despite significant potential. IGFF also reinforces the objectives of 
the India E-Mobility Financing Program (FP186) by addressing financing and infrastructure gaps in rural and peri-urban areas. 
While FP186 focuses on building out India's urban EV ecosystem, IGFF enables electric mobility solutions for smaller operators 
and underserved regions, expanding the reach of transport decarbonization efforts. In the area of infrastructure, IGFF aligns with 
Climate Investor One (FP099) and Climate Investor Two (FP190), which mobilize private investment into renewable energy. 
IGFF’s support for decentralized solar and RTC renewable energy systems contributes to the reliability and sustainability of 
energy infrastructure. 
 
35. 
Enhancing GCF’s engagement with DFIs. IGFF focuses on strengthening climate finance systems by expanding the 
role and capacity of DFIs. While previous GCF programs such as FP084 (implemented with NABARD) focused on rural 
decentralized energy and livelihood support, IGFF broadens this engagement to include a network of DFIs, such as REC, IIFCL, 
and NABARD itself, each with specialized mandates in infrastructure and rural finance. It will work directly with DFIs to channel 
long-term concessional finance, build internal systems for climate risk assessment, and strengthen the pipeline of investable 
clean energy projects. 
 
36. 
Supporting GCF’s priorities in India. IGFF is fully aligned with GCF’s India Country Programme. It will support the 
mainstreaming of emerging clean energy technologies that remain underserved by current programs such as RTC renewable 
energy with storage, green hydrogen for industrial use, and compressed biogas for sustainable waste management. The facility 
aims to crowd in $2.8 billion in private and public capital and is well aligned with GCF’s priority to catalyze private sector 
engagement, especially in high-impact, underfinanced sectors. At a systems level, IGFF supports institutional reform and capacity 
development across five DFIs, while promoting the adoption of green lending standards and climate risk frameworks throughout 
India’s broader financial ecosystem. It also prioritizes inclusivity by targeting regions such as Northeast India that are currently 
underserved by energy finance, and by integrating gender-responsive financing to ensure women-led enterprises and 
communities can participate meaningfully in the clean energy transition. 
 
37. 
ADB’s continued engagement in India.  ADB has a strong and long-standing energy sector engagement in India, 
aligned with the Government’s priorities for sustainable, inclusive, and climate-resilient growth. Under its 2023–2027 Country 
Partnership Strategy (CPS), ADB supports structural transformation through clean energy investments, power sector reforms, 
and targeted assistance to lagging states. Over the past five years, ADB has committed over US$ 2.5 billion in sovereign energy 
sector lending, spanning generation, transmission, energy access, and energy reforms. Together, these efforts reflect ADB’s 
dual-track approach of combining infrastructure finance with institutional and regulatory strengthening, an approach that directly 
complements the objectives of the IGFF.  
 
38. 
ADB’s PBL programs play a catalytic role in unlocking structural reforms essential for scaling clean energy and mobilizing 
private capital. The ongoing Power Sector Reform Policy Based Lending (PBL) targets two key reform pillars: (i) enabling deeper 
integration of VRE, including RTC power and energy storage, into national and state grids; and (ii) improving the financial 
performance, corporate governance and consumer service quality of distribution companies. The PBL also supports the 
implementation of the Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS), including smart metering, loss reduction, and results-
linked fiscal support, the scale-up of PM-KUSUM, through solarization of agricultural feeders and incentive frameworks for 
distributed RE. Complementary ADB technical assistance supports MNRE and state agencies in developing national green

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
hydrogen standards, establishing hydrogen hubs in Gujarat and Maharashtra, and designing policy roadmaps for green steel, 
battery storage, and solar irrigation. These upstream reforms help create bankable policy frameworks for technologies directly 
supported by IGFF. 
39. 
The IGFF builds on this strong policy foundation by translating upstream reforms into institutionalized climate finance 
systems through Output 2.3. Specifically, IGFF supports DFIs in adopting green lending taxonomies, climate risk disclosure 
frameworks, and gender-responsive financing standards, initiatives directly aligned with national regulatory developments such 
as India’s emerging climate finance taxonomy and the RBI’s draft climate risk guidelines. By anchoring these practices within DFI 
operations and enabling inter-agency coordination, IGFF contributes to a green finance architecture that is scalable, credible, 
and private-sector ready. The facility also creates a feedback loop between practice and policy: lessons learned from IGFF 
implementation will inform ongoing policy dialogue and regulatory refinement, helping government and financial institutions adapt 
frameworks based on real-time evidence from subproject implementation. Through targeted policy dialogue, technical toolkits, 
and embedded TA support, Output 2.3 serves as a key delivery mechanism for translating ADB’s broader reforms, such as those 
supported under the PBL into long-term institutional transformation within India’s financial system. 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) 
40. 
The high-level vision of the program is to accelerate India’s clean energy transition by institutionalizing green lending 
practices within DFIs and broader financial institutions. By expanding access to concessional finance, risk-sharing mechanisms, 
and key financial and risk management tools and methodologies, IGFF aims to catalyze large-scale, gender-responsive 
investments in emerging clean energy technologies, while transforming the financial ecosystem to support long-term sustainability 
and inclusion.   
 
41. 
Building on this vision, the program’s impact can be articulated as follows:  IF India's DFIs have access to concessional 
finance and enhanced technical capacities to design and implement financing products for emerging clean energy technologies, 
and if project developers  and private/public financial institutions are equipped to access climate finance, THEN the India Green 
Finance Facility (IGFF) will catalyze large-scale investments in clean energy, mobilizing public and private capital that contributes 
to the reduction of 50 million metric tons of CO₂ eq. BECAUSE systemic financing barriers are minimized or eliminated, 
transforming India's financial ecosystem to support a sustainable and inclusive clean energy transition  
 
42. 
To realize this vision, IGFF is designed to drive key systemic changes, through two outcomes:  
Outcome 1: DFIs deploy concessional finance and risk-sharing mechanisms, enabling them to expand their investment 
portfolios in emerging clean energy technologies 
 
43. 
IGFF enables DFIs to expand their green financing portfolios and scale up investments in emerging clean energy 
technologies by providing concessional finance and operationalizing a risk-sharing facility (RSF). These mechanisms de-risk 
investments, enhance the bankability of innovative clean energy projects, and enable DFIs to mobilize greater private sector 
participation in climate finance. By reducing credit risks and improving access to long-term financing, IGFF strengthens the ability 
of DFIs to channel capital into emerging clean energy sectors, including RTC renewables, green hydrogen, compressed biogas 
(CBG), distributed renewable energy (DRE), and electric mobility in rural and peri-urban areas. This is achieved through following 
two outputs:   
 
• 
Output 1.1: DFIs have secured concessional loans to finance emerging clean energy technologies  
o 
Activity 1.1.1:  Design and provide concessional loans to DFIs to finance emerging clean energy technologies. This 
includes structuring affordable financial products tailored to overcome the high capital costs and extended payback 
periods associated with emerging clean energy technologies such as RTC renewables with storage, green hydrogen, 
CBG and DRA in rural areas, ensuring accessibility and scalability for DFIs (see Annex 3 Economic and Financial 
Analysis).  
  
• 
Output 1.2: Risk-sharing facility (RSF) is established to de-risk investments in CBG projects  
o 
Activity 1.2.1: Create RSF to de-risk investments in CBG projects. The RSF provides partial credit guarantees to PFIs 
to mitigate the high-risk perception of CBG investments, encouraging PFIs to extend credit. By covering a portion of

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
potential losses, the facility mobilizes private sector investment and facilitates increased capital flow into clean energy 
ventures.  
  
44. 
These activities directly respond to systemic financial barriers that hinders investments in clean energy:  
• 
High capital costs and risk perception: Emerging clean energy technologies, such as CBG, green hydrogen, and 
energy storage, require significant upfront capital but face uncertain revenue models and technology risks. Private 
lenders and commercial banks perceive these projects as high-risk and are reluctant to finance them without risk 
mitigation instruments. By offering concessional finance, IGFF reduces borrowing costs, making clean energy projects 
more viable and attractive for developers and investors. (refer to Annex 2, Section 2.4, para #36)  
• 
Limited access to long-term, low-cost finance: India’s financial ecosystem is constrained by high interest rates and 
short loan tenures, making it difficult for DFIs to provide affordable, long-duration loans. Concessional lines of credit inject 
patient capital, allowing DFIs to extend longer-term financing to projects that require long payback periods. By addressing 
these financial barriers, IGFF enables DFIs to mobilize private capital, expand lending to clean energy projects, and 
accelerate India’s transition to a low-carbon economy. (refer to Annex 2, Section 2.3)  
Outcome 2: Project developers and public/private FIs have access to inclusive finance for emerging clean energy 
technologies 
 
45. 
To scale up clean energy financing, IGFF will build the institutional capacity of DFIs and PFIs across the country to 
finance emerging technologies such as green hydrogen, distributed renewable energy (DRE), and compressed biogas (CBG). 
Through embedded technical assistance, capacity-building, and policy engagement, IGFF will help these institutions originate, 
structure, and monitor climate-aligned investments and scale up the use of risk-sharing instruments like the RSF. Through 
technical assistance, policy engagement, and capacity-building, IGFF will enable these institutions to originate, structure, 
appraise, and monitor investments in emerging clean energy technologies, and scale up the use of risk sharing instruments like 
the RSF.  including those eligible for IGFF’s Risk Sharing Facility (RSF).   
 
46. 
Support will include tailored technical assistance packages for at least 5 DFIs, over 35 trainings for PFIs and MSMEs, 10 
gender-responsive financial frameworks, and the introduction of standardized green lending and climate risk tools across the 
sector. These efforts aim to embed climate finance principles into institutional practices and financial regulation, catalyzing a 
broader transformation in India’s financial ecosystem. By strengthening the broader financial ecosystem, IGFF ensures that 
concessional finance mechanisms translate into real-world investments that accelerate India’s clean energy transition. This is 
achieved through the following three outputs and corresponding activities:   
 
• 
Output 2.1:  DFIs have enhanced technical capacities to finance emerging clean energy technologies  
 
o 
Activity 2.1.1: Strengthen DFI capabilities in project preparation, appraisal, and monitoring of IGFF-aligned investments. 
This activity is central to the effective implementation of IGFF’s credit lines. IGFF will deliver long-term technical 
assistance to at least 5 DFIs engaged in subprojects, ensuring they can originate, appraise, and monitor emerging clean 
energy investments in line with IGFF’s requirements. Support will include tailored assistance packages delivered by 
embedded experts, the development of internal appraisal toolkits, safeguards and gender frameworks, M&E systems, 
and at least 10 structured trainings per DFI. DFIs will also benefit from market assessments and stakeholder workshops 
to support project pipeline identification, risk management, and impact reporting, enabling efficient and scalable 
deployment of concessional finance. 
 
• 
Output 2.2:  MSMEs and PFIs have enhanced technical capacities to access credit guarantees through RSF 
 
o 
Activity 2.2.1: Build capacities of PFIs and MSME project developers in structuring bankable projects and accessing 
credit guarantees through RSF. PFIs and MSMEs need training to navigate financial structuring, risk assessment, and 
credit guarantee mechanisms under the RSF. This activity is essential to the effective operationalization of the RSF. It 
will ensure that participating FIs can utilize the RSF and MSME developers can structure projects that meet financing 
requirements. IGFF will support the development of risk assessment tools, loan performance monitoring systems, and 
institutional systems for guarantee issuance. At least 35 training sessions and 5 market assessments will be conducted,

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
alongside 10 matchmaking events to connect MSMEs with PFIs. These efforts will bridge technical and institutional 
gaps, build robust project pipelines, and enable credit guarantee-backed lending for CBG. 
 
• 
Output 2.3:   Public/private FIs adopt tools and frameworks to scale up financing for emerging clean energy 
technologies 
 
o 
Activity 2.3.1: Build financial institutions' capacity and internal systems on climate risk management, green lending, 
and gender-responsive financing. IGFF will support at least 10 DFIs with gap assessments, advisory support, and 
develop 5 gender action plans and climate finance toolkits. Over 40 dialogues and workshops will facilitate peer learning, 
and 2,500 women will be trained on accessing and managing green finance. Through targeted training sessions, 
institutions will enhance their capacity for climate risk assessment, standardized green lending, and gender-inclusive 
financing. Multi-stakeholder dialogues will raise awareness among policymakers, regulators, and financial institutions 
on aligning financial policies with climate objectives. 
   
o 
Activity 2.3.2 Support dialogues between policy makers and financial institutions on enabling policies on climate risk 
management, green lending and gender-responsive financing. This activity will enhance awareness among financial 
regulators, policymakers, DFIs, commercial banks, and industry associations on developing and implementing tools and 
frameworks that promote green lending and gender-inclusive financing for clean energy projects.  IGFF will convene at 
least two annual policy roundtables with regulators and FIs, publish policy briefs on green finance, and lead consultations 
to inform regulatory approaches to climate risk and gender-inclusive financing, supporting a system-wide shift in financial 
practices. 
 
47. 
These activities directly address key institutional and social barriers hindering the adoption of green finance:  
 
48. 
Institutional barrier: Limited technical capacity within DFIs, PFIs, and MSME project developers on green 
financing products and financial practices: Many financial institutions lack expertise in climate risk analysis, concessional 
finance structuring, and green lending frameworks. Without standardized tools, DFIs and PFIs struggle to assess, manage, and 
mitigate risks in clean energy projects. IGFF will support to build institutional capacity through technical training, workshops and 
policy dialogues. (refer to Annex 2, Section 3.1, para #44 and Section 3.4, para #665)  
 
49. 
Institutional barrier: Fragmented policy landscape and lack of coordination among stakeholders: The clean 
energy financing ecosystem in India is shaped by multiple regulatory bodies, financial institutions, and government agencies, 
each with distinct mandates. Overlapping policies, misaligned incentives, and lack of coordination among key stakeholders create 
inefficiencies, slow policy adoption, and hinder the scalability of green finance solutions. Additionally, the absence of a centralized 
mechanism to harmonize regulatory frameworks results in inconsistent implementation across states and sectors. These 
challenges limit the effectiveness of adoption of standardized tools and frameworks, particularly in gender-responsive financing 
and green lending space. (refer to Annex 2, Appendix 2)  
 
50. 
Social barrier: Limited institutional focus on gender-responsive finance and weak representation of gender 
considerations in financial sector policies: Women-led clean energy enterprises in India face significant challenges in 
accessing finance, often due to unconscious biases in lending practices and a lack of dedicated financial products. Despite 
women constituting approximately 50% of the population, only about 20% of micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) are 
female owned. Additionally, financial institutions often lack sex-disaggregated data, hindering their ability to assess the impact of 
financing decisions on women and marginalized communities. These barriers limit women's participation in the clean energy 
sector and impede the growth of women-led enterprises. (refer to Annex 8)  
 
51. 
These institutional and social barriers are further compounded by technology-specific challenges that hinder the 
scalability and financing of clean energy solutions. While IGFF’s interventions aim to address broader financial and policy gaps, 
each clean energy technology presents unique constraints related to cost, risk perception, infrastructure readiness, and policy 
alignment. The table below summarizes the key barriers for each technology and the corresponding solutions that IGFF will 
implement to unlock investment and accelerate deployment.

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
Table 1:  Technology-specific barriers and IGFF’s solutions 
Technology  
Key barriers  
IGFF's solutions  
Round-the-
Clock 
(RTC) 
Renewable 
Energy  
High capital costs due to integration of 
battery storage and pumped hydro; weak 
grid 
infrastructure 
affecting 
power 
evacuation; limited ancillary service 
markets; financial institutions hesitant 
due to uncertain revenue models and 
DISCOM financial distress.  
IGFF provides concessional capital to bridge the 
viability gap and reduce project cost, enabling RTC 
renewables to compete with conventional power. 
Long-tenure financing helps align repayment with 
project cash flows, and institutional capacity-
building enhances financial institutions' ability to 
appraise RTC RE investments. 
Green 
Hydrogen  
High production costs (USD 5–6/kg vs. 
break-even below USD 2/kg); lack of 
large-scale commercial deployments; 
underdeveloped regulatory frameworks; 
limited hydrogen storage and transport 
infrastructure; 
insufficient 
technical 
assessment capacity among financial 
institutions. 
Concessional capital lowers the cost of early stage 
projects and supports infrastructure development. 
Technical assistance builds DFI capacity to assess 
and structure hydrogen investments. IGFF also 
facilitates 
knowledge 
sharing 
on 
subsidy 
frameworks and pricing mechanisms, supporting 
policy alignment and early market development. 
Compressed 
Biogas (CBG)  
High 
interest 
rates 
(12-14%) 
and 
stringent collateral requirements for 
MSME 
developers; 
weak 
market 
structures with unguaranteed offtake; 
volatile 
prices 
leading 
to 
financial 
uncertainty; banks’ lack of familiarity with 
project economics causing conservative 
lending; 
logistical 
inefficiencies 
in 
feedstock collection and transportation; 
limited financial products tailored for 
small-scale developers.  
IGFF supports a dedicated $65 million Risk Sharing 
Facility (RSF) that provides credit guarantees to 
mobilize lending to MSME CBG developers. The 
RSF reduces collateral barriers and catalyzes 
private sector co-financing. Targeted TA also 
strengthens financial institutions’ understanding of 
CBG lending risks and opportunities. 
Electric Mobility 
(EVs 
and 
Charging 
Infrastructure)  
Inadequate rural and peri-urban EV 
charging infrastructure; high upfront 
vehicle costs; limited consumer access to 
affordable financing; financial institutions 
reluctant to lend due to technology 
unfamiliarity and resale concerns. 
IGFF expands financing liquidity for DFIs to enter 
underserved geographies and support EV lending, 
particularly in rural areas. TA helps design financial 
products for rural EV users and small fleet 
operators. Facility resources are used to catalyze 
investment 
in 
charging 
infrastructure 
where 
demand 
uncertainty 
has 
constrained 
private 
investment. 
Decentralized 
Renewable 
Energy (DRE)  
High upfront costs for smallholder 
farmers and micro-enterprises; weak 
rural banking infrastructure; irregular 
income flows create perceived credit 
risks; limited awareness of productive-
use DRE solutions. 
IGFF improves financing availability for rural DRE 
sub-projects, enabling DFIs to extend lending into 
underserved segments. TA supports rural banks 
and MFIs in structuring DRE loans, and strengthens 
outreach to rural enterprises, enabling scale-up of 
solar-powered irrigation, agro-processing, and 
other productive-use applications. 
 
52. 
Beyond these outcomes, IGFF’s interventions also generate broader environmental, economic, and social co-benefits. 
Increased financing for clean energy projects mitigates air pollution and reduces carbon emissions (co-benefit 1), directly 
improving environmental quality. Strengthened channels of financing facilitate greater investment, leading to job creation and 
economic opportunities (co-benefit 2) in clean energy sectors. The expansion of concessional finance and risk-sharing facilities 
further enhances affordable access to clean energy (co-benefit 3), particularly for MSMEs and rural communities, driving 
adaptation co-benefits. Moreover, by embedding gender-responsive financing principles into DFI operations and lending 
practices, IGFF promotes women’s leadership and participation within the clean energy value chain (co-benefit 4), 
fostering inclusivity in climate finance.   
 
53. 
Crucially, these linkages demonstrate interdependencies across activities, outputs, and outcomes, where financial, 
institutional, and policy interventions mutually reinforce each other. Building capacities of DFIs (Activity 2.1.1) and

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
providing technical assistance strengthens their ability to manage concessional finance (Output 2.1) and effectively implement 
RSF (Output 1.2). This also enhances their overall technical capacity in green lending (Output 2.1) – enabling DFIs to better 
structure financial products, conduct due diligence, and monitor climate impacts—ultimately leading to more efficient and 
sustainable green finance operations. Furthermore, training programs on climate risk assessment, financial disclosure 
frameworks, and gender-responsive lending equip FIs in the ecosystem with the necessary tools and methodologies (Activity 
2.3.1) to mainstream climate considerations into their decision-making. This, in turn, enhances their operational effectiveness 
and strengthens their role in shaping policy frameworks.  
 
54. 
Engaging with regulators, financial institutions, and industry stakeholders ensures that emerging learnings from IGFF’s 
technical and financial interventions are integrated into national discussions on climate finance. Similarly, standardizing green 
lending criteria and developing policy briefs not only support DFIs in structuring their portfolios but also contribute to regulatory 
discussions on integrating climate risk and gender considerations into financial decision-making. These interwoven linkages 
illustrate how IGFF’s structured approach strategically addresses financial, institutional, and social barriers, ensuring long-term 
resilience, scalability, and sustainability in India’s green finance ecosystem.   
 
55. 
The successful implementation of IGFF’s interventions relies on mitigating key risks that could hinder the scaling of green 
finance. One major risk is the limited participation of private sector developers due to the high-risk perception of 
emerging clean energy technologies. Many financial institutions hesitate to invest in clean energy due to concerns over 
unproven revenue models, long payback periods, and policy uncertainty. This risk is mitigated through concessional lines of 
credit (Activity 1.1.1) and the risk-sharing facility (Activity 1.2.1), which reduce the financial exposure of lenders by de-risking 
their investments. Additionally, training financial institutions (Activity 2.1.1) helps DFIs better evaluate and price clean energy 
project risks, increasing investor confidence.  
 
56. 
Another critical risk is the limited scalability of green financing practices by DFIs, which could hinder the long-term 
sustainability of concessional lending. If DFIs do not fully integrate climate finance principles into their internal processes, 
green lending may remain a niche rather than a mainstream financing approach. This risk is mitigated through building 
capacities of DFIs (Activity 2.1.1), ensuring that green finance practices become embedded in institutional structures (Activity 
2.3.1)

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
Figure 5: Theory of Change 
 
 
Mapping of assumptions with outputs  
 
Assumptions  
Outputs 
Stable macroeconomic and financial conditions in India 
Output 1.1, 1.2  
Governments, regulators (e.g., RBI), and policymakers maintain supportive 
policies, streamline regulatory processes, and provide incentives for clean 
energy transition 
Output 2.1, 2.2, 2.3   
Sustained demand for clean energy technologies and projects, as well as for 
skilled female professionals and entrepreneurs, ensuring a viable pipeline for 
financing and participation 
Output 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3  
Societal norms and cultural environments support women's participation in 
technical roles, leadership positions, and entrepreneurial ventures within the 
clean energy sector 
Output 2.1, 2.2, 2.3   
Private sector stakeholders actively collaborate with DFIs to co-finance clean 
energy projects 
 
Output 1.1, 1.2, 2.1   
 
 
 
B.2 (b) Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
 
 
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation and 
access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1:  
Increased 
deployment of 
financing for 
emerging clean 
energy technologies
by DFIs in India 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 2:  
Enhanced 
institutional capacity 
of DFIs to catalyze 
lending for clean 
energy technologies 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the corresponding category 
as defined in the FP guidance note. 
 
Co-benefit 
number  
Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  
Economic  
Gender  
Adaptation  
Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1  
☒  
☐  
☐  
☐  
☐  
☐  
Co-benefit 2  
☐  
☐  
☒  
☐  
☐  
☐  
Co-benefit 3  
☐  
☐  
☐  
☐  
☒  
☐  
Co-benefit 4 
☐  
☐  
☐  
☒  
☐  
☐  
 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
Overview 
57. 
The IGFF is a blended finance facility designed to accelerate India’s energy transition through targeted financing to scale 
up emerging clean energy technologies in the country. It leverages concessional capital from the GCF, complemented by 
resources from the ADB, to provide lines of credit to participating public DFIs in India to address bankability and financing gaps 
for these technologies. Additionally, the IGFF will deploy technical assistance to strengthen project pipelines, address market 
barriers, and build the capacity of DFIs to institutionalize green lending practices within their operations, including the adoption 
of domestic climate-related financial disclosure frameworks while advancing gender-responsive financing practices to promote 
women’s participation in the clean energy value chain. 
 
58. 
For the purposes of the IGFF, a subproject is defined as an ADB-financed operation that will provide financial intermediary 
loans to one or more DFIs. Such loans include those with GCF resources (GCF loans) and with ADB resources (ADB loans). 
Each subproject will enable DFIs to provide loans (DFI loans) or de-risking to support investments in eligible clean energy 
technologies. A single subproject may include one or multiple DFIs, and each ADB loan or GCF loan could in turn also support 
either a single technology or multiple technologies. Each subproject will be presented for approval to the ADB Board and/or other 
applicable ADB approving authorities on a transaction-by-transaction basis. 
 
Key design principles

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
1. 
Programmatic approach: The facility takes a programmatic approach to financing, enabling the development of a 
portfolio of clean energy subprojects with common criteria and themes. This ensures efficiency in financing 
administration, scalability, and alignment with India’s long-term climate goals. 
2. 
Focus on low-carbon subprojects: The facility prioritizes transformational subprojects with the potential to accelerate 
India’s energy transition, focusing on emerging technologies critical for reducing emissions while also supporting climate 
resilience. Technical assistance will focus on building robust project pipelines, integrating innovative financial models, 
and supporting the bankability of clean energy projects early in their lifecycle. 
3. 
Prioritizing underserved areas: The facility prioritizes investments in clean energy projects in underserved areas of 
India, where financing for renewables is still low. 
4. 
Emphasis on leverage and catalytic financing: By utilizing GCF concessional financing, the facility will mobilize high 
shares of ADB and DFI resources while catalysing private sector capital. Using low-interest rate, long-tenor loans, and a 
guarantee facility, the IGFF will de-risk investments in emerging clean energy technologies, creating the confidence 
needed to attract commercial banks and private investors to scale these investments.  
5. 
Greening India’s DFIs: The facility emphasizes strengthening the climate finance capabilities and systems of India’s 
DFIs. This includes institutionalizing green lending practices, aligning portfolios with Paris Agreement goals, and adopting 
domestic climate-related financial disclosure frameworks. 
6. 
Focus on gender-responsive financing: IGFF strengthens DFI capacities to integrate gender-informed practices into 
their operations, supporting sex-disaggregated data systems, preferential financing for women-led projects, and 
capacity-building programs. These efforts aim to enable women’s active participation across the clean energy value 
chain, fostering greater inclusion and equity within the sector. 
Structure 
59. 
Through IGFF, GCF financing of $200 million will be used to support 5 subprojects, with the following breakdown: $187 
million loans (including $65 million deployed as a loan with special conditions to support a risk-sharing facility) and $13 million 
grant for technical assistance. ADB expects to mobilize up to $793 million of financing from its own resources, with the potential 
for co-financing from other development partners for these subprojects. Additionally, $1.178 billion in financing is expected to be 
leveraged from participating DFIs. A further $754 million is expected to be catalyzed from the private sector and project 
developers through IGFF. Table 1 outlines the IGFF financing structure. 
 
Table 2: IGFF financing structure 
India Green Finance Facility (IGFF) 
Mobilized financing for investments 
Comp
onent  
Sub-projects  
DFI  
Financing 
instrument 
GCF  
($ 
million) 
ADB 
 ($ 
million) 
Total IGFF 
financing 
DFI 
Project 
proponents 
Total 
financing 
mobilized for 
investments 
Compo
nent 1 
SP 1: RTC 
Renewables 
DFI 1 
Loan 
32 
128 
160 
128 
72 
360 
SP 2: E-
mobility 
DFI 2 
Loan 
34 
136 
170 
136 
102 
408 
SP 3: Green 
hydrogen 
DFI 3 
Loan 
30 
120 
150 
120 
68 
338 
SP 4: CBG 
DFI 4 
Loan  
(with special 
conditions to 
support risk 
sharing facility) 
65 
0 
65 
390 
167 
622 
Loan  
0 
300 
300 
300 
257 
857 
SP 5: DRE 
DFI 5 
Loan  
26 
104 
130 
104 
88 
322

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
 
Technical 
assistance for 
Output 1.1 
 
0 
5 
5 
0 
0 
5 
Compo
nent 2 
Technical 
assistance 
  
Grant   
13 
0 
13 
0 
0 
13 
  
Total 
  
  
200 
793 
993 
1178 
754 
2925 
 
 
Component 1: Financing for DFIs to scale up the deployment of emerging clean energy technologies 
 
60. 
The IGFF will leverage GCF financing for loans and guarantees to complement ADB financing and attract additional 
resources from DFIs, supporting emerging clean energy technologies critical to India’s energy transition. Under Component 1, 
GCF resources will (i) provide dedicated concessional lines of credit for subprojects, through ADB, to participating DFIs for on-
lending to both public and private sector borrowers and (ii) provide a loan to a DFI with special conditions for repayment, as part 
of a subproject, to establish a Risk Sharing Facility (RSF). Initially, IGFF will target subprojects with three DFIs with whom 
discussions are currently ongoing – NABARD, IIFCL, and REC – though participation remains open to additional DFIs interested 
in engaging with the facility.  
 
Technology focus 
 
61. 
The prioritization of technologies for IGFF was guided by India's clean energy transition goals, and the need to address 
critical gaps in technology deployment, financing, and international technology transfer. Technologies were chosen based on 
their alignment with national priorities, sectoral needs, and their potential to reduce emissions, enhance climate resilience, and 
support economic growth (for more details please refer to Annex 2, Section 4. Assessment of priority technologies for IGFF). 
 
62. 
India’s clean energy transition demands a strategic, sector-specific approach that expands renewable energy deployment 
while addressing grid stability and integration challenges across power, industry, transport, and rural energy access. In the power 
sector, RTC renewables, integrating solar, wind, and storage, are essential to stabilize the grid, provide dispatchable clean 
electricity, and facilitate the seamless integration of intermittent renewable sources. By ensuring round-the-clock power 
availability, RTC renewables reduce dependence on coal and enhance overall energy security. Green hydrogen is crucial for 
industries such as steel, cement, and aluminum, where high-temperature processes cannot be easily electrified, offering a viable 
pathway to lower emissions. The transport sector, responsible for 9% of national emissions, requires widespread electrification 
to curb pollution and fossil fuel use. Scaling up EV infrastructure, particularly in underserved regions, and expanding financing 
options for two- and three-wheelers will accelerate adoption and drive a shift toward sustainable mobility. Compressed Biogas 
(CBG) plays a pivotal role in diversifying the energy mix, providing a renewable substitute for natural gas in industries and 
transport while simultaneously creating value from agricultural and organic waste, thereby reducing methane emissions. 
Decentralized renewable energy (DRE) solutions, including off-grid solar pumps and biogas systems, are vital for improving 
energy reliability in rural areas, supporting agricultural productivity, and fostering economic resilience 
 
63. 
Financing support will be provided to subprojects that support the following objectives: 
 
Table 3: Objectives and technologies to be supported by IGFF (based on Annex 2) 
Objective 
Type of technologies 
Powering India’s Energy Transition - Projects which accelerate the 
large-scale deployment of renewable energy technologies and 
infrastructure to facilitate the shift from fossil fuels to cleaner energy 
sources. 
  
• 
Round-the-clock renewable energy (renewable energy with 
energy storage systems) 
• 
Green hydrogen production 
Modernizing Energy Access for Cleaner Living - Projects which 
expand  sustainable energy solutions to underserved regions to 
reduce dependence on traditional fuels, enhance air quality, and drive 
economic opportunities.  
• 
E-mobility (2, 3, and related infrastructure) 
• 
Compressed Biogas

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
 
28 Note that the risk of the DFIs absorbing the concessionality of GCF funds is considered low. With an assumed 80/20 ratio of ADB / GCF 
funds and considering the conversion of ADB and GCF funds to national currency and inclusion of any applicable sovereign guarantee fees, 
the likely cost of funds to GCF will be higher than current DFI borrowing costs (see Annex 3a). 
  
Resilient and Reliable Energy Systems for Rural and Urban 
Communities – Projects which strengthen energy systems to 
withstand climate risks while improving agricultural productivity and 
supporting sustainable livelihoods. 
• 
Decentralized RE supporting energy access and agricultural 
applications to power livelihood applications, such as off-grid 
solar-powered water pumps and solar-powered cold-storages.  
  
DFI focus 
64. 
As part of the project design, consultations were held with several DFIs tasked with supporting clean energy and related 
interventions (Annex 7). These discussions served four key objectives: (i) to identify market, financial, policy, and technical 
barriers hindering the scale-up of critical sectors and technologies from the perspective of DFIs, (ii) to validate insights from the 
findings in Annex 2, (iii) to preliminarily identify interventions that align with India’s clean energy transition goals and DFIs’ broader 
development mandates, and (iv) to shortlist DFIs for potential collaboration under IGFF’s initial implementation phase. These 
engagements reinforced the focus on designing interventions that maximize impact while ensuring alignment with India’s 
nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and long-term low-carbon strategies. 
 
Portfolio performance targets 
65. 
The following portfolio-level targets will help measure impact, track financial performance, and ensure alignment with 
India's clean energy transition goals: 
• 
Total Financing Mobilized 
o 
Total amount of concessional capital deployed: $200 million 
o 
Total financing leveraged from DFIs, private sector, and ADB: $ 2842 million 
• 
GHG Emissions Mitigation 
o 
Estimated total CO₂ equivalent mitigated over the lifetime of projects: 50 million tons CO₂e 
 
 
Output 1.1: DFIs have secured concessional loans to finance emerging clean energy technologies  
Executing entities: DFIs 
 
Activity 1.1.1:  Design and provide concessional loans to DFIs to finance emerging clean energy technologies 
66. 
GCF resources will be used to provide sovereign-guaranteed concessional loans to DFIs, alongside ADB sovereign 
and/or sovereign-guaranteed loans for on-lending to private and public sector borrowers for clean energy investments. GCF and 
ADB loans – channeled through subprojects – aim to address financing barriers associated investments in emerging clean energy 
technologies with limited availability of affordable long-term capital, and the high upfront costs of emerging clean energy 
technologies (for detailed assessment please refer to Annex 2, Section 4).  Loans are designed to direct DFI financing towards 
underserved sectors and help lower the weighted average cost of capital (WACC) for subprojects depending on their risk profiles, 
making them financially viable and attractive to private sector investors. By bridging the financing gap, these loans will unlock co-
financing from DFIs and commercial lenders and accelerate the deployment of transformative clean energy technologies critical 
to India’s energy transition. 
 
67. 
Proposed terms for GCF loans to DFIs are provided in Table 4. The concessionality of GCF loans will be passed on 
through subprojects to project proponents in the form of reduced interest rates, extended loan tenors, or longer grace periods, 
with the level of concessionality to be commensurate with the financial needs of investments in specific technologies and designed 
in a manner to limit the risk of market distortion. These terms will be determined based on specific analysis to be conducted 
during preparation of each subproject. ADB will conduct (i) economic and financial analysis that considers investment-specific 
cash flow projections and viability for a selection of target investments (ii) assessment of the cost of funds to DFIs taking into 
account the conversion of ADB and GCF funds to national currency and inclusion of any applicable sovereign guarantee fees.28

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
 
29 For example, states with high solar potential but low installed capacity, or states with agriculture sectors but low CBG deployment. 
30 For RTC renewables, in addition to underserved areas, this technology is most suited to areas with high installed capacity but significant 
grid stability issues. As this criteria is at least 30% of financing, it should not hinder financing for RTC RE in other states. 
The outcomes of this analysis will then be discussed with DFIs to determine the optimal level of concessionality to be provided 
to borrowers to address financing gaps, lower perceived risks, and improve the bankability of emerging technologies while 
avoiding market distortion. ADB will work with DFIs during the finalization process to identify and implement possible measures 
that can lower the effective borrowing cost for technologies where this concessionality is needed, without distorting the market. 
Considering the cost of funds to DFIs through the facility are likely to be similar to their current cost of funding, the transmission 
of concessionality may be modest. Finally, terms agreed will be embedded in subproject specific project documents and loan 
agreements.  
 
Table 4: Proposed lending terms for GCF funds under Output 1.1  
Currency 
Interest Rate(i) 
Commitment fee 
Tenor (years)  
Grace Period (years) 
USD 
1.25 
0.75 
20  
5 
(i) This includes interest rate (0.75%) and GCF service fee (0.5%);  
 
Eligibility criteria 
 
68. 
The following criteria will be applicable to all subprojects supported under Output 1.1:  
 
• 
Eligible borrowing entities: Sovereign-guaranteed financing institutions that meet the following eligibility criteria:  
• 
Be at least 50% government-owned, either at the central or state level. 
• 
Have a stated mandate and/or operational focus to support developmental goals, including infrastructure 
development, renewable energy, climate resilience, or rural development. 
 
• 
Eligible technologies: Subprojects will target six emerging clean energy technologies aligned with India’s energy 
transition goals: 
• 
Round-the-Clock renewable energy systems that combine intermittent renewable sources with energy storage to 
ensure continuous supply 
• 
Green hydrogen production and infrastructure, with (i) green hydrogen production powered by renewable energy 
sources, (ii) potential to scale up and or integrate in existing energy systems and (iii) excluding investments related 
to export of green hydrogen. 
• 
Compressed biogas projects using organic waste (e.g. municipal or agricultural waste) 
• 
Electric mobility solutions focusing on two- and three-wheeler vehicles and related charging infrastructure, as 
applied to rural and peri-urban areas  
• 
Decentralized renewable energy solutions designed to improve energy access in rural areas and support 
agricultural applications with priority for (i) solar irrigation pumps by small holder farmers and cooperatives, and (ii) 
other decentralized renewable energy solutions designed to improve energy access in rural areas and support 
agricultural applications. 
 
• 
Underserved areas: Subprojects to be designed to target at least 30% of financing for states in the country with either 
(i) high potential and low deployment of each RE technology,29 (ii) over dependence on one type of RE technology, or 
(iii) low electricity access.30 The list of underserved areas will be identified for each technology using national and state 
government datasets as part of the IGFF Program Implementation Guidelines and updated annually.  
  
• 
GCF financing share: At least 8% of the subproject financing amount, up to a limit of 20% subproject financing amount  
 
• 
Leverage: At least 80% cofinancing from ADB and / or other cofinanciers to be leveraged for each sub-project.

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
 
31 The concessionality in the financing offered by DFIs under each subproject will also be monitored during subproject implementation. 
32 All loans will be categorized as Effective Gender Mainstreaming (EGM) according to ADB’s Gender and Development Framework. 
33 As part of the design of subprojects, reflows of funds by DFIs from borrowers will be considered. These could be repaid back to ADB, or 
used to support further loans under the same conditions that the original loans were made.  
• 
Concessionality: Financing terms and conditions for subprojects to demonstrate pass down of concessional terms (e.g. 
interest rate reduction, change to tenor or grace period etc.) to borrowers as appropriate for the given technology and 
region.31  
 
• 
Gender mainstreaming: All subprojects will advance women’s participation in the clean energy sector and work towards 
narrowing existing gender gaps.32  
 
69. 
In addition, the following requirements will apply to all subprojects: 
  
• 
Due diligence:  Prior to approval, full due diligence will be conducted on all subprojects and borrowing entities in 
accordance with ADB’s policies, internal rules and usual practice. 
 
• 
Environmental and social safeguards: All subprojects must adhere to the environmental and social safeguard policies 
of ADB as outlined in Annex 6, ensuring no adverse impacts on vulnerable communities or ecosystems. 
 
• 
Risk assessment: Each qualified subproject will be screened as per ADB’s standard operational and due diligence 
guidelines including legal, financial and integrity risks.  
 
70. 
ADB will originate, design and develop subprojects with DFIs and allocate GCF and ADB resources for subprojects that 
meet the eligibility criteria above.  This will include assessing technologies to be supported, developing financing terms and 
conditions, identifying potential pipelines of investments, understanding capacity gaps within the DFIs and conducting due 
diligence of the subproject. Under each subproject, DFIs could be supported to build on existing or establish new financing 
products to support eligible investments.33 At a facility level, a governance arrangement will be established within ADB to 
administer the program and oversee allocation of funding (see B4) comprising a steering committee, a program management 
unit in ADB and project implementation units in DFIs for each subproject.   
 
Output 1.2 Risk-sharing facility (RSF) is established to de-risk investments in compressed biogas (CBG) projects 
Executing entity: DFI who will manage the RSF 
 
71. 
India’s CBG sector faces significant financing hurdles, particularly for small-scale developers, despite its estimated USD 
1.5 billion market potential and government support through the SATAT scheme. MSMEs, which drive decentralized production 
and rural economic growth, struggle with high interest rates, stringent collateral requirements, and limited access to credit (see 
Annex 2, Section 4.2). Financial institutions remain cautious due to perceived risks and lack of sector awareness, leading to 
conservative lending policies and slow loan approvals. In response, under Output 1.2, a Risk Sharing Facility (RSF) will be 
established to address two critical challenges: 
• 
High perception of risk: MSME-led CBG projects face a high-risk perception due to their nascent track record and the 
limited number of operational plants. Banks and other financial institutions are hesitant to lend, as the market remains 
fragmented and many projects involve small-scale plants with uncertain cash flows. 
• 
Unaffordable financing terms: Even when loans are available, MSMEs struggle with high interest rates (often 
exceeding 12–14%) and stringent collateral requirements—sometimes demanding collateral equal to 50% or more of the 
loan amount. These factors limit the scalability of MSME projects despite significant market potential.  
Overview of the RSF 
72. 
The Risk Sharing Facility (RSF) will be established as part of a subproject under the IGFF to provide credit guarantees 
and promote financing for MSME developers for the deployment of CBG. US$65 million GCF reimbursable funds will be provided 
as a concessional loan to a DFI (RSF Manager) to establish and manage the RSF corpus, which in turn is expected to enable

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
 
34 The RSF corpus is the capital invested in the RSF to be used to support issuances of guarantees. 
35 DFI’s obligation to repay the loan will be limited to remaining corpus at the end of the RSF duration. In case this is less than the principal 
amount, recoveries made thereafter until the end of the loan term will also be repaid (up to the $65 million).  
36 While the GCF and ADB loans will support the same sector (i.e. CBG) and contribute to the same outcome i.e. increased CBG 
deployment in India, the two loans will cover separate activities and market segments.  
37 ADB is in advanced stages of discussion with NABARD as the potential Guaranteeing DFI, with RSF operations to be managed under 
NABARD or a wholly owned subsidiary of NABARD, under a trust. 
total project investments of $557 million.34 35 This will be provided alongside a sovereign-guaranteed ADB loan to the same DFI, 
with ADB and GCF loans covering separate activities.36 37 The RSF would be required to make PCG payouts to PFIs if MSME 
borrowers default in payment on PFI Loans which are covered by RSF PCGs.  
 
73. The RSF structure includes the following parameters: 
• 
Guarantee Structure: The RSF includes a pool of funding (i.e. the RSF corpus) which will support the issuance of 
guarantees and is available to cover claims in case of defaults, thereby reducing uncertainty and encouraging better 
lending terms. This is required for a nascent CBG market with a high perception of risk. 
• 
Coverage: The facility is designed to cover 50% of payment defaults (covering both principal and interest on a pari-
passu basis). This is lower than typical MSME guarantees in India (which often cover 60–85%) but is justified by the 
financial returns expected from CBG projects. 
• 
Term and duration: Each credit guarantee will have a 12-year term. This long duration accommodates the high-risk 
phases during construction and early operations, ensuring that banks do not require additional collateral post-guarantee 
expiry. 
• 
Overall RSF duration: The RSF will be operational for 20 years—the first five years focusing on active guarantee 
issuance and portfolio build-up, followed by ten years of claim reimbursement and financial monitoring, and the final three 
years of loan repayments to GCF. 
• 
Leverage: The RSF will start with a leverage of 3, meaning the US$65 million guarantee fund can mobilize up to 
US$390 million in PFI loans, potentially supporting a total project investment of around US$557 million. 
 
Impacts and benefits of the RSF 
 
74. 
The RSF includes targeted credit enhancement and risk sharing. It specifically targets loans to MSME CBG 
developers, reducing risk for PFIs by guaranteeing 50% of each loan’s exposure on a pari-passu basis. This mechanism directly 
lowers the cost of borrowing and collateral burdens on small-scale projects. In the event of defaults, losses are shared between 
the RSF and the PFIs, ensuring that the financial burden does not fall solely on the lender. 
 
75. 
The RSF design builds on precedents from existing MSME-focused guarantee schemes in India and enhances 
these with a clear focus on CBG projects. Existing schemes such as the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small 
Enterprises (CGTMSE) and the National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company both demonstrate how targeted guarantees can 
increase lender willingness and reduce borrower interest rates and collateral burdens. When backed by credible institutions, 
including NABARD or multilateral financial institutions, such guarantees can further mobilize private finance for CBG and promote 
faster growth of India’s CBG sector. 
 
76. 
With improved financing terms—lower interest rates (from about 13% to roughly 11.9%) and reduced collateral 
requirements (even after the payment of a guarantee fee)—the RSF makes CBG projects more viable. In addition to mobilizing 
significant PFI lending, the RSF is anticipated to facilitate broader market confidence, encouraging further private sector 
participation. Beyond direct financial support, the RSF serves as a market-making tool. As banks gain confidence from successful 
guarantee-backed lending, the overall risk perception of the MSME CBG sector is expected to decline, paving the way for 
additional financing avenues in the future. 
 
RSF mechanics 
 
77. 
The RSF mechanics will be as follows. The GCF loan for the RSF will be provided to the RSF Manager, which will in turn 
establish a trust to manage the funds.  Funds will be disbursed from GCF over 5 years, in annual tranches, to gradually build up

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
 
38 Each year, the FEFR will accumulate up to a “maximum reserve amount,” defined as the difference between the outstanding amount of 
the GCF loan at prevailing exchange rates and the amount adjusted to the base year exchange rates. The FEFR will allow the DFI to 
capture residual cash (e.g., guarantee fee revenues) from the guarantee operations, up to 75% of the foreign exchange fluctuation loss 
realized in the preceding year. Even in years with a foreign exchange fluctuation gain, 25% of that gain shall be transferred to the FEFR in 
the following year. This cumulative reserve fund will effectively mitigate the foreign exchange risks associated with the repayment of the 
foreign currency funds from the GCF. 
guarantee operations. Corpus funds will earn interest and based on the corpus and a leverage ratio of 3, the RSF Manager will 
issue PCGs to PFIs for PFI loans. In line with this objective, the RSF corpus may be invested in high-quality public securities, 
primarily government securities and treasury bills, subject to applicable RBI and FEMA regulations. Annual guarantee fees will 
be charged to the PFIs which in turn will be passed on to MSME borrowers. The enhancement of the credit quality of the borrower 
due to the PCG is expected to reduce the potential interest rate of PFI loans, and the fees charged for PCG guarantees will be 
recouped from the gain that accrues to the MSME. The concessionality of the GCF contribution will enable the guarantee fees to 
be kept at a level that is affordable by MSME borrowers. 
  
78. 
Guarantee fee revenues, and interest earnings on the RSF corpus from the initial years of operations will be used to 
establish an appropriate loss reserve. Any recoveries made in case of a default and a claim being filed will also be channeled 
back into the corpus. At the same time, the RSF Manager will pay an interest rate on the GCF loan and will support annual 
administration costs. A foreign exchange fluctuation reserve (FEFR) will be maintained within the RSF to absorb potential foreign 
exchange risk.38 Based on the assumptions in the financing model of the RSF (see Annex 2, Appendix 3), with an expected 
leverage of 3, assumed expected losses based on an expectation of supporting a mix of MSMEs with ‘BBB’ and ‘A’ risk profiles, 
the RSF is estimated to absorb potential losses and have adequate capital to return GCF funds by the end of its life.  
 
 
Figure 6: Fund flow arrangement in Risk-Sharing Facility

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
 
39 Calculated as value of loans covered by the PCGs provided divided by RSF corpus.  
40 Upfront fee will apply to overall loan amount, and annual guarantee fee will apply to outstanding principal. The guarantee fee will carry a 
rebate of 0.5% for the first five years for each PCG to reduce the entry barriers for this product in the market. 
 
Operating arrangements and criteria 
 
79. 
The RSF Manager will manage the PCG approvals and payouts in case of defaults. PFIs will be selected based on 
eligibility criteria to be set out in a guarantee operations manual (GOM) (see B4). The eligibility criteria will include minimum 
requirements on capital adequacy ratio, non-performing loans, liquidity and efficiency, in particular compliance with RBI prudential 
norms. Participating PFIs will also need to show evidence of a robust mechanism for the selection, appraisal, evaluation and 
issuance of loans to MSMEs undertaking Investments.  After loan sanction and prior to disbursement, the PFI shall seek approval 
for guarantee cover from the RSF Manager on submission of the required documents. TA support under Output 2.2 will support 
this process. In addition, for the initial phase of RSF operations ADB will also assess individual proposals to ensure they meet 
the GOM and RSF criteria, with this role shifting to monitoring after the initial phase.  
 
80. 
In case of defaults, PFIs will initiate recovery proceedings and then lodge a claim with the RSF Manager.   A loan account 
would be considered in default based on RBI norms—currently, accounts that are overdue by more than 180 days are classified 
as Non-Performing Assets (NPAs). The mechanics of guarantee recovery process are aligned with applicable regulatory 
guidelines issued by the RBI. An independent Measurement and Verification Agency will be contracted to verify risk claims 
submitted by the PFI.  Subrogation rights will be shared between the PFI (which bears 50% of the risk) and RSF Manager, with 
the PFI taking primary responsibility for recoveries as they are engaged in lending and best placed to manage the recovery 
process effectively. Recovered funds will be reflowed to the RSF corpus. 
81. 
The following terms and conditions will apply to the RSF: 
• 
The RSF leverage ratio39 will initially be 3, and will be reassessed annually, with the potential to increase (up to a 
maximum of 5) or reduce (up to a minimum of 2) based on performance of the portfolio in the preceding year. 
• 
The RSF Manager may issue PCGs under the RSF up to the leverage ratio. 
• 
The DFI will serve as guarantor of record for the PCGs issued. 
• 
With the guarantee, PFIs will extend a 12-year loan with a 2-year principal payment grace period, with reduced interest 
rates reflecting the risk reduced as a result of the PCG.  
• 
PFIs will be charged with respect to each PCG (i) an upfront fee of 0.50% and (ii) an annual guarantee fee of 1.50%.40 
• 
PFIs will be required to demonstrate reduced pricing and lower collateral requirements for guaranteed loans. 
 
82. 
The term of the GCF loan is as per Table 5.  
 
Table 5: Proposed lending terms for GCF funds under Output 1.2  
Currency 
Interest Rate(i) 
Commitment fee 
Tenor (years) 
Grace Period (years) 
USD 
1.25 
0.75 
20  
17 
(i) This includes interest rate (0.75%) and GCF service fee (0.5%); 
 
83. 
Specific eligibility criteria for the RSF include: 
 
• 
Eligible DFI to manage the RSF: Financing institutions that meet the following eligibility criteria:  
• 
Be at least 50% government-owned, either at the central or state level. 
• 
Have a stated mandate and/or operational focus to support developmental goals, including infrastructure 
development, renewable energy, climate resilience, or rural development. 
• 
Be able to serve as guarantor of record for RSF-supported PCGs. 
• 
Have experience in managing guarantee schemes / funds or issuing guarantees. 
 
• 
Eligible investments

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
 
41 Projects supported by ADB funds under the same subproject under Output 1.1 will not be eligible for support under the RSF under 
Output 1.2. 
42 https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/12/Landscape-of-Green-Finance-in-India 
• 
Scope: Only CBG projects developed by MSMEs are eligible, with a specific focus on small-scale plants that face 
conventional financing challenges.41  
• 
Definition: of borrowers as a MSME in accordance with the Government of India’s MSME Development Act.  
• 
Debt-Equity Structure: Projects must adhere to a debt-to-equity ratio of 70:30, ensuring that MSME developers 
contribute at least 30% equity. 
• 
Technical and Economic Viability: Projects need to meet technical, financial, and economic criteria, which are 
documented and evaluated using standardized appraisal guidelines. 
 
• 
Eligible PFIs 
• 
PFIs must have licensing and registration as a Financial Institution: Commercial banks, regional rural banks, Non-
Banking Financial Companies, and government-backed financial institutions, all of which are approved and 
registered with the Reserve Bank of India 
• 
PFIs must have compliance with RBI prudential norms, including minimum requirements on capital adequacy ratio, 
non-performing loans, liquidity and efficiency 
• 
PFIs must have a proven track record in financing relevant business areas, or technical assessment capabilities for 
such sectors; PFIs must have project evaluation capabilities, such as possessing specialized team capable of 
evaluating relevant projects or willingness to undergo training 
• 
PFIs must have reporting and monitoring capabilities: PFIs should be able to regularly report data regarding its 
loan portfolio and monitor the performance of projects in line with ADB/GCF as applicable.    
 
Component 2: Technical support for institutionalizing green lending practices and strengthening 
DFI capacities 
 
84. 
India’s clean energy transition hinges not just on mobilizing finance but on ensuring that DFIs are equipped to channel 
capital effectively into emerging clean energy technologies. While DFIs have historically played a key role in financing large-scale 
solar and wind projects42, emerging areas like energy storage, energy efficiency, green fuels (e.g. green hydrogen), off-grid 
solutions remain underfunded. The limited DFI exposure in scaling up these technologies is largely due to three broad sets of 
technical and institutional constraints. First, limited technical expertise, awareness, and inadequate systems within DFIs 
hinder their ability to identify, appraise and finance projects that involve emerging clean energy technologies. Second, 
fragmented pipelines and fewer projects for emerging clean energy technologies makes it harder for DFIs to find and finance 
such projects. Finally, across the financial sector in India, the lack of standardized green finance taxonomies and evolving 
climate risk disclosure requirements further hinders DFIs ability to scale up green lending.  
 
85. 
Outputs and activities under Component 2 will complement investments and de-risking under Component 1, and will 
address the above institutional and capacity gaps, by working with DFIs, project proponents,  participating financial institutions 
(PFIs) and MSME developers. Component 2 includes three outputs:  
• 
Output 2.1:  DFIs have enhanced technical capacities to finance emerging clean energy technologies 
• 
Output 2.2: MSMEs and PFIs have enhanced technical capacities to access credit guarantees through RSF 
• 
Output 2.3: Public/private FIs adopt tools and frameworks to scale up financing for emerging clean energy technologies 
 
86. 
Together these outputs contribute to ensuring that DFIs deploy concessional finance and expand their portfolio in 
emerging clean energy technologies (outcome 1) and project developers and public/private FIs have access to finance (including 
gender-responsive financing) for these technologies. 
 
Output 2.1:  DFIs have enhanced technical capacities to finance emerging clean energy technologies 
Executing entity: ADB

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
Activity 2.1.1: Strengthen DFI capabilities in project preparation, appraisal, and monitoring of IGFF-aligned investments 
   
87. 
This activity aims to enhance the technical and institutional capacity of DFIs receiving IGFF support under Output 1.1, 
enabling them to effectively structure, appraise, and monitor emerging clean energy projects. Through technical assistance, this 
activity will strengthen the technical and institutional capabilities of at least 5 DFIs engaged in IGFF-supported 
subprojects. This support will ensure that DFIs can efficiently deploy concessional financing, mitigate project risks, and track 
investment impacts. Through technical assistance and structured training, DFIs will be equipped to assess, originate, and monitor 
clean energy investments (e.g., green hydrogen, DRE, CBG). By embedding long-term technical assistance within DFIs and 
developing standardized frameworks, this output will enable DFIs to scale investments in emerging clean energy technologies 
efficiently and sustainably.  
 
88. 
The following activities and deliverables will be supported under this activity:  
 
• 
Conduct needs assessment and develop technical assistance package for each IGFF subproject, including: 
o 
Assess capacity and institutional needs: Needs assessments will be carried out for each DFI to be engaged 
in subprojects and potential proponents during preparation of each subproject. This will focus on capacity to (i) 
effectively implement IGFF subprojects and (ii) identify project pipelines, with a specific focus on emerging clean 
energy technologies targeted by IGFF.  
o 
Design technical assistance support packages: Each package will be executed over five years, aligned with 
the implementation of IGFF-funded subprojects. This support will be implemented by ADB-engaged consultants 
embedded within Project Implementation Units (PIUs) established within DFIs for each subproject, and will 
provide support across the full project lifecycle, from origination and pipeline development to implementation, 
impact tracking, and reporting back to IGFF. Capacity-building workshops and advisory support will be 
sequenced based on DFI needs and market maturity levels for each technology. 
  
• 
Strengthen internal DFI capacities and systems to implement IGFF subprojects and finance clean energy projects, 
including:  
o 
Strengthen DFI systems for implementation of credit lines for clean energy: PIUs in at least 5 DFIs 
strengthened with additional capacity to originate, identify and implement clean energy lending. 
o 
Support clean energy investment appraisal: At least 5 internal DFI toolkits and/or frameworks to standardize 
project appraisal and risk assessment will be developed and institutionalized, and investment appraisal for 
emerging technologies will be supported to support disbursement of loans to project proponents. 
o 
Strengthen safeguards implementation: At least 5 DFI-level safeguards frameworks and/or screening 
approaches will be enhanced, and support provided on safeguards screening and assessment including 
environmental and social impacts of investments. 
o 
Strengthen gender-responsive financing: At least 5 DFI-level gender policies and/or frameworks will be 
developed and institutionalized, including through training on gender-responsive lending practices for clean 
energy. Data templates for capturing sex-disaggregated data will be created for all DFIs. 
o 
Build DFI staff capacity: At least 15 structured training sessions will be conducted for each DFI on project 
structuring, risk evaluation, financial due diligence, and monitoring of clean energy investments, as well as on 
gender-sensitive lending and safeguards. This will target DFI staff in headquarters and regional offices and cover 
both business development and loan operations teams. Trainings and seminars will be conducted for DFI officers 
on gender and financing. 
o 
Establish monitoring and evaluation systems: At least 5 DFI-level monitoring frameworks and data collection 
systems will be established or strengthened to track baseline, mid-term, and final project performance, ensuring 
alignment with GCF reporting requirements.  
o 
Develop knowledge products and training programs: To facilitate broader adoption of best practices across 
financial institutions, knowledge products, guidelines, and/or toolkits will be developed based on IGFF’s 
experience.  
• 
Supporting DFIs in identifying bankable pipelines for emerging clean energy technology projects including:  
o 
Conduct market assessments:  At least five market assessments will be conducted to provide critical market 
intelligence on sectoral trends, infrastructure readiness, financial viability, and policy developments, ensuring

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
sub-projects are well-structured and aligned with IGFF financing criteria. These assessments will support DFIs 
in identifying high-potential clean energy projects, evaluating risks, and integrating best practices. Additionally, 
annual policy research updates will be conducted for each sub-project to facilitate engagement with state and 
national ministries, regulators, and financing agencies, ensuring that project selection and financing remain 
aligned with evolving clean energy policies. 
o 
Facilitate industry engagement and market outreach: For each subproject, at least 10 industry stakeholder 
workshops and awareness sessions will be organized to educate developers and DFIs on financing mechanisms 
and investment readiness requirements and facilitate stakeholder engagements and site visits for each 
subproject across multiple states to assess project viability and developer capacity and local market conditions.  
Furthermore, knowledge-sharing sessions and training programs will be held for financial institutions to 
disseminate learnings, best practices, and developed toolkits from IGFF-supported projects, including RSF 
ensuring broader adoption and scalability of clean energy financing beyond IGFF’s immediate partners. 
 
Output 2.2: MSMEs and participating financial institutions (PFIs) have enhanced technical capacities to access credit 
guarantees through RSF 
Executing entity: ADB 
 
Activity 2.2.1:  Build capacities of PFIs and MSME project developers in structuring bankable projects, and accessing credit 
guarantees through RSF 
 
89. 
This activity ensures that PFIs and MSME project developers can effectively access and utilize the RSF established 
under Output 1.2. Since CBG projects face high perceived risks, financing remains constrained by limited institutional expertise, 
fragmented pipelines, and the absence of standardized risk assessment frameworks. Technical assistance will be provided to: 
(i) DFIs managing the RSF to establish operational systems, risk assessment models, and performance tracking mechanisms 
and (ii) participating FIs in the RSF to build appraisal capacity and enable efficient guarantee-backed lending and MSME project 
developers to enhance access to financing from PFIs.  By bridging knowledge and technical gaps, this activity will increase RSF 
uptake and unlock additional financing for clean energy MSMEs, ensuring greater private sector participation in CBG sector. 
 
90. 
To achieve this, the following activities will be implemented:  
• 
Provide assistance to establish RSF systems and frameworks and strengthen DFI capacity to issue credit 
guarantees. This will include providing support to the DFI managing RSF for the following activities: 
o 
Develop risk assessment tools and credit scoring methodologies for CBG projects to guide PFI decision-making 
and implement a digital system to track guaranteed loan performance and enable data-driven reporting to ADB 
and GCF. 
o 
Facilitate at least 5 regional outreach campaigns annually to raise awareness about the RSF, its benefits, and 
eligibility requirements among PFIs and MSMEs. 
 
• 
Assist PFIs to identify pipelines of CBG investments and for MSME developers to access credit guarantee-
supported loans, including for the following activities: 
o 
Institutional needs assessments (2) of PFIs and MSMEs to identify capacity gaps in loan application processes, 
credit risk assessment, and project structuring 
o 
Delivery of 35 training sessions (7 per year for 5 years) on project bankability, financial structuring, and credit 
risk assessment for PFIs and MSME developers. Hands-on training will be carried out for PFIs on leveraging 
RSF mechanisms, including guidance on guarantee issuance, risk-sharing agreements, and financial reporting 
obligations, as well as support to set up mechanisms to screen and appraise MSME CBG projects. 
o 
Annual market assessments (5) will be conducted to identify emerging MSME-led CBG projects across different 
states and provide critical market intelligence for PFIs. These assessments will analyze demand centers in 
industrial, transport, and commercial sectors, develop risk profiles evaluating feedstock supply, technology 
viability, and financial risks, and study market landscapes in new regions where PFIs seek to expand. 
Additionally, they will map financing needs, policy incentives, regulatory frameworks, and subsidy mechanisms, 
ensuring that CBG investments align with market conditions and support sectoral growth.

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
o 
Support targeted marketing and matchmaking initiatives to link MSMEs with financiers:  In each state where 
MSME-led CBG projects are implemented, at least 2 matchmaking events will be organized to connect MSME 
developers with PFIs and other financiers. 
 
Output 2.3: Public/private FIs adopt tools and frameworks to scale up financing for emerging clean energy technologies 
Executing entity: ADB 
 
91. 
This output will mainstream green lending and climate risk management across India's financial sector by equipping 
public and private financial institutions with standardized tools and methodologies on encouraging green lending and managing 
climate and environmental risks and ensuring evolving policies around these areas are based on strong sector experience. This 
output includes two activities, with the Activity 2.3.1 focused on facilitating broader awareness and adoption of tools and 
methodologies across FIs, and Activity 2.3.2 supporting dialogue between FIs and policymakers. Support under this output will 
focus on strengthening / introducing tools and frameworks that support two categories of actions that banks can take: 
• 
Measures to encourage green lending: This includes adopting green bonds frameworks to issue bonds that support 
climate and environmental projects, developing green lending products and lending facilities (e.g. lending targeting 
energy efficiency, or specific RE technologies), and adopting climate / sustainable finance taxonomies to better track and 
define green financing provided by the bank. 
• 
Measures to manage climate risk: This would include using scenario analysis and stress tests (based on international 
and Indian standards and frameworks) to evaluate how physical and transition risks could impact portfolios, incorporating 
tools to measure the carbon footprint of lending portfolios and assess exposure to high-emission sectors, embedding 
climate risk in credit risk assessment, and initiating climate disclosure and reporting based on voluntary Indian standards 
or regulatory requirements in the future.  
 
Activity 2.3.1: Strengthen financial institutions' capacity on climate risk management, green lending, and gender-responsive 
financing 
 
92. 
Shifting India’s financial sector towards climate-aligned lending and gender-responsive financing requires equipping 
financial institutions with standardized risk assessment frameworks, ESG screening tools, and climate disclosure approaches. 
This activity will complement support provided to DFIs and PFIs engaged under Outputs 1.1 and 1.2. by engaging a broader 
group of DFIs and strengthening dialogue across public and private financial institutions (FIs).  
 
93. 
To achieve this, the following activities will be conducted: 
• 
Organize financial sector dialogues and roundtables: Facilitate, design and organize at least 40 financial sector 
dialogues (8 per year, across the country) on green lending, climate risk management, and disclosure frameworks 
engaging DFIs, PFIs, and commercial banks. 
• 
Conduct institutional gap assessments for DFIs: Through the financial sector dialogues, at least 11 DFIs will be 
identified for further support, beyond the DFIs already receiving support under Output 2.1 and Output 2.2. For each DFI, 
institutional gap assessments will be conducted to identify barriers and opportunities for integrating gender indicators, 
climate risk assessment, standardized ESG screening, and financial disclosure frameworks (aligned with India’s BRSR 
standards). Based on these, tailored advisory support and training will be given to each DFI to further develop internal 
green lending policies, climate risk assessment tools, and gender-responsive financial frameworks. Post assessment 
insights, a set of proposed gender indicators with an intersectional lens can be drafted for DFIs, aligned with IGFF’s 
criteria, focusing on measurable impacts. 
• 
Strengthen gender mainstreaming: Develop 5 gender mainstreaming action plans or tools to promote women-led clean 
energy enterprises and increase gender-responsive lending within financial institutions. 
 
Activity 2.3.2  Support dialogues between policy makers and financial institutions on enabling policies on climate risk 
management, green lending and gender-responsive financing 
 
94. 
Strengthening policy coherence and financial regulations is crucial for aligning India’s banking sector with climate finance 
objectives. However, the regulatory framework for green lending is evolving, with recent developments including initiation of work 
to develop a taxonomy for climate finance, and draft guidelines on climate-related risk disclosure for banks and FIs being issued 
by RBI. When approved, these policies will require a major shift in practice among DFIs and FIs more broadly. This activity will

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
facilitate dialogues with policymakers to enhance the discussion on emerging policies and their implications for the financial 
sector, as well as ensure that policymakers remain aware of DFI challenges and opportunities in rolling these out. 
  
95. 
To this end, this activity will support at least two annual green finance policy roundtables with RBI, SEBI and other 
financial policy makers with leading DFIs and other banks and FIs. To inform each dialogue, at least two annual evidence-
based policy briefs will be commissioned to assess state of play among FIs and provide policy recommendations on green 
finance. These roundtables will also focus on gender-inclusive financing mechanisms and scaling up financing for women-led 
energy investments.   
 
96. 
In parallel, targeted gender-responsive activities will be carried out, including structured consultations with women’s 
groups and gender experts, the organization of four workshops engaging at least 200 stakeholders (with 40% women), and the 
publication of a dedicated gender policy brief. Additionally, skill development programs will train at least 2,500 female 
entrepreneurs in accessing and managing green finance, equipping them to lead in India’s clean energy economy. 
 
Project pipeline 
97. 
The indicative project pipeline for the Program is presented in the table below. This pipeline was used to design the 
program structure, calculate GHG reductions, and assess sustainable development and financial frameworks. While these initial 
projects have informed the program's design, they remain indicative and subject to change. Projects may be adjusted in size, 
scope, or replaced based on further design and structuring. 
 
Table 6: Indicative Project Pipeline 
Project 
Readiness and 
Status 
Green Fuel Development Project  
The project aims to accelerate the adoption of compressed biogas (CBG) across India by 
addressing financial and operational barriers in the sector. The project aims to establish a 
robust business market for CBG across India by utilizing municipal solid waste and agricultural 
residue. The project will be implemented by NABARD (relevant to IGFF) and the State Bank 
of India (SBI) and is structured around two financial mechanisms: a $300 million credit line to 
provide low-cost financing for established large-scale CBG developers and a $65 million credit 
guarantee facility to de-risk investments, particularly for MSME borrowers. To facilitate 
financing for private MSME players in the sector, a credit guarantee mechanism will be 
implemented through NABARD and its participating financial institutions (PFIs). These PFIs 
specialized in state and local financing operations in collaboration with NABARD. This initiative 
addresses critical challenges such as weak credit profiles and high collateral requirements, 
enabling broader participation in the CBG sector. 
 
The initiative aligns with India’s National Policy on Biofuels (2018) and the SATAT Initiative, 
which targets the development of 5,000 CBG plants. The project will support at least 200 CBG 
plants. At least 100 CBG plants are expected to be supported by the guarantee mechanism 
and an additional 100 CBG projects are supported by the proposed credit line.  Additionally, 
the project promotes gender-inclusive workforce development and aims to enhance waste 
management systems through digital trading platforms for feedstock supply chains. 
Advanced 
discussions, ADB 
loan approval is 
expected in Q3 
2025. 
Expansion of Financing Environmentally Sustainable Growth in Infrastructure Project  
Building on an established and ongoing financing relationship with IIFCL, this subproject is 
being developed to expand the access to concessional financing to emerging technologies 
proposed by IGFF. The project will strengthens IIFCL’s institutional capacity by integrating 
climate risk assessments, ESG criteria, and sustainability frameworks into its lending 
operations. The project will also promotes gender-inclusive financing. Additionally, it will 
leverage concessional finance to mobilize private sector investment through blended finance.  
Preliminary 
discussions with 
IIFCL for a follow-up 
additional financing 
in 2026.

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
 
By implementing sustainability frameworks and innovative financial instruments, the project 
will support India’s net-zero commitments. 
New project with NABARD 
Under IGFF, discussions are ongoing with NABARD to develop DRE-based interventions 
targeting, dairy industry, cold storage, and off-grid solar water pumps.  
 
Preliminary (initial)  
discussions with 
NABARD 
New subproject with REC 
Under IGFF, discussions are ongoing with REC to develop energy transition and energy 
access interventions targeting, RTC-renewables, green hydrogen production, and E-mobility 
with charging infrastructure. 
 
Preliminary (initial)  
discussions with 
REC

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
98. 
As accredited entity (AE) for this proposal, ADB will be responsible for the overall Facility (Funded Activity), which 
includes two components (a TA/grant component and a concessional loan component).  
 
Overview 
99. 
Following the GCF Board approval, ADB and GCF will, based on the AMA, enter into a program-specific legal 
agreement (the “Funded Activity Agreement” or the “FAA”). The FAA will outline, among other, the sectoral and 
geographical scope of the proposed ADB/GCF Co-financing Program. The GCF funds will be placed in a dedicated ADB 
GCF Trust Fund and ADB’s privileges and immunities will be considered applicable to the GCF funds disbursed to and 
held by ADB for the IGFF and other GCF funds held in the Trust Fund. ADB (acting as AE) will be solely responsible for 
the management and administration of GCF proceeds and other GCF funds and will carry out such management and 
administration in accordance with its own policies and procedures, and with the same degree of care as it uses in the 
administration of its own funds or other donor funds for which it has management or investment responsibility, taking into 
account the provisions of the AMA. 
 
100. 
Usage of GCF funds will be based on criteria outlined in this proposal which will be included in dedicated Program 
Implementation Guidelines to be developed following FAA effectiveness and prior to first disbursement for GCF funds 
for the IGFF. These guidelines will complement the program Term Sheet and FAA, and include further guidance on 
implementation arrangements, sub-project selection and prioritization, monitoring and evaluation, and reporting. 
 
101. 
During the implementation period, following the entry into effect of the FAA for this Program, GCF resources will 
be allocated by ADB for specific sub-projects. Each potential sub-project will be identified during ADB’s country 
programming process, prepared in accordance with ADB’s internal policies and procedures, and evaluated against the 
criteria presented in this proposal and agreed with GCF, to determine eligibility for funding under the program.   
 
Due diligence and subproject preparation 
102. 
Subprojects will be prepared by ADB based on requirements in the FAA and in line with GoI and ADB’s Country 
Partnership Strategy. The assessment of the institutional capacity and eligibility of DFIs will be individually undertaken 
as part of the preparation process, and will follow ADB policies, procedures, and due diligence standards. The share of 
GCF financing under the IGFF to be allocated to each subproject, scope of the subproject, and terms and conditions of 
the blended financing package will be confirmed during preparation.  
 
103. 
In accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures for preparation of sovereign and non-sovereign projects, due 
diligence will be conducted as part of preparation of each subproject. The scope of due diligence includes technical due 
diligence, economic and financial analyses, gender assessment, and categorization, sector assessment. As part of 
technical due diligence, ADB will support feasibility studies and market assessments, as needed, to identify specific 
technologies to be supported under each subproject and assess potential pipelines for DFI lending. The design of 
subprojects under Output 1.1 will include a careful assessment of the cost of funds to DFIs, and final pricing to borrowers. 
ADB will conduct economic and financial analysis that considers investment-specific cash flow projections and viability 
for a selection of target investments and also assess the financial management systems and situation of DFIs. Subproject 
design will also consider implementing arrangements, monitoring and reporting arrangements, and measures to support 
capacity gaps in DFIs. 
 
104. 
On safeguards, screening will be done which will inform due diligence to prepare safeguards documents on 
environment, involuntary resettlement and/or indigenous people (as relevant), summary poverty reduction and social 
strategy will be prepared. Furthermore, procurement risk assessment and financial management assessment will be 
conducted on the implementing agency. As subprojects will include DFIs, ADB will also conduct Integrity Due Diligence 
to ensure that integrity-related risks are addressed in the course of project processing, measures put in place to

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
strengthen borrowers’ financial accounting, and auditing arrangements are in place to prevent misuse of ADB and GCF 
funds.  
 
105. 
For each subproject to be supported under Output 1, a Project Preparatory Report (PPR) will be submitted to 
the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) under the Ministry of Finance, GoI. This PPR serves as a techno-commercial 
evaluation of the proposed project. The DEA is required to review and approve the project based on the PPR before 
ADB can proceed with lending to the respective DFI.  
 
106. 
Upon completion of the due diligence process and the negotiation of loan terms with the client, subprojects will 
be considered for approval by ADB.  
Figure 7: Overview of fund flows for loans and TA 
 
 
 
Legal agreements 
Component 1 (Loans) 
107. 
ADB will provide sovereign-guaranteed loans – using GCF and ADB resources - to borrowers or executing 
entities (EEs) in accordance with ADB policies for sovereign loans. Borrowers will be public financing institutions 
(referred to as DFIs in this proposal). ADB, as AE, will enter into (i) sovereign-guaranteed loan agreements with the DFI 
(with separate loan agreements for ADB resources and GCF resources), and (ii) guarantee agreements with India for 
each subproject for both ADB and GCF-financed loans.  
 
108. 
EEs will be responsible for channeling resources provided by ADB via sovereign loans (funded with GCF and/or 
ADB resources) to eligible sub-borrowers for eligible investments, in accordance with the loan agreement between the 
EE and ADB. Detailed arrangements for the implementation of each subproject, including criteria for eligible sub-

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
borrowers and eligible investments as aligned with the FAA, will be set out in a Project Administration Manual for each 
subproject. The execution and administration of any of the above-mentioned operations, including reporting 
requirements, will follow ADB policies and procedures. 
 
Figure 8: Overview of legal agreements 
 
 
Component 1 (RSF) 
109. 
ADB will provide a conditional loan (using GCF reimbursable resources) to a selected EE/DFI (RSF Manager) 
to establish the RSF as part of a subproject. ADB, as AE, will enter into a loan agreement with the RSF Manager (RSF 
Loan Agreement) on terms reflecting the bespoke structure of the loan including but not limited to (i) repayment of the 
loan only to the extent of the unused/reimbursed principal and recoveries through instalments beginning at the end of 
year 18 of the tenor till the end of year 20 and (ii) payment of periodic interest. Further details of the proposed commercial 
terms for the RSF can be found in Annex 2. The RSF loan will not be guaranteed by the Government of India, however, 
a cross default provision will be included in the complementary ADB sovereign-guaranteed loan agreement to the DFI 
under the same subproject. This will help mitigate the risk of non-performance on the RSF loan agreement.  
 
110. 
The DFI/EE will be responsible for establishing the RSF under a separate trust (subject to further due diligence) 
in accordance with the RSF Loan Agreement signed with ADB. A guarantee operations manual (GOM) will be prepared 
detailing roles and responsibilities of the RSF stakeholders, eligibility criteria and approval processes, funds flow and 
cash management procedures, procedures for PCG issuance and claims, and a risk management framework. The GOM 
will also include templates for RSF documentation, such as a model RSF master guarantee agreement and reporting 
templates. The GOM will be finalized, subject to the ADB’s no-objection, as a condition for the first disbursement of the 
funds allocated to the RSF by ADB to the RSF Manager. Compliance with the GOM by RSF Manager will be covenanted 
in the loan agreement.  
 
111. 
The RSF Manager will provide guarantees to eligible PFIs for loans to support eligible investments. For each 
guarantee, the RSF Manager will sign a guarantee agreement with the PFI. PFIs will provide lending for investments 
based on their own processes and policies and will monitor and report on these to the DFI (see Annex 2, Appendix 4 for 
more details on proposed implementing arrangements for RSF). 
 
Component 2

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
112. 
For Component 2, ADB will serve as the EE for technical assistance grant resources. When acting as EE, ADB 
would apply its own policies and procedures for the hiring of individual consultants and/or procurement of consulting 
firms and other services, ensuring the fulfilment of applicable AMA and FAA requirements. 
 
Program management and governance 
113. 
In its capacity as AE, ADB will administer loans, grants and technical assistance funds from GCF under the IGFF 
as follows: 
• 
Administer GCF financing as per GCF terms and requirements as set out in the FAA and AMA, and provide 
financing from ADB’s own resources and other ADB-administered financing (if applicable), applying the same 
duty of care and due diligence for all sources.  
• 
Carry out such management and administration of the GCF funds for loans and technical assistance in 
accordance with ADB’s policies, procedures and practices, and with at least the same degree of care as it uses 
in the administration of its own funds or other donor funds, in accordance with the provisions of the FAA and 
AMA. 
• 
Assign ADB staff to support the program management and implementation. 
 
114. 
The following arrangements will be put in place to guide program implementation (see Figure 9):  
• 
ADB will establish a program steering group to provide strategic direction for the program including (a) allocation 
of loans and technical assistance funds to subprojects; (b) subproject selection, (c) approving the program 
implementation guidelines (PIG) and any updates thereto, and (d) ensuring compliance of the program’s 
implementation with the FAA and applicable ADB policies.  The group will include representatives from ADB’s  
South Asia Regional Department, India Resident Mission and relevant Sector Departments (e.g. covering 
energy, financial sector etc.).  
 
• 
An ADB program management unit (PMU) will be established, with a dedicated fund manager, and supported 
by staff and consultants to help manage the program. The PMU will serve the focal point for day-to-day 
operations of the program, approve allocation of program resources in accordance with the program 
implementation guidelines, conduct monitoring and evaluation, and collate reports to be provided to GCF. The 
PMU will take its strategic direction from the program steering group. It will guide implementation of subprojects 
by engaging with and supporting subproject-level project implementation unit (PIUs). The PIG will serve as the 
manual for implementation of the program, outlining processes to implement the program in accordance with the 
provisions in the FAA. The PMU will also implement TA activities under Component 2, including overseeing 
procurement of consulting services, design and delivery of TA activities, overseeing events and training, 
developing knowledge products etc. 
 
• 
For each subproject, DFIs will establish a PIU to oversee operations of the subproject. The PIU will include full 
time staff from DFI to manage and implement the subproject, supplemented with technical support provided 
under Output 2.1. The PIU will serve the focal point for day-to-day operations of the subproject, screen and select 
investments that meet subproject eligibility criteria, carry out financial management processes (e.g. audits, 
reporting), conduct monitoring and evaluation, and collate reports to be provided to the PMU.  The consultants 
engaged under Output 2.1 will focus on developing frameworks and tools, demonstrating their use, supporting 
policy rollout, building capacity within bank teams and branches, and facilitating data collection to enable 
monitoring and reporting as required by ADB and GCF. The subproject-specific project administration manual 
(PAM) will outline implanting arrangements and processes for each subproject.  The PIUs will also support 
delivery of TA activities under Component 2 such as trainings and events, market studies and assessments etc. 
 
115. 
For the RSF specifically, the RSF Manager will be responsible for (i) identification of PFIs and pipeline 
development, (ii) PCG review, approval and issuance, (iii) risk management and monitoring and (iv) cash management. 
It will operate under the oversight of ADB and will provide regular reports to ADB on the performance of the RSF. A PIU 
will be established for the RSF to support implementation. The RSF operations will be guided by the GOM. In the first 
two years of RSF operation, ADB – through the PMU – will take an active role. Proposals for guarantees  submitted by

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
PFIs and evaluated by the RSF Manager, will be further validated and reviewed by ADB. The GOM will developed by 
the RSF Manager and the PMU. TA consultants will also support the appraisal and fund management process. From the 
third year of operations. ADB’s role will shift to monitoring and compliance checks as per the GOM. 
Figure 9: IGFF governance arrangements 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
116. 
IGFF is anchored in the urgent need to accelerate deep decarbonization across India’s economy by broadening 
the range of clean energy solutions that can drive this transformation. As outlined in Section B.1 of the funding proposal– 
while utility-scale renewable energy projects continue to play a central role in achieving India’s 2070 net-zero target, 
complementary investments are required to strengthen grid reliability, decarbonize high-emitting sectors, and extend 
clean energy access to underserved regions. However, as detailed in Annex 2 (#33 to #35), the current financing 
landscape remains disproportionately concentrated in utility-scale solar and wind, which together accounted for 65% of 
all tracked clean energy investments in 2021/22, while sectors like biofuels received only 1%.   
 
117. 
Financing is also heavily skewed toward domestic sources (83%) and debt instruments (50%), with 64% of 
domestic debt raised via direct balance sheet issuances and only 24% through concessional project loans. As shown in 
Table 6 of Annex 2, the average cost of lending for emerging technologies—such as RTC renewables, green hydrogen, 
and compressed biogas—ranges between 9.6% and 13.5% (Table 6 of FP Annex 02), with typical loan tenors capped 
at 10 years (except for RTC solar, which can extend to 19 years). In contrast, the average cost of borrowing for domestic 
financial institutions is approximately 7.5%. The higher cost of financing for emerging technologies reflects prevailing 
market barriers, including greater perceived risk, limited commercial maturity, and the absence of standardized revenue 
models.   
 
118. 
GCF funds will enable DFIs to scale lending for emerging clean energy technologies by providing concessional 
and long-term capital, de-risking investments in high impact but underfunded technologies, and strengthening financial 
institutions' capacity to assess and structure clean energy projects, ultimately reducing the cost of capital and catalyzing 
private sector participation.

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
GCF support is critical for scaling emerging clean energy technologies 
119. 
RTC projects in India face considerable financial and structural challenges. While integrating solar, wind, and 
battery storage offers a stable supply of clean power, the investment required is nearly double that of standalone solar 
or wind installations. This high capital intensity, compounded by weak grid infrastructure and underdeveloped ancillary 
markets, limits project viability. Distribution companies (DISCOMs), which are the main off takers, are often financially 
distressed, further weakening revenue certainty for investors. According to Annex 3 EFA, projects remain only marginally 
viable with concessional support, with a financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 7.8% at par with the weighted average 
cost of capital (WACC) of 7.8%. GCF concessional loans, alongside ADB loans, improves the financial case by lowering 
the WACC, extending tenors, and mitigating risks—transforming an otherwise commercially marginal project into a more 
investible opportunity.  
 
120. 
Green hydrogen, though pivotal to decarbonizing hard-to-abate sectors like steel and chemicals, remains 
economically uncompetitive. Production costs are still significantly higher than grey hydrogen and achieving price parity 
requires renewable electricity prices as low as INR 2,000/MWh— below current market averages. The market is also 
hindered by a lack of large-scale commercial deployment, limited infrastructure for transport and storage, and 
underdeveloped regulatory frameworks. The EFA shows that, under standard DFI lending terms, the financial viability is 
insufficient to justify investment. However, with GCF and ADB blended financing under IGFF, WACC drops from 10.4% 
to 9.3%, improving viability with a FIRR of 9.9%. Despite these tight margins, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) 
is robust at 22.8%, suggesting that GCF concessional loans are not only necessary but well justified to facilitate early 
investments in the sector. 
 
121. 
The CBG sector, particularly among MSME developers, faces persistent structural and financial barriers. High 
interest rates of 12–14%, stringent collateral requirements, and limited lender familiarity with biogas economics deter 
lending. Even where letters of intent (LoIs) exist under the government’s SATAT initiative, the transition from intention 
to implementation remains slow. The EFA highlights how guarantees through the GCF-supported Risk Sharing Facility 
(RSF) can address these challenges. By partially guaranteeing loans and lowering capital reserve requirement of banks, 
lower interest rates and decreased collateral requirements can be passed on to end-borrowers. With FIRR of 14.2% or 
even 16% when combined with capital subsidies available, and a WACC of 11.6%, the investment case becomes more 
stringent. The economic returns (EIRR 20.5%) further underscore the importance of public de-risking mechanisms to 
catalyze lending and unlock MSME participation in this underdeveloped market.  
 
122. 
Electric mobility, especially two and three-wheelers in rural and peri-urban India, faces a different but equally 
critical set of challenges. Despite being economically attractive—with a strong FIRR of 19.3%—EV adoption is limited 
by inadequate charging infrastructure, high upfront vehicle costs, and limited consumer access to financing. Rural users 
face a dual burden: poor credit history and unfamiliarity with EV technologies, while banks hesitate to lend due to 
uncertain resale values and technological risks. The EFA finds that IGFF loans, by reducing borrowing costs together 
with training to financial institutions, can unlock scale and enable cleaner, more accessible mobility solutions outside of 
India’s urban cores. The EIRR of 15.3% reinforces the economic rationale for concessional support to expand EV 
adoption in underserved markets.  
 
123. 
DRE, including rooftop solar and productive-use systems like cold storage, remains severely under-financed 
despite its potential to transform rural livelihoods. High upfront costs and low fixed tariff structures reduce financial 
viability for DRE systems. Moreover, banks remain hesitant to lend due to the small scale of investments and weak credit 
histories of rural consumers. The EFA indicates that without GCF and ADB loans, most DRE systems would be financially 
unviable, with FIRRs below WACC. Only through concessional loans can the WACC be reduced to match the FIRR at 
9.1%, enabling investments in energy access for agriculture and small businesses. Notably, the economic benefits are 
substantial, with an EIRR of 25.5%, pointing to the broader developmental and climate co-benefits of scaling DRE 
solutions.  
 
124. 
Finally, off-grid solar-powered irrigation pumps offer one of the most economically viable clean energy 
interventions in rural India. Yet, adoption is stalled by low awareness, limited credit access, and lender reluctance due

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
to small loan sizes and informal borrower profiles (also explained in Annex 2 #25). According to the EFA, even without 
subsidies, these systems yield a FIRR of 46%, increasing to 63.6% with government subsidies. However, the high WACC 
of 15.6% under commercial lending conditions makes them inaccessible to most farmers. GCF concessional loans, 
alongside ADB loans, reduce this barrier by bringing down the WACC to 14.2%, making these high-impact, climate-
resilient technologies scalable through aggregated delivery and de-risking strategies.  
 
GCF financing instruments and technical assistance are designed to target specific market barriers 
125. 
IGFF utilizes a combination of concessional loans, risk-sharing mechanisms, and technical assistance to address 
the barriers described above.   
 
• 
Concessional loans (80% ADB, 20% GCF contribution): GCF concessional loans will be provided alongside 
ADB loans, reducing the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) from 11.1% to 10.2%, making clean energy 
projects bankable (refer to Annex 3).  GCF loans will provide long-tenure, affordable capital to DFIs enabling 
them to support high-impact but underfinanced technologies. A mix of 80% ADB and 20% GCF reduces the 
landed cost of financing to DFIs to 8%, and 20 year tenor of funds is considerably longer than the funds DFIs 
typically raise in the domestic market. GCF and ADB loans will also target specific technologies, and through 
IGFF subprojects, DFIs will also invest their own funds (alongside GCF and ADB) enabling a larger pool of 
funding to be mobilized for such projects. 
 
126. 
RSF for CBG MSMEs ($65M GCF loan to support PCG issuance): With a proposed corpus of $65 million, the 
RSF is structured to guarantee $195 million in loans and catalyze $390 million in PFI lending, ultimately mobilizing 
approximately $557 million in total project financing when accounting for a 30% contribution from MSME developers. 
This scale is targeted to support 110-150 small-scale CBG plants—roughly 10% of the letters of intent received under 
the SATAT program as of December 2024.  
 
127. 
According to the analysis in Annex 2 and 3, a 50% partial credit guarantee coverage would be associated with 
an up to 250-basis point reduction in PFI interest rates for the guaranteed portion of the loan. This translates into a drop 
in the cost of funds for MSME project developers from DFIs from 13% to 11.9% and a reduction in the weighted average 
cost of capital (WACC) of project proponents from 12.1% to 11.6%. Although the project rate of return remains similar, 
the improved financing terms enhance overall project viability and affordability. As a result of successful lending 
experiences, the most significant indirect impact of the RSF would be the market making aspect. 
 
128. 
Compared to a direct loan to PFIs, structuring the RSF as a guarantee mechanism is significantly more efficient 
and specifically targets the issue of high perception of risk and high collateral requirements. From an efficiency 
perspective, while a loan will require full disbursement to a PFI, a guarantee allows the same capital to mobilize nearly 
three times more private sector lending by de-risking PFI exposure to MSME-led CBG projects. Guarantees are also 
critically needed for MSME CBG projects to bring down the high-risk perception by PFIs for these projects, which may 
not be achieved through a loan (which does not alter the risk associated with the project).   
 
129. 
Technical assistance to support targeted capacity building of DFIs and strengthen the enabling 
environment. Financing support alone is not enough to address the barriers above, especially in changing the lending 
behavior of DFIs to target emerging clean energy technologies. GCF technical assistance under Output 2.1 will be key 
in building the capacity of DFIs to initiate and scale up lending for new technologies. This assistance will train DFI officers 
in the PIUs as well as teams engaged in lending, corporate issues, risk management etc. while also investing in systems 
needed to strengthen green lending. For example, technical assistance will be provided to develop tools and frameworks 
to appraise specific technologies, and for supporting markets assessments to enable DFI teams better understand the 
financing environment in different states for specific technologies. Technical support under Output 2.2. will be critical in 
implementing the RSF and enabling rollout of PCGs amongst PFIs. Subproject-level assistance will be complemented 
by support under Output 2.3 which focuses on the enabling environment for DFIs to scale up green lending and adopt 
climate risk assessments. Together GCF grants through technical assistance will enable GCF loans to achieve the 
impact of the program in terms of shifting the financing for emerging clean energy technologies.

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
 
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
130. 
IGFF has been designed with a strong orientation toward long-term sustainability and a clear, structured exit 
strategy. The core intent is not to create long-term dependence on concessional finance but rather to de-risk markets, 
build institutional capacity, and catalyze private investment in currently underfunded and high-impact clean energy 
segments. 
131. 
GCF concessional support enables DFIs—India’s largest public financing institutions with nationwide presence—
to expand their climate portfolios into frontier markets and underserved geographies. Through the facility, DFIs will be 
supported to pilot and expand clean energy projects in these regions—laying the groundwork for private sector 
replication. Over time, as risks are better understood and project track records are built, DFIs will be able to progressively 
lend to such markets without reliance on concessionality. 
132. 
Parallel to geographic expansion, IGFF also aims to mainstream green lending practices within the institutional 
architecture of DFIs. The facility’s technical assistance components will institutionalize risk assessment tools, climate 
disclosure frameworks, and standardized credit enhancement mechanisms. DFIs will receive tailored support to develop 
internal green taxonomies, enhance ESG integration, and embed climate criteria within their project appraisal and credit 
processes. This systemic change ensures that the impact of GCF support endures well beyond the project timeline, 
fostering a sustained pipeline of green investments aligned with national and global decarbonization goals. 
133. 
The facility’s financing structure reinforces this long-term sustainability. Concessional loans provided through 
DFIs will be blended with ADB co-financing, reducing the weighted average cost of capital and extending loan tenors—
essential conditions for scaling capital-intensive technologies like RTC renewables and green hydrogen. In addition, the 
$65 million RSF will leverage a 3:1 ratio, unlocking ~$390 million in loans and catalyzing ~$557 million in total financing 
for MSME-led CBG projects, thus building a new market segment that can eventually transition to commercial viability. 
134. 
As markets mature, the role of concessional finance will taper off. Financing instruments developed under 
IGFF—such as credit guarantees, concessional term lending, and project structuring models—will be absorbed into DFIs’ 
regular operations and gradually replaced by market-based products. E-mobility, off-grid solar, and DRE technologies, 
which have shorter asset lives and faster loan recycling potential, will transition even faster to commercial models. 
135. 
IGFF’s sustainability is also underpinned by its efforts in knowledge dissemination and market development. The 
facility will invest in toolkits, policy guidance, stakeholder platforms, and replicable delivery models—ensuring that 
lessons from subprojects are institutionalized and inform future financing decisions. In this way, the exit from 
concessional support will coincide with the emergence of more robust, resilient, and responsive domestic green finance 
systems. 
136. 
In sum, IGFF’s exit is premised on transformation—both of the financial sector and the clean energy ecosystem. 
GCF support is catalytic, not permanent. By shifting DFIs’ lending norms, expanding financing to underserved regions 
and sectors, and crowding in private capital, the facility will lay the institutional and financial foundations for sustained, 
market-driven climate investment across India.

=== PAGE 49 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount (in USD million) 
Currency 
200 
USD 
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
187 
20 years 
5 years (Output 
1.1) 
 
17 years (Output 
1.2) 
1.25%  
(iii) Grants  
13  
n/a 
 
 
(b)Co-financing information 
Total amount 
Currency 
793 
million USD ($) 
Name of institution 
Financia
l 
instrume
nt 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seni
ority 
Asian Development Bank 
Senior 
Loans 
788 
million USD ($) 
20 years 
with 5 
years grace 
period 
Flexible: 
SOFR+net 
spread 
(currently 
87-167 
bps)43 
pari 
pass
u 
 
Grant 
5 
million USD ($) 
 
 
 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
993 
million USD ($) 
(d) 
Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions  
The above financing is expected to mobilize a further $1.178 billion from DFIs 
and $754 million in equity from project proponents, bringing the total financing 
for investments supported by the program to $2.8 billion. 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
million 
USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amoun
t 
million 
USD 
($) 
Financia
l 
Instrum
ent 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrume
nt 
Name of 
Institution
s 
 
43 ADB’s pricing includes a reference rate (SOFR) plus a net spread over the reference rate including effective contractual spread of 50bps, 
surcharge on funding cost margin and maturity premium.. See https://www.adb.org/what-we-do/public-sector-financing/lending-policies-
rates.

=== PAGE 50 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
 
Component 1 
Financing for 
DFIs to scale up 
emerging clean 
energy 
technologies 
Output 1.1  
DFIs have secured 
concessional loans to finance 
emerging clean energy 
technologies 
 
915.0 
122.0 
     
Senior 
Loans 
788.0 
Senior 
Loans 
ADB 
 
 
 
5.0 
Grant 
ADB 
Output 1.2  
Risk-sharing facility (RSF) is 
established to de-risk 
investments in compressed 
biogas (CBG) projects 
65.0 
65.0 
Senior 
Loan* 
 
 
 
Component 2 
Institutional 
capacity 
building for 
DFIs, 
Public/Private 
FIs, PFIs, and 
MSME project 
developers  
 
Output 2.1  
DFIs have enhanced technical 
capacities to finance emerging 
clean energy technologies 
6.0 
6.0 
Grants 
 
 
 
Output 2.2 
MSMEs and participating 
financial institutions (PFIs) 
have enhanced technical 
capacities to access credit 
guarantees through RSF 
3.0 
3.0 
Grants 
 
 
 
Output 2.3  
Public/private FIs adopt tools 
and frameworks to scale up 
financing for emerging clean 
energy technologies 
2.85 
2.85 
Grants 
 
 
 
Monitoring & 
Evaluation** 
- 
1.15 
1.15 
Grant 
 
 
 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
993 million 
USD ($) 
200 million USD 
($) 
793 million USD ($) 
*Principal repayments under this loan would be contingent on capital remaining in the RSF corpus at the end of its duration.  
** M&E costs are embedded within sub-project design activities managed by ADB, and ADB will assume the associated 
responsibilities and costs 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance 
capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. 
Does 
GCF 
funding 
finance 
technology 
development/transfer? 
 Yes ☐    No ☒ 
137. 
Under Component 2, the program will provide technical assistance to DFIs to integrate climate risk 
assessment tools, develop standardized project evaluation methodologies, and improve sectoral understanding to  
enhance pipeline development for green investments. The program will also institutionalize green lending practices, 
including the adoption of climate-related financial disclosure frameworks and risk screening tools, ensuring long-term 
sustainability. Key activities include training sessions on climate risk management, development of climate finance 
taxonomies, and establishment of Project Implementation Units (PIUs) within DFIs to enhance project monitoring and 
safeguard compliance.   
 
138. 
Additionally, the program will support policy dialogues with financial regulators such as the RBI and the SEBI 
to promote the widespread adoption of green finance practices. To further support market transformation, peer 
learning initiatives among DFIs and commercial banks will be organized to disseminate best practices in green finance 
innovations.

=== PAGE 51 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
 
139. 
The total requested GCF funding for these capacity-building activities is approximately USD 10.90 million, 
which will unlock significant private sector investments by reducing financial barriers and improving institutional 
capabilities to scale clean energy solutions across India.

=== PAGE 52 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s 
Initial Investment Framework.  
 
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
140. 
IGFF is designed to accelerate India’s clean energy transition by de-risking investments in emerging clean 
energy technologies, expanding access to concessional finance, and strengthening the financial ecosystem to support 
low-carbon growth. By integrating concessional capital, risk-sharing mechanisms, and technical assistance, IGFF will 
increase the scale, speed, and commercial viability of clean energy investments.  
 
141. 
IGFF is expected to mobilize USD 2.8 billion in clean energy investments and facilitate the deployment of the 
following technologies: 
• 
Solar & RTC renewables: Installation of 363 MW of decentralized solar projects and 473 MW of RTC renewable 
energy capacity (578 MWh BESS), improving grid reliability and reducing fossil fuel dependency. 
• 
Decentralized Renewable Energy: Deployment of ~46,000 3HP solar-powered pumps and ~17,000 5HP solar-
powered pumps 
• 
Compressed Biogas: 194 CBG plants, 111 5-TPD plants, 82 10-TPD plants, and 1 30-TPD plants, reducing 
methane emissions 
• 
E-mobility: Financing for ~100,000 electric two-wheelers and ~30,000 electric three-wheelers, supporting the 
transition to low-emission transport.  
• 
Green Hydrogen: 451 MW of electrolyzer capacity, enabling the production of ~43,000 tonnes of green 
hydrogen, reducing reliance on fossil-based hydrogen in industrial applications. 
 
142. 
IGFF aims to unlock investment in clean energy technologies that remain largely underserved or are advancing 
too slowly under current market conditions. For instance, while battery storage deployment remains minimal at just 219 
MWh nationwide, IGFF will increase this by 578 MWh—representing a 164% boost and directly enabling more reliable 
Round-the-Clock (RTC) renewable energy (Table 7). In green hydrogen, where India’s current production is negligible, 
IGFF will catalyze a substantial scale-up by deploying 451 MW of electrolyzer capacity, producing ~43,000 tonnes of 
green hydrogen annually. 
 
143. 
In rural e-mobility, where uptake remains limited outside urban hubs, IGFF will support the deployment of over 
131,000 electric 2/3-wheelers—facilitating inclusive electrification. Similarly, for decentralized renewable energy (DRE), 
IGFF will expand access to solar-powered dairy units and add ~63,000 solar irrigation pumps, contributing to more 
resilient rural livelihoods. These investments provide early proof points and financial viability for technologies that are 
otherwise unlikely to scale under current market conditions, helping shift India’s clean energy trajectory toward broader 
inclusion and deep decarbonization. 
 
144. 
IGFF will result in a projected reduction of 50 million tCO₂e over the lifetime of supported projects, contributing 
directly to India’s NDC target of reducing emissions intensity by 45% by 2030 compared to 2005 levels. 
 
Table 7: Mitigation Potential – GHG Emission Reduction 
Project  
GHG Reduction (over lifetime) 
Other co-benefit(s) 
Round-The-Clock Renewable 
Energy 
10,750,300 
tCO2e 
Enhances grid reliability, enables 
24/7 renewable power, and reduces 
fossil fuel dependency. 
Green Hydrogen 
7,563,731 
tCO2e 
Supports industrial decarbonization, 
reduces reliance on grey hydrogen, 
and enhances energy security.

=== PAGE 53 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
 
CBG  
22,840,576 
tCO2e 
Converts agricultural and organic 
waste into clean energy, reduces 
methane emissions, and boosts 
rural incomes. 
E-mobility (2, 3-electric wheelers 
and related infra) 
1,584,998 
tCO2e 
Reduces vehicular emissions, cuts 
urban air pollution, and lowers fuel 
costs for users. 
DRE based applications 
7,326,970 tCO2e 
Reduces reliance on diesel, 
supports rural electrification, and 
improves agricultural productivity. 
 
145. 
The transition to a green economy under IGFF is expected to generate approximately 139,234 jobs across 
manufacturing, installation, operations, and maintenance, contributing to inclusive economic growth and workforce 
development. A strong focus will be placed on rural employment, particularly in bioenergy, decentralized renewable 
energy (DRE), and sustainable agriculture. 
 
146. 
IGFF is projected to abate 50 million tCO₂e over the lifetime of its projects, making a substantial contribution to 
India's decarbonization efforts. To put this into perspective, India's energy-related CO₂ emissions were approximately 
2516 MtCO₂e in 202244, with the power sector alone accounting for 33% of total greenhouse gas emissions. The transport 
sector, another key focus of IGFF, contributed about 14% of energy-related emissions, with road transport responsible 
for nearly 90% of that share. IGFF’s interventions—spanning renewable energy deployment, energy efficiency, clean 
transportation, green hydrogen, and bioenergy—will help mitigate emissions at scale, aligning with India’s Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs) and net-zero ambition. 
 
147. 
Relative to India’s energy and transport emissions, IGFF’s 50 MtCO₂e mitigation impact represents 1.99% of 
India’s total annual energy-related emissions. Given that these reductions are distributed over the lifetime of the projects, 
IGFF will provide a sustained annual mitigation impact, reducing reliance on fossil fuels while strengthening India’s clean 
energy transition. Additionally, by catalyzing financing for emerging technologies, IGFF is expected to drive systemic 
market shifts, de-risk private sector participation, and ensure long-term sustainability, making it a transformative 
intervention for India’s low-carbon future.  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
148. 
IGFF is designed to catalyze structural change in India’s clean energy finance landscape by institutionalizing 
green lending within DFIs. Through a strategic blend of concessional loans, technical assistance, and risk-sharing 
instruments, IGFF enables DFIs to expand their portfolios toward emerging clean energy technologies such as RTC 
renewables, green hydrogen, CBG, and DRE—sectors typically considered too risky or premature by commercial 
lenders. By embedding climate-aligned financing frameworks, appraisal tools, and disclosure standards within partner 
DFIs, IGFF creates a lasting foundation for climate finance that will continue beyond the programme’s implementation 
period. DFIs—central actors in India’s financial system—will emerge as climate finance champions, facilitating private 
sector participation and anchoring long-term investment flows. 
 
Enabling scale and market demonstration 
 
149. 
The RSF plays a critical role in demonstrating how innovative financial structuring can unlock credit to MSMEs 
in the CBG sector, where traditional bank lending remains severely constrained.  Supported by a $65 million GCF loan, 
it plays a pivotal role in enabling MSME participation in the CBG sector, one of the most underdeveloped clean energy 
markets in India despite its high mitigation potential under the SATAT initiative. By offering 50% partial credit guarantees 
and reducing the cost of capital, the RSF addresses high interest rates and stringent collateral requirements that currently 
prevent MSMEs from accessing commercial loans. Its leverage ratio of 1:3 ensures significant crowding-in of PFI lending, 
 
44 https://www.iea.org/countries/india/emissions

=== PAGE 54 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
 
 
enabling approximately $557 million in total project financing. This creates a scalable model that can be expanded across 
other sectors, while also addressing geographic equity by supporting high-impact projects in underserved areas. 
 
150. 
Beyond CBG, IGFF supports large-scale deployment of RTC RE, where battery storage integration is critical for 
grid reliability but remains commercially marginal. These pilot investments will demonstrate the viability of RTC business 
models and provide market signals to commercial lenders and developers, encouraging replication. 
 
IGFF’s contribution against current deployment level 
Table 8:  IGFF’s contribution against current deployment level 
Technology  
Current Deployment 
(2025)  
Business-as-usual 
(BAU) projection 
IGFF Deployment  
% Increase from 
IGFF  
RTC 
renewables 
~64.7 GW hybrid RE under 
planning45   
~111 MW (219 MWh) BESS 
installed46 
– Large RE capacity (~500+ 
GW by 2050) but 
intermittent; significant 
reliance on coal/gas for 
baseload 
– Renewables ~60% of 
electricity; storage 
deployment limited, many 
areas still face outages or 
use diesel backup 
+473 MW RTC Solar   
+578 MWh BESS 
164% increase (for battery 
storage) 
Green 
hydrogen 
<0.1 MTPA production   
A few tens of MW 
electrolyzers47 
~25–27 MTPA by 205048 
+451 MW electrolyser 
capacity 
~43,000 tonnes of annual 
green hydrogen production 
Massive scale-up 
Compressed 
biogas 
~75 operational plants49 
~5,000 plants under SATAT 
by 2030 may not be met 
+194 new CBG plants of 
size ranging between 
5TPD-30 TPD 
158% increase 
E-Mobility (2/3-
Wheelers) 
50%+ EV share in urban 
three-wheelers/ ~4% of new 
two-wheeler sales were 
electric50 
Low rural adoption 
– Significant EV uptake but 
not complete: perhaps ~50–
60% of 2/3-wheeler fleet 
electric by 2050.  
– Urban areas lead EV 
adoption 
~+131,000 EVs (rural/peri-
urban focus) 
Significant rural penetration 
DRE (e.g.: 
dairy sector) 
Few hundred units in pilot 
stage 
(Most of India’s ~75 million 
rural microenterprises (tailor 
shops, mills, agro-
processing units, etc.) still 
rely on erratic grid power or 
diesel)51 
 
<10% of rural dairy 
operations have solar-
based cooling 
~+11,00 solar dairy PV units 
Substantial new coverage 
 
45https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2100603 
46 https://www.pv-magazine-india.com/2024/07/09/indias-installed-battery-storage-capacity-reached-219-1-mwh-as-of-march-end-mercom/ 
47 https://www.adb.org/publications/india-s-green-hydrogen-review-and-perspective 
48 https://www.ceew.in/sites/default/files/how-can-india-boost-investments-for-financing-domestic-green-hydrogen-production.pdf 
49 https://www.worldbiogasassociation.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/WBA-India-Policy-and-Market-Briefing-2024.pdf 
50 https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/06ad8de6-52c6-4be3-96fc-2bdc3510617d/TransitioningIndiasRoadTransportSector.pdf 
51 https://www.ceew.in/publications/decentralised-renewable-energy-technologies-market-impact-potential-for-sustainable-livelihoods-india

=== PAGE 55 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
 
Solar irrigation 
pumps 
~540,000 installed under 
PM-KUSUM52 
– DRE livelihood solutions 
grow slowly; by 2050 only 
limited adoption (thousands 
of systems).  
– Most rural MSMEs still 
use grid/diesel. Minor 
improvements in income 
and productivity for a small 
subset with solar 
appliances. 
+~64,000 new pumps 
~12% increase 
 
151. 
The IGFF delivers a targeted boost to clean technologies that are either nascent or under-deployed under BAU 
trajectories. While large-scale renewables are growing rapidly, technologies critical for grid stability, rural inclusion, and 
industrial decarbonization—such as RTC renewables, green hydrogen, CBG, decentralized renewables and e-mobility—
remain underfunded. IGFF's concessional support results in a 164% increase in battery storage deployment, supports 
one of the first commercial-scale green hydrogen deployments in India (451 MW of electrolyzer capacity producing 
approximately 43,000 tonnes of green hydrogen annually) and facilitates the installation of 194 new CBG plants– 
representing a 158% increase over the current 75 operational plants—contributing directly to methane abatement and 
rural income generation.  
 
152. 
Further, the program catalyzes e-mobility expansion in underserved geographies, financing 131,000 electric 2- 
and 3-wheelers focused on rural and peri-urban areas, addressing the current urban bias in EV adoption. In the DRE 
sector, IGFF supports deployment of 11,000 new solar PV units in rural dairy applications, scaling a solution currently 
present only at pilot scale. Additionally, it will add over 64,000 solar irrigation pumps, representing a ~12% increase over 
the 540,000 currently deployed under PM-KUSUM, enhancing rural livelihoods and reducing diesel dependency. These 
interventions shift the BAU pathway by catalyzing early-stage markets, de-risking technologies, lowering financing costs 
for DFIs and MSME developers, and unlocking private capital. Collectively, they accelerate both mitigation outcomes 
and inclusive development while building India’s long-term clean energy ecosystem.  
 
GCF support is an incentive for DFIs - key players in the Indian financial system - to scale up energy transition 
financing and address underserved regions 
153. 
Indian DFIs are central to scaling up climate-aligned investments, particularly in segments where commercial 
financial institutions remain hesitant to lend due to high perceived risks and nascent market conditions. These institutions 
are strategically positioned to serve as financial intermediaries for deploying concessional capital in emerging clean 
energy sectors, leveraging their existing networks, policy mandates, and experience with infrastructure and priority sector 
lending. 
 
4. 
However, as highlighted in section 3 of the feasibility study (Annex 2), DFIs face structural financing constraints 
that limit their ability to support longer-tenure, capital-intensive clean energy investments. Their typical cost of borrowing 
remains elevated—averaging around 7.5%—and average loan tenors remain between 10–15 years, far short of the 20–
25 years ideally required for financing projects such as RTC renewables, green hydrogen, and DRE systems. REC, for 
example, has committed to expanding its green finance portfolio and has raised a little more than USD 1 billion through 
green bonds, yet its current financing remains concentrated in conventional renewables, with limited exposure to RTC 
renewables, battery storage, and industrial decarbonization solutions. One of the constraints is also the lack of a strong 
pipeline of bankable projects in emerging clean energy areas, compounded by the need for support in structuring financial 
instruments tailored to these technologies that are low-cost and offer longer tenor periods. GCF’s concessional finance—
blended with ADB’s lending—serves as a catalytic incentive to redirect DFI lending portfolios towards clean energy 
subprojects that are otherwise underfunded due to high risk and uncertain returns. 
 
 
52 https://www.mercomindia.com/solar-pumps-pradhan-mantri-kisan-urja

=== PAGE 56 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
 
155. 
DFIs are uniquely positioned to channel investments into India’s most underserved regions, particularly in the 
North-Eastern and Eastern states. Despite their considerable renewable energy potential—including solar, hydro, and 
biomass—these states account for only 0.21% of India’s total installed renewable energy capacity. Structural barriers 
including limited access to finance, high perceived risks, and inadequate energy infrastructure have historically deterred 
investment. Rural districts in these regions continue to experience prolonged power outages (up to 8-10 hours daily), 
dependence on traditional fuels, and limited access to clean energy solutions. 
 
156. 
By offering blended finance at concessional terms, GCF can play a catalytic role in incentivizing DFIs to expand 
their clean energy portfolios into high priority yet underfunded geographies. Concessional capital will help lower the cost 
of lending, mitigate project-level risks, and improve the commercial viability of clean energy interventions. In doing so, 
GCF funding will not only unlock the renewable energy potential of these regions but also promote equitable energy 
access and inclusive development. 
GCF support through IGFF will unlock systemic change across the financial system  
157. 
Beyond mobilizing capital, GCF support will play a transformative role in institutionalizing green lending practices 
within DFIs. While DFIs have been instrumental in financing conventional infrastructure, many lack dedicated 
frameworks, toolkits, or disclosure systems to evaluate climate-related risks or align with climate taxonomies. Under the 
IGFF program, GCF-financed technical assistance (component 2) will help develop standardized investment appraisal 
frameworks, environmental and social safeguards, and gender-responsive financing practices within at least 5 
participating DFIs. DFIs will also be equipped with monitoring and reporting tools aligned with GCF’s results framework, 
improving long-term accountability and transparency. 
 
Capacity-building efforts will include structured training on climate risk management, domestic climate disclosure 
frameworks, credit evaluation for low-carbon technologies, pipeline development and ESG due diligence—thereby 
embedding climate considerations into lending operations. These reforms will not only strengthen the operational 
capacity of DFIs but also signal market confidence, thereby encouraging greater participation from commercial banks 
and private investors. Furthermore, IGFF’s engagement with regulators, policymakers, and financial institutions will drive 
broader reforms in green finance taxonomies, disclosure requirements, and risk assessment methodologies, reinforcing 
long-term climate-aligned lending. By mainstreaming these practices across DFIs, the IGFF will contribute to building a 
more climate-resilient financial ecosystem capable of supporting India’s net-zero transition over the long term. 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
158. 
IGFF advances climate-resilient development by scaling clean energy deployment across energy, transport, and 
agriculture sectors. In doing so, the facility contributes directly to multiple sustainable development goals (SDGs) 
including:  
• 
SDG 13 (Climate Action): through significant mitigation outcomes–over 50 million tCO₂e avoided–and long-
term adaptation co-benefits. 
• 
SDG 5 (Gender Equality): by embedding gender-responsive financing instruments and offering dedicated 
capacity-building for women-led enterprises. 
• 
SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy) by expanding clean energy access and scaling decentralized and 
innovative technologies. 
• 
SDG 8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth) through green job creation in emerging clean energy 
technologies and energy-driven rural livelihoods. 
• 
SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure) by strengthening climate-aligned financial systems and 
mainstreaming green lending. 
• 
SDG 11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities) by fostering low-carbon transport and off-grid energy 
solutions for per-urban and rural areas.  
• 
SDG 15 (Life on Land) by supporting bioenergy solutions (e.g., CBG) which improves waste management and 
promotes sustainable agricultural practices.  
 
159. 
The facility aims to generate inclusive and sustainable development benefits, across the following dimensions:

=== PAGE 57 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
 
Table 9: Sustainability Dimensions of the IGFF 
 
 
Sustainability 
Dimension 
Sustainability Attributes 
Environmental 
• 
IGFF is expected to result in 50 million tonnes of CO₂ equivalent emissions reductions over 
its lifetime. Projects in compressed biogas and solar irrigation will reduce local air pollution 
and improve soil and water outcomes by replacing diesel-based energy. The programme’s 
support for clean energy assets (solar, hydrogen, bioenergy) also contributes to long-term 
climate resilience by reducing dependence on fossil fuel imports and enabling climate-
adaptive infrastructure. 
Economic  
• 
The facility will support the creation of over 139,000 direct and indirect jobs in clean energy 
manufacturing, installation, and services. By reducing fossil fuel dependency, IGFF facilitates 
national savings on imports and fuel subsidies. For example, cumulative avoided costs 
include INR 14 million annually for CBG, INR 7.1 million for e-mobility, and INR 8.4 million for 
solar irrigation (Annex 3). Through DRE solutions, the programme also unlocks income-
generating opportunities for small-scale farmers and rural microenterprises. 
Social  
• 
IGFF promotes inclusive development by enhancing energy access in underserved rural and 
peri-urban areas, supporting agricultural productivity and food security through solar 
irrigation, and improving health outcomes by reducing indoor and ambient air pollution from 
biomass and diesel use. It strengthens water access and reliability, particularly in climate-
vulnerable areas, and provides targeted support for low-income communities, improving the 
quality of life through reliable, clean energy. 
Knowledge 
• 
IGFF’s knowledge-sharing approach is designed to generate lasting institutional and market 
transformation. Through codified case studies and toolkits—particularly from early 
deployments in RTC renewables, green hydrogen, DRE, and the Risk Sharing Facility—the 
facility will enable replication of successful models across geographies and sectors. Capacity-
building efforts will establish communities of practice and expert networks within DFIs and 
partner institutions, ensuring that technical expertise in climate risk assessment, financial 
structuring, and green lending endures well beyond the life of the programme. 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 58 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
 
Needs of the country 
160. 
India’s clean energy transition is central to its commitment to achieve net-zero emissions by 2070 and reduce 
emissions intensity by 45% by 2030, as outlined in its NDCs. Achieving these targets requires a systemic scale-up of 
emerging climate technologies—such as RTC renewable energy, green hydrogen, CBG, and DRE—that are essential 
to decarbonize hard-to-abate sectors and ensure energy access in underserved regions. Despite strong national 
commitments, the country faces a significant climate finance gap, requiring USD 170 billion annually and over USD 2.5 
trillion by 2030 across mitigation and adaptation needs. 
 
161. 
However, macroeconomic conditions significantly constrain India’s fiscal ability to meet these needs. The 
Government of India’s 2023–24 Union Budget estimates a fiscal deficit of 5.9% of GDP, and public debt is projected to 
average 56% of GDP between 2025–29. With subsidies on food, fertilizer, and fuel absorbing a large share of public 
expenditure, there is limited fiscal space for public investment in emerging clean energy technologies. Private investment, 
meanwhile, is skewed toward established utility-scale solar and wind, where returns are predictable and risk perception 
is low. Newer technologies face prohibitive financing costs and underdeveloped enabling ecosystems. Key underfunded 
clean energy sectors include: 
• 
Round-the-clock renewable energy (RTC-RE): Higher capital costs for battery storage in comparison to 
standard solar PV and limited long-tenor debt makes RTC-RE financially unviable without concessional 
support. 
• 
Green hydrogen: Production costs remain USD 3.5-5 per kg, while breakeven is below USD 2 per kg. Existing 
subsidies remain insufficient to close this gap. 
• 
Compressed biogas (CBG): High capital costs, inefficient biomass supply chains, and long payback periods 
deter investment. 
• 
EV infrastructure: High financing costs, interest rates 1-9% higher than ICE vehicles, and shorter loan tenures 
limit consumer adoption. Adoption concentrated in urban areas. 
Solar pumps and DRE: Limited private financing, weak revenue models, and high perceived risks hinder scale-
up. 
 
Needs of DFIs 
162. 
DFIs are essential to bridging this financing gap but are limited by structural lending constraints. Currently, most 
DFIs offer loans at interest rates ranging from 9.6% to 11.5%, with tenors typically capped at 10–15 years—insufficient 
for capital-intensive clean energy projects that require 20–25-year loan horizons. High cost of capital (~7.5%) further 
inhibits their ability to offer affordable financing. DFIs also face capacity gaps in climate risk assessment, structuring 
blended finance instruments, and aligning with disclosure frameworks such as BRSR—critical for accessing international 
climate capital. Without concessional co-financing and technical support, DFIs cannot scale investments in early-stage 
technologies or underserved geographies.  
 
Needs of project proponents (private sector and MSMEs) 
163. 
For project proponents—particularly MSMEs and women-led enterprises—barriers are more acute. These 
include high interest rates, stringent collateral requirements, and limited access to credit guarantees or project 
development support. Sectors like CBG, rural e-mobility, and DRE remain excluded from mainstream financing due to 
fragmented markets and a lack of bankable project pipelines. Gender disparities exacerbate exclusion, as women 
entrepreneurs face lower financial literacy and weaker access to networks and finance. 
 
How IGFF addresses these needs 
164. 
IGFF is structured to systematically address these barriers through a blend of financial, institutional, and 
regulatory interventions: 
1. Blended concessional finance (80:20 ADB:GCF) lowers the cost of capital, improves tenors, and enhances 
bankability for high-impact, low-carbon technologies, supporting the creation of USD 2.8 billion in clean energy 
investments. 
2. Risk-sharing mechanisms, such as the USD 65 million RSF for CBG, catalyze lending to MSMEs by offering 
partial credit guarantees and lowering collateral requirements, with a projected leverage ratio of over 1:3.

=== PAGE 59 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
 
3. Technical assistance equips DFIs with tools for climate risk analysis, project appraisal, ESG compliance, and 
gender-responsive finance. 
4. Institutional support helps align DFI operations with India’s evolving green finance architecture—including 
BRSR and RBI/SEBI guidelines—to unlock commercial and concessional capital. 
 
165. 
By catalyzing investments in frontier technologies and underserved geographies, IGFF will help redirect financial 
flows from conventional to climate-aligned investments, enabling India to meet its NDCs and net-zero ambition while 
building an inclusive and resilient green finance ecosystem. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
India has demonstrated a strong political commitment, backed up by policies and regulations, that are 
underpinning the development of the Facility. 
166. 
In its latest revised Nationally Determined Contribution, India has made a commitment to reduce its emissions 
intensity by one-third by 2030, compared to 2005 levels. This can only be achieved through a substantial increase in the 
country's renewable energy capacity; and through the creation of a carbon sink of 2.5 to 3 GtCO2e created by additional 
forest and tree cover by 2030. At COP26 in November 2021, India furthermore committed to reaching a share of 50% of 
the total electric power capacity to come from non-fossil-fuel-based energy sources by 2030; and achieving net zero 
emissions by 2070.  Lastly, India also formally requested more concessional climate finance to catalyze the low-carbon 
transition.  
India’s National Action Plan on Climate Change and the National Missions53 
167. 
The Government of India launched National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) on 30th June, 2008 
outlining eight National Missions on climate change. Missions directly relevant to the facility are the following: 
• 
National Solar Mission 
• 
National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency 
• 
National Mission for a Green India 
• 
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture 
 
India’s Updated NDC (2022) 
168. 
India's updated NDC under the Paris Agreement reflects the country's commitment to addressing climate change 
and promoting climate justice. The strategic areas of intervention include promotion of sustainable living, adopting a  
cleaner development path, emissions intensity reduction (reducing emissions intensity of GDP by 45% by 2030, 
compared to 2005 levels), renewable energy deployment (50% of capacity installed from non-fossil fuels based energy 
resources by 2030), carbon sink creation (additional carbon sink of 2.5 to 3 billion tons of CO2 equivalent by increasing 
forest and tree cover by 2030), climate adaptation investments (including in agriculture, water resources, mountain and 
coastal regions, health, disaster management), mobilizing funds and development of future technologies.54 
Additional national-level policy frameworks related to enabling this facility (sector and sub-sector level 
frameworks). For more details, refer to Annex 2 (Feasibility Study) 
RTC Renewable Energy (RE) 
169. 
By combining solar power with an energy storage facility (typically a battery or pumped storage), RTC can 
mitigate intermittency issues associated with non-dispatched renewable energy (solar and wind). The National Solar 
Mission aims to position India as a global leader in solar energy by creating favorable policy conditions for rapid diffusion 
across the country. RTC RE is supported by favorable Electricity Rules of 202155, specifying that solar power plants are 
must-run power plants, i.e. must be compensated in case of curtailment. Further, Tariff-Based Competitive Bidding 
Process for Procurement of RTC Power was issued in 2020, anticipating RTC power.56 
Battery Storage 
 
53 Indian Government 
54 India’s Updated First Nationally Determined Contribution Under Paris Agreement (2021) 
55 https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/National_Framework_for_promoting_Energy_Storage_Systems_August_2023.pdf 
56 https://mnre.gov.in/policies-and-regulations/schemes-and-guidelines/guidelines/

=== PAGE 60 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
170. 
The ministry of Power released the National Framework on Energy Storage Systems (ESS), including battery 
storage, in August 202357. ESS are proposed as a solution to store excess energy from renewable sources for later use, 
addressing grid balancing issues and enabling peak shifting. Amongst the objectives of the ESS policy is the achievement 
of 24x7 dispatchable Renewable Energy (RE) power, enhancing grid stability and reliability, promoting energy 
independence and resilience in remote areas, redesigning energy markets to encourage ESS participation, and 
establishing technical standards for ESS to ensure safety, reliability and interoperability. 58 Comprehensive guidelines 
for the procurement and utilization of Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS) as part of generation, transmission, 
distribution assets, or ancillary services have further been issued.59 
Electric Vehicles and Related Infrastructure 
171. 
To achieve ambitious targets in EV growth, the Indian government has implemented various policy interventions. 
The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India (FAME India) Scheme, launched in 2015, 
aims to reduce fossil fuel dependency. The National Mission on Transformative Mobility and Battery Storage, 
launched by the Indian government in 2019, focuses on establishing large-scale, export-competitive integrated batteries 
and cell-manufacturing plants in the country.  
Green Hydrogen  
172. 
The National Green Hydrogen Mission was approved in 2023 by the Indian Union Cabinet and aims to make 
India the international center for the production, usage, and export of green hydrogen and seeks for India to be energy 
independent. There are two strategic interventions for the green hydrogen transition: 1) supports the domestic 
manufacturing of electrolysers, and 2) offers incentives for the production of green hydrogen. Pilot projects will begin in 
2025 with shipping pilot projects and mobility pilot projects and in 2029 with low-carbon steel projects.60 Various policy 
provisions were introduced, including waiving interstate transmission charges for renewable energy used in Green 
Hydrogen production, facilitating renewable energy banking, and ensuring the timely grant of Open Access and 
connectivity for Green Hydrogen projects. The mission also supports the development of efficient supply chains for 
transporting and distributing hydrogen. A framework for regulations and standards is being established to facilitate sector 
growth and engagement with international norms.61  
Compressed Biogas 
173. 
The Government of India introduced the National Policy on Biofuels in 2018 to increase their use in the energy 
and transportation sectors over the next decade. The Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation 
(SATAT) initiative aims to produce 15 million metric tons of CBG by 2023-24 from 5000 CBG plants.62 The process 
involves generating CBG from waste and biomass sources through anaerobic decomposition. The Biogas Program 
(Phase-I) for FY 2021-22 to 2025-26 in India aims to leverage the country's substantial livestock population for setting 
up biogas plants to promote clean cooking fuel lighting and meeting power needs.63  
Off-grid Solar Water Pumps 
174. 
Off-grid Solar PV Applications Program is a longstanding initiative by the Ministry designed to provide solar PV-
based solutions in areas without reliable grid power. Standalone solar pumps were initially part of the program until March 
2017. A new scheme, Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha Utthan Mahabhiyan (PM KUSUM), has been launched by 
the government to install standalone solar pumps in off-grid areas and solarize existing grid-connected agricultural 
pumps. Solar home lights are also part of this initiative, implemented under the Saubhagya Scheme of the Ministry of 
Power.64 
Solar Feeders for Rural Areas 
 
57 https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/National_Framework_for_promoting_Energy_Storage_Systems_August_2023.pdf 
58 Ibid. 
59 Ibid. 
60 National Green Hydrogen Mission (Government of India, 2024) 
61 Ibid. 
62 Jumpstart Biogas in India (GERMI, 2022) 
63 Ibid. 
64 Off-grid Solar Pumps (Government of India, 2023)

=== PAGE 61 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
175. 
PM-KUSUM is a plan that ensures energy security for Indian farmers through solar power. States such as 
Maharashtra and Bihar are pushing for solar-powered agricultural feeders to maintain energy security but there is no 
policy in place for such.65 
Solar Power Cold Storage 
176. 
The National Horticulture Board created a capital investment subsidy scheme for the development of cold 
storage. This component of the assistance program focuses on credit-linked projects related to Cold Storage, specifically 
those involving Controlled Atmosphere (CA) and modernization. The eligible projects include the setting up of new Cold 
Storage infrastructure, limited to multi-chamber units with energy-efficient technologies, thermal insulation, humidity 
control, advanced cooling systems, and automation.66  
Engagement With the National Designated Authority  
177. 
ADB has ensured consistent dialogue and coordination among the relevant ministries and departments, thereby 
facilitating smooth governance and fostering ownership of the IGFF proposal. In August 2023, ADB fielded a mission in 
India and convened meetings with top-tier leadership, including the Managing Directors of several financial institutions, 
at their headquarters in Mumbai. The primary objective of these meetings was to understand the needs of these financial 
institutions and align the proposal. The institutions in attendance included the REC, SIDBI, IIFCL, NABARD, Indian 
Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (IREDA), State Bank of India (SBI), and National Bank for Financing 
Infrastructure and Development (NABFID). 
 
178. 
Furthermore, separate meetings were convened with the Secretary of the Ministry of Power and the Joint 
Secretary of the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) for alignment on the needs, objective of the proposal. ADB has 
consistently engaged with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) to develop the concept 
and agree on the scope of the facility. The discussions also focused on the timing of the proposal submission for GCF 
and the potential availability of resources to the country. 
 
179. 
On December 8, 2023, ADB organized a panel session, titled 'Scaling Up Climate Finance to Meet India's Energy 
Transition Goals,' which took place at the ADB Pavilion during COP28 summit in Dubai, UAE. The panel featured 
esteemed participants from NABARD, IREDA, and SIDBI as panelists, with REC and the IIFCL among the audience. 
Notably, representatives from the MoEFCC were also present at the panel session and delivered special remarks 
addressed to all the financial institutions in attendance. Furthermore, during COP28 in December 2023, ADB's climate 
envoy, Warren Evans, engaged in a meeting with Mr. Henry Gonzalez, Deputy Executive Director of the Green Climate 
Fund, on the sidelines of the event, on the proposed facility. 
 
180. 
During the period March-May 2024, ADB has also led in-country consultations with each of the DFIs in order to 
discuss their needs, building green pipelines and screening the alignment between their corporate policies and desired 
trajectories to boost climate interventions and align with the target of the Paris Agreement. The consultations resulted to 
narrow down the scope with specific sub project alignment with the participating DFIs. The consultations with the DFIs 
continued during Funding Proposal review (last meetings were held in February 2025), to prepare comprehensive 
categories of program interventions that align with the GCF MRAs and ARAs.  
 
181. 
Further, India’s NDA provided no objection to the proposal in September 2024.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
The facility represents an economically attractive and cost-effective approach to realizing India's NDC targets 
and contributing to global climate goals, considering GHG abatement per dollar of capital investment and per 
dollar of lifecycle cost.  
 
 
65 Solar Feeders (SAUR International, 2022) 
66 Cool Storage (Government of India, 2022)

=== PAGE 62 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
Additionality and Effectiveness of Concessional Loans and Guarantees 
182. 
Despite systemic de-risking measures such as policy reforms, regulatory enhancements, and 
institutional support, residual risks remain that deter private capital from investing in clean energy technologies. 
Financial de-risking instruments, such as concessional loans and guarantees, play a crucial role in addressing these 
risks by improving the risk-return profile of emerging clean energy projects. 
 
183. 
Blended finance mechanisms help redistribute these residual risks between risk-averse private 
investors and public institutions with a higher risk tolerance. Concessional capital lowers financing costs, making 
projects more bankable, while guarantees provide critical protection against uncertainties related to performance, 
revenue, and regulatory environments. The effectiveness of these instruments depends on the nature of the residual 
risks that persist after systemic interventions. Concessional loans are best suited for overcoming market risks, such as 
missing markets and cost competitiveness, while guarantees address risks related to regulatory uncertainties, revenue 
volatility, and access to capital. By strategically deploying these financial tools, development finance institutions can 
unlock private investment and accelerate India’s clean energy transition. 
Figure 9: De-risking effect of systemic instruments on the financing cost of clean energy projects 
 
184. 
Concessional loans are essential to overcoming market and financial barriers for emerging clean energy 
technologies, particularly missing markets, cost competitiveness, and access to capital. RTC RE requires concessional 
finance to offset high storage costs and bridge the gap between required tariffs and market rates. This is particularly true 
as the market share of RE increases, when increasing storage plays a pivotal role in limiting the dependency on thermal 
generation in India. Green hydrogen remains uncompetitive, requiring low-cost capital to scale. E-mobility adoption is 
hindered by high upfront costs and interest rates, which concessional loans can reduce. DRE solutions, despite their 
many benefits, are only viable when they offset a sufficiently high electricity price paid to Discoms. Both DRE and off-
grid solar pumps face weak financial infrastructure and credit constraints in rural areas, making long-tenor concessional 
debt critical for market expansion.  
 
185. 
Guarantees will unlock financing for CBG. They allow mitigating perceived risks of DFIs and PFIs due to revenue 
and operational risks observed in the sector. Regulatory uncertainties and volatile offtake prices deter lenders, while 
guarantees provide risk-sharing mechanisms to improve bankability. Insecure implementation arrangements, potential

=== PAGE 63 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
construction delays and operational inefficiencies threaten project viability. But also the typical investor profile of rural 
MSMEs with a limited credit history reduce access to finance for proponents of such investments, often resulting in banks 
not providing credit at all, or only with high collateral demands and interest rates. Guarantees de-risk lending, reducing 
collateral requirements and improving financing terms for MSME developers.  
Cost Effectiveness of IGFF and Value for Money 
186. 
With an estimated cost per tonne of CO2 abated of USD 55 (including the entire investment size of USD 
2.8bn expected to be raised by IGFF), the proposed interventions are competitive compared to global 
benchmarks. While technologies such as simple utility scale solar PV would be available at lower costs (around USD 
40 per tonne of CO2 abated67), IGFF focuses on currently expensive technologies that are critical for scaling up more 
affordable renewable energy in the future, such as green hydrogen and round-the clock renewables. This further 
excludes the wider mitigation and adaptation/resilience benefits compared to business as usual that will materialize as 
the targeted financial institutions embark on low-GHG emissions and climate-resilient corporate pathways aligned with 
the goals of the Paris Agreement. The facility aims to mobilize significant co-financing by strategically crowding in 
commercial capital. The financial architecture combines GCF's concessional financing with market-based resources in 
an optimal structure considering specific needs of each sub-project. 
 
187. 
The cost of capital for clean energy in India is high, but for key emerging technologies targeted by the 
IGFF, it is even higher. A benchmarking analysis of 10 DFIs found that interest rates for clean technology financing 
range from 7% to 13.5%, with an average of 9.4% (see Table 6 of the FP Annex 02 - Feasibility Study). In addition, a 
targeted assessment of RTC RE, E-Mobility, CBG, Decentralized Solar PV, Off-Grid Solar Pumps, and Green Hydrogen 
showed that these technologies face an even greater average financing interest rate of 11.18%, reflecting their higher 
perceived risk and capital intensity. These sectors require concessionality due to large upfront costs, long payback 
periods, and limited commercial viability in the absence of de-risking mechanisms. 
Figure 10: DFI rates 
 
188. 
The Facility will support the DFIs to finance suitable projects that are economically viable but that require 
concessional financing and/or innovative lending models to be financially viable. ADB’s economic internal rate of return 
(EIRR) hurdle rate of 9% will be adopted by the DFIs for initial screening of projects. Additional project effectiveness 
metrics will also be screened for by DFIs, including GHG abatement per dollar of capital investment and per dollar of 
lifecycle cost, with benchmarks set on for each sub-sector supported by the Facility, so that DFIs are encouraged to 
diversify, and for each DFI’s overall Facility-supported investment portfolio, to underpin the Facility’s climate mitigation 
 
67 ESG_Economist_-_MACC_30_April_2024.pdf

=== PAGE 64 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
objectives. Technical assistance provided to DFIs will include training on economic and climate-change related 
assessment and screening of potential projects. 
 
189. 
A preliminary assessment of Facility’s economic performance was undertaken using a portfolio of generic 
projects of the type that will be eligible for inclusion (refer to Annex 03, Economic and Financial Analysis). It shows that 
all chosen clean energy technologies display a high economic internal rate of return. In addition to GHG emissions 
reductions, the economic analysis includes cost savings from lower fuel and maintenance expenses, improved energy 
security by reducing reliance on imported fossil fuels, and enhanced resource efficiency. E-mobility lowers operating 
costs, compressed biogas repurposes waste while displacing LNG imports, and off-grid solar irrigation reduces fuel and 
maintenance costs for farmers. 
 
190. 
The project types are all easily scalable to reflect the overall size of the Facility and the desired portfolio 
mix and performance. On the basis of preliminary analysis, the aggregate EIRR of the Facility has been estimated at 
22.8%, easily surpassing the assumed hurdle rate of 9%. A range of downside sensitivities was examined to confirm an 
expectation of robust economic performance for the Facility, even if the assumed economic value of avoided GHG 
emissions is significantly reduced or excluded entirely. 
 
191. 
Financial analysis furthermore demonstrates that all clean energy technologies are at least marginally 
financially viable but also need concessional financial support to be further promoted – either in order to increase 
viability of emerging technologies, or in order to incentivize the provision of loans and the removal of barriers in access 
to finance, tackling information asymmetry, and reaching underserved beneficiaries.   
   
FIRR  
WACC DFI Only  
WACC IGFF  
RTC Renewable Energy  
7.8  
8.2  
7.8  
Decentralized Solar PV  
9.1  
10.1  
9.1  
Green Hydrogen  
9.9  
10.4  
9.3  
E-Mobility  
19.3  
11.6  
10.2  
CBG (MSME) 
CBG (Others)  
14.2 
13.8 
                      12.1  
                      11.3 
11.6  
                 10.5  
Off-Grid Solar Pumps  
46.0  
   15.6  
14.2  
  
192. 
The IGFF’s concessional financing mechanism strengthens the financial viability of key clean energy 
technologies by addressing high financing costs that currently hinder investment. The Financial Internal Rate of 
Return (FIRR) for RTC RE (7.8%), Decentralized Solar PV (9.1%), and Green Hydrogen (9.9%) remains below their 
Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) under standard DFI financing, making them financially unattractive. With 
IGFF support, WACC for these technologies is reduced to 7.8%, 9.1%, and 9.3%, respectively, improving their investment 
potential while cost-effectively using GCF concessional funding. However, concessional capital alone is insufficient. 
Dedicated credit lines incentivizing DFIs to finance clean energy technologies combined with technical assistance are 
necessary to further improve financial sustainability by strengthening financial institutions' climate investment frameworks 
and screening approaches. 
 
193. 
On the other hand, despite stronger financial viability, E-Mobility, CBG, and Off-Grid Solar Pumps remain 
underfinanced due to risk perception, limited technical expertise, and rigid lending criteria among DFIs. CBG, 
despite a FIRR of 14.2%, struggles with financing due to MSME-led investments facing high collateral requirements of 
up to 50%. EV adoption is constrained by high interest rates that are 1-7% higher than for internal combustion engine 
vehicles, while financiers remain hesitant due to uncertain borrower credit histories and the absence of a secondary 
market for repossessed EVs (see Annex 2, pp. 63-65). Off-grid solar pumps also face limited financing access due to 
supply chain inefficiencies and repayment risks from smallholder farmers. These clean energy technologies face access 
to finance issues due to perceived high risks by banks, stemming from a combination of volatile and/or unknown return 
profiles of investments and typically small or medium sized investors with uncertain credit profiles.

=== PAGE 65 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
194. 
To overcome these barriers, IGFF combines concessional finance with risk-sharing mechanisms and 
targeted technical assistance. A risk-sharing facility, initially designed for CBG projects, will help leverage private 
sector financing by covering end-borrower credit risks, with every dollar in guarantees mobilizing up to six times its 
lending volume. Once proven successful, a further graduation in leveraging could be considered, depending on first 
experiences with the instrument (refer to Annex 3, EFA, and Annex 2, Feasibility Study, Appendix 4). In addition, targeted 
concessional financing towards underfunded clean energy technologies ensures DFI’s focus on those areas of 
investments as well as on rural and small/medium-sized investors. Dedicated technical support will strengthen financial 
institutions' ability to assess and finance climate projects, ensuring greater private sector participation in the clean energy 
transition and crowding in significant private investments.  
 
195. 
The IGFF facility will not crowd out private capital but will catalyze future private sector participation by 
targeting clean energy technologies currently too risky for commercial financing. IGFF bridges this financing gap 
through DFIs until risks decrease and private lenders can step in. Strict eligibility criteria and screening mechanisms in 
line with IGFF’s program description and ADB’s operations manual on financial intermediation lending and ADB’s staff 
instructions for processing financial intermediation lending ensure concessional finance is only used where market 
failures persist, preventing overlap with commercially bankable projects. With India’s clean energy transition requiring 
$170 billion annually—far beyond IGFF’s $993 million mobilization—the facility is designed to lower barriers, establish 
viable financial models, and de-risk early-stage investments, paving the way for private sector scale-up. 
 
196. 
In accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures on financial intermediation, projects financed under this facility 
will be designed to address situations where effective demand for credit by potential sub-borrowers exists, but the 
demand is not being adequately met through the domestic financial system due to market failure or structural problems.  
Relending rates and on-lending conditions will be designed during project diligence and set out in each project proposal. 
While on-lending rates for sub-borrowers should be designed to limit the risk of market distortion, such rates will be 
designed to ensure efficient use of GCF proceeds and optimal benefits to ultimate beneficiaries.

=== PAGE 66 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
 
  E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☐ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
  
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the 
project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
 
Description 
Rating 
  
  
Scale 
DFIs 
in 
India 
predominantly finance 
large-scale renewable 
projects (solar, wind), 
with limited exposure 
to 
emerging 
clean 
energy 
technologies 
such 
as 
battery 
storage, 
green 
hydrogen, 
decentralized 
renewable 
energy 
(DRE), 
CBG 
and 
round-the-clock (RTC) 
solutions. 
High 
perceived risks, lack of 
concessional 
capital, 
and 
absence 
of 
Low 
By the end of IGFF, DFIs will have significantly increased financing 
for emerging clean energy technologies, mobilizing at least $1.2 
billion in investments. Total financing mobilized for IGFF-supported 
investments including from project proponents will be $1.9 billion, with 
$557 million specifically mobilized for CBG projects through the RSF. 
The private sector will have greater participation in high-impact but 
currently 
underfunded 
sectors, 
supported 
by 
risk-sharing 
mechanisms and concessional capital. Beyond the implementation 
period, these investments are expected to drive long-term reductions 
in CO₂ emissions by 50 million tonnes.  Green lending portfolios will 
be diversified, and financial institutions will routinely integrate 
standardized climate risk assessments. This transformation will 
contribute to a long-term shift in India’s clean energy financing 
landscape. 
IGFF 
will 
provide 
concessional capital, risk-
sharing mechanisms, and 
technical 
assistance 
to 
enable 
DFIs 
to 
scale 
investments beyond utility-
scale 
renewables. 
By 
institutionalizing 
new 
financing instruments and 
improving 
credit 
risk 
assessment, IGFF will de-
risk emerging clean energy 
investments, 
attract 
commercial 
capital, 
and 
drive 
long-term 
CO₂ 
reductions. The RSF will 
play 
a 
critical 
role 
in 
enhancing 
financing 
for 
CBG projects, ensuring that

=== PAGE 67 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
 
tailored 
financing 
instruments constrain 
private 
sector 
participation. 
As 
a 
result, green finance 
flows 
remain 
insufficient 
to 
meet 
India’s clean energy 
targets. 
MSMEs and PFIs have 
access 
to 
structured 
guarantees 
that 
lower 
perceived risks and unlock 
additional capital. 
Replicability 
DFIs 
and 
financial 
institutions 
lack 
standardized 
green 
finance 
taxonomies, 
risk 
assessment 
frameworks, 
and 
methodologies 
for 
evaluating 
emerging 
technologies. 
Traditional 
lending 
models 
do 
not 
accommodate 
the 
unique 
risk-return 
profiles 
of 
battery 
storage, 
green 
hydrogen, 
or 
decentralized 
renewable 
solutions. 
Limited 
coordination 
between 
financial 
institutions 
and 
knowledge-sharing 
gaps 
hinders 
the 
replication 
of 
successful 
financing 
Low 
By the end of IGFF, standardized financing tools, methodologies, and 
climate risk assessment frameworks will be embedded into DFI 
operations, enabling broader adoption of green finance practices. 
DFIs will have institutionalized green lending policies, and knowledge-
sharing mechanisms will facilitate the transfer of best practices across 
institutions and geographies. The financing models pioneered 
through IGFF will provide a replicable blueprint for scaling clean 
energy investments in other markets, both within India and 
internationally. 
IGFF will integrate green 
finance taxonomies, climate 
risk models, and blended 
finance structures into DFIs’ 
core 
lending 
operations. 
Through training, technical 
assistance, 
and 
policy 
engagement, the facility will 
establish 
financing 
approaches that can be 
adapted and replicated by 
other financial institutions, 
sectors, 
and 
regions, 
creating 
a 
sustainable 
framework 
for 
green 
investments 
beyond 
the 
program duration.

=== PAGE 68 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
 
mechanisms 
across 
markets and regions.  
Sustainability 
While 
DFIs 
are 
increasingly focusing 
on 
climate 
finance, 
there is no structured 
mechanism to ensure 
sustained financing for 
emerging clean energy 
sectors. Green lending 
efforts rely on ad hoc 
concessional funding, 
and 
financial 
institutions 
lack 
permanent 
frameworks 
for 
integrating climate risk 
considerations 
into 
decision-making. ESG 
policies 
and 
risk 
disclosure frameworks 
Low 
By the end of IGFF, DFIs will have embedded structured risk-sharing 
mechanisms, standardized climate finance policies, and internal 
expertise to sustain green lending beyond the program period. 
Climate-aligned investment strategies will be institutionalized, and 
financial institutions will integrate ESG and climate risk assessments 
into core lending processes. The facility will contribute to long-term 
financial market confidence, sustaining clean energy investment flows 
beyond IGFF’s implementation. 
IGFF will strengthen DFIs’ 
capacity to assess and 
structure 
green 
finance 
transactions, ensuring long-
term sustainability through 
dedicated 
policy 
engagement, 
regulatory 
alignment, and technical 
support. By mainstreaming 
green 
lending 
practices, 
developing permanent risk-
mitigation mechanisms, and 
fostering 
private 
sector 
participation, 
IGFF 
will 
create 
a 
self-sustaining 
financing ecosystem that 
continues to drive clean 
energy 
investments 
well 
beyond its implementation 
period.

=== PAGE 69 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
 
remain 
inconsistent, 
limiting 
long-term 
institutional alignment 
with climate finance 
priorities. 
  
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative 
indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
 
  
  
  
Mid-term (5 
years) 
  
Final  
(10 years)68 
  
TOTAL 
Core 1: 
GHG 
emissions 
reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/s
equestered  
Project-level 
monitoring reports, 
IGFF Monitoring, 
reporting & 
verification systems, 
national GHG 
inventories, reports 
209 million 
tonnes of 
CO2e (as 
on 2020)69 
1.9 million 
tCO2e (at 
the end of 3 
years) 
Final: 12.7 million tCO2e 
 
For mid-term target calculation: 
Assuming that by year 5- CBG 
project + DRE projects are 
commissioned. By year 5 - 
CBG: 1 year of operation; 
DRE/pumps: 
2 
years 
of 
operation.  
For final target calculation: 
Assuming that by year 10 - all 
 
68 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end 
of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective. 
69 ]https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2089589#:~:text=India's%204th%20Biennial%20Update,inventory%20for%20the%20year%202020.

=== PAGE 70 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
 
from DFIs and project 
developers 
projects 
would 
have 
commissioned but with different 
active years of operation.  
CBG: 6 years; DRE: 7 years; 
RTC: 4 years; Green Hydrogen: 
2 years; E-mobility: 2 years 
Lifetime target (20 years): 
50 million tCO2e 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access 
Core 1: 
GHG 
emissions 
reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/s
equestered 
Project-level 
monitoring reports, 
IGFF Monitoring, 
reporting & 
verification systems, 
national GHG 
inventories, reports 
from DFIs and project 
developers 
209 million 
tonnes of 
CO2e (as 
on 2020)70 
  
1.9 million 
tCO2e (at 
the end of 3 
years) 
Final: 12.5 million tCO2e 
 
 
Lifetime target (20 years): 
48.48 million tCO2e 
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access 
Supplemen
tary  1.2: 
Installed 
energy 
stoarage 
capacity 
Primary Data 
Sources: 
- National statistics, 
government reports 
(e.g., censuses, 
surveys, asset 
registers) 
- International 
organizations 
(IRENA, IEA, World 
Bank, UN) and 
credible GIS data 
(e.g., NASA, ESA) 
  
219.1 
MWh of 
battery 
storage, 
plus 4,745 
MW of 
pumped 
storage 
capacity 
(as of Mar 
2024) 
0 
  
578 MWh 
  
It is anticipated that RTC project 
will not be commissioned (only 
financially approved) within the 
initial 
five 
years 
of 
implementation. Consequently, 
setting a mid-term target value 
will not reflect the project's 
operational reality.   
Lifetime Target (over 20 years):  
578 MWh 
  
Ministry of Power / CEA: India’s 
cumulative 
Battery 
Energy 
Storage 
System 
(BESS) 
capacity is 219.1 MWh as of 
March 2024. India also has 
about 4,745 MW of pumped 
 
70 ]https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2089589#:~:text=India's%204th%20Biennial%20Update,inventory%20for%20the%20year%202020.

=== PAGE 71 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
 
Secondary Data 
Sources: 
- GFF Annual 
Reports 
- Facility- 
commissioned 
surveys or studies 
- Expert validation, 
including external 
assessments 
facilitated by ADB 
hydro storage installed (with 
~3,305 MW operational) 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access 
  
Supplemen
tary 1.3: 
Installed 
renewable 
energy 
capacity 
 
209,440 
MW 
(209.44 
GW) – 
total 
renewable 
capacity 
(incl. large 
hydro) as 
of Dec 
2024 
363 MW 
836 MW 
For mid-term target calculation: 
Assuming that by year 5- CBG 
project 
+ 
DRE 
project 
is 
commissioned.  
  
Lifetime Target (over 20 
years): 836 MW 
  
Ministry of New & Renewable 
Energy (MNRE): India’s total 
installed 
renewable 
energy 
capacity reached 209.44 GW 
as of Dec 31, 2024. This 
includes major contributions 
from solar (~97.86 GW) and 
wind (~48.16 GW) 
  
Figure includes all renewables 
including large hydro (in line 
with updated definition of RE 
capacity). Data as per official 
year-end 2024 reporting 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access 
Supplemen
tary 1.4: 
Renewable 
 
~3.6559×
10^8 MWh 
 12,949,045 
MWh 
2,955,259,798 MWh 
Lifetime Target (over 20 
years):  2,91,440,138,746 
MWh

=== PAGE 72 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
 
energy 
generated 
per year 
(≈365.6 
TWh in 
FY2022–
23) 
Central 
Electricity 
Authority 
(CEA): In FY 2022–23, India’s 
total electricity generation from 
renewables (including large 
hydro) was about 365.59 billion 
kWh. (For reference, non-hydro 
RE alone contributed ~203.55 
billion units that year 
  
Value given is for the full fiscal 
year 2022–23. “Billion units” 
(BU) are converted to MWh (1 
BU = 1e9 kWh = 1e6 MWh). 
Figure includes large hydro 
generation for consistency with 
capacity above 
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
Core 1: 
GHG 
emissions 
reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/s
equestered 
 
  
0 million 
tCO2e 
Final: 0.2 million tCO2e 
Lifetime Target: 1.58 million 
tCO2e

=== PAGE 73 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
 
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
Supplemen
tary 1.5 
Improved 
low-
emission 
vehicle fuel 
economy 
 
0.0456 
litre of 
petrol per 
km 
 0.0347  
net change 
in fuel 
consumptio
n per km 
travelled 
(volume of 
fuel per km 
travelled by 
fuel type 
and 
equivalent 
energy 
unit/joule) 
  
  
Lifetime Target (over 20 
years): 0.0347 litre of petrol 
per km 
  
New passenger cars in India 
averaged about 121.3 g 
CO₂/km in FY2020–21, 
equivalent to roughly 5.0 L/100 
km (≈0.05 L/km) fuel 
consumption. Upcoming 
2022–23 standards target 
~4.89 L/100 km71 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for 
current 
state 
(baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute to 
technology deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation 
India has made significant 
progress 
in 
deploying 
renewable 
energy, 
but 
financing 
for 
emerging 
technologies remains limited. 
Key clean energy solutions—
including 
RTC 
renewables, 
green hydrogen, CBG, and 
battery 
storage—face 
high 
low  
IGFF 
will 
accelerate 
the 
deployment of high-impact, 
underfinanced clean energy 
technologies, 
expanding 
financing 
across 
RTC-RE, 
green hydrogen, CBG, and 
battery storage, along with 
decentralized renewables for 
MSME-driven 
applications. 
This will enhance renewable 
IGFF 
will 
provide 
concessional 
finance, 
risk-sharing 
mechanisms 
(through 
RSF), 
and 
DFI 
capacity-building 
to 
scale 
clean 
energy 
deployment. 
By 
enabling 
broader 
National 
level 
(one country)  
 
71 https://www.climatepolicydatabase.org/policies/corporate-average-fuel-economy-norms-passenger-cars-india-
2015#:~:text=force%20from%202022,89%20l%2F100%20Kms

=== PAGE 74 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
 
upfront 
costs, 
limited 
risk 
capital, and lack of proven 
financing models. Additionally, 
decentralized 
renewable 
energy (DRE) applications for 
MSMEs 
remain 
underdeveloped 
due 
to 
fragmented supply chains and 
lack of access to affordable 
finance. 
capacity, 
reduce 
GHG 
emissions, 
and 
provide 
sustainable 
alternatives 
to 
fossil fuels. 
IGFF is expected to mobilize 
USD 2.8 billion in clean energy 
investments and facilitate the 
deployment of the following 
technologies: 
• 
Solar 
& 
RTC 
renewables: 
Installation of 363 MW 
of decentralized solar 
projects and 473 MW 
of 
RTC 
renewable 
energy 
capacity, 
improving 
grid 
reliability and reducing 
fossil 
fuel 
dependency. 
• 
Decentralized 
renewable 
energy: 
Deployment of 46,450 
3HP 
solar-powered 
pumps and 17,765 
5HP 
solar-powered 
pumps, 
enhancing 
energy access and 
supporting agricultural 
resilience. 
• 
Compressed 
biogas 
(CBG): Establishment 
of 223 CBG plants, 
including 111 5-TPD 
plants, 
82 
10-TPD 
plants, and 1 30-TPD 
participation of private 
sector financiers and 
MSME 
developers, 
IGFF 
will 
drive 
commercial adoption of 
emerging technologies.

=== PAGE 75 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
 
plant, 
significantly 
reducing 
methane 
emissions 
and 
supporting 
waste-to-
energy solutions. 
• 
E-mobility: Financing 
for 100,900 electric 
two-wheelers 
and 
30,270 electric three-
wheelers, 
accelerating the shift 
to 
low-emission 
transport. 
• 
Green 
hydrogen: 
Deployment of 451 
MW of electrolyzer 
capacity, enabling the 
production of 119 TPD 
of green hydrogen, 
reducing reliance on 
fossil-based hydrogen 
in 
industrial 
applications. 
  
  
  
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute to 
market 
development/transformati
on at the sectoral, local, 
or national level 
 High capital costs and risk 
perceptions 
continue 
to 
constrain investment in India’s 
clean energy sector, limiting 
financing for technologies such 
as 
green 
hydrogen, 
RTC-
renewables, and CBG. Private 
sector 
participation 
remains 
suboptimal due to credit access 
barriers and unstructured risk 
low  
IGFF will reduce financing 
barriers 
by 
introducing 
concessional 
lending, 
de-
risking 
investments, 
and 
integrating 
risk-sharing 
through the RSF. The facility 
will enhance private sector 
participation by demonstrating 
bankability through structured 
credit guarantees. The RSF 
IGFF will mobilize DFIs 
to offer lower-cost, long-
tenor financing for clean 
energy. The RSF will 
incentivize PFIs to lend 
to MSMEs in the CBG 
sector 
by 
providing 
partial 
credit 
guarantees, 
reducing 
collateral burdens, and 
National 
level 
(one country)

=== PAGE 76 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
 
mitigation 
tools. 
MSME-led 
projects in the CBG sector, 
despite having strong market 
potential, struggle with high 
interest 
rates, 
stringent 
collateral requirements, and 
limited 
lender 
confidence. 
Gender-responsive 
financing 
remains weak, with financial 
products rarely tailored for 
women-led enterprises. 
will support MSME-led CBG 
projects by mobilizing $390 
million in PFI loans, unlocking 
$557 million in total financing. 
Gender-responsive 
lending 
frameworks 
will 
be 
mainstreamed 
into 
credit 
appraisal processes.  
lowering interest rates. 
By 
strengthening 
financial 
institutions' 
climate-aligned lending 
and risk assessment 
capabilities, IGFF will 
create a more resilient 
financial ecosystem for 
green investments. 
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute to 
effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
DFIs 
in 
India 
have 
demonstrated 
intent 
to 
integrate 
climate 
risk 
considerations 
but 
lack 
standardized 
green 
lending 
criteria, 
climate 
risk 
management frameworks, and 
ESG-aligned 
financial 
reporting. 
There 
is 
limited 
institutional capacity to assess 
the 
financial 
viability 
of 
emerging 
clean 
energy 
projects, 
and 
inadequate 
technical 
expertise 
in 
evaluating 
blended 
finance 
models. PFIs lack familiarity 
with risk-sharing instruments 
such as the RSF, limiting their 
ability to finance MSMEs. 
low  
IGFF 
will 
institutionalize 
knowledge-sharing 
on 
climate-aligned 
finance 
by 
embedding standardized ESG 
integration, risk assessment 
methodologies, and climate-
related financial disclosures 
into DFI operations. The RSF 
will 
provide 
a 
structured 
mechanism 
to 
enhance 
creditworthiness for MSME 
developers, encouraging PFIs 
to develop long-term lending 
models for the CBG sector. By 
the end of implementation, 
DFIs and PFIs will have the 
capacity to scale clean energy 
financing in line with global 
best practices.  
  
IGFF 
will 
deliver 
targeted 
training 
for 
DFIs and PFIs on green 
finance methodologies, 
risk assessment, and 
gender-responsive 
lending. The RSF will 
provide 
a 
real-world 
demonstration of risk-
sharing 
mechanisms, 
allowing 
financial 
institutions 
to 
gain 
experience 
with 
structured 
credit 
enhancement. 
Policy 
dialogues 
will 
further 
ensure the integration of 
standardized 
green 
finance taxonomies into 
financial 
sector 
regulations, contributing 
to 
long-term 
market 
transformation. 
National 
level 
(one country)

=== PAGE 77 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)   
   
Project/programme 
results    
(outcomes/outputs)   
    
Project/programme 
specific Indicator    
    
Means of Verification 
(MoV)   
Baseli
ne    
Target    
Assumptions / Note    
Mid-
term    
Final     
  
Outcome 1  
DFIs deploy concessional 
finance and risk-sharing 
mechanisms, enabling 
them to expand their 
investment portfolios in 
emerging clean energy 
technologies  
GCF financing 
disbursed to DFIs for 
IGFF subprojects (USD 
million)  
ADB financial monitoring 
reports  
0  
91 
122  
GCF financing disbursed by ADB to 
DFIs to support investments.  
ADB financing 
disbursed to DFIs for 
IGFF subprojects (USD 
million)  
ADB financial monitoring 
reports  
0  
404 
788  
ADB financing disbursed to DFI to 
support investments.  
Output 1.1   
DFIs have secured 
concessional loans to 
finance emerging clean 
energy technologies  
No. of GCF loan 
agreements signed with 
DFIs   
IGFF annual performance 
reports (APRs), ADB 
website  
0   
1   
5  
GCF loan agreements signed by 
ADB (as AE) with DFIs   
IGFF financing 
committed to DFIs 
(USD million)  
IGFF annual performance 
reports (APRs), ADB 
website  
0  
975  
975  
This would include commitment in 
the ADB system of ADB financing 
and GCF financing for each 
subproject, which occurs upon loan 
effectiveness.  
Output 1.2   
Risk-sharing facility (RSF) 
is established to de-risk 
investments in 
compressed biogas (CBG) 
projects  
GCF financing 
committed for RSF 
(USD million)  
IGFF annual performance 
reports (APRs), ADB 
website  
  
0  
  
65  
65  
This would include commitment in 
the ADB system of GCF financing 
for RSF, which occurs upon loan 
effectiveness.  
 RSF becomes 
operational (y/n)  
  
RSF operational manual, 
and signed guarantee 
agreements  
0  
y  
y  
  
Outcome 2: Project 
developers and 
public/private FIs have 
access to inclusive finance 
for emerging clean energy 
technologies  
Total financing 
mobilized for IGFF-
supported investments 
(USD billion)  
IGFF annual performance 
reports (APRs), ADB 
website, DFI reports  
0  
0.8 
2.8  
This includes ADB+GCF financing, 
DFI financing and project proponent 
equity; and also includes financing 
mobilized under the RSF for CBG 
projects.  
Output 2.1   
No. of DFIs reporting 
adequate tools, 
IGFF APRs, ADB project 
completion reports  
0  
  
2  
  
5  
  
Change in DFI tools and processes 
measured through needs 
assessment during project design,

=== PAGE 78 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
 
DFIs have enhanced 
technical capacities to 
finance emerging clean 
energy technologies  
   
processes and 
standards in place to 
guide project 
origination, appraisal 
and management    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
and DFI consultation during 
development of subproject 
completion report.  
No. of DFIs reporting 
improved capacity to 
use the tools, 
processes and 
standards in project 
origination, appraisal 
and management.  
IGFF APRs, ADB project 
completion reports  
0  
2  
5  
Change in DFI capacity as 
measured through pre- and post-
event assessments.   
No. of DFIs confirmed 
as having adequate 
capacity to integrate 
gender consideration in 
project origination, 
appraisal and 
management.  
IGFF APRs, ADB project 
completion reports  
0  
2  
5  
Change in DFI capacity as 
measured through pre- and post-
event assessments.  
Output 2.2   
MSMEs and participating 
financial institutions (PFIs) 
have enhanced technical 
capacities to access credit 
guarantees through RSF  
Total value of financing 
mobilized for CBG 
projects through the 
risk-sharing facility 
(USD million) 
Reporting by DFI to IGFF 
PMU, RSF annual reports, 
RSF guarantee 
agreements  
0  
390 
557  
Assuming a corpus size of $65 
million, a fund leverage of 3 and 
50% coverage of PCGs.  
Number of RSF 
participating financial 
institutions confirmed 
having the capacity to 
prepare and submit 
loan and credit 
guarantee applications 
to RSF   
RSF annual reports  
0  
1  
3  
  
Number of MSME 
developers confirmed 
having the capacity to 
prepare and submit 
loan applications to 
PFIs1  
RSF annual reports  
0  
30  
75

=== PAGE 79 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2.3   
Public/private FIs adopt 
tools and frameworks to 
scale up financing for 
emerging clean energy 
technologies  
   
No. of DFIs reporting 
adoption of tools and 
frameworks for    
IGFF APRs  
0  
1  
5  
  
  
No. of DFIs reporting 
improved 
understanding of 
gender integration in 
lending  
IGFF APRs  
 0 
1  
5  
  
  
No. of evidence-based 
policy briefs published  
ADB website  
  
 0 
4  
10  
  
Project/programme co-benefit indicators    
Co-Benefit 1: 
(Environmental)   
Mitigated air pollution from 
adopting clean energy 
technologies  
Reduction in PM2.5 
concentration or NOx or 
SOx  
Environmental impact 
assessment reports of 
DFIs or project developers/ 
IGFF APRs  
0  
TBD   
TBD   
 Baselining and target setting 
will be conducted in year 1 of 
implementation  
Co-Benefit 2: (Economic)   
Improved employment 
opportunities in 
communities   
Number of direct jobs 
created in clean energy 
sectors (construction, 
operations, and 
maintenance)  
Employment tracking 
reports from DFIs or 
project developers/ IGFF 
commissioned surveys and 
field studies   
0   
101,775   139,234 
Calculations are in Annex 22   
Co-Benefit 3: 
(Adaptation)   
Expanded affordable 
access to clean energy  
Number of people 
provided with clean 
energy solutions  
DFI or project developer’s 
project impact reports/ 
IGFF APRs  
0  
614,250   903,218 
Calculations are in Annex 22   
Co-Benefit 4:   
 (Gender)   
Increased leadership of 
women within clean 
energy value chain   
X% increase in women-
led enterprises 
accessing clean energy 
financing  
Loan disbursement data 
from DFIs/ IGFF APRs  
0  
TBD   
TBD   
Baselining and target setting will 
be conducted in year 1 of 
implementation   
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
 
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. 
Add rows as needed.  
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number 
sub-activities as shown below to associate to the related activity.  
Activities  
Description  
Sub-activities  
Deliverables   
Activity 1.1.1: Design and provide 
concessional loans to DFIs to 
finance emerging clean energy 
technologies 
GCF and ADB resources will be 
used to provide concessional loans 
to DFIs for on-lending to public and 
private sector borrowers to support 
the deployment of emerging clean 
energy technologies 
• 
Engage with DFIs to originate 
IGFF subprojects and build 
pipeline 
• 
Design subprojects and conduct 
due diligence 
• 
Finalize loan agreements, 
financial terms, and operational 
modalities before disbursement. 
Loan agreements 
Activity 1.1.2: Create RSF to de-
risk investments in CBG projects 
GCF and ADB resources will be 
used to provide partial credit 
guarantees to enhance the 
bankability of CBG projects, 
mitigating risks and unlocking private 
capital 
• 
Engage with DFI to finalize RSF 
structure  
• 
Finalize loan agreements, 
financial terms, and operational 
modalities before disbursement 
Loan agreement (RSF) 
Guarantee issuance documents 
Activity 2.1.1: Strengthen DFI 
capabilities in project preparation, 
appraisal, and monitoring of IGFF-
aligned investments   
 
GCF and ADB resources will be 
used to provide technical assistance 
to DFIs to strengthen their project 
preparation, appraisal, and 
monitoring capacities for IGFF 
aligned investments 
• 
Conduct needs assessment 
and develop technical 
assistance package for each 
IGFF subproject 
• 
Strengthen internal DFI 
capacities and systems to 
implement IGFF subprojects 
and finance clean energy 
projects 
• 
Develop bankable pipelines for 
emerging clean energy 
technology projects  
 
Needs assessment report, project 
appraisal and risk assessment 
toolkit/framework, DFI-level 
safeguards policy, DFI-level gender 
policies, DFI-level data collection 
and monitoring frameworks, market 
assessments, training sessions and 
workshop reports 
Activity 2.2.1: Build capacities of 
PFIs and MSME project developers 
in structuring bankable projects and 
accessing credit guarantees through 
RSF 
 
GCF and ADB resources will be 
used to train PFIs and MSME 
developers on tools and processes 
to effectively leverage credit 
guarantees through RSF 
• 
Provide support to establish 
RSF systems and frameworks 
and strengthen DFI capacity to 
issue credit guarantees.  
RSF operations manual, needs 
assessment reports, market 
assessments, risk assessment tool 
and credit scoring methodology, 
outreach campaigns, training sessions

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Support PFIs to identify 
pipelines of CBG investments 
and for MSME developers to 
access credit guarantee-
supported loans 
 
Activity 2.3.1: Build financial 
institutions' capacity and internal 
systems on climate risk 
management, green lending, and 
gender-responsive financing 
 
GCF and ADB resources will be 
used to support participating DFIs 
and other public/private FIs on 
developing frameworks and tools to 
institutionalize green lending 
practices, and gender-responsive 
lending practices in their operations 
 
• 
Organize financial sector 
dialogues and roundtables 
• 
Conduct institutional gap 
assessments for DFIs:  
• 
Strengthen gender 
mainstreaming  
Institutional gap analysis, Gender 
action plans, financial sector dialogue 
reports 
 
Activity 2.3.2: Support dialogues 
between policy makers and financial 
institutions on enabling policies on 
climate risk management, green 
lending and gender-responsive 
financing 
GCF and ADB resources will be 
used to facilitate multi-stakeholder 
roundtables to increase awareness 
on development and implementation 
of tools and frameworks that 
promote green lending and gender 
equality in financing clean energy 
projects 
 
• 
Organize annual green finance 
policy roundtables with 
policymakers 
• 
Develop evidence-based policy 
briefs on industry uptake of 
green lending and climate 
disclosure 
Policy briefs 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
197. 
Purpose of the M&E Plan: The M&E plan for IGFF aims to support the Program Management Unit (PMU) and DFIs, with assistance from Project 
Implementation Units (PIUs), in establishing an M&E structure, data management system, and reporting framework. It seeks to generate evidence on fund-
level impact and outcome indicators, along with environmental, economic, adaptation, and gender co-benefits. Additionally, the IGFF will track program-
specific outcome and output indicators at the facility level by consolidating DFI-reported data, leveraging their existing data collection and management 
systems. 
 
198. 
M&E Structure, Data Management, and Reporting: The AE, through the PMU, oversees the consolidation and submission of reports to the GCF, 
with support from DFIs as the executing entities. DFIs are responsible for tracking progress against fund-level and program-specific indicators. At the facility 
level, the PMU reviews DFI-submitted reports, providing feedback on quality and compliance status. DFIs, in coordination with PIUs, conduct primary due 
diligence using their management information systems (MIS), ensuring consistency with PMU standards. The reporting framework includes the following: 
• 
Monitoring Tool Development: Once sub-projects are approved for funding, a monitoring tool will be developed in consultation with PFIs and Micro, 
Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). This tool will outline contributions to logical framework indicators, disaggregated targets (e.g., location,

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
 
gender, direct/indirect beneficiaries), and compliance with environmental, social safeguards, and gender action plans. The same monitoring tool will 
be developed for TA-related indicators and will be prepared by DFIs with guidance from PIUs. 
• 
Quarterly and Annual Reporting: PFIs/MSMEs will submit progress reports to DFIs based on agreed targets. Reports will be stored in the DFIs’ MIS. 
• 
Data Quality Assessment: DFIs and PIUs will conduct data quality assessments of the submitted reports to ensure compliance with data requirements 
and standards. Feedback will be provided to PFIs/MSMEs for corrections. 
• 
DFI-Level Submission: PIUs and DFIs will submit vetted reports to the PMU quarterly and annually. 
• 
PMU Consolidation: The PMU will review and integrate reports, ensuring alignment with logical framework indicators and compliance with 
environmental and gender safeguards, as well as the established data requirements and standards. Feedback will be shared with DFIs/PIUs for 
continuous improvements. 
• 
Annual Reporting to GCF: The AE, through the PMU, will submit an annual consolidated progress report to GCF, highlighting accomplishments 
against targets in the logical framework indicators, implementation challenges, lessons learned, and best practices.

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), sanctions, 
prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the 
proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability 
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact 
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as 
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices 
Selected Risk Factor 1 – Forex risk  
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Financial  
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
199. 
GCF and ADB’s loan financing to the DFIs is extended in hard currency (USD). DFIs will on-lend in local 
currency (INR) to their clients, which include SMEs and corporates. For the Risk-sharing facility, the DFI or its subsidiary 
will provide the partial risk guarantees in local currency (INR) and receive guarantee fee in INR, while payments to 
ADB/GCF will be in USD. A devaluation of INR against the USD will therefore increase DFIs’ debt service costs or 
decrease amounts left in the RSF at the end of its term, and will result in foreign exchange losses. For example, the 
Indian Rupee depreciated by around 10% against the USD and was the worst-performing Asian currency in 2022. It 
has continued to depreciate into 2023 (https://www.xe.com/currencycharts/?from=USD&to=INR&view=2Y).  
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
200. 
For ADB, in most sovereign loan projects, the sovereign government assumes currency risks before passing 
on loans to projects in local currency. This also provides adequate comfort on this risk, with sovereigns better able to 
match currency outflows and inflows. For the RSF, we propose setting up a Foreign Exchange Fluctuation Reserve 
(FEFR) to mitigate the currency risks within the RSF corpus. Each year, the FEFR will accumulate up to a “maximum 
reserve amount,” defined as the difference between the outstanding amount of the GCF loan at prevailing exchange 
rates and the amount adjusted to the base year exchange rates. The FEFR will allow the DFI to capture residual cash 
(e.g., guarantee fee revenues) from the guarantee operations—up to 75% of the foreign exchange fluctuation loss 
realized in the preceding year. Even in years with a foreign exchange fluctuation gain, 25% of that gain shall be 
transferred to the FEFR in the following year. This cumulative reserve fund will effectively mitigate the foreign exchange 
risks associated with the repayment of the foreign currency funds from the GCF.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 – Risk to realized co-financing and mobilization of resources  
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Financial  
Low 
Low  
Description 
201. 
This risk covers the possibility of ADB partners contributing less than the anticipated co-financing that is 
calculated for this Facility.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
202. 
During the development of the Facility, ADB has been in close and continuous dialogue with the selected banks, 
with which it has negotiated current projects and future pipelines, gaps and needs. The banks have expressed the need 
as well as a commitment to work with ADB and GCF to blend their resources and contribute to climate finance.

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
- Risk to potential to realize climate pipeline  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
203. 
Not all DFIs have an equal understanding of climate finance, green taxonomies, climate risks and what is 
entailed in building a low-carbon and climate-resilient pipeline of projects.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
204. 
During the development of the Facility, ADB has been in close and continuous dialogue with the selected banks, 
with which it has negotiated current projects and future pipelines, gaps and needs. Furthermore, the Facility includes a 
grant component that will specifically tackle the issue of aligning operations with the Paris Agreement and climate risk 
frameworks, therefore contributing to enhancing the technical knowledge and skills of the bank officers to structure 
climate projects. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 – Lack of implementation of policy & regulatory framework  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Policy 
Medium  
Low  
Description 
205. 
India has a rich and comprehensive policy and regulatory framework that informs and guides the sectors 
and subsectors that are the target areas for the investments by the Facility. The policies on paper may not always 
translate into project pipelines, although there have not been instances of policies or laws obstructing renewables 
or renewables technologies.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
206. 
The ADB and partner DFIs will ensure continuous policy dialogue with the relevant ministries and national 
institutions tasked with policy guidance and/or implementation.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 – Mismatch between national policy and state-level interventions and 
implementation  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Policy 
Medium  
Medium  
Description 
207. 
There are potential regional policymaking issues that can arise from implementing national policy at the 
local (State) level. For example, the National Green Hydrogen Mission utilises various policy provisions to produce 
green hydrogen, facilitate banking, and transport/distribute the hydrogen. Despite the project being proposed in 
January 2023, there has yet to be regions identified that can support production. This is due to regional policy 
issues of land availability. States must create land banks for renewable green hydrogen deployment at national 
request for the project to be successful in choosing regions for development. It has proven difficult to do so. The 
administrative fragmentation of the system can create such policy implementation risks. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
208. 
Through this program’s implementation unit and through the partner DFIs, the ADB can support continuous 
policy dialogue to ensure that the relevant regulation is followed through at the State level, so that the pipeline is 
not affected.

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 6 - Money laundering, terrorist financing and prohibited practices 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
AML/CTF 
Low  
High 
Description 
209. 
This risk refers to the probability that GCF financing through GFF to the DFIs results in money laundering, 
terrorist financing or financing of prohibited practices. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
210. 
As GCF funds will be provided alongside co-financing from ADB, ADB Integrity Principles and associated 
due diligence will apply at sub-project level, which will also mitigate this risk. Furthermore, two of the DFIs are 
already GCF accredited and have passed the ethics and fiduciary requirements of GCF. The remaining two DFIs 
will be required to comply with the same requirements, for example, in applying know-your-customer (KYC) as a 
key AML measure to avoid financial crimes.

=== PAGE 86 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
211. 
The IGFFs overall approach to Environmental and Social risk assessment is guided by the Green Climate Fund 
Revised Environmental and Social Policy and all other relevant GCF E&S policies and commitments that have been 
recognized as established good international practices by GCF and ADB’s E&S framework and policies, including the 
GCF’s IP Policy. Due to the nature of the proposed sectors and activities, and the level of accreditation of ADB, a 
category I-2 is proposed for IGFF. Activities which imply resettlement and/or other irreversible E&S impacts will not be 
funded as they will fall under category I-1. 
212. 
IGFF will finance climate-related projects or interventions through DFIs. For each, an assessment procedure 
of Environmental and Social (E&S) safeguards of the proposed projects is required and will be embedded in their 
investment cycle. Project proponents/DFI will develop documentation to present to the DFI E&S team, including an 
E&S checklist and establishing mitigation plans and processes for any adverse impacts identified. Following this, DFI 
E&S teams will conduct an initial screening according to a predefined exclusion list, and a categorisation procedure, 
based on the significance of potential impacts and risks in compliance with GCF Revised Environmental and Social 
Policy (2021). The purpose of this initial screening is to ensure that the project does not fall within exclusion criteria and 
has an appropriate understanding of E&S impacts (including Safeguarding Against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and 
Harassment (SEAH) and indigenous peoples) as well as appropriate mitigation measures in place which will form the 
basis of the Environment and Social Management System (ESMS)/Environment and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) moving forward. Following this screening, a decision will be made, either approval for continuation, requesting 
clarification of issues/further documentation being required, or a screening out. Projects will be categorised by DFIs 
according to GCF/ADB categories, which can be considered equivalent. Only projects meeting the criteria for either 
category C or B (or substantial, moderate, and low risk under the new ADB’s Environment and Social Framework [ESF] 
starting in 2026) will be approved under the IGFF. All projects assessed as being category A (or high risk under the 
new ADB’s ESF starting in 2026) will be excluded.   
213. 
Once a project has passed this initial screening stage, it will move on to a full proposal assessment, still at the 
DFI level. Part of this will include a second E&S screening, with requirements varying depending on the categorisation 
of the project. If the project is category C, an Environmental and Social Policy appropriate to the size and nature of the 
risks and activities involved in the project, along with an Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP), and a Gender 
Equality Assessment and Action Plan (GAP) will be required. Category B projects will require, in addition to the outlined 
above, an Environmental and Social Health Impact Assessment (ESHIA) to mitigate any residual impacts identified, an 
ESMS based on the mitigation measures identified earlier in the process, and Environmental and Social Management 
Plan(s) (ESMP(s)) to mitigate any residual impacts identified following the ESHIA. The ESMS and ESMP will be 
performed instead of an ESAP for category B projects. 
214. 
IGFF, through its PIU will then review the proposal, checking the relevant documentation created (e.g., ESMS, 
ESHIA), perform random checks and sample screenings to confirm categorisations of projects, and ensure that all 
proposals meet IGFF requirements and are aligned with IGFF objectives and priorities. Once these have been ensured, 
final approval for a project will be given, and the project will be approved for funding. The first two sub-projects assessed 
and categorised for each DFI, and the first category B project if this does not fall within the first two sub-projects, will 
be reviewed and screened by the PMU to ensure correct categorisation. The Facility is also responsible for oversight 
and implementation of the IGFF ESMF.  
215. 
Projects will be periodically monitored and evaluated by the DFIs to ensure that E&S policies are being 
complied with, and risks and impacts are being identified and mitigated appropriately. The extent of the monitoring, 
including scope and frequency, will be based on the type and level of risks identified. DFIs will ensure that projects will 
appoint a person responsible for this monitoring, who will ensure participatory monitoring of individuals impacted by the 
project. Reports on these will be prepared by DFI E&S teams and sent to the Facility, which in turn is responsible for 
regularly updating GCF at a cadence consistent with the categorisation and disclosure requirements.

=== PAGE 87 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
216. 
Women are critical stakeholders in India’s shift to renewable energy and require greater financial inclusion.  
While women hold 32% of renewable energy jobs globally, in India, their participation is lower—for example they 
represent only 11% of the workforce in rooftop solar companies. Like other countries in the region, there is a growing 
number of women participating in the renewable energy sector in India, including in decentralized solar PV systems, 
where they have the highest participation rate (21%). Despite this progress, persistent gender biases and women’s 
limited access to finance remain key challenges. Women are primarily employed in administrative roles, with limited 
presence in technical and leadership positions. However, decentralized renewable energy projects have seen higher 
female engagement, especially in rural areas. This indicates a need for targeted policies and better access to finance 
for women to support their greater participation and leadership as energy entrepreneurs.    
217. 
According to Government of India data, female entrepreneurs own about 20% of businesses and only about 
6% of tech startups have women-only founders, but only a fraction operate in the energy sector. While data specific to 
energy entrepreneurship are scarce, the broader trend shows that women entrepreneurs are few in number relative to 
men. Significant barriers include lack of collateral, bias in lending, and limited access to financial information. Female 
representation in leadership and technical roles also remains limited. While according to IRENA, globally women hold 
about 17% of senior management roles in the solar industry, in a survey of Indian rooftop solar firms, only one-third 
had even a single woman on their board, and none had more than one. Women rarely head engineering, project 
management, or operations teams in energy companies.    
218. 
Despite challenges, women are participating in the energy transition by founding startups and social enterprises 
– from solar solutions companies to clean cooking ventures – but often face more significant hurdles in scaling up and 
access to finance remains one of their biggest barriers. Women also play an essential role as micro-entrepreneurs in 
the renewable energy value chain (for example, as distributors of solar lamps or operators of local energy kiosks), 
though these roles are often informal and not captured fully in official data. The potential is significant: studies estimate 
India's renewable energy goals (500 GW by 2030) could create over 3 million new jobs, which presents an opportunity 
to increase women's participation if supportive measures are in place.  
219. 
ADB’s Country Partnership Strategy for India (2023), notes that while substantial progress has been made on 
education and health, there are still significant gender gaps in the country. 50From 2022-23, per data from the 
Government of India Periodic Labor Force Survey indicated that women’s participation in labour force has increased to 
37%. Approximately 33.6% of women surveyed women reporting that they wanted to continue their studies, while 44.5% 
cited childcare/ care commitments as reasons for not participating in the labour force. Other contributing factors include 
societal prejudices against women working outside the home and concerns about safety and security.   
220. 
Narrowing existing gender gaps in the renewable energy sector is an important component of the Facility, 
aligning with GCF requirements under the gender policy and action plan, and reflecting ADB’s policies and institutional 
priorities on gender equality as articulated under ADB’s Strategy 2030. This strategy requires ADB operations to 
contribute to gender equality across five pillars: women’s economic empowerment, gender equality in human 
development, gender equality in decision-making and leadership, reduced women’s time poverty, and women’s 
resilience to external shocks. The IGFF gender action plan identifies specific objectives, activities, targets and time-
bound KPIs to ensure that women benefit from IGFF funded projects and programs.    
221. 
The governance of this Facility is overseen by the ADB, which will provide the management of the Facility 
through a PIU. Gender guidelines for the IGFF follow the gender mainstreaming framework and policy guidelines of the 
ADB, in alignment with GCF gender policy. The Facility will channel funding through selected Indian DFIs, two of which 
are GCF accredited national entities. IGFF will review the GCF-approved gender assessments (GAs) and gender action 
plans (GAPs) for the accredited entities and may request clarification or supplementation thereof if required. For the 
unaccredited DFIs, the IGFF will conduct a gender assessment including a review of their existing Gender and ESS 
policies and formulation of a GAP to address and support remediation of any identified shortcomings with respect to 
IGFF requirements. Additionally, the IGFF will require preparation of a GA & GAP for all projects and programs, direct

=== PAGE 88 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
or indirect, to be funded by the Facility. The full documentation related to the requirements on gender are provided as 
Annex 8.   
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
ADB systems for financial management, audit, integrity and procurement will apply for all sub-projects 
supported by GCF funds under the IGFF.  
222. 
Financial Management and Audit. Details of every project’s financial accounting, disbursement procedures 
and auditing requirements will be developed during preparation of each project, in accordance with ADB’s policies on 
Financial Management and Analysis of Projects and will be included in their respective project administration manuals. 
Financial management systems of the DFIs will be assessed on the adequacy and the ability for timely reporting. The 
loan proceeds for all IGFF projects will be disbursed in accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, 
as amended from time to time), and detailed arrangements agreed upon between the respective DFIs, government, 
and ADB. Public disclosure of the audited project’s financial statements, including the auditor’s opinion on the 
subproject financial statements, will be guided by ADB’s Access to Information Policy 2018. DFIs financial management 
and audit performance will be regularly supervised through quarterly progress reports, annual audited reports, and 
compliance with financial covenants. 
223. 
Integrity and anticorruption policy. ADB will conduct integrity due diligence on DFIs, the members of their 
board of directors, and their management teams, in accordance with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended 
from time to time), and relevant guidelines and procedures.  
224. 
Procurement. Procurement of consulting services to support the execution of the technical assistance grant 
will be in accordance with ADB’s Procurement Guidelines (2017, as amended from time to time). All procurement for 
IGFF projects will also be done in accordance with ADB’s Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers (2017, as amended from time to time), and will be done by the Implementing Agencies for each project. 
To the extent possible, ADB staff will support procurement processes and offer procurement training. Procurement 
plans for the respective projects shall be in accordance with their respective project administration manuals. A detailed 
procurement plan for use of GCF grants for technical assistance is included in Annex 10. Implementation of the 
program, particularly on the projects, shall conform to all applicable ADB policies, as amended from time to time, 
including those concerning anticorruption measures, anti-money laundering, counter terrorist financing, safeguards, 
gender, procurement, consulting services, and disbursement. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an 
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 89 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 
72 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
n/a  
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) n/a  
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project n/a  
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and cross 
cutting-projects)72 
☐ 
Annex X 
Other references

=== PAGE 90 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.

=== PAGE 91 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 92 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
India Green Finance Facility (IGFF) 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
India 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Thursday, May 15, 2025 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Hindi 
Explanation on language 
These are the official languages of the target country. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.adb.org/documents/igff-annex-6-
environmental-social-management-framework  
 
Hindi:  
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/1054581/igff-annex-6-esf-hi.pdf  
 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
2 project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework”.

=== PAGE 93 ===
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) 
Description of report 
N/A 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, May 23, 2025 
Place 
Asian Development Bank India Resident Mission 
4 San Martin Marg, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi 110021, India 
Contact Information 
Mr. Suhail Mircha, Senior Safeguards Officer (Social) 
Email: smircha@adb.org 
Tel: +91 11 66145 200 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Monday, June 30, 2025 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 94 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP271 
Proposal name: 
India Green Finance Facility (IGFF) 
Accredited entity: 
Asian Development Bank  
Country: 
The Republic of India 
Programme size:  
Large 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The India Green Finance Facility (IGFF) 
programme focuses on accelerating solutions 
for India’s energy transition, aiming to 
decarbonize the power, transport, agriculture 
and industrial sectors – an urgent step in 
avoiding long-term lock-in of fossil fuels, 
while directly delivering large-scale 
mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions. 
Potential delays in the approval of 
subprojects, including the Risk Sharing 
Facility (RSF), could delay programme 
impacts. 
The programme opens the path for large-
scale commercial investments by addressing 
initial market barriers for the emerging clean 
energy technologies and solutions by 
derisking investments at scale and expanding 
deployment in underserved areas. It also 
demonstrates the impact and viability of 
innovative financing structures, such as the 
RSF, to enable further scale-up and 
replication. 
IGFF may focus too heavily on a few sectors 
and thereby potentially underfund others. 
The programme partners with national 
development finance institutions to deliver 
climate finance, strengthen their capacity to 
invest in emerging clean energy solutions, 
integrate long-term climate risks into 
decision-making, and align them with global 
green finance frameworks to enhance access 
to and delivery of climate finance over the 
long term. 
There is a possibility that the private sector 
might lack interest in certain sectors in the 
initial years due to an evolving policy 
environment.

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 95 
 
 
 
 
While addressing long-term energy transition 
challenges, the solutions supported by the 
programme also aim to enhance climate 
resilience and deliver broader developmental 
co-benefits, such as improved public health, 
the creation of green jobs, increased access to 
clean energy, and the greater participation of 
women in the clean energy sector. 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal in accordance with the 
terms listed in the term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity (AE), 
and, if considered appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in annex II to document 
GCF/B.42/02. 
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Programme background  
3. 
The India Green Finance Facility (IGFF) is a large-scale initiative designed to accelerate 
India’s transition toward its net-zero commitments by enhancing the role and capacity of 
development finance institutions (DFIs). The programme aims to unlock funding at scale for 
emerging clean energy technologies and expansion into underserved areas. Its core objective is 
to mobilize climate finance, institutionalize green lending practices within public DFIs, and 
drive large-scale, gender-responsive investments in clean energy.  
4. 
India is the world’s third-largest emitter of carbon dioxide (CO2), with its energy supply 
heavily dependent on fossil fuels. Over the past decade, India has made significant progress and 
achieved rapid growth in renewable energy capacity. However, the country faces the risk of 
remaining locked into a carbon-intensive trajectory, as rising energy demand – driven by rapid 
industrialization and urban expansion – continues to outpace the deployment of clean energy 
solutions. New solutions to drive decarbonization of sectors like industries and transport is 
required, while solutions to address intermittency are needed to support further scale-up of 
renewable energy in the power sector. Climate change further complicates this transition, with 
extreme weather events disrupting power supply and heatwaves increasing demand for fossil-
fuel based energy.  
5. 
The programme will address these challenges by supporting DFIs in scaling up emerging 
clean energy technologies through the provision of concessional lines of credit for clean energy 
subprojects. It will enable participating DFIs to offer loans to both public and private sector 
borrowers to finance initiatives that promote deployment of technologies/solutions facilitating 
the long-term decarbonization of the energy, transport, industry and agriculture sectors. 
Additionally, the project will establish a Risk Sharing Facility (RSF) to provide guarantees for 
small-scale projects, facilitating investments by local participating financial institutions. The 
IGFF aims to collaborate with multiple DFIs, including the National Bank for Agriculture and 
Rural Development (NABARD), India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) and the 
Rural Electrification Corporation (REC), among other entities. The USD 993 million IGFF is 
expected to mobilize an additional USD 1.85 billion and deliver an emissions reduction impact 
of up to 50 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO₂ eq) over the project’s 27-year 
lifespan.

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 96 
 
 
 
 
6. 
The IGFF will also provide technical support to institutionalize green and gender-
responsive lending practices and strengthen the capacity of DFIs to align the DFIs to globally 
accepted frameworks to enhance their capacity to access climate finance in future. This will 
involve targeting technical assistance to equip DFIs with the skills to assess, structure and 
finance climate-aligned projects effectively; embedding climate risk management frameworks 
within DFIs’ credit evaluation processes, thereby aligning them with global standards; and 
enhancing DFIs’ ability to attract domestic and international investment for climate action. 
7. 
The programme is requesting USD 200 million in GCF financing, structured into USD 13 
million in grant financing and USD 187 million in loan financing. The total cost of the 
programme, including co-financing, is USD 993 million, with co-financing in the form of grants 
and loans from the AE, the Asian Development Bank (ADB). 
8. 
In terms of environmental and social safeguards (ESS), this proposal has been 
categorized as environmental and social (E&S) risk category I-2. The review by the Secretariat 
confirms the E&S risk category assigned by the AE. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Outcome 1: Financing for DFIs to scale up emerging clean energy technologies (total cost: USD 980 
million; GCF cost: USD 187 million) 
9. 
Outcome 1 will provide the DFIs with dedicated concessional lines of credit for on-
lending to both public and private sector borrowers and establish the RSF, which will de-risk 
investments of public and private sector participating financial institutions (PFIs) and 
guarantee investments for supporting emerging technologies critical for India’s energy 
transition. This component will promote investment in sectors aligned with India’s clean energy 
transition goals and national programmes and in ways that will contribute to addressing the 
critical gaps in technology deployment, financing and capacity of DFIs with a particular focus on 
addressing the energy needs of the energy, transport, industry and agriculture sectors. The 
component will focus on improving clean energy access by supporting the development of 
capacity for the provision of round-the-clock renewable energy with energy storage systems; 
promoting e-mobility and related infrastructure, compressed biogas (CBG), and green hydrogen 
production; and promoting the decentralized provision of agricultural applications to power 
livelihood applications such as off-grid solar-powered water pumps and distributed renewable 
energy (DRE) solutions for rural areas. 
Outcome 2: Institutional capacity-building for DFIs, public/private financial institutions, PFIs, and 
micro, small and medium-sized enterprise (MSME) project developers (total cost: USD 11.85 
million; GCF cost: USD 11.85 million) 
10. 
Outcome 2 of the IGFF programme focuses on addressing technical and institutional 
barriers that limit the capacity of financial institutions in India to finance emerging clean energy 
technologies such as green hydrogen, DRE and CBG. Through targeted technical assistance, 
policy engagement, and capacity-building initiatives, this component will enhance the ability of 
DFIs, PFIs and MSMEs to originate, appraise, structure, and monitor climate-aligned 
investments. The component will build institutional capabilities to utilize concessional finance 
and risk-sharing instruments – such as the RSF – while embedding climate finance principles 
and gender-responsive approaches into institutional practices. IGFF will support at least five 
DFIs with long-term technical assistance, deliver over 35 training sessions for PFIs and MSMEs, 
introduce standardized tools for green lending and climate risk management, and develop 
gender-responsive financial frameworks. By addressing gaps in technical capacity, policy 
alignment, and gender inclusion, this component aims to catalyse systemic change in India’s

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 97 
 
 
 
 
financial ecosystem, unlocking inclusive and scalable finance for the country’s clean energy 
transition. 
Project management and monitoring and evaluation (total cost: USD 1.15 million; GCF cost: USD 
1.15 million) 
11. 
Programme implementation and monitoring and evaluation costs have been adequately 
provided for, and specific activities have been planned and integrated within the design of the 
programme to ensure that project implementation and monitoring and evaluation processes 
will be effectively coordinated. 
Gender, environmental and social management framework  
12. 
An environmental and social management framework (ESMF) and a gender action plan 
have been developed to align the programme’s subprojects with GCF’s ESS polices and 
requirements, outlining specific activities that will ensure that ESS are put in place and 
observed throughout the programme’s lifespan, as described in section IV of this Secretariat 
assessment.  
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential                                                                                 Scale: High 
13. 
IGFF is a transformative initiative designed to unlock large-scale investment in emerging 
clean energy technologies through an innovative blend of concessional finance, risk-sharing 
mechanisms, and embedded technical assistance. By catalysing finance for underdeveloped 
sectors such as green hydrogen, storage, CBG, DRE and electric mobility for peri-urban and rural 
areas, the programme will address critical market gaps and accelerate India’s clean energy 
transition. IGFF is projected to mobilize USD 2.8 billion in clean energy investments, including 
the deployment of 451 megawatts of electrolyzer capacity for green hydrogen, 578 megawatt-
hours of battery energy storage, over 63,000 solar irrigation pumps, and more than 131,000 
electric two- and three-wheelers. These interventions are expected to collectively reduce 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by up to 50 million t CO₂ eq over the 27-year project lifespan, 
contributing significantly toward India’s nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and its 
broader net-zero ambitions. The IGFF investments are also aligned with COP29 Energy Pledges 
and Declarations. 
14. 
Beyond mitigation, IGFF will deliver adaptation and socioeconomic co-benefits by 
enabling cleaner, more resilient energy access for rural and urban communities. The initiative 
will strengthen climate resilience in critical sectors such as transport, agriculture and industry 
by supporting the adoption of efficient low-carbon technologies. For example, CBG projects will 
reduce methane emissions while converting agricultural waste into energy, and DRE 
applications will improve rural livelihoods and energy security. IGFF’s inclusive approach is also 
expected to generate over 139,000 green jobs across the clean energy value chain, with a 
particular emphasis on rural employment and gender-responsive financing.  
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential                                                                  Scale: High 
15. 
IGFF advances India’s net-zero ambitions and accelerates progress toward its 2030 NDC 
targets by prioritizing investment in sectors that are pivotal to deep decarbonization, such as 
round-the-clock (RTC) renewables, green hydrogen and bioenergy. For example, RTC renewable 
energy solutions are critical to further scale solar and wind sectors by providing a stable power

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 98 
 
 
 
 
supply to meet demand and enhance the confidence of power utilities in such technologies. 
Similarly, green hydrogen will be essential for hard to abate industrial and transport sectors. 
These sectors have been identified as critical enablers of low-carbon transformation across 
energy, industry and transport. By addressing early-stage market barriers, enabling the 
development of ecosystems for the implementation of targeted technologies/solutions, and 
demonstrating scalable deployment models, IGFF plays a catalytic role in unlocking these 
markets for private investment at scale.  
16. 
By embedding standardized green finance practices into institutional systems and 
facilitating coordination between financial institutions and policymakers, IGFF aims to catalyse 
a systemic transformation in India’s financial ecosystem. The result will be a more robust, 
inclusive, and scalable pathway for clean energy investment, ensuring long-term impact well 
beyond the lifespan of the programme. The adoption of innovative financing structures such as 
the RSF will provide successful frameworks for replication for other climate investments and 
upscaling. By creating robust financial models and institutional mechanisms, IGFF ensures the 
sustainability of these outcomes well beyond its lifetime, contributing to a climate-resilient, low-
carbon economic transition. 
17. 
The RSF’s rural and MSME-focused interventions – including solar irrigation, electric 
vehicles in peri-urban areas, and DRE for microenterprises – advance inclusive development, 
climate resilience and energy access.  
18. 
The programme will adopt and foster a strategic approach to enhancing emissions 
reduction in both the energy sector and sectors such as transport, industry and agriculture – 
which rely heavily on energy use – by focusing on promoting clean and renewable energy 
technologies, which both increase efficiency in addressing the energy access gaps and needs and 
promote emissions reduction. This can help to ensure the long-term security and sustainability 
of energy access by fostering energy systems that can cushion communities and businesses 
from the current and future climate shocks such as increasing temperatures and impacts that 
affect their energy security. 
19. 
The programme further promotes a transformation in India’s climate finance landscape 
by building capacity in the finance sector for the acceleration of clean energy adoption and by 
assisting the finance sector in the country aligned with the Paris Agreement and that meet 
transparency and accountability standards and requirements. The paradigm shift potential is 
well embedded across the two components of the project and is designed to deliver long-term 
impacts beyond the life of the IGFF. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential                                              Scale: High 
20. 
The sustainable development potential is embedded in both components of the 
programme and places emerging technologies at the centre of efforts to strengthen India’s 
contribution towards emissions reduction while enhancing livelihoods, creating green jobs, 
enhancing environmental benefits and promoting a gender-responsive clean energy transition. 
21. 
It supports progress on multiple Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), particularly 
SDG 13 (Climate action), SDG 7 (Affordable and clean energy) and SDG 8 (Decent work and 
economic growth), while also advancing gender equality (SDG 5), innovation and infrastructure 
(SDG 9), and life on land (SDG 15). IGFF will result in over 50 million t CO₂eq in emissions 
reductions, while simultaneously enhancing adaptive capacity across sectors such as 
agriculture, transport and energy.  
22. 
By embedding gender-responsive financing tools and providing targeted capacity-
building for women-led enterprises, the project promotes inclusive growth and strengthens the

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 99 
 
 
 
 
role of women in clean energy transitions. Additionally, the project will create over 139,000 
green jobs and foster rural entrepreneurship by expanding DRE technologies, thus catalysing 
economic opportunities across India’s rural and peri-urban communities. 
23. 
IGFF’s environmental, economic and social co-benefits reflect its integrated, long-term 
approach to climate-resilient development. Interventions in solar irrigation and CBG production 
will reduce diesel reliance, improve air and soil quality, and strengthen water access, 
particularly in climate-vulnerable regions. The expansion of clean energy infrastructure 
supports national savings through reduced fuel imports and subsidies while unlocking new 
income streams for farmers and microenterprises. Socially, the project improves quality of life 
through reliable, low-emission energy services and enhanced food and energy security. 
Furthermore, IGFF’s knowledge-sharing and institutional capacity-building components will 
ensure that innovations in green finance, climate risk management, and project structuring are 
replicated across DFIs and other financial actors.  
24. 
By creating an enabling environment for inclusive, climate-aligned investments, IGFF 
supports a systemic shift toward sustainable development pathways that can scale across India 
and the broader South Asian region. 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient                                                                       Scale: High 
25. 
The programme targets the world’s third-largest carbon emitter, whose energy supply is 
still heavily dependent on fossil fuels, with an ever-heightening energy consumption that is 
propelled by a growing population and development. 
26. 
While India has made significant progress, with rapid growth in renewable energy 
capacity, it still faces the risk of remaining locked into a carbon-intensive trajectory, as rising 
energy demand – driven by rapid industrialization and urban expansion – continues to outpace 
the deployment of clean energy solutions. Climate change further complicates this transition, 
with extreme weather events disrupting power supply and heatwaves increasing demand for 
fossil-fuel based energy. To accelerate the shift to clean energy, India needs investments in 
solutions that address challenges in large-scale variable renewable energy technologies, 
decarbonize hard-to-abate sectors, and promote rural development.  
27. 
The Government of India has launched several ambitious climate change missions and 
programmes, however, progress in some areas remains slower than anticipated. The 
technologies and solutions targeted under IGFF are strategically aligned with these national 
initiatives, focusing on segments where deployment has lagged. For instance, under the Pradhan 
Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyan (PM-KUSUM) scheme launched in 2019, 
the goal was to install 1.5 million off-grid and 3.5 million grid-connected solar irrigation pumps 
by 2022. Despite extended timelines, only around 200,000 pumps have been deployed, mostly 
concentrated in just three states. Similarly, achieving India’s NDC target of 500 gigawatts of 
renewable energy under the National Solar Mission will require a massive scale-up of solar and 
wind capacity. This goal could be significantly constrained without enabling solutions like RTC 
renewables, which are essential to manage variability and close the demand-supply gap in the 
power sector. 
28. 
DFIs have played an important role in several development areas, however their role in 
the clean energy transition had been limited. The proposed interventions, through the 
mobilization of climate finance and strengthening of public DFIs by institutionalizing green 
lending practices and providing credit lines, guarantees and equity mechanisms, will drive 
large-scale, gender-responsive investments to support emerging clean energy technologies.

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 100 
 
 
 
 
29. 
India is heavily indebted, and hence its ability to fund the investments required for an 
effective energy transition is constrained. The country is currently struggling to access finance 
to support the transition that it needs to safeguard the energy security of its population and 
economy. Without access to finance and investments, India’s clean energy transition will remain 
slow, and the country’s dependency on fossil fuels will continue to increase, thereby 
undermining its national climate action and targets and its potential to contribute to global 
climate goals. The project will fill an important gap through working with key national and local 
institutions in both the public and private sectors and will help to foster long-term solutions 
through financial innovation and building access for public and private sector actors.  
3.5 
Country ownership                                                                            Scale: High 
30. 
Country ownership is well embedded in the project, which is fully aligned with the 
climate change and broader development aspirations, strategies and policies of India. The 
programme will promote the development of capacity and structuring of clean energy 
investments and systems in the country. IGFF also places an important focus on ensuring 
synergy with ongoing regional and national strategies and actions being implemented in the 
country.  
31. 
The programme is aligned with the updated NDCs, national adaptation plans, national 
action plan on climate change and other climate change and environmental policies and plans, 
and the GCF country programme of India. Furthermore, the programme has been developed 
with the strong participation and commitment of the Government of India, as well as the 
participation and commitment of other national and local-level stakeholders in the country, 
involving both high-level and grassroot-level stakeholder groups, including women and youth. 
32. 
The architecture of the programme consists of NABARD, REC and IIFCL, which are all 
publicly owned DFIs potentially acting as the potential executing entities (EEs). This will bolster 
the integration of local contexts and ownership into the project’s activities and outputs. 
33. 
The programme is built on well-designed stakeholder consultations that were 
conducted throughout the project development process, ensuring local knowledge, innovation, 
sustainability and participation is fully embedded in the design of the programme. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness                                       Scale: Medium to high 
34. 
In terms of effectiveness, the IGFF is designed to maximize economic and climate value 
for money. With an estimated cost of USD 55 per tonne of CO₂eq abated, the programme targets 
harder-to-finance and more expensive but strategically essential technologies that are critical 
for long-term renewable energy scale-up, justifying this initial higher abatement costs. A 
preliminary economic analysis shows a strong aggregate economic internal rate of return 
(EIRR) of 22.8 per cent, confirming IGFF’s strong economic performance even under 
conservative assumptions. Technologies such as CBG, electric vehicles and off-grid solar 
irrigation show robust EIRRs in the range of 15–45 per cent, reinforcing the project’s value from 
a cost-benefit standpoint. While financial viability varies across technologies, IGFF support 
reduces their weighted average cost of capital (WACC), thereby improving investment 
attractiveness. By addressing credit constraints, particularly for rural and small-scale 
developers, and ensuring that concessional finance is used only where market gaps exist, IGFF 
provides a scalable and replicable model that strengthens institutional capacity and facilitates 
private sector engagement. Several components, including solar irrigation, electric vehicles and 
CBG, demonstrate good financial returns, and there is a role for GCF concessional finance to

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 101 
 
 
 
 
address persistent access-to-finance barriers, de-risk new market entrants and support 
underserved geographies. And as such, it should be clear, targeted, time-bound and preferably 
structured to transition toward commercial terms as market mature. In contrast, technologies 
such as RTC solar and decentralized solar remain only marginally financially viable. For RTC 
solar in particular, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR) barely exceeds the WACC, and the 
project’s bankability depends on assumptions around battery price reductions and off-take 
tariffs that remain unproven. There is a risk that the demand for financing in this segment may 
be overestimated, given the lack of confirmed off-takers and low returns to private investors. 
The AE cites ongoing power sector reforms to support renewable energy markets, which, 
however, are long-term changes. There is a need for near-term mitigation if pricing assumptions 
fail, such as the policy backstop.   
35. 
The funding amount is well justified to provide the support needed to unlock the urgent 
energy transition that India needs to achieve and develop innovative approaches and lessons for 
transforming energy systems in the South Asia region. The IGFF presents a cost-effective 
strategy to support India’s clean energy transition and NDC goals by using concessional loans 
and guarantees to reduce financial barriers in high-impact but underfinanced sectors. These 
instruments are tailored to address risks that persist even after systemic reforms, helping to 
make emerging clean technologies more attractive to private investors. Concessional loans 
reduce the cost of capital and improve access to financing for sectors like round-the-clock 
renewables, green hydrogen, electric mobility, and decentralized solar. Guarantees play a 
complementary role by mitigating risks linked to CBG projects by MSMEs, where MSME 
investors often face steep collateral demands. This blend of financial tools, combined with 
technical assistance and capacity-building for DFIs, enables a strategic de-risking approach that 
crowds in private capital and unlocks new markets for clean energy deployment. 
36. 
The programme also has an exit strategy that will enable its approach to finance to be 
scaled up across India. It will also facilitate access and partnership between public and private 
actors and stakeholders for rolling out investments into emerging energy technologies, 
establishing innovative approaches for promoting them, and further improved ecosystem 
leading to lower costs. 
37. 
The programme has a proposed budget of USD 993 million, with GCF funding 
representing 20 per cent of the estimated cost at USD 200 million and co-financing at 80 per 
cent or USD 793 million. The GCF financing includes a USD 13 million grant (1.3 per cent of the 
total funding) and a USD 187 million senior loan (18.8 per cent of total funding). ADB will 
provide USD 788 million in senior loans with a 20-year tenor and a 5-year grace period (79.3 
per cent of the total funding) and will support the project with a USD 5 million grant (0.5 per 
cent of total funding). The project will mobilize USD 1.8 billion from the participating DFIs and a 
further USD 754 million in equity from project proponents.  
38. 
Of the GCF’s total loan of USD 187 million, USD 122 million will be provided under the 
financial terms and conditions set by the GCF Board for public sector concessional loans and will 
benefit from a sovereign guarantee from the Government of India. The remaining USD 65 
million, intended to establish the RSF, will not be covered by a sovereign guarantee and will be 
structured as a non-recourse loan. 
39. 
Given the unique and innovative nature of the RSF, initial consideration was given to 
using grant funding and a potential GCF guarantee. However, both options had limitations: 
grants would not demonstrate a viable business case, while the GCF guarantee was constrained 
by a 1:1 leverage ratio – resulting in lower efficiency – and faced regulatory challenges within 
the current framework. Consequently, a concessional loan structure with a 1:3 leverage ratio 
was selected as the most efficient and feasible option.

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 102 
 
 
 
 
40. 
To ensure the long-term sustainability of the RSF and provide adequate coverage for all 
loans guaranteed under it, the USD 65 million loan will require differentiated payment terms, 
including a grace period of 17 years. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
41. 
IGFF background. The IGFF will leverage concessional financing from GCF to catalyse 
financing for clean energy investments in India which aim to scale up emerging clean energy 
technologies, including round-the-clock renewable energy, decentralized solar energy, electric 
mobility solutions, green hydrogen, and CBG. The key E&S risks and/or impacts will mainly 
come from component 1, particularly on DFIs’ financing of various subprojects such as: (i) 
Renewable energy technologies (e.g. round-the-clock renewable energy solutions and green 
hydrogen/ammonia production); (ii) Energy access modernization (e.g. e-mobility 
infrastructure, charging stations and CBG plants utilizing municipal solid waste and agricultural 
residues; and (iii) Resilient energy systems for communities (e.g. DRE applications supporting 
livelihoods such as solar-powered cold storage, off-grid solar water pumps, flour mills, and 
dairy farms). The E&S co-benefits include improved air quality and reduced air pollution and 
carbon emissions. Providing accessible concessional finance and risk-sharing facilities also 
enhances access to clean energy supply and improves the resilience of communities.  
42. 
E&S risk category and safeguard instruments. The E&S risk category of the IGFF is 
category I-2 (medium level of intermediation) given that the IGFF’s proposed portfolio is 
expected to include substantial financial exposure to activities with potential limited adverse 
environmental or social risks and impacts that are few, generally site-specific, largely reversible, 
and readily addressed through mitigation measures. The IGFF will likewise not support 
activities with potential significant adverse environmental and social risks and impacts that, 
individually or cumulatively, are diverse, irreversible or unprecedented (equivalent to category 
A). The Secretariat agrees with this categorization and it is within the AE’s accreditation level. 
The AE has prepared an ESMF for the IGFF. 
43. 
Compliance with GCF’s ESS standards. The paragraphs below describe the IGFF’s 
compliance with GCF’s interim ESS standards. 
44. 
ESS 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and 
impacts. The AE has developed an ESMF for the IGFF. This framework defines eligible 
subproject types, assigns roles and responsibilities to key institutions, and establishes 
environmental and social policies, standards, and procedures throughout the investment cycle. 
It also provides guidelines for information disclosure, stakeholder consultation, participation, 
grievance redress, and accountability mechanisms. Additionally, the ESMF includes templates 
and checklists for environmental and social impact assessments (ESIA) and action plans, while 
addressing supply chain human rights and cultural heritage considerations. The ESMF also 
provided a programme-level assessment of E&S risks and impacts, which identified potential 
E&S risks, impacts, or mitigation measures based on the types and scale of subprojects 
anticipated under the programme. It also outlined the process and requirements for assessing, 
vetting and monitoring individual subprojects. Under the framework, each funded subproject 
must develop and implement an environmental and social management system based on an 
ESIA and an environmental and social management plan. All subprojects are required to 
establish grievance redress mechanisms (GRMs) and conduct meaningful stakeholder 
consultations.

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 103 
 
 
 
 
45. 
ESS 2: Labour and working conditions. Many subprojects under the programme 
would likely involve the hiring of workers. The ESMF proposes mitigating issues related to ESS 2 
through compliance with legislation and international standards, carrying out screenings and 
using checklists relevant to occupational health and safety, non-discrimination, forced and child 
labour, types of workers and origin of workers (taking the ADB Prohibited Investment Activities 
List (e.g. harmful and exploitative labour, child and forced labour) into account); and assessing 
labour risk in the supply chain, as relevant. It shall also include in contracts with civil works 
contractors, subcontractors and other providers of goods and services provisions to employ 
local labour wherever possible and ensure compliance with ADB’s social safeguards 
requirements and international core labour standards, as defined in ADB’s Core Labor 
Standards Handbook. 
46. 
ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention. The programme is designed to 
contribute to energy conservation through the utilization of solid waste and agricultural residue 
in the production of biogas and the use of solar power and other decentralized renewable 
energy applications. However, some of the subprojects to be supported may also involve the 
generation of solid waste (e.g. used batteries, discarded solar panels, other wastes), air 
emissions (e.g. dusts from construction activities and odour and fugitive gases from compressed 
biogas plants and ammonia production) and wastewater and other effluents (e.g. dairy farms 
and other applications). These pollution issues require ESIAs and the implementation of 
mitigation measures to ensure compliance with national and international environmental 
standards. The ESMF provides for conducting sustainability assessments of water supply and 
demand; integrating good practice environmental, health and safety guidelines and conducting 
environmental and social compliance audits; and developing environmental and social action 
plans to implement appropriate pollution prevention and management measures. 
47. 
ESS 4: Community health, safety and security. The programme will exclude 
subprojects that involve the construction, maintenance, and rehabilitation of critical 
infrastructure that would require further technical assessment and safety studies as they would 
have significant adverse risks/impacts (equivalent to category A). However, some subprojects 
would potentially expose local communities and workers to sexual exploitation, abuse and 
harassment (SEAH) risk (e.g. when influx of labourers occur) and potentially generate 
hazardous wastes and pollutants. This would require further studies on management, 
minimization and control, and compliance with the country’s and applicable international 
environmental quality standards. The potential impacts of the programme on community health 
and safety would include exposure to construction site hazards, product (e.g. battery) safety 
hazards, exposure to hazardous materials and wastes, and safety risks from construction and 
operation of energy infrastructure. These community health and safety issues require thorough 
assessment during subproject preparation and implementation. The ESMF provides for 
community health and safety risk assessments (e.g. construction site risks, infrastructure safety, 
product safety, hazardous materials, etc.) to be covered and addressed with mitigation 
measures in accordance with the mitigation hierarchy. 
48. 
ESS 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. As much as possible, the IGFF 
will avoid activities that will potentially involve resettlement and dispossession, land 
acquisition, and economic displacement of persons and communities. However, some of the 
proposed investments under the IGFF will potentially need to acquire lands to set up physical 
facilities or will require rights of way (e.g. for temporary access roads) during construction and 
operation stages. Approaches such as voluntary land donation, prioritizing “degraded sites” 
(brownfield sites) and avoiding areas subject to natural hazards will be employed. Should 
subproject construction and operation require the preparation of a land acquisition and 
resettlement plan (LARP), the ESMF includes guidance to prepare a LARP.

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 104 
 
 
 
 
49. 
ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources. The ESMF’s pre-screening of the programme impacts using the E&S screening form 
indicates that the possibility of subprojects being located within or in the vicinity of protected 
areas and areas of ecological significance, including in natural habitats, key biodiversity areas 
and internationally recognized conservation sites, is low but cannot be ruled out. Nevertheless, 
at the concept stage, subprojects that are anticipated to pose significant adverse impacts and 
risk on biodiversity and natural resources that will impair biodiversity values or ability of 
ecosystems to function effectively will be screened out. Subprojects that may have limited 
potential impacts on biodiversity and natural resources will be assessed and, if needed, a 
biodiversity management plan will be developed. 
50. 
 GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy & ESS7 (Indigenous Peoples). Indigenous Peoples 
are involved in this project. The project requires project proponents to engage with Indigenous 
Peoples through meaningful consultation processes. This includes performing consultations in a 
language and manner that is understandable and accessible to the affected Indigenous Peoples, 
ensuring that their views are incorporated into decision-making processes such as project 
design, mitigation measures, and implementation issues. The consultations should also take 
place in an environment free of intimidation and coercion and must be gender-responsive and 
tailored to the needs of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups. The AE has agreed to apply its 
new Indigenous Peoples standard for this project. The AE has also agreed that for any 
differences between ESS 7 and the Indigenous Peoples requirements of the GCF Indigenous 
Peoples Policy, the most stringent will apply. In line with their roles and functions, the 
Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group is available to provide advice to the AE and EEs. In line with 
the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF Indigenous Peoples focal point will be available for 
assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made. 
51. 
ESS8: Cultural heritage. Given the potential for physical works involved (e.g. some 
subprojects will involve the construction and/or expansion of land area or right of way), 
physical cultural resources may be encountered in such activities. These will need to be 
identified and highlighted during the screening, assessment, review and due diligence of 
proposed subprojects. A cultural heritage procedure has been developed, which defines cultural 
heritage as resources that reflect and express evolving values, beliefs, knowledge and traditions, 
encompassing both tangible and intangible heritage. The procedure focuses on potential 
cultural heritage discoveries during small-scale construction and renovation activities and 
requires subprojects to establish a chance find procedure, as needed. 
52. 
Implementation arrangements. A programme management unit (PMU), which will be 
established by the AE, will be responsible for the overall implementation of the ESMF, including 
continuous improvement, and provide due diligence on, coordination and oversight of, and 
technical assistance to DFIs to ensure compliance with E&S policies and standards. Project 
implementing units (PIUs) will also be established at each participating DFIs. These units will be 
responsible for overseeing and managing of DFI-specific operations, thereby ensuring effective 
implementation of the ESMF at the subproject level. The PIUs will be staffed/supported by 
international and national consultants (E&S specialists), who will conduct screenings, checks 
and reviews of relevant safeguards instruments.  
53. 
Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure. The IGFF underwent extensive 
stakeholder consultations, including initial discussions with key government agencies in India, 
focusing on concessional financing and capacity-building for green investments. Further 
consultations refined the IGFF scope and subproject selection criteria. The process culminated 
with stakeholder consultations engaging think tanks, private sector banks, DFIs, research 
organizations, and venture capital funds. A stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) has also been 
prepared to document past consultations and outline ongoing stakeholder engagement during

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 105 
 
 
 
 
implementation. During IGFF implementation, stakeholders will be engaged through structured 
consultations, capacity-building workshops and collaborative partnerships. The Government of 
India will ensure policy alignment through high-level consultations, while DFIs will execute 
subprojects, integrate climate risk assessments, and pilot financial products. Private sector 
institutions will co-finance projects, test innovative financial instruments, and participate in 
investment roadshows. Civil society and local communities will contribute insights, co-design 
projects, and join localized public consultations. To ensure transparency and accountability, the 
programme will establish regular updates, participatory decision-making platforms, and GRMs. 
The programme commits to the principle of transparency, accountability and disclosure of 
information. IGFF-funded subprojects will disclose E&S risks, impacts, and management plans in 
a timely and accessible format to stakeholders, including affected communities, who will have 
access to meaningful consultation processes. 
54. 
Grievance redress mechanism (GRM). The SEP recognizes GRMs as a vital component 
of community and civil society engagement. Each subproject funded under the IGFF is required 
to establish its own grievance mechanism in accordance with best practice. The ESMF outlines 
the desirable design features of an effective GRM. The GRM must be transparent, accessible and 
culturally appropriate, with clear steps for grievance reception, response and monitoring. It 
must be legitimate, accessible, gender-sensitive and free of cost. The ESMF defines the roles of 
the PMU and the grievance redress officer (GRO) at the PIU and executing entity levels in 
documenting, processing and resolving grievances. A GRO will be engaged to handle grievances 
and ensure they are handled in a transparent, accessible and culturally appropriate manner. In 
addition to the GRM that will be established by each subproject, affected individuals may 
directly submit complaints to ADB’s Accountability Mechanism and GCF’s Independent Redress 
Mechanism, which provide an independent avenue for addressing grievances. 
55. 
Sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) safeguarding. The revised GCF 
Environmental and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 requires safeguarding 
from SEAH in GCF-financed activities. The AE provided SEAH safeguarding in its submission for 
this funding proposal.  The ESMF outlines the screening phase requirements that SEAH risks 
and impacts will also form part of this project’s screening and E&S categorization. SEAH 
assessments will be carried out in order to improve environmental and social outcomes and to 
generate inclusive benefits to the communities. They further provide guidance on how in cases 
of SEAH instances, the AEs grievance redress mechanism has already embedded gender, GBV 
and SEAH accountability framework. Confidentiality, responsiveness, survivor centered, 
nonretaliation, safety and welfare will form the core standards for SEAH and reporting and 
GRM. The AE has zero tolerance approach to SEAH and in alignment with GCFs SEAH provisions 
of the RESP.   
4.2 
Gender policy  
56. 
The AE has provided a gender analysis and action plan and therefore complies with the 
GCF Gender Policy. Women in India face significant systemic and structural challenges that limit 
their participation and leadership in the clean energy and finance sectors. These challenges are 
shaped by deeply rooted social norms, gender inequalities in access to resources, and 
intersectional vulnerabilities related to caste, class, location, age and disability. In the energy 
sector, rural women bear a disproportionate burden in managing household energy needs, often 
spending 20–40 hours a week collecting traditional fuels, leading to adverse health outcomes 
from indoor air pollution and limiting time for education and income-generating activities. 
Women face additional barriers in accessing modern energy solutions due to lower asset 
ownership, limited access to finance, and entrenched economic dependency on male family

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 106 
 
 
 
 
members. In the workforce, women’s participation in India’s renewable energy sector is 
extremely low (11%), with significant underrepresentation in technical and leadership roles 
despite high graduation rates in science, technology, engineering and mathematics among 
women. Sociocultural barriers, safety concerns, limited vocational training, wage gaps, and lack 
of gender-inclusive workplace policies further constrain women’s participation across the 
energy value chain. Additionally, intersectional disparities affect Dalit women, Adivasi women, 
elderly women, and women with disabilities, who face compounded barriers to education, 
employment, energy access, and leadership roles. 
57. 
The gender action plan (GAP) defines activities, indicators and targets for women’s 
participation and benefit with corresponding timelines, budget and gender expertise. The GAP 
adopts an approach to mainstreaming gender equality across its operations, with a focus on 
institutional strengthening, capacity-building, and promoting women’s participation in clean 
energy value chains. The GAP provides targeted technical assistance to DFIs to develop gender-
responsive workplace policies, collect and utilize sex-disaggregated data, and embed gender 
criteria in project selection processes. It establishes mandatory gender assessments and gender 
action plans for all projects, aiming to provide financing for women-led businesses at a level of 
10 per cent in the DRE and e-mobility sectors. The GAP includes specific activities such as 
training 2,500 female entrepreneurs in green business development, organizing 30 gender 
awareness programmes for DFIs, and establishing internal gender task forces within all 
participating DFIs. It also promotes stakeholder dialogues to integrate gender equity into clean 
energy financing policy frameworks, supports the development of gender-sensitive loan 
products, and fosters inclusive consultation processes to ensure women’s needs are reflected in 
project design. These measures aim to reduce gender disparities in access to finance, create 
safer and more inclusive workplaces, and enhance women’s technical and leadership capacities, 
enabling their active engagement across the clean energy ecosystem in India. 
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium-high risk)  
58. 
The Secretariat considers the overall programme as medium-high risk.  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk) 
59. 
The ADB is the AE for this project. The AE has committed 655 public sector loans, grants, 
and technical assistance totalling US$59.5 billion to India. The executing entities (EEs) will be 
selected by the AE in accordance with the eligibility criteria for each Subproject for Output 1.1 
and for the RSF facility for Output 1.2. NABARD, REC and IIFCL, which are all publicly owned 
DFIs potentially acting as the potential EE for Output 1.1.  
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium-high risk) 
60. 
Sovereign Credit Risk: The borrower of the GCF loan amounting to USD 122 million for 
Output 1.1 is a development financial institution (DFIs) backed by a sovereign guarantee. 
Consequently, GCF is exposed to the sovereign credit risk of India, rated Baa3 by Moody's. 
Although the country has a high general government debt, it is anticipated that the budget 
deficit and debt levels will be continuously reduced according to forecasts by the central 
government and rating agencies. Additional comfort is provided by the fact that the GCF loans 
will rank pari-passu with ADB loans, including cross-default provisions.

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 107 
 
 
 
 
61. 
Performance Risk for RSF: The borrower of the GCF loan amounting to USD 65 million 
for Output 1.2 will be the RSF manager. This entity will manage the RSF and issue guarantees to 
participating financial institutions (PFIs), which will, in turn, lend to MSMEs investing in 
compressed biogas. Any default by these MSMEs (guaranteed borrowers) will be covered by the 
guarantee up to 50%. Losses will be shared proportionately between the RSF borrower and 
PFIs. Unlike Output 1.1, GCF is the sole investor for this output without a sovereign guarantee, 
exposing it to the performance risk of the RSF, which will depend on underlying guarantee 
losses and recoveries.  
62. 
The AE has provided a financial model with various scenarios, aiming to preserve capital 
under several assumptions such as the composition and profiles of guaranteed borrowers, 
recovery rates, and expected losses. It is projected that the guarantee fee will be sufficient to 
cover expected losses, although actual claims and losses will only be determined during 
implementation. The loans and guarantees will be provided in INR, while GCF disbursement and 
repayment will be in USD. The RSF will establish a Foreign Exchange Fluctuation Reserve 
(FEFR), funded by managed contributions from RSF revenues on an annual basis to mitigate the 
FX risk for GCF. Further details on procedures for claims, the establishment of the FEFR, and 
fees will be outlined in the RSF Operations Manual (ROM), which will be a condition precedent 
to disbursement. GCF relies on the RSF manager’s ability to efficiently manage the facility. 
63. 
Project Viability and Concessionality: The program has a proposed budget of USD 993 
million, with GCF funding accounting for 20% of the estimated cost, at USD 200 million, and co-
financing covering 80% or USD 793 million.  
64. 
The full concessionality of the GCF grant (USD 13 million) will benefit DFIs, PFIs, and 
MSMEs by facilitating the origination, appraisal, and structuring of investments in targeted 
sectors through technical assistance.  
65. 
The GCF portion in Output 1.1 accounts for approximately 13% (USD 122 million out of 
USD 910 million). Given GCF’s relatively small stake in Output 1.1, the extent to which the 
concessionality is passed down to the end borrower is expected to be moderate.  A question was 
raised by the Secretariat that how the AE can ensure that DFIs are not using concessional funds 
to improve their own balance sheet rather than passing on the benefits to the end-borrowers. 
The AE has analyzed that the cost of funds to DFIs is close to, or in some cases even slightly 
higher than, their current funding costs. In this respect, DFIs primarily benefit from access to 
additional resources that enable them to expand their lending capacity to high-risk perceived or 
underserved sectors, rather than significantly from pricing due to concessionality. To ensure 
that the concessionality is not absorbed by DFIs and is effectively passed down, the term sheet 
mandates periodic monitoring to demonstrate how GCF concessionality is passed down in 
terms of pricing or tenor to the end borrowers at the Subproject level, compared to other deals 
that do not benefit from GCF concessionality. 
4.3.4. 
Compliance risk (medium risk)  
66. 
The proposal presents inherently high-impact but low-probability compliance risks 
related to money laundering, terrorist financing, and prohibited practices. These risks arise 
from the structure of the project, which channels GCF resources through multiple Development 
Finance Institutions (DFIs). While the proposed DFIs operate under India’s AML/CFT 
framework, residual risks remain due to variations in institutional maturity and enforcement. 
These are mitigated somewhat by ADB’s Integrity Principles and due diligence applied at the 
sub-project level. Two DFIs are already GCF accredited, and the others must meet equivalent 
standards, including KYC measures, ensuring consistent compliance across all institutions.

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 108 
 
 
 
 
67. 
ADB intends for its institutional AML/CFT framework to provide the foundations for 
mitigation mechanisms. This includes enhanced integrity due diligence, know-your-customer 
(KYC) checks, sanctions screening, and anti-corruption procedures. ADB's established 
mechanisms—such as the Office of Anticorruption and Integrity, integrity checklists, 
whistleblower protections, and grievance redress procedures—offer layered controls 
throughout the project lifecycle. The mandatory application of these safeguards across all DFIs, 
including those not yet accredited by GCF, ensures uniform compliance expectations and 
contributes to higher institutional accountability. 
68. 
Given the project’s operating structure, ADB integrity standards, and embedded 
compliance safeguards, the residual compliance risk is assessed as medium. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk  
69. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains non-
material and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration levels, results area, single 
proposal or AE concentration. 
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
70. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment 
Overall programme 
Medium-High 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
Medium-High 
Compliance 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration 
Within the monitoring thresholds  
4.4 
Fiduciary 
71. 
ADB will play the dual role of AE and EE in the programme. As EE for the IGFF, ADB will 
be responsible for the overall programme, including deployment of technical assistance 
(component 2).  
72. 
For the lending and RSF, ADB will partner with national DFIs as the EEs. ADB has 
identified three such entities (listed below), but will finalize them at the subproject design stage:  
(a) 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD);  
(b) 
Rural Electrification Corporation (REC); and  
(c) 
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL). 
73. 
For the execution of sovereign investment loans and grants, each EE will be responsible 
for the full execution of the sovereign investment loans and non-sovereign loans in accordance 
with the subsidiary loan/grant agreements.  
74. 
Financial accounting, disbursement procedures and auditing requirements will be 
developed during the preparation of each project, in accordance with ADB’s policies on financial 
management and the analysis of projects, and will be included in their respective project 
administration manuals. The financial management systems of the DFIs will be assessed based 
on the adequacy and ability for timely reporting. The loan proceeds for all IGFF projects will be

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 109 
 
 
 
 
disbursed in accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook, and detailed arrangements 
will be agreed upon by the respective DFIs, government authoritiest and ADB. Public disclosure 
of the audited project’s financial statements, including the auditor’s opinion on the subproject 
financial statements, will be guided by ADB’s Access to Information Policy 2018. DFIs financial 
management and audit performance will be regularly supervised through quarterly progress 
reports, annual audited reports, and compliance with financial covenants. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
75. 
This is a mitigation programme that will contribute to GCF Mitigation Result Area -
MRA1 (Energy generation and access) and MRA2 (Low-emission transport). The project is 
expected to contribute to the reduction of 12.7 million t CO2 eq by the complete date of the 
programme (10 years from the effective date) and 50 million t CO2 eq for the whole lifetime of 
the programme’s proposed technologies (20 years), helps improve access to clean energy for 
almost 24 million people and creates 139,000 jobs through the implementation of the 
technologies. 
76. 
The AE has produced a quite comprehensive annex 22 explaining how the GHG 
emissions reduction was calculated per proposed technology with reference to specific clean 
development mechanism (CDM) methodologies. Baseline and additionality were also clearly 
defined in accordance with the process and tools prescribed in relevant CDM methodologies and 
tools. Even though this is a mitigation programme, people in communities will have also co-
benefits in relation to better access to clean renewable energy as well as jobs created along the 
clean renewable energy development value chain.  
77. 
The results management arrangements proposed under the project were refined over 
five rounds of review and engagement with the AE. Specifically, changes were made to the 
project theory of change to ensure that it was clear, logically coherent, and linked to the climate 
rationale and activities proposed under the project. The project logical framework was also 
refined over multiple rounds to ensure that the proposed indicators and targets were realistic 
and linked to the proposed theory of change.  
78. 
The AE was also provided with advice for refining the supporting annexes, including the 
implementation timetable, monitoring and evaluation plan, and GHG emission reduction 
calculation.  
79. 
The AE has responded positively to guidance provided and refined the funding proposal 
accordingly. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
80. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 17 
August 2017, and became effective on 6 September 2017, which was amended and restated 
pursuant to a first amendment and restatement agreement dated 13 July 2023, and which 
became effective on 20 September 2023 (the “AMA”). 
81. 
The Accredited Entity has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the 
programme. 
82. 
The proposed programme will be implemented in the Republic of India, a country in 
which GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other 
things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 110 
 
 
 
 
to be further assessed. Moreover, the ability of GCF to undertake redress activities and/or 
investigations in the country may be hindered due to the absence of privileges and immunities 
for relevant GCF personnel. 
83. 
Therefore, it is recommended that the Board considers whether disbursements of GCF 
proceeds should only be made after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation 
and expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and 
immunities for GCF and its personnel. 
84. 
Pursuant to clause 4.05(b) of the AMA, the Accredited Entity is required to carry out, 
among other things, legal due diligence on the proposed programme. Although the Accredited 
Entity has submitted its legal due diligence for the programme, the Accredited Entity is not 
currently able to complete its legal due diligence on the proposed structure of the risk sharing 
facility under Output 1.2 of the programme (the “RSF”) as the exact Indian legal regime 
applicable to the RSF would depend on the identity of the development finance institution 
(“DFI”) selected by the Accredited Entity to house the RSF. Consequently, the Accredited Entity 
will need to conduct further due diligence following the selection of the relevant DFI during 
programme implementation to confirm the exact structure of the RSF and how it will be 
operationalized. 
85. 
The Secretariat is therefore not able, at this point, to fully assess the legal risks that may 
be associated with the final legal structure of the RSF. To mitigate this uncertainty relating to 
the RSF, it has been agreed in the term sheet, and the Secretariat will reflect in the subsequent 
legal arrangements, that the final RSF structure will need to be satisfactory to the Secretariat, 
and any necessary risk mitigants put in place prior to the Accredited Entity’s approval of the 
RSF and prior to any disbursements being made by the GCF for the RSF-related activities. 
86. 
To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by 
the Board is made subject to the following conditions: 
(a) 
Submission by the Accredited Entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, in form 
and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval 
(or as otherwise provided for in Clause 4.21 of the AMA), confirming that the Accredited 
Entity has obtained all final internal approvals needed by it and has the capacity and 
authority to implement the proposed programme; 
(b) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the 
Accredited Entity has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has 
obtained all final internal approvals, whichever is later; and  
(c) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 111 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP271 
Proposal name: 
India Green Finance Facility (IGFF)  
Accredited entity: 
Asian Development Bank  
Country: 
The Republic of India 
Pprogramme size: 
Large 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Overview 
1. 
The India Green Finance Facility (IGFF) proposal, submitted by the Asian Development 
Bank (ADB) to GCF, represents a strategic intervention designed to accelerate a clean energy 
transition for India by addressing critical financing gaps for emerging technologies that remain 
underserved by traditional financing channels. This comprehensive funding proposal seeks GCF 
support of USD 200 million to catalyse a total financing package of USD 993 million, with the 
potential to mobilize approximately USD 2.9 billion in total investments for clean energy 
development in India. 
1.2 
Programme structure and components 
2. 
The IGFF is structured around two primary components, each with specific outputs and 
activities: 
Component 1: Financing for development finance institutions (DFIs) to scale up emerging 
clean energy technologies (USD 980 million) 
3. 
This component provides financial support through two distinct outputs: 
Output 1.1: DFIs have secured concessional loans to finance emerging clean energy technologies 
(USD 915 million) 
4. 
This output will provide concessional financing to DFIs for on-lending to both public and 
private sector borrowers investing in emerging clean energy technologies. 
5. 
The financing will target five key technologies: round-the-clock (RTC) renewable energy 
with storage, green hydrogen production, electric mobility, and decentralized renewable energy 
solutions including solar irrigation pumps. 
6. 
The financing structure includes USD 122 million in GCF loans blended with USD 788 
million in ADB loans and USD 5 million in ADB grants. 
Output 1.2: Risk-sharing facility (RSF) is established to de-risk investments in compressed 
biogas (CBG) projects (USD 65 million) 
7. 
This output establishes a dedicated USD 65 million RSF funded entirely by GCF loans to 
provide partial credit guarantees for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSME) 
developers in the CBG sector.

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 112 
 
 
8. 
The RSF aims to address high-risk perception and stringent collateral requirements 
currently limiting financing for small-scale CBG projects. 
9. 
With a leverage ratio of 3, the RSF is expected to mobilize approximately USD 390 
million in loans from participating financial institutions and support total project investments of 
USD 557 million. 
Component 2: Technical support for institutionalizing green lending practices (USD 13 
million) 
10. 
This component focuses on capacity-building and technical assistance through three 
outputs: 
Output 2.1: DFIs have enhanced technical capacities to finance emerging clean energy 
technologies (USD 6 million) 
11. 
This output will strengthen the institutional capacity of at least five DFIs to appraise, 
structure and monitor investments in emerging clean energy technologies. 
12. 
Activities include developing appraisal toolkits, establishing monitoring systems, and 
training DFI staff on technical assessment of clean energy projects. 
Output 2.2: MSMEs and participating financial institutions have enhanced technical capacities to 
access credit guarantees through RSF (USD 3 million) 
13. 
This output will build the capacity of participating financial institutions and MSME 
developers to structure bankable CBG projects and utilize the RSF effectively. 
14. 
Activities include developing risk assessment tools, training on project structuring, and 
establishing portfolio monitoring systems. 
Output 2.3: Public/private financial institutions adopt tools and frameworks to scale up 
financing for emerging clean energy technologies (USD 2.85 million) 
15. 
This output will support broader adoption of green finance practices across the financial 
sector in India. 
16. 
Activities include organizing financial sector dialogues, developing climate risk 
assessment tools, and supporting policy engagement on enabling frameworks for green finance. 
17. 
An additional USD 1.15 million is allocated for monitoring and evaluation activities 
across the programme. 
1.3 
Financial instruments and terms 
18. 
The IGFF employs a blended finance approach with the following instruments: 
19. 
GCF concessional loans (USD 187 million):  
(a) 
USD 122 million for on-lending to DFIs under Output 1.1; 
(b) 
USD 65 million for the RSF under Output 1.2; 
(c) 
Loan terms include 1.25 per cent interest rate (including 0.5 per cent service fee), 0.75 
per cent commitment fee, 20-year tenor, and 5-year grace period for Output 1.1 loans; and 
(d) 
For the RSF loan, an extended grace period of 17 years is proposed to allow for 
guarantee operations and potential claim payouts. 
20. 
GCF grants (USD 13 million):  
(a) 
USD 6 million for capacity-building of DFIs (Output 2.1);

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 113 
 
 
(b) 
USD 3 million for capacity-building related to the RSF (Output 2.2); 
(c) 
USD 2.85 million for broader financial sector capacity-building (Output 2.3); and 
(d) 
USD 1.15 million for monitoring and evaluation. 
21. 
ADB co-financing (USD 793 million):  
(a) 
USD 788 million in senior loans; and 
(b) 
USD 5 million in technical assistance grants. 
1.4 
Expected impact and results 
22. 
The IGFF aims to deliver significant climate and development benefits:  
(a) 
Climate impact: Target mitigation of 50 million metric tonnes of carbon dioxide (t CO₂ 
eq) over the 27-year lifespan of the facility; 
(b) 
Energy transition: Target support for 836 megawatts (MW) of new renewable energy 
capacity, including 451 MW of electrolyser capacity for green hydrogen and 578 megawatt-hour 
of battery energy storage: 
(c) 
Rural development: Target deployment of over 63,000 solar irrigation pumps and other 
decentralized renewable energy solutions; 
(d) 
Sustainable transport: Target financing for more than 131,000 electric two- and three-
wheelers; 
(e) 
Job creation: Target over 139,000 green jobs across the clean energy value chain; and  
(f) 
Gender empowerment: Targeted support for women-led enterprises and gender-
responsive financing. 
1.5 
Implementation arrangements 
23. 
The programme will be implemented over a 10-year period, with a total lifespan of 27 
years. ADB, as the accredited entity (AE), will be responsible for overall programme 
management, while selected DFIs will serve as executing entities. These include the National 
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, Rural Electrification Corporation, and India 
Infrastructure Finance Company Limited. 
24. 
The IGFF represents a comprehensive approach to addressing financing barriers for 
emerging clean energy technologies in India, combining concessional finance with technical 
assistance to transform the financial ecosystem for climate investments and accelerate progress 
towards the climate goals and nationally determined contributions (NDCs) of India. 
II. 
Overall assessment 
25. 
The IGFF represents a strategic intervention to accelerate a clean energy transition for 
India by addressing critical financing gaps for emerging technologies that remain underserved 
by traditional financing channels. The facility demonstrates strong alignment with the country’s 
climate commitments and has potential for significant climate impact, with USD 200 million in 
GCF funding expected to mobilize USD 2.9 billion in total investments and deliver 50 million t 
CO₂ eq in emissions reductions over its 27-year lifespan. 
26. 
A key potential strength of the IGFF is its integration with the broader ADB policy and 
reform initiatives in the energy sector in India. The programme builds upon and complements

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 114 
 
 
ADB's substantial engagement in India, including over USD 2.5 billion in sovereign energy sector 
lending over the past five years. The IGFF will leverage synergies with ADB's ongoing Policy-
Based Lending (PBL) for Power Sector Reform, which focuses on enabling deeper integration of 
variable renewable energy and improving the financial performance of distribution companies. 
While the ADB PBL programmes catalyse structural reforms that are essential for scaling clean 
energy, the IGFF translates these upstream reforms into institutionalized climate finance 
systems through its technical assistance components, particularly Output 2.3. 
27. 
While the leverage of PBL instruments in terms of enforcing conditionality remains 
contested (experience across multiple operations suggests that disbursement-linked conditions 
are often relaxed or waived when deadlines approach), this general set-up has the potential to 
create a powerful feedback loop between practice and policy: reforms supported by the ADB 
policy programmes - such as the PBL - create an enabling environment for IGFF investments, 
while lessons from IGFF implementation inform future policy dialogue and regulatory 
refinement. Through this approach, the IGFF may extend beyond a one-off programme to 
become a transformative mechanism that embeds green finance practices within the financial 
architecture of India, creating lasting pathways for institutional change and private sector 
participation in clean energy financing.  
28. 
While the proposal presents a compelling case for GCF support, several areas require 
further clarification and refinement, particularly regarding the structure of the RSF, the financial 
viability of some technologies, implementation arrangements, and monitoring frameworks. 
III. 
Assessment against investment criteria 
3.1 
Impact potential     
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
3.1.1 
Contribution to GCF mitigation and adaptation results areas 
29. 
The IGFF directly contributes to GCF mitigation results areas 1 (Energy generation and 
access) and 2 (Low-emission transport), with 82 per cent and 18 per cent of GCF contribution 
allocated to these areas respectively. The proposal targets an impressive mitigation impact of 
50 million metric t CO₂ eq over the facility's lifetime through the installation of 836 MW of new 
renewable energy capacity. This includes investments in RTC renewables, green hydrogen 
production, CBG, distributed renewable energy, and electric mobility solutions. 
30. 
The scale of the anticipated impact is substantial, with the programme planning to 
deploy 451 MW of electrolyser capacity for green hydrogen, 578 megawatt-hour of battery 
energy storage, over 63,000 solar irrigation pumps, and more than 131,000 electric two- and 
three-wheel vehicles. These investments align strategically with the NDCs and targets for 
energy transition in India. 
3.1.2 
Scale of expected mitigation impact and departure from business-as-usual 
31. 
The programme represents a significant departure from business-as-usual by targeting 
high-impact but underfunded sectors that are currently not receiving adequate commercial 
financing. The economic analysis shows robust economic returns across technologies with an 
aggregate economic internal rate of return of 22.8 per cent. 
32. 
The IGFF focuses strategically on technologies that remain underfinanced despite their 
critical role in the country’s energy transition, including RTC renewables with storage, green 
hydrogen for industrial decarbonization, and CBG for waste management. As highlighted in the 
funding proposal, these technologies are essential for avoiding carbon lock-in in sectors like

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 115 
 
 
power generation, transport and industry, which collectively account for the majority of 
emissions in India. 
33. 
In response to a written question from the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) 
regarding the necessity of concessional support for RTC renewables, ADB clarified that despite 
progress made by India in renewable energy investment, the regulatory framework for battery 
monetization is still immature, and RTC renewables face significant bankability challenges. The 
concessional finance is necessary to unlock investments in this area until the regulatory 
environment matures. While the role of domestic DFIs remains central to the IGFF’s design, it 
may be prudent to consider greater and more systematic engagement with commercial banks – 
particularly for technologies such as RTC and stand-alone battery energy storage systems – 
where risk aversion may be less pronounced and operational efficiency potentially higher. 
3.1.3 
Addressing needs of vulnerable communities and populations 
34. 
The IGFF specifically targets underserved regions and vulnerable communities. The 
programme will direct at least 30 per cent of financing to states with either high potential but 
low deployment of renewable energy technology, overreliance on a single type of renewable 
energy technology, or low electricity access. 
35. 
The focus on rural and decentralized applications will particularly benefit vulnerable 
communities through improved energy access and livelihoods. The programme expects to 
create over 139,000 green jobs across the clean energy value chain, with particular attention to 
rural employment opportunities. Women and MSMEs are specifically targeted as beneficiaries, 
with a gender action plan aiming to promote women's participation in the clean energy sector. 
36. 
In response to iTAP question #48 regarding benefits to rural and peri-urban 
communities, ADB detailed how the programme will ensure financing reaches beyond urban 
areas through specific targets for rural lending in DFI agreements and through technologies like 
off-grid solar pumps and mini-grids that are inherently focused on rural areas. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential  
 
 
 
             Scale: Medium 
3.2.1 
Potential to catalyse impact beyond the programme 
37. 
The IGFF is designed to catalyse long-term systemic change in the clean energy financing 
landscape of India by fundamentally transforming how DFIs approach climate finance. As noted 
in the Secretariat assessment, the programme "advances India's net-zero ambitions and 
accelerates progress towards its 2030 NDC targets by prioritizing investment in sectors that are 
pivotal to deep decarbonization". 
38. 
The programme's holistic approach combines concessional finance with technical 
assistance to address both supply and demand barriers to climate finance. The 
institutionalization of climate risk management practices within DFIs will ensure lasting impact 
beyond the programme duration. By embedding standardized green finance practices into 
institutional systems and facilitating coordination between financial institutions and 
policymakers, IGFF aims to catalyse a systemic transformation in the financial ecosystem in 
India. 
39. 
In response to the iTAP’s written question on paradigm shift potential, ADB explained 
that IGFF will catalyse change beyond immediate beneficiaries by mainstreaming climate 
finance within DFIs through three key channels: capacity-building that transforms credit 
assessment methodologies; demonstration effects that show the commercial viability of climate 
investments; and knowledge-sharing that enables replication by other institutions.

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 116 
 
 
40. 
The iTAP welcomes the programme’s intent to build institutional capacity across Indian 
DFIs and embed climate finance as a core function. However, we note a missed opportunity to 
more fully leverage GCF concessionality to elevate the climate ambition of the participating DFIs 
themselves. In other comparable financial intermediation programmes, concessional access has 
been conditioned not only on climate screening of the end-use investments but also on the 
strategic alignment of intermediary institutions. This includes requiring DFIs to articulate their 
own climate strategies, disclose transition plans, and commit to phasing out support for carbon-
intensive activities. 
41. 
In the case of IGFF, no such conditionalities appear to apply. As a result, concessional 
resources could inadvertently support institutions whose broader portfolios are not aligned 
with low-carbon development objectives, undermining the overall coherence of the programme. 
The iTAP believes this represents a missed opportunity to drive a deeper paradigm shift – one 
that influences not only the allocation of capital but also the governance, risk frameworks and 
institutional direction of key financial actors in India. Given the scale and systemic influence of 
DFIs in the Indian financial ecosystem, such alignment could have significant catalytic spillover 
effects.  
3.2.2 
Approach to scaling up and replication 
42. 
The proposal presents a clear framework for scaling and replication through the 
development of standardized assessment tools, financing approaches and risk management 
frameworks that can be adopted by other financial institutions. The RSF for CBG projects 
provides a potentially replicable model for de-risking early-stage technologies in other sectors. 
43. 
By demonstrating successful financing models and building institutional capacity within 
DFIs, the programme creates the foundation for continued scaling of climate finance beyond 
GCF support. The technical assistance component will produce knowledge products and 
standardized tools that can be replicated by other financial institutions, fostering wider 
adoption of climate finance practices. 
44. 
In response to the iTAP question #33 on involving the commercial banking sector in 
India, ADB detailed how the programme actively aims to promote replication by involving 
commercial banks through knowledge-sharing activities, creating demonstration projects, and 
helping DFIs develop products that commercial banks can later adopt. The programme will 
document and share successful financing models that can be replicated by private sector 
financial institutions. The initiative would have been more paradigm-shifting had it directly 
engaged commercial banks – particularly for more established technologies such as RTC and 
stand-alone battery energy storage systems – where general market readiness as well as 
support from federal and state programmes is higher and the potential for mainstreaming green 
finance through existing channels is more immediate. 
3.2.3 
Innovation in approach and financial instruments 
45. 
The IGFF introduces several innovative elements, particularly in its approach to 
fostering transition planning by selected DFIs. The RSF for CBG represents an innovative 
approach to addressing market barriers in a nascent sector, combining guarantee mechanisms 
with technical assistance to build market confidence. 
46. 
In response to an iTAP written question on why the RSF was only designed for CBG, ADB 
explained this strategic choice was based on the unique challenges facing the CBG sector, 
including the early stage of market development and the predominantly MSME-based developer 
landscape. These factors create higher perceived credit risks requiring a dedicated de-risking 
mechanism beyond what is needed for more established technologies.

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 117 
 
 
3.2.4 
Contribution to regulatory frameworks and policies 
47. 
The IGFF contributes significantly to improving the regulatory and policy environment 
for climate finance in India. Component 2 of the programme includes technical assistance for 
policy engagement, with ADB facilitating at least two annual green finance policy roundtables 
with the Reserve Bank of India, the Securities and Exchange Board of India and other financial 
policymakers along with DFIs and financial institutions. 
48. 
The programme will support the development of standardized green lending criteria, 
climate risk disclosure frameworks, and transition planning methodologies that align with 
emerging national and global standards. These activities will strengthen the overall enabling 
environment for climate finance in India. 
49. 
In response to iTAP question #28 on alignment with emerging green finance taxonomies 
and disclosure requirements, ADB confirmed that the programme is designed to align with and 
support the implementation of green finance taxonomies and disclosure frameworks being 
developed by the Reserve Bank of India and the Securities and Exchange Board of India. The 
technical assistance component includes specific activities to help DFIs adopt these frameworks 
as they emerge. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
    Scale: Low-Medium 
3.3.1 
Environmental, social, economic, and gender-sensitive development impacts 
50. 
The IGFF provides a comprehensive assessment of its sustainable development benefits 
across multiple dimensions.  
51. 
Environmental co-benefits include improved air quality from reduced fossil-fuel 
combustion, enhanced water-use efficiency through solar irrigation systems and other 
technologies, and better waste management through CBG projects. The Secretariat notes that 
the programme "will result in over 50 million t CO₂ eq emissions reductions, while 
simultaneously enhancing adaptive capacity across sectors such as agriculture, transport, and 
energy". 
52. 
Social co-benefits include enhanced energy security, improved health outcomes from 
reduced air pollution, and greater access to clean energy services, particularly in rural and 
underserved areas. The programme is expected to create 139,234 green jobs across the clean 
energy value chain, with a focus on inclusive employment opportunities. 
53. 
Economic co-benefits include reduced energy import dependency, new income streams 
for farmers through the CBG value chain, cost savings for energy consumers, and the 
development of domestic manufacturing capacity for clean energy technologies. The Secretariat 
notes that "sectors prioritized by the programme – such as energy, manufacturing and 
agriculture – are both major contributors to GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions and vulnerable to 
climate change impacts." 
54. 
Gender-sensitive development impacts are addressed through a comprehensive gender 
action plan that includes targets for women's participation in programme activities, dedicated 
financing for women-led businesses, and capacity-building initiatives targeting women 
entrepreneurs. The gender action plan aims for 10 per cent of financing to go to women-led 
businesses in decentralized renewable energy and e-mobility sectors. 
3.3.2 
Environmental and social risk management 
55. 
The IGFF includes an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to 
identify, assess and manage environmental and social risks associated with programme

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 118 
 
 
activities. The Secretariat's assessment notes that "a costed environmental and social 
management framework (ESMF) was developed to align programme's sub-projects with GCF's 
ESS [environmental and social safeguards] polices and requirements, outlining specific activities 
that will sufficiently ensure that ESS are put in place and observed throughout the programme's 
lifespan." 
56. 
The ESMF includes screening criteria for subprojects, risk management procedures and 
monitoring protocols. Subprojects will be categorized according to their environmental and 
social risk levels, with high-risk (Category A) projects excluded from programme financing. 
57. 
While the ESMF does acknowledge water scarcity as a risk for hydrogen production – 
noting that approximately nine litres of water are needed per kilogram of hydrogen, and 
warning about potential impacts on local communities – this recognition appears largely 
confined to the technical appendices. The ESMF correctly identifies that water-intensive 
hydrogen production could exacerbate existing water shortages, threaten food production, and 
impact lives and livelihoods, particularly in already water-stressed regions. It even proposes 
mitigation measures such as “assessing the sustainability of freshwater demand” and 
implementing awareness campaigns on sustainable water management. 
58. 
However, a critical disconnect exists between this risk identification and the actual 
investment framework. The main funding proposal fails to integrate these water concerns into 
its hydrogen component description or financial analysis, suggesting that while the technical 
teams understand the risks, these considerations haven't been elevated to the decision-making 
level. The proposed mitigation measures remain vague and procedural, stating that water 
sustainability "shall be assessed" without specifying methodologies, thresholds, or timing 
requirements. Most concerning is the absence of any requirement to complete water availability 
assessments before approving hydrogen projects, or to exclude such projects from water-
stressed areas despite acknowledging the potentially severe impacts. 
59. 
This gap between risk recognition and risk management exemplifies a broader pattern 
in climate finance proposals where technical appendices identify critical constraints, but these 
insights fail to meaningfully influence project design or investment criteria. For GCF to ensure 
responsible investment, the water scarcity concerns identified in the ESMF must be elevated 
from a technical checkbox to a core criterion in the hydrogen project selection process, with 
mandatory water stress assessments required before any financing approval and clear 
exclusion criteria for water-stressed regions. 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient   
 
 
 
   Scale: Medium-High 
3.4.1 
Addressing country and group vulnerabilities 
60. 
The IGFF directly addresses the vulnerability of India to climate change impacts and 
energy security challenges. The Secretariat assessment strongly validates the country’s position 
as "the world's third-largest carbon emitter, whose energy supply is still heavily dependent on 
fossil fuels, with an ever-heightening energy consumption that is propelled by a growing 
population." 
61. 
The programme targets technologies that enhance climate resilience in vulnerable 
sectors such as agriculture through solar irrigation pumps and decentralized renewable energy 
solutions. These interventions will help reduce dependency on rainfall-dependent energy 
sources and improve resilience to climate impacts on water availability and agricultural 
productivity. 
62. 
By focusing financing on underserved regions, including the north-eastern and eastern 
states of India that have lower renewable energy deployment and electricity access, the

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 119 
 
 
programme addresses geographical inequalities in climate vulnerability. The Secretariat notes 
that "despite extended timelines, only around 200,000 pumps have been deployed – mostly 
concentrated in just three states", highlighting the need for more equitable distribution of clean 
energy resources. 
3.4.2 
Addressing financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
63. 
The IGFF comprehensively addresses the financial, economic, social and institutional 
barriers to scaling clean energy investments in India. The Secretariat notes that "India is heavily 
indebted and hence its ability to fund the investments required for an effective energy 
transition is constrained", highlighting the critical need for concessional finance. 
64. 
Financially, the programme provides affordable long-term capital for technologies that 
face financing constraints due to high upfront costs, perceived risks, or limited track records. 
The blended finance approach, combining GCF concessional loans with ADB financing, 
addresses the affordability gap for emerging clean energy technologies. 
65. 
Economically, the programme supports job creation, clean energy access, and the 
development of domestic manufacturing capabilities in strategic sectors like green hydrogen 
and energy storage. These outcomes align with the economic development priorities of India. 
66. 
Institutionally, the programme addresses significant capacity gaps within DFIs through 
comprehensive technical assistance. As noted in the Secretariat assessment, "DFIs have played 
an important role in several development areas, however their role in clean energy transition 
had been limited." The programme will strengthen DFI capacity to assess, structure, and 
monitor climate investments. 
67. 
In response to iTAP question #9 on the availability of long-tenure green financing in 
India, ADB confirmed that commercial banks and non-banking financial companies currently 
offer limited long-term green financing, typically providing loans with tenors of 5 to 7 years 
compared to the 10 to 15 years needed for many clean energy technologies. This gap 
particularly affects MSMEs and underscores the need for an IGFF intervention. 
3.5 
Country ownership  
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
3.5.1 
Alignment with national strategies and plans 
68. 
The IGFF demonstrates exceptional alignment with the climate and development 
strategies of India. The Secretariat assessment confirms that "the project is aligned with the 
updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), National Adaptation Plans (NAPs), 
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) and other climate change and environmental 
policies and plans." 
69. 
The programme directly supports the country’s NDC target of 500 gigawatt of non-fossil 
energy capacity by 2030 through its focus on RTC renewables, green hydrogen and 
decentralized renewable energy. It also addresses the energy efficiency targets in the NDC 
through investments in efficient technologies across multiple sectors. 
70. 
The technologies supported align with key national initiatives, including the National 
Hydrogen Mission, the National Smart Grid Mission, and the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja 
Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyan scheme for solar irrigation. The programme's focus on 
decentralized renewable energy and electric mobility also supports the country’s goals for 
energy access and sustainable transportation. 
71. 
In response to iTAP question #30 on policy alignment for green hydrogen, ADB detailed 
its engagement strategy with government agencies, including regular consultations with the

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 120 
 
 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy and the Ministry of Power, to ensure alignment with the 
National Green Hydrogen Mission. ADB will also facilitate cross-sectoral planning for industrial 
applications of green hydrogen through industry working groups and policy dialogues. 
3.5.2 
Demonstration of country and beneficiary ownership 
72. 
The IGFF demonstrates strong country ownership through the involvement of major 
Indian DFIs (National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, India Infrastructure Finance 
Company Limited, Rural Electrification Corporation) as executing entities. These institutions are 
central to the financial infrastructure of India and have established relationships with local 
financial institutions and other stakeholders. The programme has secured a no-objection letter 
from the government, confirming national endorsement. 
73. 
Stakeholder consultations were conducted throughout the project development process, 
ensuring local knowledge, innovation and sustainability, and participation is fully embedded in 
the design of the project. The programme design reflects extensive consultations with 
government agencies, DFIs, private sector entities and civil society organizations. 
74. 
ADB has a long-standing presence in India and has developed considerable expertise in 
the country's energy and financial sectors. The programme builds on ADB's experience with 
similar initiatives and its established relationships with key stakeholders. 
75. 
In response to iTAP question #31 on alignment with the National Programme for Dairy 
Development, ADB explained how it will ensure coordination through formal agreements with 
the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development that reference national policies, and 
by engaging with relevant ministries during implementation. Regular policy dialogues and 
coordination mechanisms will ensure alignment between IGFF-supported activities and 
national programmes. 
3.5.3 
Engagement of appropriate partners 
76. 
The IGFF engages appropriate partners at multiple levels. The selection of DFIs as 
implementing entities is strategic given their mandate to support development objectives and 
their established networks with local financial institutions. As argued in the section on 
paradigm shift, the programme would have nonetheless been stronger if the commercial banks 
that have skills and experience in climate finance were also encouraged to invest in the more 
innovative sectors targeted by the funding proposal. Their involvement would have ensured 
that, on implementation of the programme, the commercial banks would have been well placed 
to scale up the more successful technologies.  
77. 
The programme's governance arrangements include a multi-stakeholder approach, with 
ADB establishing a programme steering group to provide strategic direction and ensure 
compliance with the funded activity agreement and applicable policies. For each subproject, 
DFIs will establish a Project Implementation Unit to oversee operations and manage 
implementation. 
78. 
In response to an iTAP question on considering the National Infrastructure Investment 
Fund (NIIF) as a DFI partner, ADB explained that while the current definition of a DFI in the 
programme requires at least 50 per cent state ownership (which excludes NIIF at 49 per cent 
state ownership), the programme's implementation flexibility would allow for engagement with 
NIIF if it demonstrates strong alignment with the programme's objectives and meets other 
eligibility criteria. 
3.5.4 
Implementation by organizations with relevant country experience

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 121 
 
 
79. 
The programme will be implemented by ADB in partnership with national DFIs. ADB has 
extensive experience in the energy and financial sectors of India, and maintains a country office 
with technical staff who understand the local context. The DFIs that will act as executing entities 
are national institutions with deep roots in the country’, financial system as well as experience 
supporting development objectives. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness   
 
 
   Scale: Medium-High 
80. 
The IGFF presents strong economic rationale, with the Secretariat noting that the 
programme has a "cost of USD 55 per tonne of CO₂ abated", which is "considered reasonable in 
international comparison". The economic analysis shows robust aggregate economic internal 
rate of return of 22.8 per cent across technologies, indicating good value for money. 
81. 
The financial structure is sound, with concessional GCF financing strategically deployed 
to address specific market barriers while catalysing additional investment from other sources. 
The blended finance approach ensures that concessionality is used only where necessary to 
address market failures and viability gaps. 
82. 
However, there are some concerns about the financial viability of specific technologies. 
The Secretariat notes that "For RTC solar in particular, the FIRR [financial internal rate of 
return] barely exceeds the WACC [weighted average cost of capital], and the project's 
bankability depends on assumptions around battery price reductions and off-take tariffs that 
remain unproven." This highlights implementation risks that will need careful management. 
83. 
In response to iTAP question #38 on the cost per t CO₂ abated, ADB justified the USD 55 
figure by explaining that while this is higher than some conventional mitigation options, it 
reflects the programme's strategic focus on technologies that are essential for long-term 
decarbonization but currently face higher costs due to their emerging nature. The programme 
aims to drive down these costs over time through market development. 
84. 
The financial structure of the IGFF is appropriately tailored to address the specific 
barriers facing clean energy investments in India. The programme combines concessional loans 
for on-lending to DFIs with a dedicated RSF for CBG projects and grant funding for technical 
assistance. 
85. 
The total GCF funding request of USD 200 million includes USD 187 million in loans and 
USD 13 million in grants. This is expected to leverage USD 793 million in co-financing from ADB, 
along with additional resources from DFIs and private sector entities, for a total programme 
size of USD 993 million. 
86. 
The concessionality level is calibrated to address market barriers without creating 
distortions. As explained in response to iTAP question #16 on ensuring concessionality pass-
through to end borrowers, ADB will implement several mechanisms including contractual 
requirements for DFIs to maintain interest rate spreads within agreed limits, regular 
monitoring and reporting on lending rates, and in some cases direct financing for end 
borrowers where needed to ensure affordability. 
87. 
The use of GCF resources is efficient compared to alternative funding sources. The GCF 
concessionality is used strategically to address specific market barriers and viability gaps that 
cannot be addressed through commercial financing alone. The blended finance approach 
leverages significant co-financing, with each dollar of GCF funding expected to mobilize 
approximately USD 14.6 in total investments. 
88. 
In response to iTAP question #19 on indicative pricing terms, ADB provided detailed 
information on how the GCF concessional terms will translate into financing terms for DFIs and 
end borrowers. For GCF loans to DFIs, the terms include a 1.25 per cent interest rate (including

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 122 
 
 
a 0.5 per cent service fee), a 0.75 per cent commitment fee, a 20-year tenor, and a 5-year grace 
period. These terms enable DFIs to offer financing at rates of 2 to 3 per cent below market rates 
while still maintaining financial sustainability. 
89. 
The IGFF demonstrates strong potential for mobilizing additional financing. The 
programme is expected to mobilize USD 2.9 billion in total investments, including USD 1.178 
billion from DFIs and USD 754 million from private sector project developers. 
90. 
The programme incorporates specific mechanisms to catalyse private sector investment, 
including the RSF for CBG projects which addresses credit risk concerns that currently limit 
private financing for this sector. The technical assistance component will also support pipeline 
development and project structuring to enhance bankability and attract additional investment. 
91. 
In response to iTAP question #26 on leveraging private sector participation, ADB 
detailed specific measures including setting portfolio-level targets for private sector co-
financing, providing technical assistance for pipeline development and project structuring, 
implementing a results-based financing mechanism to incentivize private investment, and 
developing standardized transaction templates to reduce costs for private investors. 
92. 
The IGFF sustainability strategy focuses on institutional transformation within DFIs and 
market development for emerging clean energy technologies. By building the capacity of DFI to 
assess, structure and finance clean energy projects, the programme creates lasting institutional 
capability that will continue beyond GCF support. 
93. 
The programme includes a clear exit strategy based on gradual reduction of 
concessionality as markets mature and technologies reach commercial viability. The iTAP would 
have wanted to see initial analysis of where that price point of commercial viability for each 
technology would have been. This would have implied an understanding from the AE of the 
process of scaling up innovative technologies to become fully commercial and reach scale. That 
understanding is missing from the funding proposal. The technical assistance component will 
develop standardized tools and methodologies that can be maintained and updated by DFIs 
after programme completion. 
94. 
In response to iTAP question #25, ADB outlined its exit strategy for ensuring the 
sustainability of IGFF mechanisms and capacities. This includes phased reduction of 
concessionality based on market maturity, institutionalizing climate finance practices within 
DFIs through policy changes and operational procedures, developing standardized tools that 
remain available after programme completion, and establishing knowledge-management 
systems to preserve and disseminate lessons learned. 
3.6.1 
Market analysis and alignment with regulatory frameworks 
95. 
The IGFF is built on comprehensive market analysis that establishes clear demand for 
the proposed interventions. The funding proposal and its annexes provide detailed information 
on the market potential for each target technology, barriers to investment and existing financing 
gaps. 
96. 
The market study (annex 2) includes thorough assessments of local financial 
institutions, their current climate finance activities, and institutional barriers to scaling up 
green lending. It also analyses the policy landscape and identifies opportunities for alignment 
with emerging regulatory frameworks. 
97. 
The programme's focus technologies were selected based on extensive market analysis 
and stakeholder consultations, as explained in response to iTAP question #3. ADB conducted a 
rigorous comparative analysis of technologies based on alignment with the climate goals, 
market potential, financing gaps and barriers to deployment in India. This analysis determined 
that RTC renewables, green hydrogen, CBG, distributed renewable energy, and e-mobility

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 123 
 
 
presented the highest climate impact potential while facing the most significant financing 
barrier.  
IV. 
Key Issues and recommendations 
4.1 
Risk-sharing facility structure and management 
98. 
The Secretariat's legal assessment notes that "the Accredited Entity is not currently able 
to complete its legal due diligence on the proposed structure of the risk sharing facility under 
Output 1.2 of the programme (the "RSF") as the exact Indian legal regime applicable to the RSF 
would depend on the identity of the development finance institution ("DFI") selected by the 
Accredited Entity to house the RSF." 
99. 
In response to iTAP question #21 on RSF management, ADB confirmed that the RSF will 
be managed by a dedicated team within the selected DFI, with expertise in credit risk 
assessment, guarantee operations, and CBG sector knowledge. This team will be supported by 
external consultants with experience in operating similar facilities internationally. The RSF will 
be governed by a detailed operations manual with clear eligibility criteria, approval processes, 
and monitoring requirements. 
100. 
To address uncertainty around the legal structure, ADB should finalize the RSF design 
and complete legal due diligence prior to any disbursements for this component. The AE should 
provide the GCF Secretariat with detailed governance arrangements, including selection criteria 
for the managing entity, risk management protocols, and reporting mechanisms. 
4.2 
Technology selection and financial viability 
101. 
The Secretariat notes concerns about the financial viability of some technologies, 
particularly RTC renewables where "the FIRR [[financial internal rate of return] barely exceeds 
the WACC [weighted average cost of capital], and the project's bankability depends on 
assumptions around battery price reductions and off-take tariffs that remain unproven." 
102. 
In response to iTAP question #7, ADB acknowledged these challenges but emphasized 
that concessional support is necessary precisely because the regulatory framework for battery 
monetization is still maturing. Without concessionality, these projects would not be viable, yet 
they are critical for enabling higher shares of renewable energy in the grid. 
103. 
While the IGFF proposal's inclusion of green hydrogen as a target technology 
demonstrates alignment with the energy transition priorities of India, the hydrogen component 
would benefit from further development to ensure successful implementation. The proposed 
deployment of 451 MW of electrolyser capacity lacks supporting detail regarding project 
selection criteria, implementation timelines, and technical specifications, particularly given the 
global trend where only 7 per cent of announced green hydrogen projects achieved on-schedule 
completion in 2023. Furthermore, the proposal does not adequately address fundamental 
constraints identified in recent analyses of the hydrogen landscape in India, including water 
availability requirements of up to nine litres per kilogram of hydrogen production, 
infrastructure gaps in less densely populated production areas, and the current cost differential 
of USD 2–3 per kilogram compared to grey hydrogen. The proposal would be strengthened by 
explicitly demonstrating how IGFF will complement the existing National Green Hydrogen 
Mission core allocation of 19,744 rupees and its Strategic Interventions for Green Hydrogen 
Transition programme, while also providing evidence of confirmed demand through off-take 
agreements or letters of intent from industrial users willing to pay green premiums, as the

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 124 
 
 
absence of such market validation has been identified as a key barrier to hydrogen project 
implementation globally. 
104. 
The programme should adopt a phased implementation approach for higher-risk 
technologies like RTC renewables and green hydrogen, starting with pilot projects to validate 
commercial models before scaling. Regular reassessment of technology-specific financing terms 
should be conducted to adjust concessionality based on evolving market conditions and 
technology costs. 
4.3 
Policy coordination and regulatory dependencies 
105. 
The iTAP questions highlighted concerns about the programme's dependency on 
evolving regulatory frameworks. The Secretariat notes that "ongoing power sector reforms to 
support RE markets ... however are long-term" and recommends "near-term mitigation if 
pricing assumptions fail such as policy backstop". It is unclear from the funding proposal how 
appropriate and advanced are the policy-enabling reforms for the five chosen technologies, only 
that there are gaps and GCF concessionally is required to fill the near-term needs. 
106. 
In response to iTAP question #32 on regulatory reform for battery monetization, ADB 
outlined its strategy for policy engagement, which includes technical assistance for regulatory 
agencies on ancillary services market design, capacity-building for grid operators, and 
facilitating stakeholder dialogues on battery monetization frameworks. These activities will be 
coordinated with ongoing policy initiatives to ensure alignment. 
107. 
A key strength of the IGFF is its integration with the broader ADB policy and reform 
initiatives in the energy sector of India. The programme builds upon and complements the 
substantial engagement of ADB in India, including over USD 2.5 billion in sovereign energy 
sector lending over the past five years. The IGFF will leverage synergies with the ongoing ADB 
PBL for Power Sector Reform, which focuses on enabling deeper integration of variable 
renewable energy and improving the financial performance of distribution companies. While 
ADB PBL programmes catalyse structural reforms essential for scaling clean energy, the IGFF 
translates these upstream reforms into institutionalized climate finance systems through its 
technical assistance components. 
108. 
Nonetheless, the programme should develop a detailed risk mitigation strategy for 
policy delays, including potential contingency measures such as temporary financial incentives 
to bridge gaps until enabling regulations are in place. Regular coordination with relevant 
ministries and regulatory agencies will be essential to ensure alignment between programme 
activities and policy developments. 
V. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
109. 
The IGFF presents a well-structured, strategic intervention to accelerate a clean energy 
transition for India by addressing critical financing gaps for emerging technologies. The 
proposal demonstrates strong alignment with GCF investment criteria, particularly on country 
ownership, needs of the recipient and paradigm shift potential. 
110. 
The expected outcomes of 50 million t CO₂ eq emissions reductions and 139,000 green 
jobs represent significant climate and sustainable development benefits. The combination of 
financial instruments with technical assistance creates a solid foundation for transformative 
impact. 
111. 
However, the iTAP encourages ADB to strengthen certain implementation arrangements 
to maximize the programme's transformative potential. While the programme demonstrates 
strong climate impact potential and country ownership, several areas would benefit from

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 125 
 
 
further refinement during early implementation. GCF may wish to request that ADB provide 
updates on progress in addressing these recommendations within the first year of 
implementation. 
112. 
The iTAP recommends that the AE undertake the following measures: 
(a) 
Strengthen institutional climate alignment 
113. 
The AE should encourage participating Indian DFIs to develop and publicly disclose 
comprehensive climate strategies as part of their engagement with GCF concessional financing. 
This would enhance the programme's transformative impact by leveraging GCF resources for 
deeper institutional change. The programme would benefit from encouraging DFIs to: (i) 
articulate transition pathways for their overall portfolios; (ii) consider establishing targets for 
phasing out fossil-fuel financing; (iii) implement climate risk disclosure frameworks aligned 
with emerging standards; and (iv) report on portfolio climate alignment progress. Such 
measures would help ensure that GCF resources support institutions moving towards 
comprehensive low-carbon development pathways. 
(b) 
Enhance technology-specific implementation strategies 
114. 
Given the varying maturity levels and risk profiles of the five target technologies, the 
programme would benefit from developing more detailed technology-specific implementation 
road maps with clear milestones and adaptive management frameworks. For the hydrogen 
component, ADB should consider incorporating water stress assessments, seeking confirmed 
off-take agreements where feasible, and strengthening coordination mechanisms with the 
National Green Hydrogen Mission. For RTC renewables, given marginal financial viability, a 
phased approach, starting with demonstration projects, could help validate commercial models. 
The development of clear criteria for adjusting concessionality levels as technologies mature 
would enhance programme efficiency. 
(c) 
Broaden financial sector engagement 
115. 
While recognizing the strategic value of working through DFIs, the programme could 
enhance its transformative impact by developing complementary mechanisms for engaging 
commercial banks, particularly for more mature technologies like stand-alone battery storage 
and established renewable energy projects. This could include: (i) co-financing arrangements 
that gradually transition leadership from DFIs to commercial institutions; and (ii) standardized 
transaction structures that reduce due diligence costs for private sector financiers. Such 
engagement would enhance the programme's paradigm shift potential and create clearer 
pathways for market-based scaling. 
(d) 
Strengthen monitoring and adaptive management 
116. 
The programme would benefit from establishing an enhanced monitoring framework 
that goes beyond traditional output tracking to assess market transformation indicators. The AE 
should require: (i) regular assessments of technology cost curves and market conditions; (ii) 
systematic tracking of policy and regulatory developments affecting each technology; (iii) 
periodic evaluation of concessionality requirements with pre-defined triggers for adjustment; 
and (iv) comprehensive documentation of lessons learned for replication. The framework would 
enable responsive adaptation to changing market conditions and ensure efficient use of 
concessional resources. Special attention to monitoring the effectiveness of the RSF would be 
valuable, given current uncertainties about its operational framework. 
117. 
The iTAP recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal.

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 126 
 
 
 
INTERNAL. This information is accessible to ADB Management and Staff. It may be shared outside ADB with appropriate permission.
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP271) 
Proposal name: 
India Green Financing Facility (IGFF) 
Accredited entity: 
Asian Development Bank 
Country: 
The Republic of India 
Programme size:  
Large 
 
Impact potential 
ADB extends its appreciation to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) for its 
comprehensive review and recommendations. We are pleased that the iTAP assesses the 
mitigation impact potential and the potential to depart from business-as-usual of our funding 
proposal as high. We are further pleased that the iTAP recognizes the proposal’s intended 
benefit to underserved and vulnerable communities.  
Paradigm shift potential 
We are pleased to note iTAP’s recognition of the funding proposal’s potential to catalyse long-
term systemic change in clean energy financing in India through the transformation of DFI’s 
climate finance approaches. We further note the iTAPs’s recommendation to encourage DFIs 
to more clearly articulate and commit to their own climate strategies and will consider and 
address this accordingly. In addition, we appreciate the iTAP for its recognition of the funding 
proposal’s innovative elements, such as the proposed Risk-sharing facility, its approach to 
scaling up and replication throughout the banking industry, and its contribution to improving 
the regulatory and policy environment for climate finance in India.  
We also acknowledge iTAP’s recommendation to strengthen direct engagement with 
commercial banks, particularly in relation to technologies like RTC and stand-alone battery 
energy storage systems. We will explore an approach that actively involves commercial banks 
through our TA activities. 
Sustainable development potential 
ADB appreciates iTAPs acknowledgement of the environmental, social, economic and gender-
sensitive development impacts pursued by IGFF. ADB further takes note of the recommended 
water scarcity considerations for green hydrogen project and will incorporate them into sub-
project design.   
Needs of the recipient 
ADB appreciates the iTAPs assessment that the funding proposal comprehensively addresses 
vulnerabilities as well as financial, economic, social and institutional needs of the recipient 
(medium-high). 
Country ownership

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.13 
Page 127 
 
 
 
INTERNAL. This information is accessible to ADB Management and Staff. It may be shared outside ADB with appropriate permission.
ADB is pleased that the iTAP assesses the alignment with national strategies and plans, the 
demonstration of country and beneficiary ownership and the engagement of appropriate 
partners as high. ADB further extends its sincere gratitude to the iTAP for recognising ADB’s 
relevant country experience and understanding of local context, as well as executing entities’  
deep roots in the country’s financial system and long-term experience in supporting 
development objectives.  
Efficiency and effectiveness 
ADB highly appreciates the iTAP’s assessment of the funding proposal’s medium to high 
efficiency and effectiveness, underlined by its strong economic rationale, the blended finance 
approach leveraging significant co-financing, and the strategic deployment of concessional 
GCF financing to address market barriers and to catalyse investments. ADB is pleased that the 
iTAP recognizes the proposals sustainability focus on institutional transformation within 
DFIs and notes that the exit strategy, despite being comprehensive, could have been 
benefitted from a more detailed commercial viability pricing for each technology supported.   
The AE thanks the ITAP for its positive assessment of the AE’s comprehensive market 
analysis and assessment.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
ADB appreciates the iTAP for its comprehensive review and high assessment of the funding 
proposal. ADB highly appreciate iTAP’s endorsement and recommendation to the Board for 
approval of the funding proposal.  
ADB values the iTAP recommendations and will integrate them during implementation phase.

=== PAGE 128 ===
Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
Annex 8 
2 June 2025 
Gender documentation for FP271

=== PAGE 129 ===
1 
 
 
 
1. 
BACKGROUND........................................................................................................... 4 
2. 
INTRODUCTION TO THE INDIA GREEN FINANCE FACILITY ........................................... 4 
2.1. Background and Rationale ................................................................................................. 4 
3. 
APPROACH ................................................................................................................ 6 
3.1. Gender Frameworks, Policies and Guidelines .................................................................... 10 
3.2. IGFF Methodology ........................................................................................................... 12 
3.2.1. Gender Requirements at IGFF and Operational (projects/programs) ............................................... 12 
3.2.2. Roles and Responsibilities .................................................................................................................. 13 
4. 
GENDER ASSESSMENT ............................................................................................. 14 
4.1. National Laws and Policy Frameworks of India on Gender................................................. 14 
4.2. The role of energy in women's daily lives, health, productivity, and livelihoods ................. 17 
4.3. Gendered Disparities in Energy Access in India: Challenges and Opportunities .................. 18 
4.3.1. Intersectional and Regional Disparities ............................................................................................. 18 
4.3.2. Opportunities for Transformative Change ......................................................................................... 19 
4.4. Women in the renewable energy workforce in India ......................................................... 20 
4.5. Gendered dynamics across the IGFF focus areas. .............................................................. 23 
4.5.1. 
Women and powering India’s energy transition ........................................................ 23 
4.5.2. 
Women and energy access for cleaner living ............................................................. 25 
4.5.3. 
Women and resilient energy systems for rural and urban areas. ............................... 27 
5. 
GENDER ACTION PLAN ............................................................................................ 28

=== PAGE 130 ===
2 
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
AE 
_ 
Accredited Entity  
ADB 
_ 
Asian Development Bank  
ARA 
_ 
Adaptation Results Area  
DFI 
_ 
Development Financial Institutions  
DRE 
_ 
Decentralized Renewable Energy  
E&S 
_ 
Environmental and Social  
ESMF 
_ 
Environmental and Social Management Framework  
FWP 
_ 
Female Workforce Participation  
GESI 
_ 
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion  
GAP 
_ 
Gender Action Plan  
GA 
_ 
Gender Assessment  
GHG 
_ 
Greenhouse gas  
GCF 
_ 
Green Climate Fund  
IGFF  
_ 
India Green Finance Facility  
HDI 
_ 
Human Development Index 
IIFCL 
_ 
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited  
IRMF 
_ 
Integrated Results Management Framework  
NABARD 
_ 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development  
NDCSs 
_ 
Nationally Determined Contributions  
REC 
_ 
Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd.  
SIDBI 
_ 
Small Industries Development Bank of India

=== PAGE 131 ===
3 
 
 
TA 
_ 
Technical assistance

=== PAGE 132 ===
4 
 
 
1. BACKGROUND 
1. 
This Annex contains the Gender Assessment and Action Plan (GAAP) for the India 
Green Finance Facility (hereafter referred to as "IGFF" or 'Facility'). Annex 8 outlines the 
Facility's approach to mainstreaming gender in its operations, the proposed governance, and 
guiding principles, which are based on the existing policies of both the Green Climate Fund 
(GCF) and the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The Gender Assessment also briefly 
examines the role of women (as consumers, employees, and entrepreneurs) in each of the 
identified thematic pillars as laid out in the Funding Proposal. The facility will accelerate the 
deployment of key clean energy solutions, including: 
• 
Round-the-clock (RTC) renewable energy with storage to ensure 24/7 clean power 
supply. 
• 
Decentralized renewable energy for rural applications, improving livelihoods and 
resilience. 
• 
Electric mobility solutions for rural and peri-urban transport to decarbonize mobility. 
• 
Green hydrogen for industrial applications to transition hard-to-abate sectors. 
• 
Compressed biogas (CBG) for sustainable waste management. 
2. 
This annex also includes the Gender Action Plan (GAP), which outlines specific 
activities, targets, and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for the IGFF along with the two 
components of Technical Assistance (TA) and Investment Package. The GAP aligns with the 
facility-level Integrated Results Management Framework (IRMF). As such, indicators and 
targets listed in the GAP will help the Facility monitor progress against the gender targets in 
the selected Mitigation and Adaption Results Area of the IRMF. 
2. INTRODUCTION TO THE INDIA GREEN FINANCE FACILITY 
2.1. Background and Rationale 
3. 
The ADB-GCF India Green Finance Facility (IGFF or ‘Facility’) is a blended finance 
facility designed to accelerate India’s energy transition through targeted financing to scale up 
emerging clean energy technologies with a focus on underserved areas in the country. It 
leverages concessional capital from the GCF, complemented by resources from the ADB, to 
provide lines of credit and guarantees to participating public DFIs in India to address 
bankability and financing gaps for these technologies. Additionally, the IGFF will deploy 
technical assistance to strengthen project pipelines, address market barriers, and build the 
capacity of DFIs to institutionalize green lending practices within their operations, including 
the adoption of domestic climate-related financial disclosure frameworks while advancing 
gender-responsive financing practices to promote women’s participation in the clean energy 
value chain.  The Facility’s objectives are: 
i. 
Powering India’ Energy Transition including RTC renewable energy with storage and 
Green Hydrogen/Green Ammonia production

=== PAGE 133 ===
5 
 
 
ii. 
Modernising Energy Access for Cleaner Living including Electric mobility solutions for 
rural and peri-urban transport, and CBG for sustainable waste management 
iii. 
Resilient and reliable energy systems for rural and urban communities including 
Decentralized Renewable energy (DRE) to power livelihood applications e.g. off-grid 
solar power water pumps and cold storages 
4. 
One of the key design principles of IGFF is the focus on gender-responsive financing. 
IGFF strengthens DFI capacities to integrate practices into their operations that support 
women’s participation, supporting sex-disaggregated data systems, targeted financing for 
women-led projects, and capacity-building programs. These efforts aim to enable women’s 
active participation across the clean energy value chain, fostering greater inclusion and equity 
within the sector. The program will increase gender responsive financing by 10% from the 
baseline for relevant clean energy solutions. The relevant clean energy solutions are DRE and 
e-mobility. This assessment   aims to ensure that the Facility’s design, implementation, and 
outcomes are gender-responsive and aligned with the GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan1 
and ADB’s gender equality policies and procedures. It aims to address gender gaps, empower 
women in the financial and renewable energy sectors, and enhance equitable participation in 
climate resilience efforts.  
5. 
The Facility is structured in two components - Component 1 is the Financing for DFIs 
to scale up emerging clean energy technologies, Component 2 includes technical support for 
insititutionalising green lending practices and strengthening DFI capacities. Component 2 will 
strengthen capacity in DFIs to adopt inclusive gender-responsive green lending principles. 
This is an integral component to achieving mitigation and adaptation co-benefits to support 
the green and sustainable transition of India’s DFIs, ensuring their alignment with Paris 
Agreement goals, climate-related financial disclosure frameworks and other sustainability 
targets.  
6. 
By providing this integrated package of TA and low-cost financing, the Facility supports 
the government of India in its energy transition efforts, reducing carbon intensity and 
decoupling economic growth from (GHG) emissions.  
7. 
While the IGFF is primarily focused on climate goals, it also promises inclusive and 
sustainable 
development 
benefits. By 
placing 
an 
emphasis 
on 
ensuring 
that 
women, marginalized communities, and climate-vulnerable regions directly benefit from its 
initiatives, it has the potential to deliver on improved gender equality and social inclusion. 
These benefits can be realized through increased participation of women in the energy 
workforce, improved access to skills development for women, and increased access to finance 
for women-led green enterprises.  
 
 
1 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gcf-b24-15

=== PAGE 134 ===
6 
 
 
3. APPROACH 
8. 
The success of gender mainstreaming in the IGFF hinges on the active involvement of 
the DFIs. ADB’s approach is based on a) understanding the DFIs existing approach to gender 
mainstreaming and their internal capacity to integrate gender responsiveness into the design 
and implementation of climate projects; and b) identifying systemic gender issues and 
constraints, as well as the risks and opportunities in the sub-projects under the selected 
thematic pillars. The DFIs selected for the IGFF will play a pivotal role in providing long term 
finance for capital intensive sectors. By adopting a gender-responsive approach—such as 
including gender objectives and criteria in directing support to the specific sectors where 
women-led and -owned companies operate—they can lead the way in ensuring an inclusive 
decarbonisation journey for India.  
9. 
The Technical Assistance (TA) provided by ADB under component 2 will be 
instrumental in advancing gender-responsive financing and workforce development by 
building capacity of DFIs to mainstream gender considerations and support policy reforms for 
a gender-responsive clean energy financing. Specific areas of support will include: 
1. 
Delivering TA to support DFIs mainstream gender considerations, including 
monitoring and financing for women-led activities in the clean energy sector. 
a. Capacity building for gender-disaggregated data utilisation: Conduct 30 
training programs for DFIs to design gender-disaggregated data collection 
frameworks, including tools to monitor financing flows, employment 
trends, and entrepreneurial outcomes specific to women-led initiatives. 
b. Establish preferential financing criteria: Collaborate with DFIs and other 
financial institutions to develop and adopt preferential financing criteria for 
projects that prioritize the employment or support of women in the clean 
energy value chain. 
c. Training programs for women in rural communities: Organize tailored 
technical and entrepreneurial training programs aimed at equipping 
women in rural areas with the skills required to actively participate in the 
clean energy sector, fostering their inclusion in the value chain 
2. 
Support dialogues to advocate for policy frameworks that integrate gender 
considerations into clean energy financing. 
a. Stakeholder engagement for policy advocacy: Facilitate 1 structured 
dialogues between government agencies, DFIs, and private sector 
stakeholders to advocate for the integration of gender considerations into 
clean energy financing policies. 
b. Promote regulatory alignment: Work alongside key institutions such as 
RBI and SEBI to encourage the adoption of policy frameworks that 
prioritize gender equity in green finance.

=== PAGE 135 ===
7 
 
 
10. 
By equipping DFIs with the necessary tools, knowledge, and systems, the TA will 
ensure that gender mainstreaming is not only adopted but also embedded within their 
operations. Further details on the specific roles and responsibilities of the PIU, including due 
diligence, oversight, and reporting, are provided in the Roles and Responsibilities section of 
this document. 
11. 
The table below provides a high-level overview of the selected DFIs2 including a 
summary of their existing gender policies, products and services targeting women, as well as 
their current GCF accreditation status. This overview highlights the potential to enhance their 
efforts through capacity building activities within the IGFF.  
Table 1.  Overview of DFIs. 
Potential entry 
points 
National 
Bank 
for 
Agriculture 
and 
Rural 
Development 
(NABARD) 
Rural Electrification 
Corporation 
Ltd 
(REC) 
India 
Infrastructure 
Finance 
Company 
Limited (IIFCL) 
Gender 
mainstreaming 
and 
related 
policies 
The Gender Policy of 
NABARD 
stipulates 
that all activities and 
projects 
shall 
be 
gender transformative, 
and requires adequate 
resource 
allocation 
and 
institutional 
accountability. 
NABARD 
further 
integrates 
gender 
considerations 
into 
operations, mandates 
gender-responsive 
budgeting, 
monitors 
progress with gender-
disaggregated 
data, 
and 
advocates 
for 
women's 
empowerment 
in 
agriculture and rural 
development. 
 
REC does not have a 
specific 
gender 
mainstreaming policy, 
but it implements CSR 
initiatives specifically 
on 
women 
empowerment. 
The 
activities 
focus 
on 
skills development and 
livelihood projects for 
youth 
and 
underprivileged 
women, 
maternal 
care, 
awareness 
raising against child 
marriage, and rural 
infrastructural 
development. 
 
 
While IIFCL does not 
have a specific gender 
policy, it has projects 
that promote gender 
equality and support 
vulnerable groups by 
providing 
renewable 
energy, 
water 
and 
sanitation, vocational 
training, and livelihood 
opportunities 
for 
women, children, the 
elderly, and differently 
abled individuals.  
 
 
Experience 
promoting 
female-focused 
financial 
products 
Actively 
promotes 
financial inclusion for 
rural women through 
initiatives such as Self-
help Groups (SHGs) 
and 
Bank 
Linkage 
No financial products 
identified, 
but 
initiatives focused on 
skills, 
training, 
and 
safe 
spaces 
for 
No financial products 
identified, 
but 
skill 
development 
and 
cluster-based 
entrepreneurship 
projects 
were 
 
2 For information on DFIs and their work please refer to the IGFF Funding Proposal, and Annex 2

=== PAGE 136 ===
8 
 
 
Programme, 
where 
84% taking up these 
initiatives are women. 
NABARD 
also 
collaborates 
with 
Women’s 
World 
Banking 
(WWB) 
to 
enhance the utilization 
of 
basic 
financial 
services 
such 
as 
savings, 
microinsurance, 
pensions, and access 
to credit for women 
and SHGs. NABARD 
and 
WWB 
further 
collaborate 
on 
developing a Gender 
intentional 
Index 
(GIIN) to promote the 
gender-focused 
financial 
inclusion 
strategies of Regional 
Rural Banks. 
 
women 
were 
identified. 
identified 
including 
artisanal 
skill 
development.   
Percentage 
of 
female staff 
~25% (776 out of 
3,134 as of March 
31,2024) 
~15% (78 of 513) of 
staff 
are 
women 
(2023/4 
Annual 
Report) 
One-third 
women 
representation among 
its 
Key 
Managerial 
Personnel (KMPs) 
 
Women 
on 
board 
or 
leadership 
1 woman on the board 
(8%) 
1 woman on board 
(14%), 
and 
female 
representation on the 
board is required by 
company policy 
1 woman on the board 
(14%), 
as 
a 
government nominee 
director 
Gender 
inclusive human 
resources 
policies 
NABARD 
has 
a 
specific gender policy, 
which 
promotes 
gender-inclusive 
HR 
policies 
to 
ensure 
equal 
opportunities, 
career advancement, 
and work-life balance 
for 
women. 
The 
organization 
fosters 
gender 
diversity 
in 
leadership 
and 
integrates 
gender 
sensitivity 
into 
its 
Their 
equal 
Opportunity 
Policy 
stipulates 
non-
discrimination on the 
grounds of sex, and 
the safety of women is 
included in its ESG 
Policy. 
The 
corporation 
upholds 
dignity 
and 
a 
harassment-free 
workplace, enforcing a 
zero-tolerance stance 
on sexual harassment. 
IIFCL 
includes 
the 
promotion of gender 
equality 
and 
the 
empowerment 
of 
women in its CSR 
policy, 
including 
female participation in 
resettlement activities 
and 
income 
restoration programs. 
In compliance with the 
Maternity Benefit Act, 
2017, IIFCL supports 
maternity benefits and

=== PAGE 137 ===
9 
 
 
workplace 
culture. 
Since 
2019-20, 
NABARD 
also 
implemented 
a 
differentiated strategy 
under the Financial 
Inclusion Fund (FIF) to 
address 
regional 
financial 
gaps 
and 
promote 
inclusive 
financial 
access, 
reinforcing 
its 
commitment to gender 
empowerment 
within 
and 
beyond 
the 
organization. 
 
An Internal Complaints 
Committee 
(ICC) 
conducts 
fair 
investigations 
and 
takes action against 
sexual 
misconduct, 
reinforcing 
commitment 
to 
the 
well-being 
and 
protection of women 
employees. 
is 
exploring 
partnerships 
with 
nearby creches due to 
space constraints at its 
rented headquarters. 
Female 
employees 
are entitled to two daily 
nursing breaks or a 
one-hour 
alternative 
until their child reaches 
15 months. 
AE status 
Accredited to GCF for 
up to Category B/I-2. 
Initially accredited in 
2015 
and 
re-
accredited in 2022, it 
can submit large-scale 
proposals over USD 
250 million and utilize 
various 
funding 
windows. 
 
Not 
accredited, 
will 
develop projects for 
this facility up to Cat 
B/I-2 in alignment with 
ESMF 
Not 
accredited, 
will 
develop projects for 
this facility up to Cat 
B/I-2 in alignment with 
ESMF 
Potential 
capacity 
building support 
through IGFF 
As an AE, NABARD 
will 
currently 
have 
processes and policies 
in place to be IGFF 
compliant. 
TA will be provided by 
the IGFF to strengthen 
the ability of DFIs to 
collect and monitor sex 
disaggregated data 
TA support will be 
provided to i) ensure 
REC is able to become 
compliant with IGFF 
prescribed 
gender 
requirements.  embed 
IGFF ii) ensure sub-
project 
selection 
is 
gender responsive. 
TA 
will 
also 
be 
provided to strengthen 
ability to collect and 
monitor 
sex 
disaggregated 
data. 
Sex 
disaggregated 
data will be used to 
design and launch new 
gendered 
financial 
products and to track 
impact 
of 
such 
products. 
TA support will be 
provided to i) ensure 
IIFCL 
is 
able 
to 
become 
compliant 
with IGFF prescribed 
gender requirements.  
embed IGFF ii) ensure 
sub-project 
selection 
is gender responsive.  
TA 
will 
also 
be 
provided to strengthen 
ability to collect and 
monitor 
sex 
disaggregated 
data. 
Sex-disaggregated 
data will be used to 
design and launch new 
gendered 
financial 
products and to track 
impact 
of 
such 
products.

=== PAGE 138 ===
10 
 
 
 
3.1. Gender Frameworks, Policies and Guidelines 
12. 
Managed by ADB, this Facility will receive co-financing from GCF, implemented 
through selected DFIs as discussed above. The gender assessment and action plan (GAAP) 
guiding the Facility builds on a) existing ADB policies, guidelines and procedures on gender 
mainstreaming, b) GCF guidelines, and c) the existing gender-related practices and 
institutional structures systems of the DFIs.  
13. 
While gender mainstreaming within the DFIs is still nascent, the Facility seeks to 
leverage and harmonize the existing elements of gender-related systems or processes. These 
include existing policies, emerging practices, and sex-disaggregated data collection methods. 
Where gaps exist, the TA will provide the necessary support to strengthen institutional capacity 
and fully integrate gender-responsive approaches. Stakeholder engagement with the DFIs 
(NABARD, IIFCL, REC) and desk research of the DFI's gender-related documents – including 
their internal practices, capacities, and views on gender mainstreaming – has informed the 
GAAP.  
14. 
One of the key operational priorities of ADB’s Strategy 20303 is gender equality in Asia, 
measured across 5 outcomes: economic empowerment, human development, decision-
making and leadership, time poverty reduction, and resilience to external shocks. The ADB 
South Asia Department (SARD) has developed a gender and social inclusion (GESI) 
framework to guide the implementation of the two operational priority pillars of Strategy 2030, 
2 (OP2). OP2 refers to ‘accelerating progress on gender equality’, whereby ADB commits to 
support targeted operations to empower women and girls, and gender mainstreaming that 
directly narrows gender gaps.  
15. 
ADB’s guidelines for Design and Monitoring Framework4 (DMF) and Corporate Results 
Framework (CRF) provides the basis for reporting on ADB’s operational and organisational 
performance, and communication with ADB stakeholders about achievement of expected 
results.  
16. 
Under the ADB gender categorisation framework5, a project is classified as one of the 
following: 
a. Gender Equity Theme (‘GEN’) where the project explicitly includes gender equality 
outcomes or empowerment outcomes. A project is assigned GEN if the project 
outcome directly addresses gender equality and/or women's empowerment by 
narrowing gender disparities through access to social services; and/or economic 
and financial resources and opportunities etc. 
 
3 https://www.adb.org/documents/strategy-2030-operational-plans-overview  
4 https://www.adb.org/documents/guidelines-preparing-design-and-monitoring-framework  
5 Guidelines for Gender Mainstreaming Categories of ADB Projects (ADB, 2021)

=== PAGE 139 ===
11 
 
 
b. Effective Gender Mainstreaming (EGM): A project is assigned EGM if the project 
outcome is not gender equality or women's empowerment, but project outputs are 
designed to directly improve women’s access. 
c. Some Gender Elements (SGE): A project is assigned SGE if by its nature it is likely 
to directly improve women's access to social services; financial resources and 
opportunities, basic rural and urban infrastructure, included little, if any gender 
analysis  
d. No Gender Elements (NGE): the project is assigned NGE if it is not expected to 
provide direct/tangible benefits to women, although there may be indirect benefits 
for women.  
17. 
The Facility's approach to gender mainstreaming and integration also closely aligns 
with the GCF's gender policy. These policies will guide IGFF investments and ensure gender 
equality is embedded throughout the project lifecycle. These are reflected in the 
operationalization of these principles in the GAP (Section 5), which include the following key 
elements that will contribute to women's empowerment to guide IGFF Investments: 
• 
Support the growth of green jobs through relevant upskilling efforts for diverse groups 
of women to ensure equitable participation in sustainable development, with relevant 
upskilling efforts for women. 
• 
Ensure an inclusive stakeholder participation and gender-responsive consultation 
process to incorporate women’s needs and priorities and empower them to participate 
in decision-making. 
18. 
Share learnings on gender mainstreaming within green projects within the IGFF 
portfolio and more broadly in India. At the Facility level, the gender-related objectives below 
are articulated so that they can be replicated across a diversity of sub-projects that will be 
funded. 
• 
Encourage women's economic participation as leaders, employees, and suppliers by 
promoting the adoption of gender-inclusive practices in workplaces and supply chains.  
• 
Promote access to gender-responsive products, services, and approaches in clean 
energy, climate-smart agriculture, and food systems, with innovative solutions for 
women customers and end-users so that they can access and benefit from these 
resources more equally. 
• 
Support reforms in regulation to encourage adoption of policy frameworks that 
priortitise gender equity in green finance and disseminate best practices in gender 
mainstreaming within the financial ecosystem 
19. 
Aligned with the above, specific facility level and DFI outcomes are included in the 
GAP.

=== PAGE 140 ===
12 
 
 
3.2. IGFF Methodology 
20. 
IGFF will finance climate-related projects or interventions (through DFIs) that provide 
gender- responsive solutions to low-GHG emissions and climate-resilient development. 
Projects will address the targeted Mitigation Results Areas (MRA). Approved projects must 
integrate gender and social inclusion criteria, address stated GHG emissions reductions 
priorities and targets, along with resilience priorities and provide an indication of impact co-
benefits applicable to women.  
21. 
All projects must meet specific gender and social inclusion criteria as outlined in the 
Funding Proposal. These criteria include incorporating GAPs and logical frameworks with 
quantitative and qualitative gender KPIs that contribute to narrowing existing gender gaps and 
women’s empowerment. Contributions to gender objectives will vary across thematic sectors, 
with gender priorities identified in collaboration with DFIs. 
3.2.1. Gender Requirements at IGFF and Operational (projects/programs) 
22. 
Gender guidelines for the IGFF follow the gender mainstreaming framework and policy 
guidelines of the ADB, in alignment with GCF gender policy. The Facility will channel funding 
through selected DFIs, where one is a GCF accredited national entity. IGFF will review the 
GCF-approved gender assessments (GAs) and gender action plans (GAPs) for the accredited 
entities and may request clarification or supplementation thereof if required. For the 
unaccredited DFIs, the IGFF will conduct a gender assessment including a review of their 
existing Gender and ESS policies and formulation of a GAP to address and support 
remediation of any identified shortcomings with respect to IGFF requirements. Additionally, 
the IGFF will require preparation of a GA & GAP for all projects and programs, direct or 
indirect, to be funded by the Facility. Gender assessments will incorporate sex disaggregated 
data, as well as include other relevant factors, to enable setting of targets that integrate 
intersectinality. This further includes the development of GAAP by each of the financial 
institution in alignment with the program level GAAP. 
Pipeline Generation 
23. 
Gender and social inclusion criteria must guide the selection of pipeline projects at the 
DFI level. DFIs are required to conduct a gender analysis/assessment relevant to the 
proposed projects during this phase. 
Gender Categorization and GAPs 
24. 
All subprojects will advance gender considerations to promote inclusive participation 
in the clean energy sector and will be assigned a gender category based on ADB’s gender 
categorisation system (e.g., EGM, GEN)6. DFIs must prepare a detailed GAP for each project, 
including: (a) quantitative and qualitative baseline data; (b) gender KPIs with specific, 
 
6 All  loans will be categorized as Effective Gender Mainstreaming (EGM) according to ADB’s Gender 
and Development Framework Each project

=== PAGE 141 ===
13 
 
 
measurable and time bound targets; and (c) alignment with IGFF's overarching gender goals. 
The PMU will review and validate all GAPs and gender categorization during the due diligence 
process. 
Approval Process 
25. 
The GAPs and gender categorization will undergo validation at both the DFI and IGFF 
levels and the PMU will ensure that GAPs align with IGFF strategic objectives before project 
approval. 
Implementation and Monitoring 
26. 
Approved projects must adhere to their GAPs and submit regular reports, including 
sex-disaggregated data and progress on GAP implementation. DFIs are responsible for 
reporting progress on gender KPIs and GAP implementation to the IGFF. These reports will 
be compiled and submitted as gender performance reports to ADB and GCF, in accordance 
with ADB reporting requirements.  
27. 
It is important to note that not all IGFF projects will contribute to all the gender 
objectives. The degree to which a project or program contributes to these goals will vary across 
thematic sectors. The identification of which gender objectives that are most relevant and 
appropriate for each project will be done in collaboration with the DFI in accordance with the 
ADB gender categorization system and requirements for the project. Additionally, process 
evaluation at the DFI-level will be conducted, which will assess implementation challenges 
and compliance with gender standards. 
Capacity Building and Technical Assistance 
28. 
To ensure that DFIs have the necessary capacity to support gender work at the project 
and program levels, the IGFF will provide TA funding related to preparation of their Gender 
Assessment and Gender Action Plans, as well as for the implementation of specific GAP 
activities. The IGFF will hire an international gender consultant and a national gender 
consultants to strengthen the Facility’s capacity for gender mainstreaming and support DFIs 
in achieving gender goals. 
3.2.2. Roles and Responsibilities 
29. 
The IGFF will establish a Program Management Unit (PMU) at the facility level to 
oversee implementation, ensuring strategic alignment, technical support, and guidance across 
DFIs to ensure is gender is incorporated . 
30. 
At the project level, each DFI will establish a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), also 
consisting of international and national consultants, to manage DFI-specific operations while 
coordinating with the PMU both in data generation and reporting of progress. To foster 
knowledge-sharing and capacity-building, the facility-level team will organize regular 
knowledge exchange sessions, facilitating best practice sharing and continuous improvement

=== PAGE 142 ===
14 
 
 
31. 
DFIs: DFIs will be formally responsible for the preparation of projects and programs 
Gender Assessments and Action Plans. They are also responsible for ensuring project 
compliance with gender requirements and reporting on GAP to IGFF throughout project 
implementation. Should a new DFI join the IGFF, a due diligence assessment will be 
conducted by the PMU in line with the initial process at the launch of the facility. 
32. 
ADB as the Accredited Entity will be responsible for implementing and overseeing a 
governance mechanism to manage the Facility via PMU. ADB will require quarterly reports on 
project and program gender activities including implementation of the Gender Action Plans, 
together with other information required on E&S and impact, which will be provided by the 
Facility. Please refer to Annex 11 of the Funding Proposal (Monitoring & Evaluation) for more 
details.  ADB will hire the international and a national gender consultants mentioned above, to 
oversee this process. 
33. 
The PMU, staffed and overseen by ADB, will provide TA to build gender mainstreaming 
capacity of DFIs. ADB PMU will be responsible for initial level Due Diligence of all DFIs (pre-
project level); reviewing the GA and GAP for projects submitted by DFIs; Monitoring and 
Reporting sex-disaggregated data to GCF (project and facility level).  
4. GENDER ASSESSMENT 
34. 
This section provides a comprehensive analysis on the national laws and policy 
frameworks of India in relation to gender, as well as the gender disparities in the country, 
disaggregated according to the thematic pillars identified by the IGFF. The Facility will draw 
upon this baseline analysis of the existing gender inequalities, differences in vulnerability and 
adaptive capacity to climate change, and the current differences in access to resources and 
training between men and women in India to inform the gender considerations of the IGFF. 
Conducting a gender analysis from the very beginning of the planning process allows an 
understanding of gender power relations and roles to be built into the overall operations of the 
Facility from its inception to delivery.  
4.1. National Laws and Policy Frameworks of India on Gender 
35. 
The government of India has demonstrated its commitment to building an enabling 
environment for gender equality through the adoption of key international agreements, 
operationalized through the enactment of national laws and policies. A foundational step was 
India’s ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against 
Women (CEDAW) in 1993, which legally binds the country to end gender-based discrimination 
across all sectors. The country further strengthened its commitment by being one the first 
countries to adopt the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action (BPFA) in 1995, a 
comprehensive policy framework identifying 12 critical areas for achieving gender equality. 
Additionally, India is a party to international agreements that further protect the rights of 
women and vulnerable groups, such as the Convention on the Political Rights of Women, 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights, Convention on the Rights of the Child, and Convention on the

=== PAGE 143 ===
15 
 
 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, among others7. These further guide the gender-inclusive 
commitments of India towards the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.  
36. 
These international agreements are operationalized in the country through the 
formulation of numerous laws, policies, and governing bodies. In 1992, the National 
Commission for Women was founded as a statutory body mandated to safeguard the rights of 
women in the country. At the state level, State Commissions for Women have been 
established in 29 states and 7 union territories to address women’s rights issues within their 
respective jurisdiction8. The effective implementation of gender-related policies further relies 
on appropriate funding allocation, which is why the first Gender Budget Statement (GBS) of 
India was published in 2005-2006 as a fiscal tool to align budgetary commitments with gender 
equality goals. Since then, a GBS is published annually to provide an overview of public 
expenditure for women and girls through the review of gender components in government 
programs of various ministries9.  
37. 
In terms of leadership, India has undertaken significant legislative measures to 
institutionalize women’s representation in the government. In 1993, the 73rd Constitutional 
Amendment Act mandated that at least one-third or 33% of seats in Panchayati Raj Institutions 
or village councils are reserved for women. The quota laid the foundation for women’s active 
political participation in India for over 30 years, further influencing the passage of the Women’s 
Reservation Bill in 2023 at the national level. This stipulates that at least 33% of the seats in 
state legislative assemblies and the Lok Sabha, the lower house of Parliament, are occupied 
by female candidates. These laws institutionalize the greater participation of women in the 
policymaking and governance of India10. 
38. 
The CEDAW Committee's Concluding Observations on the fourth and fifth periodic 
reports of India also recognized further legislative reforms to advance gender equality in the 
country. Notable laws include the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013; Sexual Harassment 
of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition, and Redressal) Act, 2013; The Protection of 
Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2006; Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 
2012; and the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009. The Committee 
also acknowledged the establishment of a financial services banking company for women in 
2013 as a step toward enhancing women’s economic empowerment. 
 
7 UN Women. (2024). India: Beijing+30 national report on progress in gender equality and women’s 
empowerment. https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2024-09/b30_report_india_en.pdf. 
8 National Commission for Women. List of State Women Commissions. Government of India. Retrieved 
February 26, 2025, from http://ncw.nic.in/important-links/list-state-women-commissions 
9 Observer Research Foundation. (n.d.). Gender-responsive budgeting in India: A stocktaking. 
Retrieved February 26, 2025, from https://www.orfonline.org/research/gender-responsive-budgeting-in-
india-a-stocktaking. 
10 UN Women. (2023, October). India passes law to reserve seats for women legislators. Retrieved 
February 26, 2025, from https://www.unwomen.org/en/news-stories/feature-story/2023/10/india-
passes-law-to-reserve-seats-for-women-legislators.

=== PAGE 144 ===
16 
 
 
39. 
Indeed, India has made significant progress in building an enabling environment for 
gender equality through comprehensive legal and policy frameworks. However, gaps and 
opportunities remain to further strengthen the implementation of these policies. The National 
Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has observed that the effectiveness of the Gender-
Responsive Budgeting of India can be amplified by enhancing fiscal policies, transparency in 
fund utilization, and budget allocations directly linked to measurable outcomes in women's 
welfare. It has also noted that along with the passage of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment 
on the increased participation of women in national governance, capacity development and 
mentoring programs can further empower the elected female representatives11. Among the 
principal areas of recommendations in the CEDAW Committtee’s Concluding Observations on 
India is the adoption of a comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation to protect women from 
intersectional forms of inequality. This recommendation on an intersectional lens specifically 
includes mainstreaming the rights of women with disabilities within the national strategies and, 
facilitating advocacies and regularly collecting disaggregated data on persons with disabilities 
based on sex, age, type of disability, and region. 
40. 
On violence against women, the CEDAW Committee also noted the efforts of the 
Indian government to enact policies and legal frameworks to prevent and respond to gender-
based violence. However, the Committee is still concerned about the status of increasing 
cases of violence against women in the country, the escalation of caste-based violence, and 
the persistence of ‘honor crimes’ against women and girls, among others. The National Crime 
Records Bureau reported a 4% increase of crimes against women in India from 2021 to 2022, 
which translates to approximately 51 cases per hour12. Disparity between states was also 
observed, as the NCRB report highlighted that 12 states and Union Territories recorded crime 
rates higher than the national average, led by New Delhi and followed by the states of 
Haryana, and Telangana. 
41. 
Within the finance and energy sectors, women are also affected by a less discussed 
dimension of violence: economic abuse. Traditional gender norms and conservative social 
expectations can deter women from pursuing employment opportunities, limiting their ability 
to own assets and to access finance, which can further limit their access to energy. These 
experiences often result in economic dependence on their husbands and can diminish their 
autonomy, particularly in situations involving gender-based violence. Economic abuse 
marginalizes women from household financial decision-marking, restricts their ability to earn, 
 
11 National Human Rights Commission. (n.d.). Women’s rights in India: An analytical study. Retrieved 
https://nhrc.nic.in/sites/default/files/Women%E2%80%99s%20Rights%20in%20India%20complete_co
mpressed.pdf 
12 Times of India. (2024, January 5). India records 51 cases of crime against women every hour, over 
4.4 lakh cases in 2022: NCRB report. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/india-records-51-cases-
of-crime-against-women-every-hour-over-4-4-lakh-cases-in-2022-ncrb-
report/articleshow/105731269.cms

=== PAGE 145 ===
17 
 
 
and exposes them to financial exploitation by their husbands13. The lack of entitlement to 
property and financial assets reduce women's access to finance, and reinforces their 
dependence on male family members to avail credit from financial institutions. To date, some 
banks even require husbands or fathers to sign loan application forms for women borrowers14. 
42. 
The program is designed to mitigate these gender-related risks in access to finance by 
embedding gender-responsive approaches within the institutional and operational frameworks 
of the DFIs. It aims to strengthen anti-sexual harassment policies to foster safer and more 
inclusive work environments and processes, ensuring that women in finance and energy 
sectors are protected from discrimination and violence. The program also enhances the 
collection and utilization of sex-disaggregated data, enabling DFIs to develop more targeted 
and effective financial solutions for women-led businesses in the renewable energy sector. It 
further provides capacity-building initiatives to equip women with the necessary skills, financial 
literacy, and technical knowledge to succeed in green energy ventures. To promote gender 
inclusivity in the sector, the program facilitates multi-stakeholder dialogues with DFIs, 
policymakers, and industry leaders to advance gender-responsive policies and investments 
that empower women in finance and renewable energy. 
4.2. The role of energy in women's daily lives, health, productivity, and livelihoods  
43. 
Energy poverty disproportionately exacerbates vulnerabilities among women, 
particularly for economically disadvantaged women, where traditional roles often involve 
managing household energy needs such as cooking and lighting. Globally, nearly 3 billion 
people rely on polluting energy sources like firewood for cooking, with over 680 million residing 
in India. This reliance exposes women to significant health risks, including respiratory illnesses 
caused by indoor air pollution, and perpetuates socio-economic inequalities by limiting their 
access to education, entrepreneurship, and community development opportunities. 
Furthermore, women’s vulnerability to climate change is heightened by their dependence on 
traditional energy sources, restricted mobility, and exclusion from decision-making processes. 
Socio-economic inequalities, cultural barriers, and limited access to financial and natural 
resources further constrain their adaptive capacity. Expanding access to clean, affordable, 
and reliable energy is crucial for advancing gender equality, reducing health risks, and 
fostering inclusive development. Reliable energy access empowers women by enabling 
educational attainment, improving health outcomes, and unlocking opportunities for income 
generation and community participation, thus addressing critical gendered disparities in 
energy poverty. 
 
13 Raj, A., McDougal, L., & Silverman, J. G. (2023). Economic abuse and intimate partner violence in 
India: The role of women's employment and financial inclusion. BMJ Global Health, 8(10), e012576. 
Retrieved from https://gh.bmj.com/content/8/10/e012576 
14 World Bank. Improving access to finance for women-owned businesses in India. Retrieved from 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/61a1f630-279f-5fda-bd4f-
e6c0395b4a33/content.

=== PAGE 146 ===
18 
 
 
4.3. Gendered Disparities in Energy Access in India: Challenges and Opportunities 
44. 
Energy access in India continues to exhibit significant gender disparities, particularly 
between rural and urban areas and among marginalized populations. Rural women bear the 
disproportionate burden of managing household energy needs, often spending an estimated 
20–40 hours per week collecting firewood and other traditional fuels (IEA, 2021)15. This task 
is both physically demanding and time-consuming, limiting opportunities for education, income 
generation, and leisure. In urban areas, women have better access to modern energy sources 
such as LPG and electricity. However, challenges related to affordability, reliability, and safety 
persist. For instance, only 50% of households using LPG as their primary cooking fuel have 
consistent supply due to cost barriers16. 
45. 
Despite significant progress in electrification through initiatives such as the Saubhagya 
Scheme, approximately 680 million people in India—predominantly in rural areas—still rely on 
traditional biomass for cooking. The reliance on traditional fuels disproportionately affects 
women’s health, increasing exposure to indoor air pollution, which contributes to 
approximately 500,000 premature deaths annually17. Limited access to electricity also impacts 
essential tasks such as lighting, cooking, and food preservation, further amplifying gender 
inequalities in health, education, and productivity. 
46. 
Men typically have greater access to financial and resources, which allows for more 
adaptive flexibility in energy use. In contrast, women face heightened constraints due to limited 
resource ownership, cultural norms, and disproportionate responsibilities in household energy 
management. Studies indicate that women own only 13% of land in India18, which restricts 
their ability to secure financing for clean energy technologies such as solar home systems or 
biogas units. 
4.3.1. Intersectional and Regional Disparities 
47. 
Generally, the intersectionality of gender with factors such as caste, economic status, 
age, disability, and geography influence women’s access to opportunities and resources in 
India, including energy. The CEDAW Committee’s latest concluding observations on India 
expressed concerns over marginalized groups, such as Dalit and Adivasi women who continue 
to face caste and gender-based discrimination. The female literacy rates among Dalits (57%) 
and Adivasis (49.35%) remain below the national average (65%). Additionally, these women 
face substantial challenges in accessing medical care due to caste-based discrimination19.  
 
15 International Energy Agency (IEA), 2021. "World Energy Outlook." 
16 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG), Government of India, 2023. "Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala 
Yojana." 
17 World Health Organization (WHO), 2022. "Air Pollution and Health Impacts." 
18 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), 2020. "Gender and Land Rights in India." 
19 Rao, M. (2023, January 26). Caste out. Think Global Health. Retrieved February 26, 2025, from 
https://www.thinkglobalhealth.org/article/caste-out.

=== PAGE 147 ===
19 
 
 
48. 
About 14.5% in India are female-headed households, among which single mothers are 
the most economically disadvantaged with 42% belonging to the the lowest wealth index 
quintile. Due to the gender gap in education, 60% of female heads have not gone to school, 
and are also less likely to own land in comparison to male household heads (40% vs. 70%)20. 
Women entrepreneurs also struggle, owning just 20% of businesses in India, primarily in 
lower-revenue sectors. Safety concerns, lack of professional networks, and societal biases 
further restrict their progress. 
49. 
Concerns over the low enrolment of girls with disabilities and minorities were also 
expressed in CEDAW Committee’s observations. The school dropout rate for adolescent girls 
reaches 64%, and the retention and completion rates of girls at secondary level remain low, 
especially in rural areas. Among the reasons include early marriage, poverty, and poor 
sanitation particularly during menstruation. The Committee is also concerned that women with 
disabilities face high poverty rates and limited access to education, employment, and 
healthcare, particularly in rural areas. They encounter multiple barriers, including inaccessible 
public spaces and utilities, frequent harassment in public, and exclusion from decision-making 
processes. Elderly women and persons with disabilities also face systemic disadvantages. 
Over 70% of elderly women suffer from chronic illnesses, and only 28% receive pension and 
financial support. Low literacy rates further limit their access to services, and social isolation 
affects 35% of elderly women. For persons with disabilities, employment is a major issue: only 
0.28% is employed in the private sector and 0.05% in multinational companies.  
50. 
Gender inequalities in energy access further intersect with social and regional 
disparities. In northern India, cultural and religious norms significantly limit women’s 
participation in the labor force, with female labor force participation rates as low as 9% in some 
states21. This constrains their ability to afford modern energy solutions. In contrast, in southern 
and western India, socio-economic factors such as lower household incomes and education 
levels act as primary barriers. Rural women are particularly affected by energy poverty, which 
limits their resilience to climate shocks and increases dependence on traditional fuels. Climate 
change exacerbates these vulnerabilities, as prolonged droughts and deforestation reduce the 
availability of biomass fuels, forcing women and girls to travel longer distances for fuelwood 
collection. 
4.3.2. Opportunities for Transformative Change 
51. 
Despite these challenges, women hold immense potential to drive clean energy 
transitions. Evidence shows that empowering women through targeted interventions can 
significantly enhance energy access outcomes. For example, women-led initiatives in 
decentralized renewable energy systems, such as solar micro-grids and biogas plants, have 
 
20 Licart, T. (2020). Rethinking female-headed households in India: Diversity of household structure, 
contrasting socioeconomic status. European Population Conference 2020. Retrieved from 
https://epc2020.eaps.nl/uploads/200909 
21 International Labour Organization (ILO), 2023. "India Labor Market Statistics."

=== PAGE 148 ===
20 
 
 
successfully improved energy access in rural areas of states like Rajasthan and Odisha22. 
Women’s involvement in clean cooking programs has also demonstrated notable health and 
economic benefits. However, these roles often require substantial investments in capacity 
building and infrastructure support. 
52. 
ADB’s operational priorities align with these opportunities, emphasizing gender-
responsive energy planning and investments in clean energy solutions. Targeted policies and 
programs, such as subsidized financing for women entrepreneurs in renewable energy and 
awareness campaigns addressing cultural norms, are critical to reducing the gender gap in 
energy access. Scaling up initiatives such as the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY), 
which has already benefited over 80 million women by providing subsidized LPG connections, 
can further improve outcomes23.  
53. 
Relevant to the approaches of this project in addressing gender disparities in energy 
access in India, the gender assessment provides recommendations for targeted 
interventions.. These include specific activities on strengthening gender awareness and 
existing institutional measures of DFIs, while enhancing their utilization of sex-disaggregated 
data and gender indicators. Upskilling female entrepreneurs in green economy, strengthening 
their access to finance, and supporting their participation in energy decision-making through 
capacity-building programs can amplify their influence in local energy planning. Supporting 
women entrepreneurs with tailored financial assistance and technical training can enable their 
leadership in renewable energy solutions, particularly in decentralized systems. Additionally, 
investing in gender-disaggregated data collection and research is crucial to inform targeted 
interventions, track progress, and ensure equitable access to energy resources, empowering 
women as key agents in sustainable energy transitions. 
4.4. Women in the renewable energy workforce in India 
54. 
Women in India's energy sector face significant challenges that hinder their full 
participation and advancement, including in renewable energy. Cultural and patriarchal norms 
often restrict women's employment opportunities, particularly in traditionally male-dominated 
industries like energy. Safety concerns and lack of human resources policies that support 
women's participation in the sector further limit their workforce participation, as societal 
perceptions and inadequate infrastructure deter women from pursuing careers in this field. 
Additionally, limited access to education and training in science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics (STEM) disciplines reduces the pool of qualified female candidates for green 
jobs, including energy sector roles. Addressing these challenges requires comprehensive 
strategies, including promoting gender-inclusive policies in the workplace, enhancing safety 
measures, and encouraging women's education and training in relevant fields.  
 
22 Self Employed Women’s Association (SEWA), 2022. "Empowering Women in Renewable Energy." 
23 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG), Government of India, 2023. "Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala 
Yojana."

=== PAGE 149 ===
21 
 
 
55. 
As per the latest government data, female Labour Force Participation Rate in the 
country has improved significantly by 4.2 percentage points (in 2012) to 37% in 202324 
attributed mostly to policy initiatives around skills development, entrepreneurship facilitation 
and safety in the workplace. Table 1 below reflects the type of high-level data available, 
through which there are significant differences across industries and sub-sectors. 
Table 2. Percentage distribution of work Participation by Sector by gender 
Broad Industry division 
RURAL 
URBAN 
 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Agriculture 
51.0 
75.9 
5.4 
11.1 
Mining and Quarrying 
0.4 
0.1 
0.4 
0.1 
Manufacturing 
7.9 
7.9 
21.5 
24.3 
Electricity, Water 
0.5 
0.1 
1.4 
0.5 
Construction 
16.6 
5.3 
12.9 
3.9 
Trade, Hotel and restaurants 
10.6 
3.7 
25.2 
14.8 
Transport, 
Storage 
& 
Communications 
5.6 
0.3 
12.5 
4.6 
Other services 
7.5 
6.8 
20.7 
40.7 
Source: (PLFS- 2022, NSO, MOSPI) 
 
56. 
Almost 80% (79%) of India’s female labour force is situated in rural areas (ADB 2023, 
Statistical portrait of Indian Female Labour Force), hence distribution of jobs is skewed 
towards agriculture in the rural economy. Low-earning, unpaid family work and own account 
work constitute the highest proportion of female employment in rural India, while urban areas 
have mostly higher-paid regular salaried jobs. At the urban level, the female workforce is more 
broadly distributed across various sectors. Manufacturing and related industries make up 
roughly 25% of female employment, closely followed by service industries like education 
 
24 Ministry of Women and Child Development, India, 2023.

=== PAGE 150 ===
22 
 
 
(12%); trade, retail and wholesale (12%); household services (10%); and business and 
professional services (9%)25. 
57. 
Difference in female labour force participation across regions within India is marked 
and must be taken into consideration while designing programs and projects. The low female 
labour market participation in the North seems to reflect strong cultural and religious factors 
and less the socioeconomic status concerns which are stronger in the more developed and 
educated South and West26. The implementing DFIs are aware of these differences and factor 
this information into program planning in such a way that pilot projects take place where 
conditions for success are in place. These successful pilots are then adapted and replicated 
in other regions. 
58. 
India’s renewable energy sector is expanding rapidly, presenting significant 
opportunities for women’s economic empowerment. However, women’s participation in this 
field remains disproportionately low, highlighting critical barriers that must be addressed to 
ensure an inclusive transition to green energy. Below, key issues concerning women’s 
involvement in the renewable energy workforce, their participation in STEM education, and 
the challenges they face are outlined.  
59. 
Women’s participation in STEM education. Enrolment rates: women make up 
approximately 43% of STEM graduates in India, the highest percentage globally. This 
indicates significant potential for women to contribute to the renewable energy sector, which 
demands technical expertise. 
60. 
Transition from education to workforce. Despite high STEM graduation rates, only 
about 14% of STEM-qualified women secure positions as scientists, engineers, or 
technologists in research and development institutions. Female representation declines 
significantly at higher organisational levels, with women largely underrepresented in 
leadership and decision-making roles within energy and STEM-related industries. 
61. 
Women’s participation in the renewable energy sector. Women constitute less 
than 11% of India’s solar energy workforce, compared to the global average of 32% in the 
renewable energy sector. While women’s representation is higher in specific segments, such 
as solar PV manufacturing, where they account for 40% of the workforce, their participation 
decreases sharply in areas like construction, commissioning, and maintenance roles. 
62. 
Barriers to participation. Women face limited access to industry-aligned education 
and vocational training programs in renewable energy, with low participation in technical 
trades at Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) further hindering their entry into technical roles. In 
the workplace, women in the renewable energy sector encounter unequal company policies, 
inadequate safety measures, and a significant gender wage gap, even when their skill levels 
are comparable to their male counterparts. Additionally, cultural and societal norms often 
 
25 ADB, Policy Brief, 2023. 
26 OECD, Determinants of low female labour force participation in India, Working Paper, 2015.

=== PAGE 151 ===
23 
 
 
discourage women from pursuing careers in traditionally male-dominated fields like energy, 
further limiting their opportunities. 
63. 
Addressing barriers and promoting inclusion. The Indian government and key 
organisations have introduced various programs to enhance women’s participation in the 
workforce. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) offers initiatives aimed at 
increasing women’s involvement in renewable energy projects through skill development 
programs. Similarly, the Skill Council for Green Jobs (SCGJ) and the Council on Energy, 
Environment, and Water (CEEW) provide training for women in areas such as solar panel 
installation, maintenance, and energy entrepreneurship.  
64. 
Private sector companies are also taking steps to improve workplace conditions 
through gender-sensitive policies, including quotas for female recruitment, gender-responsive 
workplaces, and tailored safety measures such as PPE designed for women’s body shapes 
and the provision of separate facilities at worksites. Additionally, some firms are promoting 
flexible work arrangements, enabling women to better balance their professional and personal 
responsibilities. 
4.5. Gendered dynamics across the IGFF focus areas. 
65. 
In this section we look at gender dynamics across the three broad objectives of IGFF 
outlined in the Funding Proposal: 
4.5.1. Women and powering India’s energy transition  
66. 
Women can play transformative roles in energy transition projects in India, contributing 
to various aspects such as project planning, technical implementation, policy development, 
and community engagement.  
67. 
Renewable energies are already a more diverse sector than traditional energy and 
fossil fuel sectors; solar tops the charts with 40% FTEs occupied by women worldwide27. 
Women represent a mere 11 percent of the workforce in India’s renewable energy sector, 
significantly lower than the global average of 32 percent28. But this is higher than the 
percentage of women in other energy sectors in India, such as coal, oil and gas companies, 
and electricity utilities. 
68. 
Women working on projects in this sector need a range of skills to contribute effectively. 
On the technical side, expertise in electrical engineering, renewable energy technologies, 
project management, and data analysis are essential. Knowledge of grid integration, energy 
storage systems, and renewable energy policy frameworks are also crucial, particularly as 
India moves towards more complex grid-scale systems that require seamless integration of 
 
27 IRENA’s report ‘Renewable Energy: A Gender Perspective’, 2019 
28 McKinsey global institute study.

=== PAGE 152 ===
24 
 
 
renewable sources. Additionally, skills in software development for smart grid technologies, 
operation and maintenance of renewable installations, and financial modelling for large-scale 
energy investments are becoming increasingly important29. 
69. 
Non-technical skills such as leadership, communication, stakeholder management, 
and the ability to navigate regulatory and compliance frameworks are equally vital to ensure 
that women can hold decision-making and managerial positions in energy projects. 
70. 
There is currently a low level of skills among women in India's large-scale energy 
transition sector, especially in technical and leadership roles. This gap is often due to a 
combination of gender biases in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) 
education, limited access to technical training, and societal norms that discourage women 
from pursuing careers in traditionally male-dominated industries like energy.30 However, 
efforts are being made to address this skills gap through various upskilling and capacity-
building initiatives. For example, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) has 
launched programs aimed at enhancing women’s participation in renewable energy projects. 
Additionally, organizations like the Council on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW) and 
the Skill Council for Green Jobs (SCGJ) offer vocational training programs specifically 
targeting women. These initiatives focus on upskilling women in areas such as solar panel 
installation, maintenance, and energy entrepreneurship. Partnerships between the 
government, NGOs, and the private sector are key to scaling these efforts and ensuring that 
women are equipped with the skills needed to participate meaningfully in India’s energy 
transition. 
71. 
Potential IGFF sub-projects in this pillar include round-the-clock solar projects, green 
hydrogen production. Gender dynamics in energy transition projects, such as round-the-clock 
(RTC) solar and energy storage solutions, are critical to ensuring equitable and inclusive 
development. These projects are essential for transitioning to a sustainable energy future, and 
the participation of women can significantly influence their success and impact. 
72. 
 Women’s participation varies across the value chain of rooftop solar companies31. The 
design and pre-construction phase, and the corporate segment – which offer mostly office-
based positions – have a relatively high share of female employees at 18% and 34%, 
respectively. In the area of construction and commissioning, women constitute 3%, and, in 
operations and maintenance, a mere 1%. Both areas involve frequent site visits or onsite work. 
Factors governing the low representation of women include a lack of access to opportunities 
for women due to safety and security concerns at project sites and misperceptions of women’s 
 
29 A just transition or just a transition: Making the case for women in energy, RES4Africa Foundation, 
2024 
30 Women working in the rooftop solar sector, IEA and CEEW, 2019 
31 International Energy Agency, 2019.

=== PAGE 153 ===
25 
 
 
physical capabilities in some roles, as well as insufficient human resource policies beyond 
legally mandated requirements.  
73. 
Large scale renewable energy projects provide opportunities for direct employment for 
women. Quotas for female recruitment, together with gender sensitive workplaces including 
part time work, separate male and female toilets, and PPE designed for women’s body shapes 
all contribute to a gender responsive workplace and successful retention of female staff. 
Women can be employed in various roles within RTC solar projects, including technical 
positions (such as engineers and technicians), administrative roles, and project management. 
Women’s involvement in community engagement activities can help address local concerns, 
promote project acceptance, and ensure that the benefits of solar projects reach all community 
members. Women entrepreneurs can establish businesses in the solar supply chain, including 
manufacturing, installation, and maintenance service. Sale of solar panels or energy efficient 
appliances is an area of opportunity for women’s entrepreneurship. 
74. 
Renew, one of India’s leading renewable energy companies is launching a first-of-its-
kind round-the-clock renewable project in India. For green hydrogen, a very new segment 
within the renewable energy space, there is not yet much information available on women’s 
participation. This information will be gained through information on knowledge sharing, more 
projects, lessons learnt. 
4.5.2. Women and energy access for cleaner living 
75. 
Providing greater access to alternative sources of fuel for cooking and have a direct 
impact on women’s health, productivity, access to education and participation in the workforce. 
Potential IGFF sub-projects in this objective include e-mobility (2-3-wheeler and related 
infrastructure) and compressed biogas.  
76. 
Clean energy access has a direct correlation with the improved health of women. For 
example, switching from firewood to clean stoves reduces indoor air pollution, which is 
responsible for nearly 600,000 premature deaths annually in India, most of them women and 
children.32 This shift also boosts productivity by freeing up time previously spent on unpaid 
chores (gathering of firewood), allowing women to participate in paid work. The clean cooking 
value chain presents significant opportunities for women’s economic empowerment. 
According to a World Bank study, around 13% of enterprises in the clean cooking sector are 
female-owned, and women remain underrepresented in leadership roles.33 However, they can 
contribute as entrepreneurs, technicians, and sales agents, creating pathways for women to 
shape and benefit from this growing global industry. Improved access to finance for women-
lead enterprises in the clean cooking value chain can lead to greater female participation. 
 
32 The health and economic impact of air pollution in the states of India: Global Burden of Disease Study 
2019 
33 Advancing Gender-Equal Benefits in Clean Cooking Operations, ESMAP, 2022

=== PAGE 154 ===
26 
 
 
Women’s involvement in agriculture, which provides feedstock for biogas production, such as 
crop residues, animal manure, and organic waste, is another key opportunity. Their 
participation in collecting and segregating organic waste from households, markets, and farms 
is critical to biogas production, offering a way for women to participate in and lead localized 
clean energy initiatives. 
77. 
Despite these opportunities, there are significant barriers. Gender norms often limit 
women's access to education, particularly in STEM fields, which are critical for advancing in 
the clean energy sector. A report by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) 
found that women make up only 32% of the global renewable energy workforce, and in 
technical roles, this percentage drops even lower.34 Cultural and social barriers, including 
safety concerns and limited mobility in rural areas, also hinder women’s participation in energy 
projects. However, various enablers can support women’s involvement in this sector. Targeted 
capacity-building programs, financial incentives, and mentorship initiatives can equip women 
with the skills and confidence to enter and excel in the clean energy industry. Programs like 
the UN's Clean Cooking Alliance and India's "Ujjwala Yojana," which provides subsidized LPG 
connections to women below the poverty line, are already making a difference.35 Scaling these 
initiatives while addressing structural barriers can accelerate women’s participation in India’s 
clean energy transition. 
78. 
The biogas industry presents a powerful opportunity for women to play an active role 
in renewable energy projects. Unlike traditional energy sectors that are often male-dominated, 
the biogas sector is more inclusive and offers multiple entry points for women’s participation 
across the value chain. Women can contribute significantly to feedstock collection, operation 
and maintenance, research and development, and project management. As noted above, a 
study by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) notes that women comprise 
about 32% of the renewable energy workforce, higher than in traditional energy sectors, but 
there is room for more targeted interventions. By enabling women to become entrepreneurs 
who establish small-scale biogas plants, they can serve local communities while producing 
clean energy and bio-fertilizers for agriculture. Successful examples can be found in India’s 
“Biogas Support Program,” which encourages women to take leadership roles in setting up 
and operating biogas plants.36 Women in the biogas industry are not only challenging 
traditional gender norms but are also driving sustainable development by contributing to 
energy access and food security, creating a more diverse and equitable renewable energy 
industry. 
 
34 Renewable Energy: A Gender Perspective. IRENA, 2019 
35 Global Subsidies Initiative-IISD and Integrated Research and Action for Development (IRADe). 
(2019). 
36 Biogas as sustainable approach for social uplift in South East Asian Region, 2023

=== PAGE 155 ===
27 
 
 
79. 
In transportation, empowering women through green mobility systems can be equally 
transformative. Safe, accessible, and gender-sensitive transport systems allow women and 
girls to better participate in the workforce and education. Mapping the distinct mobility patterns 
of men and women, as well as individuals with disabilities, can provide invaluable insights into 
how they engage with public transport and how new systems can be tailored to meet their 
needs. According to UN Women, a lack of safe and reliable transport is one of the biggest 
barriers to women's participation in the economy.37 Integrating women into transportation 
planning, both as users and as part of the workforce, can significantly boost female 
empowerment. The GCF can play a role in supporting green mass transit projects that not 
only reduce GHG emissions but also promote health co-benefits through reduced air 
pollution.38 Moreover, initiatives like the Small Industries Development Bank of India’s (SIDBI) 
"C to D to E" electric vehicle program exemplify good practice by encouraging women to 
become EV users, drivers, and even entrepreneurs in the electric vehicle sector. This focus 
on women as both consumers and leaders in the transport and mobility sector can catalyse a 
more inclusive transition to green transportation, with broader economic and social benefits. 
80. 
Consultative process is key to designing urban transport systems in a way that it 
addresses women’s’ travel needs. Inclusive design features such as ramps, rest benches and 
secure lighting to enhance security, and ticketing systems that provide low-cost multiple short 
trips will go a long way. The nascent electric vehicles industry is leading the field in terms of 
women empowerment-both as customers and decision makers. 25 % of EV buyers in India 
are women, which is double the industry average of 12% of women buyers of petrol and diesel 
cars. Women already account for 37% of its workforce, managing multiple roles and 
responsibilities across engineering, manufacturing, field, HR, IT, finance, and other functions. 
The reasons for higher inclusion could be that the EV segment is less mechanical and more 
electrical/electronic-oriented thereby lending well to the inclusion of more women across 
functions. Representation of women is seen in all levels of hierarchy. 
4.5.3. Women and resilient energy systems for rural and urban areas. 
81. 
IGFF goals of working at the food, agriculture, energy nexus inevitably mean attention 
must be paid to the agricultural sector. According to the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation 
(FAO), 60-80% of farmers in non-industrialised countries are female.39 Women farmers 
perform a wide set of critical activities throughout the crop cycle, from sowing to harvesting 
and post-harvesting. Only 13 percent of rural women who are engaged in agriculture own land 
and absence of land rights for women has been a critical barrier for them in accessing their 
rights and entitlements, such as credit, agriculture input subsidies, technology, information 
 
37 Closing Gender Gaps in Transport, World Bank, 2024 
38 Adaptation: Accelerating action towards a climate resilient future, GCF, 2019 
39 Women and sustainable food security, FAO https://www.fao.org/4/x0171e/x0171e02.htm

=== PAGE 156 ===
28
and extension40. Consequently, women’s adaptive capacities are significantly more limited as 
compared to men- with limited access to assets, resources, credit facilities, markets, and 
information and technology. Women’s increased vulnerability to climate change and reduced 
access to climate smart agricultural (CSA) practices can be attributed to limited land 
ownership, poor access to credit, reduced access to information and formal extension, and 
time pressures from multiple domestic and productive demands on their time41 Given the 
differences in the resilience capacities and response options of men and women farmers, with 
the latter more vulnerable to climate shocks, it is imperative to understand the gendered 
adoption of CSA practices and the associated constraints, especially related to information 
and extension, to help facilitate better adoption of improved practices and technologies.  
82.
Potential IGFF sub-projects in this pillar include Decentralised RE to power livelihood
applications, off grid solar water pumps, rooftop solar for MSMEs. These projects will
collectively lead to not only enhanced agricultural productivity using renewable energy sources
but will also build climate resilience of women in this sector and increase their employment
and entrepreneurship opportunities.
83.
While women constitute a third of the total workforce in the renewable energy industry,
they appear to have a higher representation in the solar PV sector, with a 40% share42. This
is also the case in decentralised renewable energy (DRE), where solar technologies are
prominently deployed.
84.
The solar targets (40 GW of rooftop solar installations sanctioned by 2026) are a major
opportunity for sustainable development and for women’s employment. It has the potential to
create a considerable number of jobs attractive to high skilled women, largely untapped pool
in India.
5. GENDER ACTION PLAN
85.
The Gender Action Plan (GAP) is ADB’s key gender mainstreaming tool and
mechanism for ensuring gender-inclusive design and implementation of projects. The Gender
Action Plan is aligned with the Facility level IMRF (Section E of the Funding Proposal) which
outlines the theory of change along the 2 components. The objective of the TA support
(component 2) is to support institutionalizing green lending and advancing gender responsive
40 Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations, Gulati, A., Sharma, P., Samantara, 
A.,& Terway, P, 2018, Agriculture extension system in India: Review of current status, trends and the 
way forward.  
41 Gender, agriculture policies and climate smart agriculture in India, iFRI, 2022. 
42 Solar PV: A gender perspective, IRENA 2022.

=== PAGE 157 ===
29 
 
 
financing and worksforce development. Consultations with women’s groups and relevant 
institutions will take place during the conduct of due diligence process.

=== PAGE 158 ===
30 
 
 
Impact Statement: IF India's Development Financial Institutions (DFIs) have access to concessional finance and enhanced technical capacities to design and implement 
financing products for emerging clean energy technologies, and if project developers (incl. MSMEs) and private/public FIs are equipped to access climate finance, THEN the 
India Green Finance Facility (IGFF) will catalyze large-scale investments in clean energy, mobilizing public and private capital that contributes to the reduction of 50 million 
metric tons of CO₂ eq. BECAUSE IF India’s Development Financial Institutions (DFIs) integrate gender-responsive financing practices into their lending 
operations—by applying gender criteria, collecting sex-disaggregated data, and designing financial products tailored to the needs of women entrepreneurs 
and workers in the clean energy sector, THEN the IGFF will catalyze financing towards projects that actively promote women’s participation and leadership in 
clean energy value chains, BECAUSE this will address existing gender disparities in access to finance and opportunities, enabling more women to engage 
meaningfully across the clean energy ecosystem.  
Outcome Statement: Project developers and public/private FIs have access to inclusive finance for emerging clean energy technologies Participating DFIs demonstrate 
increased institutional capacity to deploy financing to women, track sex-disaggregated outcomes, and design inclusive clean energy investments. 
Output 1: Policy and regulatory frameworks strengthened to support green lending practices and gender responsive clean energy financing 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Cost (US$) 
1. Conduct targeted gender awareness 
programs 
at 
DFIs 
to 
support 
the 
development and adoption of policies 
aligned with 2X Challenge criteria. 
1.1 Conduct 30 Training programs in at 
least 3 DFIs delivered within 12 months of 
launch of  the Facility. 
1.2 At least two seminars on gender and 
renewable energy conducted for all DFIs, 
with a minimum of 70% of participants (sex-
1.1: Year 1 
1.2: Year 2 
1.3: End of project. 
1.4: Year 2 
IGFF PMU and 
DFIs 
431,000

=== PAGE 159 ===
31
1.1 
Develop 
and 
customize 
gender 
awareness training materials tailored to 
the specific operational contexts of DFIs. 
1.2 
Organize 
interactive 
workshops 
for 
management and staff, including one-on-
one support if needed, focusing on the 
importance of gender equality, the 
business case for 2X compliance, and 
best practices for implementation. 
1.3 
Facilitate technical sessions to support 
DFIs in developing and implementing 
gender-responsive workplace policies 
and processes (e.g., parental leave, 
flexible working, and anti-harassment 
policies).  
1.4 
Support DFIs in establishing internal task 
forces to monitor and evaluate gender 
integration progress. 
1.5 
Support DFIs to prepare gender action 
plans at project and institutional levels. 
disaggregated) 
reporting 
increased 
knowledge 
of 
gender-responsive 
interventions 
to 
enhance 
women's 
participation, including from marginalized 
populations, across the energy sector value 
chain. 
1.3 At least 3 gender-responsive human 
resources policies in at least 3 DFIs adopted 
by the end of the project. 
1.4 100% of participating DFIs establish 
internal gender task force.  
1.5 At least 3 GA & GAP in at least 3 DFIs 
developed. 
1.5: Year 3

=== PAGE 160 ===
32 
 
 
2. Build the capacity of DFI loan officers to 
collect, 
analyze, 
and 
utilize 
sex-
disaggregated data for the IGFF Monitoring 
and Reporting. 
2.1 
Develop 
and 
distribute 
standardized 
templates 
and 
tools 
for 
collecting 
sex-
disaggregated data. 
2.2 Conduct capacity-building workshops for 
DFI loan officers, focusing on data collection 
methodologies, 
gender-sensitive 
client 
engagement, and using data for decision-
making. 
2.3 Establish guidelines for incorporating sex 
disaggregated data into loan documentation 
and reporting systems. 
2.1 Train at least 100 loan officers across all 
DFIs  
2.2 Achieve at least 90% compliance in 
collecting sex-disaggregated data for new 
loan applications within participating DFIs. 
2.3 
Generate 
and 
analyze 
sex-
disaggregated data reports from all DFIs to 
contribute to IGFF Monitoring and Reporting 
and at least one knowledge products/case 
study. 
2.1: Year 2 
2.2: End of project 
2.3: End of project. 
 
IGFF PMU and 
DFIs 
$278,000 
 
Output 2: DFIs will gain competence on institutionalising gender responsive green lending practices by adopting standardised tools and frameworks  
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Cost

=== PAGE 161 ===
33
3. Identify and align gender indicators to be
included in sub-project selection criteria
across all DFIs, ensuring alignment with
IGFF’s project selection criteria.
3.1 Conduct consultations with DFIs to review 
existing sub-project selection criteria and 
identify gaps in gender considerations. 
3.2 Facilitate and draft a set of proposed 
gender indicators with an intersectional 
lens, aligned with IGFF’s criteria, focusing 
on measurable impacts such as women’s 
economic participation, leadership roles, 
and access to resources. 
3.3 Provide technical support to integrate the 
agreed gender indicators into the sub-
project selection criteria of all three DFIs. 
3.4 Establish a reporting framework for DFIs to 
monitor 
and 
evaluate 
gender-related 
outcomes in sub-projects.
3.1 Conduct consultation to identify gender 
gaps in all participating DFIs 
3.2 100% of participating DFIs approve a 
common 
set 
of 
at 
least  
5 
gender 
indicators aligned with IGFF criteria for use 
by all DFIs in the sub-project selection 
3.3 
At 
least 
 75% 
of 
sub-
projects technologies 
include 
gender 
indicators in their selection criteria. 
3.4 At least 10% of the women-led 
businesses in DRE solutions and e-mobility 
receiving financing. 
3.1: Year 1 
3.2: Year 2 
3.3: Year 2 
3.4: End of project 
IGFF PMU and 
DFIs 
$273,000

=== PAGE 162 ===
34
Output 3: Support dialogues knowledge exchange and collaboration to advocate and promote gender inclusion in the green economy in India 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Cost 
4.
Conduct targeted research, capacity-
building workshops and facilitate dialogues
to promote gender responsiveness with an
intersectional lens
4.1 Consultation with women’s groups, gender 
experts, and relevant institutions / ministries 
with focus on gender equity during the due 
diligence process 
4.2 Develop case studies and knowledge 
products 
for 
gender 
responsive 
energy 
investments. 
4.1a Conduct consultation with women’s 
groups, gender experts, and relevant 
institutions/ministries with focus on gender 
equity. 
4.1b 
Organize 
four 
workshops 
with 
participation from at least 200 stakeholders 
(40% women) from public and private 
sectors, focusing on integrating gender into 
climate investment frameworks. 
4.2a Develop at least three country-specific 
case studies showcasing successful gender-
responsive energy investments. 
4.2b Publish a policy brief summarizing key 
recommendations and disseminate it to 
1,000 stakeholders through webinars and 
online platforms. 
4.1: Year 2 
4.2: Year 4 
IGFF PMU 
$308,000

=== PAGE 163 ===
35
5. Upskilling of female entrepreneurs in
green economy in India
5.1 Design a modular training program covering 
green 
business 
development, 
access 
to 
finance, and climate-resilient practices, with at 
least three modules developed  
5.1 Provide skill development programs for 
at least 2500 female entrepreneurs in the 
green economy in India, including training to 
help women access green loans, grants, and 
finance schemes, and prepare business 
plans tailored to green investments.  
5.1: Year 3 
IGFF PMU 
. 
Total Budget for GAP implementation – US$ 1,290,000 
_________________
