=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 21 for Word
producer: Adobe PDF Library 21.5.92
creationDate: D:20210913160802+09'00'
modDate: D:20210913204555+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
4 – 7 October 2021 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 15 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
14 September 2021 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package for FP175 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Enhancing community resilience and water security in
the Upper Athi River Catchment Area, Kenya";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page b 
3 
76 
78 
81 
93 
103 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Secretariat’s assessment 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment 
Gender documentation 
104

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Enhancing community resilience and water security in 
the Upper Athi River Catchment Area, Kenya  
Country(ies): 
Kenya 
Accredited Entity: 
National Environment Management Authority. 
Date of first submission: 
[2016/10/12]  
Date of current submission 
[2021/07/21] 
Version number 
[V.4]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3 |  
 
 
Page 2 of 73 
 
 
 
 
List of Acronyms 
 
ARCA  
Athi River Catchment Area 
ACA  
Athi Catchment Area 
NEMA  
National Environment Management Authority 
KMD  
Kenya Meteorological Department 
WRA  
Water Resources Authority 
WRUA  
Water Resource Users Authority 
AWS  
Automatic Weather Stations 
AWL 
 Automatic Water Level Station 
MAM  
March April May 
OND  
October November December 
ITCZ  
Intertropical Convergence Zone  
ENSO 
El Niño Southern Oscillation  
ASAL  
Arid and Semi-Arid Land   
MoWS  
Ministry of Water and Sanitation 
UoN  
University of Nairobi 
KFS  
Kenya Forest Service 
SOE  
State of the Environment  
CEAP 
County Environment Action Plan 
SCMP 
Sub Catchment Management Plans

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 7 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
NOTE TO ACCREDITED ENTITIES ON THE USE OF THE FUNDING PROPOSAL TEMPLATE 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference 
to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 
60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service 
standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and Programme funding proposals will 
be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to 
the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited 
Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[NEMA]-[Country/Region - Kenya]- [2020/02/14]”

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3 |  
  
 
 
 
Page 1 of 73 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. 
Project 
or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or private 
sector 
Public 
 
A.3. 
Request 
for 
Proposals (RFP) 
Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable  
 
A.4. Result area(s) 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets. For 
each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it. The 
total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation:  
 
 
☐ 
Low-emission transport:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ 
Forestry and land use:  
 
 
 
 
 
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☒ 
Most 
vulnerable 
people, 
communities 
and 
regions: 
  
☒ 
Health and well-being, and food and water 
security: 
☒ 
Infrastructure and built environment:  
 
 
☐ 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution:  
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30% 
35% 
35% 
Enter number% 
A.5. 
Expected 
mitigation impact  
Indicate t CO2eq over 
lifespan 
A.6. 
Expected 
adaptation impact  
1,156,620 
direct 
beneficiaries  
3,693,380 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
10.32% of population 
A.7. 
Total 
financing 
(GCF + co-finance)  
9,999,983.26 USD  
A.9. Project size 
Micro (Upto USD 10 
million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
_____ Choose an item. 
For 
multi-country 
proposals, please fill out 
annex 17. 
9,526,603.26 USD 
A.10. 
Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for the GCF 
funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts 
should be consistent with A.8.  
☒ Grant 
9,526,603.26  
☐ Loan 
 
Enter number 
☐ Guarantee Enter number 
☐ Equity  
 
Enter number   
☐ Results-based  
 
     payment 
 
Enter number 
A.11. 
Implémentation  
period 
4 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
30 years

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3 |  
  
 
 
 
Page 2 of 73 
 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement 
the 
project/ 
Programme, if available.  
3/20/2020 
A.14. ESS category  
Refer to the AE’s safeguard 
policy 
and 
 
GCF 
ESS 
Standards to assess your FP 
category. 
B 
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. 
Is 
this 
FP 
included in the entity 
work Programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. 
Is 
this 
FP 
included in the country 
Programme? 
Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/Programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. 
GEF, AF, CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
If not the Accredited Entity, please indicate the full legal name of the Executing Entity(ies) and provide its 
country of registration and ownership type. Note that there can be more than one Executing Entity. Also indicate 
if an Executing Entity is the National Designated Authority. Refer to the definition of Executing Entity in the 
Accreditation Master Agreement.  
The Executing Entities are as follows: 
 
1. National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) – also the 
Accredited Entity 
2. Water Resources Authority – WRA 
3. Government of Kenya represented by Kenya Meteorological Department 
- KMD of the Ministry of Environment and Forestry. 
 
The Executing Entities are all government agencies / institutions in the Republic 
of Kenya. 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3 |  
  
 
 
 
Page 3 of 73 
 
1. Kenya is highly vulnerable to erratic climatic patterns and limited water availability due to its reliance on agriculture, 
tourism, hydro-energy, among other activities, that are susceptible to rainfall and water availability. Kenya has 
experienced frequent floods and droughts resulting from climate change impacts, leading to national 
economic losses. The 2008-2011 droughts are estimated to have slowed down the GDP by an average of 2.8 % 
per annum, with total damage and losses estimated at USD 12.1 billion. Additionally, climate change has adversely 
affected water availability especially during frequent drought conditions. 
 
2. The effects of climate change and related disasters have the potential to adversely impact many Kenyans given 
that about 75% of the population depends directly on land and natural resources for their livelihoods. In recent 
years, there has been increased attention to climate change due to its impacts on the lives of Kenyans. This has 
been mainly due to an increase in the intensity and frequency of extreme climatic events such as severe droughts 
and flooding. These extreme events have had negative socio-economic impacts on almost all sectors of Kenyan 
society such as health, agriculture, livestock, environment, hydropower generation, and tourism. The seriousness 
of the problem has made it imperative for policy makers to focus on mainstreaming climate change in development 
policies and strategies1.  Another important factor in determining Kenya's vulnerability to climate change is its social 
and economic inequalities. Forty-two percent of its population of 54 million lives below the poverty line.  Access to 
basic facilities such as health care, education, clean water, and sanitation, is often a luxury for many people. Large 
segments of the population, including the burgeoning urban poor, are highly vulnerable to climatic, economic, and 
social shocks2 
 
3. Climate change affects the global hydrological cycle and it has impacts on the quantity and quality of the water.  
Water security is a key issue given that Kenya´s people and economy are highly vulnerable to erratic patterns and 
limited water availability. In the past two decades, from 1992–2012, Kenya was ranked first among African countries 
in terms of people affected by droughts (roughly 46 million people) and fifth in terms of those affected by floods 
(about 2.8 million people) during the same period.  Kenya has limited freshwater endowments and is classified as 
a chronically “water-scarce” country in absolute and relative terms. It faces the additional challenge of high inter-
annual and intra-annual rainfall variability. 
 
4. Along the Athi River Catchment Area, there are 12 counties. Historically, drought and flooding risks were the highest 
in Kiambu, Machakos, Nairobi, and Nyandarua (main beneficiaries), in that order. Droughts and floods are likely to 
rise in the future, especially in Kiambu and Machakos County. Consequently, the water infrastructure of the study 
area has suffered damage or has not had enough capacity to withstand these droughts and floods; for example, 
the water storage or potable water supply infrastructure have been insufficient.   Irregularity of water supply due to 
climate change has threatened the sustainability of those counties and has also caused waterborne diseases. 
Impacts on the quantity and quality of water are also expected due to changes in temperature, precipitation, floods 
and droughts in the area.  
 
5. With climate extremes expected to increase, climate-informed water management, climate-resilient water 
infrastructure will be critical in order to prepare for and respond to floods and droughts. The project therefore seeks 
to enhance community resilience and water security in the Upper Athi River Catchment Area through 
interventions across three Outputs:    
• 
Output 1: enhance hydrological and meteorological monitoring system to support decision making, planning 
and policy development in water and climate change sector.   
• 
Output 2: improve climate water resilience by building, enhancing and rehabilitating prioritized water 
infrastructure and implementing conservation activities in the catchment. 
• 
Output 3: Strengthen water and adaptation planning, institutional and regulatory framework to respond to 
changing climatic conditions. 
 
6. The project would directly benefit 1,156,620 people in the project site are (Kiambu, Machakos, Nairobi, and 
Nyandarua), with indirect benefit reaching 3,693,380 people in/from 4 counties within the catchment. 
 
7. The Project supports the implementation and operationalization of several key national policies strategies and plan, 
including the National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS), National Climate Change Action Plan 
(NCCAP), National Adaptation Plan (NAP), the Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) and the National Water 
Master Plan (NWMP) 2030. 
 
8. Capacity building of national level institutions will be an upscale of the ongoing Kenya's approved GCF NAP 
Readiness that has focused on training county government officials on climate change and climate finance. The 
proposal plans to support capacity building and training for relevant water governance structures and communities

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3 |  
  
 
 
 
Page 4 of 73 
 
within the project (Water Resource Users Associations -WRUAs, County Environment Committees - CECs, County 
Adaptation Committees, Community Based Organizations -CBOs. The project area refers to the four targets 
counties Nairobi, Nyandarua, Kiambu and Machakos. Materials developed by GCF NAP Readiness will be utilized 
during mentioned trainings and the already trained personnel will play key roles in the training. 
 
 
1 Kenya National Human Development Report (2013)    http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/climate-change-and-human-development 
2 https://tradingeconomics.com/kenya/gdp-growth-annual

=== PAGE 10 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 73 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Kenya´s vulnerability to climate change 
 
9. Kenya was ranked 7th, on the 2018 Global Log Term Climate Risk Index published by Germanwatch and it 
is expected to be severely impacted by the negative effects of climate change in the future3.  Much of the 
country`s vulnerability is linked to seasonal rains.  Between March and July 2018, Kenya experienced almost twice 
the normal rainfall of the wet season. Kenya's most important rivers in the central highlands overflowed affecting 
40 out of 47 counties, causing the death of 183 people, injury of 97 and the displacement of 321 630 people, as 
well as the loss of livelihoods and livestock. 
 
10. Kenya located in the Africa Region, 581,309 km2, 80% of which is arid and semi-arid, and its population is 
approximately 54 million. Kenya has a complex climate that varies significantly between its coastal, interior and 
highlands regions and from season to season, year to year, and decade to decade. This climatic variability is 
influenced by naturally occurring factors such as movement of the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) and the 
El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO). The climate impacts of El Niño (and its counterpart, La Niña) are not uniform 
across the African continent, making the impacts of El Niño or La Niña on rainfall in Africa vary according to location 
and season. Additionally, Northeastern Africa generally becomes anomalously dry during its primary and longer 
rainy season of June – September. Since 1960, Kenya’s mean annual temperature has increased by 1.0°C, at 
an average rate of 0.21°C per decade. The rate of increase has been most rapid in March-May (0.29°C per 
decade) and slowest in June-September (0.19°C per decade). This is evidently shown by Machakos 
Meteorological station as shown below where temperature data was analyzed for a period of 37 years 
between 1978 and 2015. The temperature trend for Machakos station shows an increase in temperature at 
the rate of 0.00008 °C per day which reflects to 0.0292°C   per year. This further shows that there has been 
an increase of 0.292 °C per decade.  Annex 32 details the basin level rainfall and temperature trend analysis. 
 
Figure 1: Time series chart for observed temperature

=== PAGE 11 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 73 
 
 
3 https://germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/20-2-01e%20Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202020_10.pdf 
 
Athi River Catchment Area (Project Location) baseline scenario 
11. Athi River Catchment Area (ARCA) located in South and South West Kenya, is one of the major water resources 
in Kenya.  Athi Catchment Area has varied topographical characteristics, from the highland in the Aberdare Ranges 
of around 2,600M above mean sea level (amyl) to the coastal area at the sea level. Even though the water 
catchment area is relatively small compared to other water catchments, water demand in this catchment is large 
and will be even larger (see Figure 1). According to the current monitoring situation of water resource, the quality 
of surface and ground water attains the target level by 84–100%. However, the quantity of water resource is highly 
insufficient. The ARCA has present water demands of 1,145 MCM/year which represents 76% of the available 
2010 water resources of 1,503 MCM/year.  
 
 
Figure 1. Water basins and water balance in Kenya 
12. ARCA is classified as a semi-arid land except in the upstream area of the Athi River which is classified as a humid 
land non-Arid and Semi-arid Land (non-ASAL).  The catchment has an annual average rainfall of 810mm. The 
annual rainfall differs spatially within the catchment area, ranging from around 500mm in the southern part near 
the border with Tanzania to 1,200mm in the western mountainous area. Evapotranspiration ranges from 1200-2500 
mm per year in the catchment. Daily temperatures in the catchment area range between 10°C in the Upper Zone 
to 30°C in the Coastal Zone. 
 
13. Wetlands and riparian zones: In Nairobi, Upper Athi, and Coastal Athi sub-regions, most wetlands and riparian land 
zones are rapidly being reclaimed and converted into residential estates or commercial/industrial centers. These 
wetlands and riparian zones need protection from degradation and restoration of their functional capacities.  
Croplands and rangelands: Croplands and rangelands constitute the largest land use areas in the catchment. 
Rangelands in the Middle Athi and Nolturesh Lumi area support pastoralism. Unfortunately, these rangelands are 
increasingly being converted to agro-pastoralism and urbanization with consequent loss of the protective vegetation 
cover. Their fragile soil once disturbed by cultivation becomes susceptible to soil erosion during rainy seasons. 
Agriculture and pastoralism: The Upper Athi consist of the areas of Kiambu and some parts of Nyandarua, where 
farming of coffee and tea is predominant. Horticultural farming is also practiced in these areas. Food crops like 
legumes, maize and fruits are grown in upper as well as middle Athi (Nairobi, Kajiado, Kiambu, Makueni, Machakos 
Counties and some parts of Kitui County). Other crops are cotton in Machakos County in the east of Nairobi. 
Cashew nuts, coconut and mangoes are grown in the coastal region of Kwale, Kilifi and Mombasa. Bananas are 
grown in Kiambu, Kwale and Taita Taveta Counties. Sisal is also grown in Makueni, Taita Taveta and Kilifi Counties. 
 
14. The ratio of 76% of water demand to water resources, which is called a water stress ratio, shows a very tight 
balance between water resources and demands compared with the ratio of 40% regarded to indicate severe water 
stress. It is projected that the water demands for 2030 are expected to increase to about 281% against the

=== PAGE 12 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 73 
 
2030 available water resources.   Water users in the catchment include urban and rural populations, major 
industries, livestock and wildlife which use both surface water and ground water. Groundwater forms a substantial 
part of the available water. Annex 27 provides a Peizometric surface trend analysis for acquifers. In addition to this, 
the targeted areas experience 7 dry months and 5 wet months in a year which means that for a number of 
months in a year, communities have to seek out water through travelling distances away from their homes. 
This work is mainly taken up by women and children in the communities, leaving them to spend a few 
hours each day fetching water.  
 
 
15. Currently, out of the 6 catchment areas, the Athi catchment has a negative water balance and is the least 
water secure region. This situation is further exacerbated by climate change impacts. In the context of 
climate change, majority of the ARCA is ranked as highly vulnerable with certain areas being highest and 
moderately vulnerable. In April 2016, the ARCA experienced massive floods escalating climate change impact. 
Flooding events in the catchment has an impact on the local economies of the towns within the area. In addition, 
poor drainage in major towns (e.g. Nairobi, Kiambu, and Mombasa) causes urban flooding events. In addition, the 
availability of water resources is unevenly distributed spatially and temporally in the catchment, with large 
areas suffering from water deficit. With the per capita water availability being less than half of the global 
standard the catchment experiences water supply problems which become worse during drought events. 
This is expected to get worse by 2030. The water deficits exacerbated by climate change suggest better planning 
and managing water resources.  
 
16. In a recent study on the impact of future climate on the upper Athi River water resources (Annex 29), 8 out 
9 simulations indicate increased flows in the upper Athi river basin in future. This study used CHIRPS 
(Climate Hazards Group Infra-Red Precipitation with Station) data n (Funk et al., 2015) for precipitation and 
Rossby Centre regional atmospheric model (RCA4) for future climate data analysis.  One scenario (rcp2.6 
for the period 2011-2040) indicates that the flows will be below the baseline period of 1980-2010. However, 
the water demand deficit is likely to increase in future due to increased demand with a good proportion 
emanating from increased evapotranspiration, for which the increase in streamflow is unlikely to satisfy. 
In particular, January-March and July-October are the months that the upper Athi will experience water shortage 
when comparing the supply and demands, with irrigation sector will being the worst affected. The study 
recommended development of new water storage facilities and rehabilitation of old ones to improve the storage 
capacities. It also recommended the improvement of the landscape by planting vegetation/trees in order to reduce 
bare land and retain as much rainfall in the soil. This will reduce incidence of flash floods as well as sediment 
transport that check the increase of operation and maintenance cost of water storage and treatment works.  
 
 
Future Climate Data was based three on representative concentration pathways—RCP 8.5, 4.5 and 2.6. The 
model used for the study is the Rossby Centre regional atmospheric model (RCA4 with a horizontal grid spacing 
of the simulation is 0.44 degrees (about 50 kilometers). The choice of the RCA model for this analysis was based 
mainly on the availability of the model outputs for the three different scenarios (RCP2.6, RCP4.5, and RCP8.5),  
as well as recent study (Endris et al., 2015) showing that the RCA model run driven by MPI-ESM-LR better 
reproduces the large-scale signals, such as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation and the Indian Ocean Dipole, in the 
historical period over the Eastern Africa region than RCA model runs driven by the other global climate models.  
The Rossby Centre regional atmospheric model (RCA4) output for the baseline period was evaluated against the 
CHIRPS datasets. Figure 2 shows the areal average precipitation at monthly interval and the accumulated 
precipitation for the two datasets. As shown in Figure 2 the two datasets have good agreement over the baseline 
period

=== PAGE 13 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 73 
 
 
4 http://www.wrma.or.ke/index.php/wrma-regional-offices/athi/catchment-status.html  
 
Figure 1 Comparison between Rossby Regional atmospheric Model (RCA4) and CHIRPS datasets 
 
 
17. The project is located in Southern Kenya and will cover the Athi River Catchment Area, an area of 68,900 
km2 with a population of approximately 9.79 million4. Along the Athi River Catchment Area, there are 12 
counties such as Nairobi, Makueni, Taita Taveta, Kwale, Mombasa, Kiambu, Machakos, Kajiado, Kilifi, Kitui and 
Nyandarua.    In order to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed project activities within 
the limited financial resources and according the historical and projected drought and flood risk 
assessment and water scarcity, this project will be focused on these four counties: Kenya, which are 
Nairobi, Kiambu, Machakos and Nyandarua.   In addition, these counties have been selected for enhancement 
of Athi River Catchment Area through consideration, the consultative meetings with relevant government entities 
for this project, NEMA, WRA, MoWS – Ministry of water and Sanitation, KMD, UoN – University of Nairobi and the 
respective county governments.  
 
 
Climate change vulnerability baseline, adaptive capacity and impacts 
 
18. The Upper ACA is classified as one of the most vulnerable area to the impact of climate change such as 
increasing temperatures and unpredictability of rainfall characterize. Climate change impacts and 
concerns in Upper Athi include water scarcity (Nairobi, Machakos and Kiambu), droughts (Machakos) urban 
flooding (Nairobi and Kiambu) and lack of awareness on climate change and its effects. Additionally, the 
economy in Upper Athi just like in Kenya is dependent on climate sensitive sectors. Droughts and floods therefore 
have devastating socio-economic and environmental consequences in Upper Athi.  Additionally, small holder 
farmer communities lack the necessary resources to invest in water harvesting structures such as pans and tanks. 
Investments into these structures through the project will enable the communities to have alternative water sources 
for water supply for domestic, agricultural use during the drought periods. 
 
19. Although the rainfall is observed to decrease annually and seasonally within ARCA, the rainfall fluctuates 
around a mean value thereby having enhanced rainfall in some seasons while others remaining dry or with 
depressed rainfall. These scenarios lead some areas especially Kiambu and Nairobi to experience urban 
flooding while areas like Machakos experience drought due to depressed rainfall. Both the intensity and 
the frequency of rainfall contribute to the above scenarios.  East Africa’s seasonal rainfall is predicted to be 
strongly influenced by ENSO, which contributes to uncertainty in climate projections, particularly in future inter-
annual variability.

=== PAGE 14 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 73 
 
 
5 International Institute for Sustainable Development. 2012. Climate Risks, Vulnerability and Governance in Kenya: A state of the 
art review. Pre-publication version. Winnipeg: IISD. page 24. 
20. The population in Athi River Catchment is vulnerable to climate risks due to the high dependency on 
natural resources for food, fuel and shelter. According to IISD (2012), climate risk and vulnerability in Kenya 
indicates that water availability is especially critical as they live in one of the most water scarce countries in Africa5. 
Access to this basic resource is likely to become more difficult due to population growth, economic expansion, 
unsustainable management of water and forest resources, and changes in rainfall patterns. At the same time water 
is the core input for most economic activities.  The future water demand projections as of 2040 indicate growing 
water demand. This is shown in the provided sub basin water balance.  Areas far away from perennial rivers use 
pans as a source of water, this water sources will be affected negatively in future due to increased 
evapotranspiration and therefore less likely to withstand prolonged drought. The net impact in the project area will 
be reduced water availability with increased irrigation demands. Climate change is thus anticipated to have a 
negative impact on the Upper Athi Basin from a water resources perspective. Although the frequencies of extreme 
drought (SPI less than -2.0) occurrences in the baseline climate are much lower than the baseline values for severe 
drought events, projected changes in extreme droughts have spatially more consistent and widespread signals. 
The rainfall-runoff/water resources analysis shows that the balance between future projected rainfall and ET to be 
positive leading to increased runoff. Hydrological modelling (Annex 29) used catchment areal average of future 
projected precipitation and may differ with past point/station rainfall trend analysis. The increase of stream gauging 
station measurements may not directly have related to increase of rainfall because other factors may come into 
play like ground water contribution to stream flow. 
A robust analysis based on ensemble mean of the best performing RCMs shows that the frequency and intensity 
of droughts are projected to increase in future climates under the RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 emission scenarios. Results 
are detailed Annex 26 -Analysis of projected rainfall changes. And Annex 34 -Basin Level-Analysis of projected 
rainfall changes 
  
The country’s inland areas are largely arid, with two-thirds of the country receiving less than 500 mm of rainfall per 
year, limiting the potential for agriculture.  Increased temperatures and rainfall variability are likely to exacerbate the 
conditions already experienced and may have a significant impact on water availability and droughts in the future. The 
prolonged drought of 2008 - 2011 serves to highlight some of the devastating and pervasive socio-economic 
consequences resulting from such events: crop production losses arising from reduced yields of food crops and cash 
crops amounted to KSh69 billion and KSh52 billion, respectively; the livestock sector experienced the worst impacts, 
losing approximately KSh699 billion, with KSh56 billion in damages due to costs from veterinary care, water, feeds and 
production decline and KSh643 billion in losses due to animal deaths. The risk assessment to drought was conducted 
by estimating integrated risk index, comprising hazard, exposure and vulnerability. Anthropogenic and environmental 
indicators were used in this assessment. As a result, the risk of drought is expected to increase in the future, and 
Kiambu and Machakos seem to suffer from the more pronounced risk of drought (Figure 2).

=== PAGE 15 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 73 
 
 
6 More details on the methodology and model output results can be found in the Feasibility Study. 
 
Figure 2. Historical drought risk index (left: 1976 – 2005) and estimated drought risk index (right: 2011-2040) 
21. Floods have caused equally devastating consequences in recent years, including loss of lives and livelihoods, 
personal property damage and damage to infrastructure, with ramifications for the economy. Major events were 
recorded in 1997-98. The 1997/98 El Niño floods are estimated to have caused damage equivalent to at least 11 
per cent of GDP, including KSh62 billion (USD 777 million) in damage to transport infrastructure and KSh3.6 billion 
(USD 45 million) to water supply infrastructure. While floods are generally associated with higher damages on 
public infrastructure assets, the burden of droughts falls more heavily on people, communities and the 
private sector. Flood risk assessment was also conducted, which followed a similar approach of the drought risk 
assessment.  The flood risk seems to increase in the future and a large increase in flood risk is expected in 
the Kiambu and Machakos areas (Figure3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Historical flood risk index (left: 1976 – 2005) and estimated flood risk index (right: 2011-2040) 
 
22. Climate change projections over the Athi River Catchment, modeling, downscaling and bias correction were done 
during the project preparation using 26 Global Circulation Models from CMIP5. Results for annual rainfall across 
the 4 counties show an overall increasing trend, with the highest rainfall in Nyandarua and Kiambu6. The 
Figures below show increased flood and drought risk in the Upper Athi Catchment Area across different time 
periods. Despite the projections on the Global Circulation Models, the local data results for annual and seasonal 
rainfall across the 4 counties show an overall decreasing trend, with the highest decrease in Machakos and JKIA 
Meteorological stations. The study was carried out from 3 Meteorological station within ARCA (Machakos, JKIA 
and Dagoretti stations) for a period between 1957 to 2015. The annual and the seasonal (JF, MAM, JJAS and 
OND) rainfall trends showed a decrease pattern ranging between 0.6 to 1.5 mm annually. The rainfall and 
temperature historical trend analysis was carried out at the basin level. 3 stations (Machakos, JKIA and Dagoretti 
stations) within the Athi basin were analyzed and their results presented with the analysis at the country level on 
Annex 28- Climatology of Kenya. Future projected rainfall changes for different season (MAM, OND) over the Athi 
River Basin based on ensemble averages on the top models is characterized by high temporal and spatial variations 
as described in Annex 34 - The basin level analysis of projected rainfall.

=== PAGE 16 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 73 
 
 
(a) Historical period (1975-2005) 
(b) Future1 period (2011-2040) 
 
(c) Future2 period (2041-2070) 
(d) Future3 period (2071-2099) 
Figure 4.  Flood risk index of four counties under the RCP4.5 scenario 
 
 
 
23.   The trend analysis of rainfall in Machakos Meteorological station indicates a decrease of annual and seasonal 
rainfall in the area as depicted in the figure below. The annual rainfall as plotted from 1957 to 2015 indicates that 
the rainfall decreases by 1.5 mm annually. The same trend is observed in all the other seasons as rainfall seems 
to decrease seasonally. In January – February season the rainfall decreases by 0.1 mm annually. In March, April 
and May rainfall season, the rainfall was decreasing at the rate of 0.66 mm annually. In June, July, August and 
September, the trend is the same as rainfall was decreasing at the rate of 0.008 mm annually. The October, 
November and December season the rainfall was decreasing at the rate of 0.64 mm annually. If Machakos Station 
was taken as a representation of the ARCA, then it can be deduced that the rainfall within the Catchment decreases 
by a small margin annually

=== PAGE 17 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 73 
 
 
 
Figure 5   Rainfall Time series for Machakos Meteorological Station 
 
24. The degree of dryness or wetness over Kenya was assessed using the “severe” and “extreme” categories and 
changes in projected SPI and frequency of dryness and wetness were examined for  mid- and far-future climates 
under the RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios.  Figure 5 provides the SPI over Kenya for different present and future 
periods and scenarios. Nationally averaged SPIs provide informative summary of precipitation differences between 
epochs and scenarios. SPI differences between the two scenarios in the present climate analysis are due to 
differences in the number of models used (three for RCP 4.5 and 4 for RCP 8.5). In addition to the response of 
climate to scenario forcing, temporal SPI variations for any epochs/periods depict the interannual variability of 
rainfall across Kenya. Overall, longer and/or more frequent drier events are projected in the far-future climate under 
the RCP 8.5 scenario. 
 
 
 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
Mid-
future ( 
2041-
2070)

=== PAGE 18 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 73 
 
Far-
future ( 
2071-
2100) 
 
Present 
Climate 
(1976-
2005) 
 
Present 
Climate 
(1961-
2000) 
 
 
Figure 6. Drought risk index under the RCP4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenario 
 
 
The analysis of SPI indices is conducted at basin-level. As a standardized unbiased index, the SPI is designed to show 
departures from a baseline. To show projected changes in frequency and intensity of droughts, the number of cases 
exceeding two levels of drought severity thresholds in three 30-year projection periods (near, mid and far future 
climates) were compared with identically identified counterparts in present day climate (1976-2005) for RCP4.5 and 
RCP8.5 scenarios.  
The analysis has demonstrated that; 
• 
the frequency of severe droughts is projected to increase in mid- to far-future periods under RCP4.5 and 
RCP8.5 scenarios, especially over the coastal areas; 
• 
 the frequency of extreme droughts is projected to increase in future periods under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 
scenarios in the Upper Athi River Basin; and 
• 
Projected changes in extreme droughts have spatially more consistent, widespread and intense signals over 
the Upper Athi River Basin compared to projected changes in severe droughts.  
Results are detailed Annex 26 -Analysis of projected rainfall changes and Annex 34 -Basin Level-Analysis of 
projected rainfall changes 
 
25. From the above scenarios, the frequency of the floods and drought occurrence shows an increasing trend 
and becoming more severe in the upper Athi catchment. The magnitude of flood risk in the historical period 
was substantial in order of Machakos, Kiambu, Nairobi, and Nyandarua, and similar trends were projected in the 
coming decades. Drought risk, on the other hand, was the highest in Machakos, while Nyandarua being the least 
prone area to both flood and drought events. Although the levels of flood and drought risks vary, all four counties

=== PAGE 19 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 73 
 
are projected to be increasingly vulnerable to the negative impacts of climate change, and therefore it is necessary 
to propose appropriate interventions to make the communities in the target areas more climate change resilient. 
 
26. Kenyan rainfall is highly variable; it has a strong inter-annual and spatial variability, which is associated with 
extreme events (droughts and floods. Inter-annual variability of rainfall in Kenya is associated with perturbation of 
global Sea Surface Temperature (SST). In particular, El Niño/La Niña (ENSO) and IOD phenomenon play a 
critical role in this variability. El Niño and positive IOD are associated with heavy rainfall and La Niña and 
negative IOD are associated with depressed rainfall over Kenya. Inter annual rainfall variations in Kenya is highly 
linked to the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), with more rain and flooding during El Niño and droughts in La 
Niña years, both having severe impacts on human habitation and food security. Furthermore, to show projected 
changes in frequency and intensity of droughts relative to the present-day climate, the number of cases 
exceeding two levels of drought severity thresholds in three 30-year projection periods (near, mid and far future 
climates) were compared with identically identified counterparts in present day climate (1976-2005) for RCP4.5 
and RCP8.5 scenarios.  Results are detailed Annex 26 -Analysis of projected rainfall changes and Annex 34 -
Basin Level-Analysis of projected rainfall changes 
 
27. Along with the changes and projections of temperature and precipitation patterns in the study area, and its impacts 
that are shown as floods, droughts and reduced water availability; consequently, other challenges are expected.  
One of the most important impacts of climate change on water systems is its influence on river flow, or 
discharge.  In addition, climate change has affected groundwater levels through its influence on the amount 
of water available to aquifer recharge. Changes in annual rainfall as well as changes in the patterns of 
extreme precipitation events will affect availability of water for recharge. Groundwater resources within the 
target areas have been significantly affected with some drying up especially in the drier part, a good illustration 
being Machakos county. In Kenya climate change has caused higher temperatures thereby increasing 
evaporation rates, and also affecting recharge and groundwater discharge rates. Due to decreased 
availability of surface water, there is increased reliance on groundwater to meet demand. The temperature trends 
of Machakos Meteorological station (project area) shows an increasing temperature since 1960. 
28. The case study of Nairobi aquifer monitoring stations area demonstrate the contribution of rain events to 
groundwater recharge. The observation is a representative of what happens in other aquifers within the country 
and how rain periods manipulate aquifer replenishment. Depth to groundwater level from WRA monthly monitoring 
boreholes within Nairobi Aquifer Suite from 2013 to 2020 are displaying long-term declining trends and minimal 
influence of short-term pumping schedule. Recharge based recovery are evident as observed during periods of 
heavy rains around April – June every year and as experienced in late 2019 and January 2020 as shown in the 
figure below generated from monthly monitoring data. Annex 27 on Peizometric surface trend analysis further 
details the observations

=== PAGE 20 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 73 
 
 
Figure 7: Observed groundwater levels (Nairobi sub-region) 
 
29. Climate change is also expected to exacerbate the water quality in the study area. Extreme weather events 
including typhoons, storms, and temperature jumps mainly result in water events, such as floods and 
droughts which may further affect the water quantity and quality. Some studies have reported the impacts of 
droughts on the water quality, which mainly include increased pollutant concentrations, enhanced nitrogen 
mineralization, and delayed recovery from acidification. During the drought period, lower flows can weaken the 
dilution effects of some pollutants. Downstream populations depend on water from the river. However, increasing 
pollution can lead to health and sanitation related problems including waterborne diseases which make the 
population more vulnerable. There is a need to monitor the quality of the water in the river to ensure that 
communities without piped water are able to access safe and potable water for domestic use especially during 
drought conditions.  In the Athi River Catchment area, the impacts of climate change on water quality are likely to 
be significant in several aspects: a) Water quality could suffer in areas experiencing increases in rainfall. Heavy

=== PAGE 21 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 73 
 
downpours can increase the amount of runoff into the river, washing sediment, nutrients, pollutants, trash, animal 
waste, and other materials into water supplies, making them unsafe, unusable and in need of treatment) b) Climate 
change is making heavy intense downpours, droughts and rising water temperatures more common. This can alter 
the quality of water. Bacteria and viruses thrive in these new conditions and when they come into contact with 
humans, can cause illness. Lack of water can also impact human health, especially in drought conditions. c) As 
water sources decline, the concentration of contaminants increases, making them more likely to affect human 
health. The monitoring of the water quality will therefore be important to institute measures to protect the water 
resources in the catchment. 
 
30. Annex 28 - Climatology in Kenya, further details the Kenyan Climate context. The climatic changes are not uniform 
from one region to another. Future changes that are expected to occur are different from one climatological zone 
to another. Future rainfall variability is also expected to increase, therefore climate extremes of drought and floods 
are expected to increase its frequency and intensity toward the end of 21st Century. And these will result in 
economic losses to communities because of over dependency on rained agriculture. Temperature is also 
anticipated to increase, which cause might cause frequent heat wave especially in the low lying areas and also 
increase evapotranspiration and thus affecting agriculture. Crop production and livestock keeping will be greatly 
negatively impacted by decrease in the rangeland for livestock keeping these will lead to lose of livelihood for many 
households and will lead to over reliance on government relief food and increase conflict over resources. It was 
established high heat stress will increase heat related health risks more especially to the vulnerable. Due to 
projected increase in temperature and the rapid expansion of urban areas, urban heat island will affect the urban 
dweller, where night time temperature will generally increase. 
 
31. From the climate models analysis, it has been established that temperature is increasing, the frequency of cold day 
and nights are reducing, while the frequency of hot day and warm nights are increasing. Depending on emission 
scenarios, the increase in temperature is likely to be between 0.3 and 5.4 0C by the end of the 21st century over 
Kenya. This is likely to change the hydrological cycle hence affecting precipitation intensity and extreme events 
and as a result affecting different sectors of the economy. Further, climate models indicate a reduction in 
precipitation during the long rains (MAM) and an increase in the short rains (OND). The models also show a 
reduction of annual precipitation. This exacerbates the drought condition within the area 
32. Another challenge related to its adaptive capacity to the impacts of climate change is the state of the water 
infrastructure, particularly water storage and water supply in the study area. As a consequence of droughts, 
less water availability is expected in the 4 counties beneficiaries of the project. Proposed interventions in Nyandarua 
were primarily, water pans and springs.  There are 12 water pans that require rehabilitation.  In addition, two springs 
and boreholes will require rehabilitation. These structures are expected to serve about 65820 individuals with clean 
water supply.   Proposed interventions in Kiambu were protection of springs, sinking of boreholes, rehabilitating 
existing ones and catchment protection to reduce erosion risks.  In Kiambu County there are four springs that are 
proposed for protections, three water pans that are proposed for rehabilitation and protection and four boreholes 
are proposed for rehabilitation. These structures are expected to serve about 54000 individuals with clean water 
supply.  Proposed interventions in Machakos County were primarily water pans.  There are 9 water pans that were 
selected for rehabilitation in Machakos County.  In addition, a spring and two boreholes were proposed for 
rehabilitation and establishment, respectively. These structures are expected to serve about 967,800 individuals  
with clean water supply. 
 
33. Other determining factors to reduce vulnerability (improve adaptive capacity) in the project area refer to 
the integral management of the catchment and to mainstream climate change into political instruments 
and management of water resources in Athi River Catchment Area.  Deforestation and forest degradation are 
rampant in the all the forested areas that feed the catchment. The National Water Master plan conducted a satellite 
image analysis with the forest area in ARCA in 2010 being 120,000 ha which corresponded to 2.0% of the forest 
cover in ARCA. The deforested areas during the last two decades were about 133,000 ha, which meant there was 
a decrease of 52.5% of the forest areas in 20 years since 1990. The small water sources (e.g., 20 springs and 17 
wetlands), vulnerable to external factors, have deteriorated as reported in the interviews with stakeholders in the 
WRA and KFS in the ARCA. With a consideration of the condition of semi-aridity around the ARCA, the deterioration 
of these small water sources can negatively affect the water availability.  The main environmental conservation 
activities proposed by the project are mainly reforestation under future climate intervention trees would play various

=== PAGE 22 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 73 
 
critical roles.  This include increased forest cover, providing alternative source of fuelwood, contribution to 
biodiversity diversification and carbon. 
 
34. The links between adaptation actions proposed by the project and the key climate change impacts & challenges 
outlined above are summarized in the table below. 
 
 
Table 1. Key climate change impacts, associated challenges and immediate response measures needed 
 
Key climate change (CC) impacts 
identified by the project 
Major challenges associated with key 
CC 
impacts 
(Vulnerability/adaptive 
capacity)  
Immediate 
response 
measures 
needed  
The Upper ACA is classified as one of 
the most vulnerable area to the impact 
of climate change such as increasing 
temperatures and unpredictability of 
rainfall characterize.   
 
Increased 
temperatures 
and 
variability in rainfall are likely to 
exacerbate prevailing conditions.   
 
Inadequate data collection, information, 
generation 
and 
analysis 
on 
water 
resources, water scarcity and variability, 
water pollution, enforcement of water 
laws, catchment degradation, and the 
impact of climate change (adaptive 
capacity) 
 
Inadequate 
maintenance 
of 
the 
hydrological and meteorological stations.  
 
Enhance 
hydrological 
and 
meteorological monitoring system to 
support decision making, planning and 
policy development in water and climate 
change sector 
• 
Strengthening monitoring networks 
to enhance data collection and to 
improve 
climate 
and 
water 
information management system 
• 
Improving 
the 
use 
of 
water 
resources management tools for 
effective water resources planning  
• 
Strengthening 
stakeholder 
collaboration 
to 
enhance 
water 
storage and to address the impacts 
of climate change 
• 
Building staff capacity and improving 
the work environment 
Water Scarcity  
Difficulty in accessing water resources 
due to the lack of water supply facilities 
and maintenance resource 
 
Significant impact on the availability of 
water.  
 
Crop and livestock production losses 
from reduced yields of food and cash 
crops 
 
 
• 
Improve climate water resilience by 
building, 
enhancing 
and 
rehabilitating 
prioritized 
water 
infrastructure 
and 
implementing 
conservation 
activities 
in 
the 
catchment. 
• 
Strengthen water and adaptation 
planning, institutional and regulatory 
framework to respond to changing 
climatic conditions. 
 
 
Droughts 
Flooding  
As a result, the risk of drought is 
expected to increase in the future, and 
Kiambu and Machakos seem to suffer 
from the more pronounced risk of 
drought 
Climate change is also expected to 
exacerbate the water quality in the 
study area 
 
35. The project will support the implementation of the Kenya National Adaptation Plan (2015-2030) whose vision is 
enhanced climate resilience towards attainment of Vision 2030. Enhanced climate resilience includes strong 
economic growth, resilient ecosystems, sustainable livelihoods, reduced climate-induced losses and damages. On 
the other hand, the revised Environmental management and Coordination Act (EMCA) 2015, in the spirit of 
devolution has devolved environmental planning and governance to the Counties. Counties should develop and to 
establish County Environment Committees and prepare County Environment Action Plans (CEAPs) and participate 
in the preparation of State of Environment reports (SoEs). Under the County Government Act, Counties are also 
required to prepare County Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs) to guide sustainable development. This project 
will support the Counties to integrate climate change adaptation and mitigation in their planning

=== PAGE 23 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 73 
 
processes. It will also build the capacity of local level governance structures to address the impacts of 
climate change. 
 
 
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) 
36. The project targets to enhance community resilience and water security in the Upper Athi River Catchment 
Area (ARCA) in Kenya, particularly in the counties of Machakos, Kiambu, Nairobi, and Nyandarua to address the 
core problem that climate-induced droughts, floods, water scarcity threatening livelihoods and water infrastructure.  
The target catchment is key to Kenya`s water management and host some of the most vulnerable groups of society. 
Therefore, this project will address the following challenges and barriers to improve capacity to adapt in ARCA: 
 
37. Weak technical basis of monitoring and information system on hydrology and meteorology constrains the 
adaptive capacity against flood and drought within the ARCA. Insufficient observatory facilities (rainfall and 
water level) can limit the quantity of monitoring data. In terms of a quality of the collected data by present monitoring 
systems, the hydrological data are not subject to systemic quality management due to the lack of standards and 
protocols and budget. Management of meteorological data is also barrier. Transmission of the measured data is 
compromised by the failure of equipment maintenance and transmission network.  Importantly, with adaptation or 
change comes uncertainty. Decision makers and technical staff lack sufficient information on climate change 
impacts to make informed decisions on changes in water management.  
38. Limited technical and institutional capacity to cope with climate change in water sector. In regard to the 
technical capacity in Kenya, the climate and water-related monitoring system and infrastructure is poor, many 
observation systems are not functioning, and data collection, analyzing and processing systems are unreliable. 
Furthermore, information and data sharing/dissemination and communication systems among weather stations, 
meteorological agency (center) and local communities are not properly linked. Investment in this area will lead to 
improved adaptation planning, thus building adaptive capacity of the targeted communities in the four Counties. 
Political and management instruments for water management in the beneficiary counties do not consider climate 
change as an important aspect for their planning. 
39. Climate change is expected to exacerbate water quality problems in the area.  The water resources and 
environment have been degraded by human activities such as industrial development, farming, informal 
settlements, deforestation, solid waste disposal and wetland and riparian encroachment. Pollution of Athi River is 
on the rise and has negatively impacted the downstream communities for whom the river is a lifeline.  The 
Nyandarua watershed is highly crucial because it is a main water source of Kenya. In particular, the water flows of 
Athi and Tana Rivers are affected by this area. Unfortunately, the Aberdare forest, providing water resource with 
high quality, has been destroyed by illegal harvest and deforestation activities. Consequently, the quality and 
quantity of water from this forest has also deteriorated. Awareness of negative impacts due to these activities needs 
to be increased to villagers to prevent these damages in the future. In addition, monitoring about water quality and 
climate change impacts are necessary.  
40. Floods, droughts, and the reduced availability of water in the area have impacted the water infrastructure 
in the area, in particular the provision of drinking water and domestic use.  Poor drainage infrastructure has 
caused frequent floods in Nairobi. In particular, the upstream region of Athi River experiences these damages, 
compared to the downstream region. Irregularity of water supply due to climate change has threatened 
sustainability of this city, also causing waterborne diseases. With consideration to the dense population in this city 
(> 3 million), implementation of appropriate measures is urgently required. 7) The major water source of the upper 
Athi River passes through Kiambu. The geographical location of this region largely affects the quantity and quality 
of water resources in the upper Athi River. Failure to improve the water quality and quantity of this upper region 
can deteriorate the quality and quantity of the lower Athi River. Although this town is surrounded by hilly farmlands, 
rapid urbanization within limited land space is expected to disturb the water system. Furthermore, the risk 
management on drought and flood also shows the higher vulnerability of Kiambu. 
 
41. The Theory of change proposed use a results chain of inputs, activities, outputs, outcomes. The main 
outputs are: 
• 
Output 1: enhance hydrological and meteorological monitoring system to support decision making, planning 
and policy development in water and climate change sector.   
• 
Output 2: improve climate water resilience by building, enhancing and rehabilitating prioritized water 
infrastructure and implementing conservation activities in the catchment.

=== PAGE 24 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 73 
 
• 
Output 3: Strengthen water and adaptation planning, institutional and regulatory framework to respond to 
changing climatic conditions. 
 
42. The Fund level impacts of the project are an increased resilience of: i) infrastructure and the built environment to 
climate change threats; ii) most vulnerable people and communities; and iii) health and well-being, and food and 
water security.  The paradigm shift is to move towards enhance community resilience and water security in the 
Upper Athi River Catchment Area (ARCA) in Kenya. 
 
43. The first pathway to change (output 1) is development of monitoring networks and databases for change analysis 
as an adaptation to climate change impacts on freshwater resources in the upper Athi catchment. Hydro-
meteorological Monitoring will avail methods for change detection, attribution and prediction of changes and 
vulnerability of groundwater, floods, low flows and droughts and also prediction of groundwater quality degradation 
and restoration needs. Further a network for analyzing hydrological data through the exchange of data, knowledge 
and techniques will be established that will assist on the understanding of hydrological variability in space and time 
in different counties within the upper Athi catchment which have different hydro-climatic and hydro-geological 
environments. Increased data, monitoring, knowledge, understanding, and predictive modelling of hydrological 
variables will be used to improve the management and design of water resource, agro-hydrological and eco-
hydrological systems against the influence of global climate variability and change. Improved management will lead 
to improved adaptation planning, including policy-related interventions for adaptation whose outcome is resilient 
water systems in the catchment. This resilience will lead to improved access, thereby improving the wellbeing, food 
and water security of the area.  
 
44. The second change pathway (output 2) premises that since availability of water is impacted by distorted patterns 
of rainfall, a systematic means of addressing water availability, is to avail infrastructure that collects natural sources 
of water. Harvesting rainwater directly responds to water scarcity. The infrastructure proposed will avail water to 
households that are currently struggling daily with their water demands. The increased availability of water will bring 
the ability to farm, improved health and wellbeing, and increase household social and economic value.  
 
45. The third change pathway (output 3) is strengthening capacity governance on water resources. The government 
of Kenya has 3 main local level policy tools for water governance namely, sub catchment management Plan, County 
Environmental Action Plan and the water quality regulations. Sub catchment management plans define the 
stakeholders, their roles and responsibilities, and also define actual activities to be undertaken to manage the 
resource. The County Environmental Action plan defines a whole ecosystem approach to managing the 
environment. Water quality regulations assist in managing pollution levels. Development and implementation of 
these management tools will lead to improved management of water resources in the target area, thereby leading 
to increased access to water for better wellbeing, health and food security. 
 
 
46. Assumptions: 
• 
The county government and the local community will support the project in order to address or reduce climate 
change impacts.  
• 
The Global System for Mobile communication will be operating at optimum levels 
• 
Staffs and personnel of NEMA, WRA, KMD, County governments and communities will use the information for 
decision making and better planning in climate change and water sector 
• 
County Governments will implement the recommendation of the planning documents – CEAPs, SCMPs and 
will mainstream climate change impacts on these public policy and management instruments.  
• 
The regulated stakeholders will be participating in the meetings and have enhanced compliance to the 
regulations and area aware of the climate change impacts in the area.  
 
47. Below is the theory of change for the project:

=== PAGE 25 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 73 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: The Theory of Change of the project. 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) 
Project objective, outcomes and impacts 
 
48. The target of this proposed project is four counties: Machakos, Kiambu, Nairobi, and Nyandarua in the Upper 
Athi River Catchment Area.  These counties were selected, given the counties´ high exposure to climate induced 
floods, droughts and water scarcity.

=== PAGE 26 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 73 
 
49. The project objective is to strengthen the resilience to climate change of communities and increase water security 
in the Upper Athi River Catchment in Kenya (Nairobi, Kiambu, Machakos and Nyandarua).   This is expected to be 
achieved through three outputs: 
 
• 
Output 1: enhance hydrological and meteorological monitoring system to support decision making, planning 
and policy development in water and climate change sector.   
• 
Output 2: improve climate water resilience by building, enhancing and rehabilitating prioritized water 
infrastructure and implementing conservation activities in the catchment. 
• 
Output 3: Strengthen water and adaptation planning, institutional and regulatory framework to respond to 
changing climatic conditions. 
 
50. Lessons learned from past experiences targeted at strengthening water resource management and enhancing 
water availability indicate that support has been scattered and somewhat duplicated. Such actions in the past could 
not cover all of the Athi River Catchment to sustain service, so the required recognition from government and 
beneficiaries need to be provided systematically. While past projects and programs in Kenya and other developing 
countries have been infrastructure focused, those investments can only be sustained when the institutional capacity 
is reinforced, and service delivery has successfully improved.  
 
Component 1: enhance hydrological and meteorological monitoring system to support decision making, 
planning and policy development in water and climate change sector.   
 
51. This output seeks to strengthen hydrological and meteorological information services to deliver relevant, 
accurate and timely climate information to local communities, and also to support decision making and 
policy development in the water sector. This will be achieved by investments in optimized hydro-met monitoring 
networks, more effective management and exchange of hydro-met data; and improving the capacity to forecast 
future water and weather conditions. Ultimately, this information will be used to strengthen early warning systems.  
 
52. Investing in hydro meteorological information systems will not only enhance protection from weather and climate 
shocks such as droughts and floods but will also improve our capability for gathering hydro meteorological data 
which is critical for monitoring and predicting extreme events. National Information Center for Integrated Water 
Resource Management to be established in WRA offices that will act as a hub of water resources monitoring 
information and will be equipped with proper ICT system for processing, analysis of information to produce 
integrated water resources information for informed decision making.  Water resource monitoring systems in the 
catchment area are already established covering the main Athi River and its tributaries. However only 58% of 
surface water level, 35% of groundwater level and 66% of rainfall are actually being monitored currently by the 
WRA within the Athi River Basin. Therefore, it is necessary to increase the number of monitoring stations that 
include telecommunication abilities.  
 
53. Hydro meteorological information is being collected by WRA as well as the Kenya Meteorological Department, but 
their analysis and dissemination is not coordinated. Also, WRA has signed MOUs with WRUAs in the catchment 
as required by the Water Act 2002. However, no MOUs have been signed with county governments. The Water 
Act 2016 has provision for Basin Water Resources Committees and County Governments’ are represented in the 
committees with the role of advisory on water resources management issues within their respective basins; 
however, the Basin Water Resources Committees are yet to be established. Therefore, there is a clear need for 
building up coordinated governance for water resources management from the monitoring of water resources, 
sharing information, making decisions on the water at different levels. This project will aim to bring a coordinated 
approach to ensure that this information is collected, analyzed and disseminated for the different users including 
county governments, communities and industry. Necessary support materials and training activities are required to 
enhance capacity of government institutions as well as stakeholder groups to accomplish their respective role in 
coordinated water resources management.   
54. A complete Hydro Met Station / Automatic Weather Station (AWS) comprises of a continuous monitoring of all 
meteorological and hydrological parameters at a specific location. These parameters include: Rainfall, Temperature 
(Max, Min and Actual), Wind direction and Speed, Humidity, Atmospheric pressure, Solar radiation and Soil 
Moisture. For RGS, water level is measured along the river channels. This information is very vital in the 
management of water resources by incorporating it in models to determine the future of state of water resources. 
Using this information some hydrological models will determine the future flood / drought situation. With the output

=== PAGE 27 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 73 
 
from the models, decisions on water harvesting and storage / drought risk mitigation will be reached. This will 
overall improve water security and hence food security 
55. A “Radio Internet” – RANET station will be set us to broadcast in local dialect.  The RANET Station will serve as 
learning institution for students on environmental and climate related studies. The radio station focus will mainly be 
on climate-related issues, market information, agriculture and emerging technologies in the climate change space.  
The direct beneficiaries will be the community settled within the project area in Machakos County. The station 
broadcast within a radius of approximately 50-75 km and mainly broadcast in local dialect and therefore will be able 
to reach all the target communities in the project area. 
 
56. There is a clear need for building up coordinated governance for water resources management from the monitoring 
of water resources, sharing information, making decisions on the water at different levels. This output will also 
intend to bring a coordinated approach to ensure that this information is collected, analyzed and disseminated for 
the different users including county governments, communities and industry. Necessary support materials and 
training activities are required to enhance capacity of government institutions as well as stakeholder groups to 
accomplish their respective role in coordinated water resources management. Figure. 7 shows the reporting and 
monitoring framework that provide for coordinated governance of the WRUAs who are key water resources 
management stakeholders in Athi River Catchment. 
 
 
Figure 9: Reporting and Monitoring structure of WRUA Activities 
 
 
57. This component also includes developing and implementing a capacity building, training and education program 
including formal training and retraining to build the capacity of NEMA, KMD and WRA staff on integrated water 
resource management and climate change for provision of accurate and timely information to Communities, County 
governments and relevant stakeholders in the Athi River Catchment for use in water resources management and 
adaptation planning. 
 
58. The beneficiaries for output 1 include WRA and KMD for activity 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3, NEMA for activity 1.1, 1.3 and 
1.4. KMD will acquire ownership of assets created under activity 1.1.3 and 1.2.4. WRA will acquire ownership of 
assets created under activity 12.1. and 1.2.3. NEMA will acquire ownership of assets created under activity 1.2.3. 
Hence WRA, KMD and NEMA will be direct beneficiaries of the mentioned activity lines. The county governments 
and the relevant water governance structures and communities within the project area are beneficiaries for all 
activities. 
 
59. The eligibility criteria to apply in selection of beneficiaries under Activity 1.3.1 shall include; Geographical criteria: 
staff working within the project's geographical coverage; Job criteria: staff/members responsible for providing 
water/climate information to communities regardless of the institution; Project involvement: staff/members directly 
involved in implementing Project Activities either at the county or headquarters of the institutions and Equity criteria: 
priority should be given to gender balance, and consideration for staff with special needs e.g. disability.

=== PAGE 28 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 73 
 
 
60. The eligibility criteria to apply in the selection of beneficiaries under Activity 1.3.2 shall include; Geographical 
criteria: relevant organizations/committees must have mandates related to the project’s objectives, and working 
within the geographical space of the project; Relevance: Organizations/committees/CBOs etc. should be involved 
in project-relevant work (i.e. work aligned with at least one of the project’s activities) within Athi River catchment 
area; Equity: Selection of individual trainees should consider gender balance, persons with disabilities, and 
minorities and Priority given to WRUA members. 
 
61. Table 2 explains in detail activities and sub-activities of output 1: 
 
Table 2. Outputs and activities under Component 1 
Component 1:  enhance hydrological and meteorological monitoring system to support decision 
making, planning and policy development in water and climate change sector. 
Outputs 
Activities 
Output 1.1: Support the 
establishment of a National 
Information 
Center 
for 
Integrated Water Resource 
Management.  
 
 
 
1.1.1 Set up an institutional mechanism for sharing information and getting 
feedback (data sharing protocols among players in the water sector e.g. through 
MOUs). 
• Policy dialogue Meetings aimed at developing data sharing protocols 
(between 
NEMA, 
WRA, 
KMD) 
and 
strategy 
for 
continuous 
communication 
between 
the 
user 
communities 
and 
county 
governments. 
 
 
1.1.2 Support the development of a National Information Centre for integrated 
water resource management (under the WRA HQ) by equipping it with 
necessary hardware and software facilities. 
• 
Acquire and install the centralized integrated water resource management 
information system (server, HDD 1TB, monitors, network facilities, UPS with 
additional batteries) with necessary software (operating systems, database, 
visualization, web server and other utilities). 
1.1.3 
 Support information analysis, forecasting and knowledge sharing 
platforms through an integrated database for weather and water resources-
related information; 
• 
Develop an integrated analysis tools with visualization from monitoring 
information. The Decision Support System will assist in data entry, storage, 
analysis and reporting of collected data. The DSS is an information system 
that supports an organizations decision-making and facilitate its processes. 
• 
Develop a shared system of weather forecast information for development 
of early warning and install a flood and drought warning system in flood 
prone areas in Kiambu and Machakos counties 
• 
Develop web services for sharing information with stakeholders 
Output 
 
1.2: 
Establish 
modernized 
hydro-
meteorological observation, 
monitoring, 
and 
testing 
systems 
and 
related 
networks 
1.2.1 Installation of surface hydro-meteorological monitoring and network 
systems and rehabilitate existing monitoring systems (Nyandarua, Nairobi, 
Kiambu, Machakos county).   
• 
Install 25 Automatic Weather stations within the upper Athi catchment. all 
the stations will be equipped with Remote Terminal Units (RTUs), 
GSM/GPRS Modems, and the solar PV systems with solar battery, data 
protection equipment such as noise filters, surge protective devices. 
• 
Install 23 surface water level monitoring stations with multi-parameter water 
quality sensors for 20 stations. 5 rainfall monitoring stations. All the stations 
will be equipped with Remote Terminal Units (RTUs), GSM/GPRS Modems, 
and the solar PV systems with solar battery, data protection equipment such 
as noise filters, surge protective devices. 3 Water Level Stations will be 
manual hence will not require the sensors. The 5 rainfall monitoring stations 
will be distributed in specific sites in the project area and located within the 
Automatic Water Level Station (AWLs) compound.

=== PAGE 29 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 73 
 
(Installation includes procurement of equipment and procurement of services for 
physical installation of that equipment) 
1.2.2 
Upgrade water quality testing laboratory for WRA and NEMA 
• 
Acquire and calibrate devices for water quality test such as atomic 
absorption spectrophotometer, oxitops, Chemical Oxygen Demand 
(COD) digester, incubators, sediment analysis kit, High-performance 
liquid chromatography, Procure operational materials such as 
laboratory chemicals, reagents, and glassware. Both NEMA  and WRA 
will  be allocated funds for upgrading their water quality test laboratories 
1.2.3 
 Establish 10groundwater monitoring stations 
• 
Develop10 new monitoring wells in Nairobi, Kiambu and Machakos 
counties and Install necessary sensors to measure water level, 
conductivity, temperature, RTUs and other equipment for automated 
data transfer 
 
1.2.4 
Setting up of a RANET broad casting station in Machakos County.  
• 
Installation of a RANET  - “RAdio InterNET”  broadcasting  in 
approximately 50 – 75 Kilometers radius in  the local dialect, Kiswahili 
and English for 24 hours, with an estimated   audience of 1,000,000 
listeners 
 
Output  1.3 Support training 
and 
capacity 
building 
programs 
1.3.1       Support capacity building and training for government institutions with 
water and climate change mandates within the project area.  
 
The executing entities will identity capacity building and trainings for their 
relevant institutions with water and climate change mandates within the project 
area and NEMA will approve and disburse fund accordingly 
 
1.3.2      Support capacity building and training for relevant water governance 
structures and communities within the project area (Water Resource Users 
Associations -WRUAs, County Environment Committees - CECs, County 
Adaptation Committees, Community Based Organizations -CBOs among 
others)  
 
The executing entities will identify  capacity building and training for relevant 
water governance structures and communities within the project area, develop 
training plan and manuals and NEMA  will approve training plans and disburse 
fund accordingly 
Output  1.4 Development of 
State of the Environment 
(S.O.E) reports 
1.4.1 Support development of State of the Environment (S.O.E) reports 
• 
Consultative workshops to develop the S.O.Es. 
 
Component 2: improve climate water resilience by building, enhancing and rehabilitating prioritized water 
infrastructure and implementing conservation activities in the catchment.   
 
62. The second output seeks to invest on improving and rehabilitating prioritized water infrastructure in the target 
counties considering climate change impacts and consequently increase access to potable water for domestic and 
improved livelihood. The component also covers catchment protection.  Activities under this component will 
promote development of water harnessing and storage facilities for communities and local institutions in the 
counties considering historical and future climate change impacts. Athi catchment area has a number of degraded 
water storage facilities including water pans, sand dams and rock catchments that should provide critical access to 
water for communities. The project intends to rehabilitate these facilities to enhance water access for communities 
in close proximity to the structures.  The water infrastructure assessed in Nyandarua, Kiambu and Machakos 
counties is ageing partly due to weather elements and effects of climate change. Water sources are affected by 
climate change through changes in annual rainfall and increased runoff resulting in decreased raw water quality. 
This causes poor water quality and scarcity and exerts stress on the water infra-structure affecting how communities 
can reliably access clean water.  Through the consultation meetings and site assessments, rehabilitation and

=== PAGE 30 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 73 
 
construction of boreholes, water pans, springs, tanks, and sand dam in three counties (Kiambu, Nyandarua and 
Machakos) are proposed. Detailed list of intervention is available in Feasibility Study and the Technical study report. 
 
63. Water storage and conservation allows communities to have water for a longer period of time especially during 
drought periods. Women and children particularly will benefit from increased access to water. In communities in the 
area, the roles of fetching water are left to women and children which in some cases can be quite difficult due to 
long distances covered to fetch water. Gender considerations will be considered when implementing the project to 
ensure that the benefits of access to water focus on the most vulnerable including women and children.  It is 
expected that there will be a reduction in distances travelled to fetch water subsequently reducing the amount of 
time spent to fetch water. Reduction of costs of treatment for waterborne diseases and condition will also be one of 
the expected benefits of increasing access and availability of water.  
. 
64. The restoration of degraded water catchment areas will be done through engagement of communities through 
existing water resources governance structures in the counties in rehabilitation/renewal/conservation and 
protection of degraded water catchment areas. Rehabilitation and reforestation activities within the selected 
counties will be carried out by WRA in collaboration with WRUA who will be engaged as service providers and 
eventually acquire the ownership of the established tree nurseries.  Major water catchment degradation issues in 
Kiambu and Machakos counties are Sand harvesting, poor agricultural practices, wetland and forest area 
encroachment, untreated effluent discharges and vegetation clearing. The proposed safeguards for the structures 
to be constructed among other are as follows; Monitoring through the established integrated Water Quality 
&Pollution Control networks, Enforcement through waste disposal control plans, Issuance of effluent discharge 
permits / licenses, Enforcement of the set waste disposal standards and effluent discharge control plans. There 
exists no exclusion list, all entities shall benefit from the Funded Activity. The project will underscore on the 
successes of ongoing county led Climate Smart Agriculture- CSA practices. Additionally, the project will seek to 
network and build on the achievements with the ongoing Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Project by World bank 
under implementation in 24 counties in Kenya; with the objective of increasing agricultural productivity and building 
resilience to climate change risks in targeted smallholder farming and pastoral communities in Machakos County. 
 
65. Moreover, the project will liaise with a recent initiative launched by CIGAR and World Bank titled “Accelerating 
Impacts of CGIAR Climate Research for Africa (AICCRA).”  This initiative aims to enhance access to knowledge, 
technologies, and practices to build the resilience of agriculture and food systems in Sub-Saharan Africa countries. 
The East Africa component is implemented in Ethiopia and Kenya through   CGIAR Research Program on Climate 
Change, Agriculture and Food Security - CCAFS and Igad Climate Prediction & Applications Centre - ICPAC 
partnership. This project will partner with ICPAC and CCAFS EA to enhance use of agro-advisories and agricultural 
support decision support tools developed under the AICCRA and will promote climate-smart agriculture practices 
in the upper ARCA. The project will also participate in regular national and regional climate outlook forums (NCOF, 
GHACOF) for the co-development of tailored climate information services for targeted users thereby contributing 
to increased resilience of communities in the project area 
 
66. The   selection criteria of the infrastructure that will be rehabilitated (activity 2.2.1) was carried out through a 
stakeholder consultative process during the feasibility report development.  The construction and technical 
standards that will be applied to the rehabilitation work     will be in accordance to the     guidelines provided for by 
the ministry of Water Sanitation and Irrigation in Kenya.  For all the rehabilitated water structures, the management 
committees will ensure sustainability by actioning measures that ensure steady flow of funds for O&M.  
 
67. The O&M post project implementation for those structures under water service providers in Kiambu, Nyandarua 
and Machakos will be done by the water companies. The structures under management by committees will require 
to register as water users’ associations under Water Sector Trust Fund - WSTF Community Project Cycle 
framework for community water supply and will entail development/review of by-laws to incorporate an aspect of 
water tariff to take care of O&M costs.   During planning meetings at the point of project implementation, respective 
county governments and WSTF will be involved in order to incorporate their ‘pro-poor model’ for financing water 
structures. 
 
68. The beneficiaries for output 2 are the relevant county governments, the relevant water governance structures and 
communities within the project area. 
 
69. Table 3 explains in detail activities and sub-activities of output 2.

=== PAGE 31 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 73 
 
Table 3.  Outputs and activities under Component 2 
 
Component 2: improve climate water resilience by building, enhancing and rehabilitating prioritized water 
infrastructure and implementing conservation activities in the catchment. 
Outputs 
Activities 
Output 2.1  Develop and 
upgrade water sources and 
infrastructure for domestic 
use considering present and 
future impacts of climate 
change. 
2.1.1    Construct water storage and supply infrastructure  
• 
rehabilitate two boreholes, twelve water pans, two springs in Nyandarua 
county 
• 
build a new borehole, water pan, two springs and rehabilitate three 
boreholes, two water pans, two springs in Kiambu county 
• 
build two new boreholes, rainwater harvesting tanks and rehabilitate nine 
water pans, one spring and one sand dam in Machakos county 
 
Output 
2.2 
Support 
conservation 
of 
water  
catchment areas as  climate 
change adaption measure . 
2.2.1 Rehabilitation and reforestation activities within the 4 target counties  in 
collaboration with WRUAs 
• 
Establish tree nurseries for tree planting at new and rehabilitated water structures 
within the selected counties  
• 
Undertake planting of indigenous trees in two catchment areas with high risk of 
erosion in the target counties 
• 
Riparian marking and pegging (using indigenous tree) of 20km along Riara and 
Ndarugu Rivers 
• 
Construction of terraces (1000m) and 1500m gabions (gulley healing by planting 
vetiver grass and or installation of gabion boxes) in selected sites in Kiambu and 
Nairobi counties).  
 
 
 
Component 3: Strengthen water and adaptation planning, institutional and regulatory framework to respond 
to changing climatic conditions. 
 
70. Regulations can constitute barriers or facilitate effective adaptation and therefore have a significant role on society 
and in driving the climate change adaptation agenda in Kenya. Ensuring compliance with the Water Act 2016 and 
Climate Change Act 2016 among regulated communities and enforcing the law is a critical means of contributing 
towards the realization of climate change adaptation agenda in the country. The Constitution of Kenya (COK) 2010 
and the Climate Change Act No. 11 of 2016 require the public to be engaged in Climate change discourse in 
education, capacity building and awareness creation on actions to be undertaken relating to climate change.  
 
71. This component seeks to strengthen institutional and regulatory framework by investing in capacities for enforcing 
the water regulations, supporting the four counties to develop their County Environment Action Plan (CEAPs) and 
Sub-Catchment Management Plans (SCMPs) for improved adaptation planning by incorporating climate change 
considerations into the plans. The Gazetted Water Quality regulation provides for protection of water resources, 
pollution control and has prohibition clauses for effluent discharge into the environment.  These regulations apply 
to domestic industrial agricultural, recreational and any other purpose. In enforcing these regulations, the strategies 
used include water quality monitoring, restrictions and licensing.  
 
72. Activities of this output will build the capacity of by supporting the review and implementation of sub-catchment 
plans with a focus on climate risk management in water sector. This is crucial to ensure that their catchment plans 
incorporate climate risk management approaches and activities. WRUAs will be supported in the implementation 
of sub-catchment plans in implementing climate smart activities.  
 
73. The Activity 3.1.1 “Provide water quality monitoring systems to support enforcement of the water quality regulations” 
entails investing in capacities for enforcing the water regulations by providing equipment’s that will enable real time 
testing of water quality and enforcements of the regulations.  Activity 3.1.2 “Sensitize the regulated communities to 
enhance compliance” entails having consultative forums with the regulated communities i.e. factories, filling 
stations, among others; whose industries emit effluents to the environment to inform and promote compliance to 
the existing good practices and regulations. Activity 3.1.3 “Conduct water quality pollution survey for point and non-

=== PAGE 32 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 73 
 
point sources of pollution” is a regulatory safeguard measure for sustainable protection of both surface and ground 
water resources. It aims at generating water quality and pollution information for planning, policy formulation and 
implementation; providing technological guidance for the waste emitters to develop and implement waste disposal 
control plans and enforcement of the prescribed regulatory waste disposal guidelines/standards and effluent 
discharge control plans. 
 
 
74. The beneficiaries for output 3 are WRA, NEMA and the relevant county governments. The eligibility criteria to 
apply in selection of beneficiaries under Sub-activity 3.1.2 will include; Geographical criteria: The beneficiary 
individuals/institutions must be working within the geographical space of the project, Relevance: The beneficiary 
individuals/institutions'' work must be directly related to the water sector, Equity: Selection of individual and 
institutions should consider gender balance, persons with disabilities, and minorities and Regulation Thresholds: 
The beneficiary institutions must be subject to or have a role enforcing water sector compliance requirements.  
  
75. The project will create awareness and provide trainings to the beneficiaries drawing water directly form the water 
assets to be rehabilitated on proper hygiene / sanitation measures. All water assets will have draw pipes and 
disinfection dispenser will be availed on site as a hygiene measure.  The disinfection dispensers are installed at 
the water draw off points to aid in the disinfection of remote potable water supplies (e.g. hand pump, springs etc.) 
30% chlorine solution is contained in the dispensers. The measure is 1 drop per 20-liter container of water. The 
chlorine is allowed to mix for 15 to 30 min to allow for disinfection of the water making it potable. The disinfection 
dispensers are installed and refiled by the specific county public health office to all remote water access point i.e. 
access points not connected to central water supply system. Under Kenya’s devolved governance system, County 
Governments are in charge of the provision of sanitation services as per Schedule 4 of the Constitution. All 
beneficiary counties in this proposal are implementing Community Lead Total Sanitation (CLTS) initiatives that 
seek to ensure all Kenyan communities are Open Defecation free among other Water and sanitation initiatives. 
The WASH strategies planned for implementation by the targeted counties are as reflected in the County Integrated 
Development Plan – CIDPs. There are adequate interventions on water and sanitation at the county level that will 
build synergy with the project. The project sits at the core of the respective county governments that have the legal 
mandate over water and sanitation issues in the county. This will ensure that developed water assets are protected 
from pollution that may arise from lack of water and sanitation interventions in the project areas. The USAID funded 
Kenya Integrated Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Project (KIWASH) which seeks to improve access to improved 
water, sanitation, and hygiene covers Nairobi among 8 other counties. The Athi River project will seek to network 
and build on the achievements under this project in Nairobi County. The project will also work with other local level 
community based organizations that are engaged in WASH activities in the respective counties. Additionally, the 
project will work with partners implementing WASH activities in the targeted counties targeting schools, 
dispensaries and health centers for public awareness and behavior change, including borrowing lessons and 
building partnerships with UNICEF sponsored initiatives on hand washing and SATO pans toilet promotion activities 
in neighboring Kitui County that borders Machakos where the bulk of water assets are to be rehabilitated. 
 
76. Table 4 explains in detail activities and sub-activities of output 3. 
 
Table 4.  Outputs and activities under Component 3 
 
Component 3:   Strengthen water and adaptation planning, institutional and regulatory framework to 
respond to changing climatic conditions 
Outputs 
Activities 
Output 3.1 
Enhance 
compliance of water regulations 
within the project area and 
improve adaptation planning 
3.1.1 Provide water quality monitoring systems to support enforcement of the 
water quality regulations. These include; 8 (eight) Multi parameter sonde 
(new hydrolab HL7) and ICT with ability to measure pH, temperature, nutrients 
(nitrates and phosphates), dissolved oxygen, total dissolved oxygen, salinity 
(conductivity), depth, chlorophyll, Rhodamine, blue-green algae, Ammonia, 
Chloride,  etc.  basically parameters that show effect of climate change on water 
quality;  and its accessories; a Water testing kit for Microbiology analysis 
(POTALAB) with ability to detect Ecoli (Faecal contamination), Coliform 
(bacterial 
contamination), 
Salmonella 
(Typhoid), 
Pseudomonas 
(ENT

=== PAGE 33 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 73 
 
infections); 3 (three)  Potable Heavy metal detection meters (Portable 
Metalyser for Heavy Metals) with the ability to measure Arsenic (III and Total), 
Antimony, Cadmium, Chromium, Cobalt, Gold, Mercury, Lead, Magnesium, 
Nickel, Selenium, Thallium, Tin, Zinc  
 
3.1.2 Sensitize the regulated communities to enhance compliance: 
i) Promote WASH practices through hygiene awareness campaigns aimed at 
promoting water disinfection methods and hygiene practices in collaboration 
with the beneficiary county governments 
ii) Carry out Compliance Management Action Plan trainings / workshops to 
ensure compliance with the water sector laws and standards in Kenya (Both 
NEMA and WRA will identify stakeholder among the regulated communities to 
be sensitized, develop workshop schedules / plans and implement the activity. 
NEMA and WRA are government agencies with clear mandates in the water 
sector that require a coordinated approach to ensure compliance) 
 
Activity 3.1.3 Conduct water quality pollution survey for point and non-point 
sources of pollution 
Output  3.2:  Development of 4 
County 
Environment 
Action 
Plans (CEAPs) including climate 
change 
adaptation 
considerations 
3.2.1 Support development of 4 County Environment Action Plans (CEAPs)  
Output  3.3:   Development of 8 
(eight) 
Sub-Catchment 
Management Plans (SCMPs) 
including 
climate 
change 
adaptation considerations 
3.3 Facilitate development review and implementation of 8 Sub-Catchment 
Management Plans (SCMPs).  
i. 
Capacity building and SCMP development workshops 
 
 
 
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
Project implementation structure 
 
77. The development of this project has been sponsored by several entities, the main one being NEMA, then Water 
Resources Authority - WRA, Kenya Meteorological Department - KMD and University of Nairobi -UoN. NEMA shall 
play the role of an Accredited Entity and partly in the implementation of some of the proposed activities in line with 
its accreditation credentials.  NEMA has identified WRA and KMD as the executing entities for some proposed 
activities in line with their mandates. UoN has been identified as a service provider to develop decision support tool 
and formulate relevant training modules in the water and climate sector 
 
78. The Figure 8 below illustrates the institutional arrangements to deliver the project. The institutions that will 
operate as the Executing Entities exist, however the committees will require to be formalized with guidance from 
the National Designated Authority - NDA before project implementation.  The implementation will be conducted 
by the Executing Entities -EEs but will be guided by the National Project Steering Committee through quarterly 
meetings. The National GCF Steering committee will ensure that project implementation is conducted according 
to the country’s priorities.

=== PAGE 34 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key:  
Funds flow  
Reporting relationships 
 
Figure 10: Project Implementation Arrangements 
 
 
 
 
Roles and Responsibilities  
 
79. National Treasury (NT) 
The National Treasury (NT) is the National Designated Authority (NDA), the focal point for GCF in Kenya. The NT will 
ensure the  Programme conformity with the national priorities. In addition, it shall ensure that PSC meets quarterly to 
review the progress and provide necessary guidance and direction to NEMA as the AE. 
 
National Treasury 
Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry 
National Climate Change 
Council (NCC) 
National Project 
Steering Committee 
NEMA – Accredited Entity 
Executing Entities (WRA, 
KMD) 
Accredited Entity 
Coordination Unit 
Beneficiary Counties (Kiambu, 
Nairobi, Machakos, Nyandarua) 
Green Climate Fund

=== PAGE 35 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 73 
 
80. Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
There will be an established PSC required to provide coordinated oversight to the project implementation. It shall be 
chaired by the Director General NEMA and will include representatives from the National Treasury, the Ministry of 
Water and Sanitation, and Ministry of Devolution and Planning, the Council of Governors and representatives of 
recipients’ county governments. The PSC can appoint committee member from other relevant ministries based on 
necessity. 
 
81. National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) as the Accredited Entity -A.E. 
NEMA, will take the greatest responsibility for successful implementation of the project. As the Accredited Entity, NEMA 
shall submit requests for disbursement to GCF. NEMA will perform the following other roles: 
• 
Project Management: NEMA shall be responsible for overall project planning, execution, coordination, 
monitoring, and evaluation and reporting.  
• 
Reporting: NEMA shall prepare all necessary reports required by GCF.  
• 
Budget and Auditing:  NEMA shall be responsible for the overall project budgeting based on the agreed work 
plans prepared by the executing entities. NEMA will ensure project performance audits by the NEMA internal 
auditors and Kenya National Audit office. 
82. National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) as the Executing Entity – EE 
NEMA will be implementing the following project activities. 
 
Output 1 
Output 2 
Output 3 
Activity 1.4.1  
Activity 1.2.2 
Activity 1.3.1        
Activity 1.3.2   
Activity 2.1.1 
 
Activity 2.1.2    
Activity 3.1.1 
Activity 3.1.2 
Activity 3.1.3 
Activity 3.2 
 
The proposed activities will be integrated within the NEMA Work Programme and approvals to undertake the activities 
will be granted as per the existing institutional arrangements, approval and reporting requirements. 
 
83. WRA as the Executing Entity – EE 
WRA has demonstrated a strong framework on preparedness for project implementation. WRA will dedicate operational 
capacities for the implementation of the following project activities 
 
Output 1 
Output 2 
Output 3 
Activity 1.1.1 
Activity 1.1.2 
Activity 1.1.3 
 
Activity 2.2.1 
Activity 1.2.1 
Activity 1.2.2 
Activity 1.2.3 
Activity 1.3.1        
Activity 3.1.2 
Activity 3.3 
 
 
84. University of Nairobi (UoN) as a Service Provider 
UoN is a training institution in Kenya and will be a Service Provider in the project that will work closely with WRA to 
develop decision support tool and formulate relevant training modules in the water and climate sector in the following 
project activities. 
Activity 1.3.1     and Activity 1.3.2      
 
85. Kenya Meteorological Department (KMD) as the Executing Entity – EE 
The KMD is responsible for implementation of some of the activities; KMD will dedicate operational capacities for the 
Project execution of the following project activities 
Activity 1.2.1, 1.2.4 and Activity 1.3.1        
 
86. County Governments: The county government has two-fold mandates in the county, to provide leadership / 
coordination and to implement activities / service delivery. These roles are based on legal and institutional 
framework at national and county level mainly anchored on the EMCA 1999 and Water Act 2016. Water Resources 
Users Associations provided for in the Water Act has representation in the county both to implement project 
activities and operate them even after the project period. Among the devolved functions of the county government 
include implementation of specific national government policies on natural resources and environmental 
conservation, County planning and development. and Ensuring and coordinating the participation of communities 
and locations in governance at the local level and assisting communities and locations to develop the administrative

=== PAGE 36 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 73 
 
capacity for the effective exercise of the functions, powers and participation in governance level which are key to 
the successful implementation of the Programme. The county government will be the entry point in the initiation of 
the planned activities and collaborative working relations will be established. For this project, the County 
Governments are project beneficiaries and will perform operation and maintenance of the rehabilitated adaptation 
assets 
 
87. The reporting line between GCF, National Treasury and MoEF are as follows: The Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry (MoEF)is in charge of the climate change policy frame work in the country including NCCAP, NAP among 
others and reports to the UNFCCC on the climate change initiatives and achievement of the NDC in the country.  
National Treasury (NT) is the National Designated Authority- NDA providing broad oversight of GCF activities in 
the country, NT provide reports relating to the financing of climate change activities in the country to MoEF and 
other government institutions. NT organizes stakeholders’ consultations and provides a for No Objection letters for 
funding proposals to the GCF. 
 
 
88. Funds Flow arrangements 
 
The GCF will disburse funds to NEMA as per the approved funding proposal budget. NEMA will disburse funds to the 
Executing Entities (WRA, KMD) based on the approved work plans and requisite reports. NEMA will be implementing 
some of the Programme activities that will be integrated within the NEMA work Programme and approvals to undertake 
the activities granted as per the existing institutional arrangements, approval and reporting requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11:  Funds Flow Diagram 
 
Experience and track record of the AE and EEs 
 
89. Accredited Entity (AE) - National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) 
NEMA was established in 2004 as the principal government agency mandated to implement environmental policies, 
exert supervision and coordination on all matters environment. NEMA as the Accredited Entity (AE), takes the greatest 
responsibility for successful implementation of the project and will perform the roles of Project management, Reporting 
Project supervision and project budgeting. NEMA has robust technical team in the 8 core departments in NEMA, 
namely, Directorate, Environment Education, Information and Public Participation Department, Legal Services 
Department, Environmental Planning and Research Coordination Department (EPRC), Compliance and Enforcement 
department (C&E), Finance and Administration Department and Coastal, Marine and Fresh Waters Sub-Department. 
Hence a complementary relationship that allows for efficiency and effectiveness. NEMA has operational county offices 
in all the 47counties in Kenya. NEMA is also the National Implementing Entity with the Adaptation Fund Programme 
and is currently implementing a USD 10,000,000 Programme aimed at building resilience to climate change and 
adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities in Kenya, undertaken in 14 counties in Kenya.  NEMA will implement 
some project activities under this project in line with its accreditation credentials. NEMA will be implementing activity  
The Construction of the water infrastructures will be executed by NEMA under a civil works contract. The O&M will be 
undertaken by the respective county governments and the management committees of the water structures established 
 
90. Water Resources Authority - WRA 
Water Resources Authority (WRA) is a state corporation under the Ministry of Water and Irrigation. The organization 
has been in existence for the past 12 years following its establishment under the Water Act (2002) that has now been 
replaced by the new Water Act 2016.  WRA’s mandate is to regulate, monitor, assess and allocate the water resources; 
and to collaborate with other institutions as required for better water resource management. 
WRA has established six regional offices and 26 sub-regional offices across the country that report to the national office 
based in Nairobi. WRA is a technical institution and has competent staff to implement its various roles and mandates. 
GCF 
NEMA 
Executing 
Entities (WRA, 
KMD)

=== PAGE 37 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 73 
 
WRA has a capacity of over 750 staff. The Authority is governed by a Board of Directors consisting of 10 members and 
a senior management staff composed of 3 staff that include the Chief Executive Officer, the Technical Coordination 
Manager and the Finance and Administration Manager. 
WRA uses a basin-based approach in accordance with the National Water Management Strategy in management of 
water resources countrywide. Accordingly, WRA has developed six Catchment Management Strategies (CMS) for the 
Country’s five drainage basins namely: Lake Victoria Basin which is divided into North and South, Rift Valley, Athi, 
Tana and Ewaso Ng’iro North. The CMS are implemented at community level through development of Sub Catchment 
Management Plans by WRUAs. The Senior Management is supported by various component heads based at the head 
office under the Technical and Support Services. Since 2013 WRA’s is currently managing an average of USD 20 
Million per year and sufficiently equipped to manage other projects.  The projects that WRA conducted are listed in 
section E5.2 
 
Kshs Budget 
USD 
equivalent 
Kshs 
Expenditure 
USD equivalent 
2013/2014 
1,732,153,992 
17,321,539.22 
2,022,508,375 
20,225,083.75 
2014/2015 
1,489,602,657 
20,225,083.75 
1,748,749,975 
17,487,499.75 
 
91. WRA Budget 2013/14 & 2014/15. 
 
Section 69 of the Water Act, 2016 provides for handover of completed waterworks to the county government jointly with 
the Water Service Provider for use.  The County owned water service provider is established as a public institution and 
will manage public water services assets on behalf of the public. WRUAs can serve as agents of WRA to monitor and 
ensure rational water use and allocation.  Section of the Water Act 83 provides for a County owned water service 
provider established as a public institution and operating and providing water services to hold the county or national 
public water services assets on behalf of the public. WRUAs can serve as agents of WRA to monitor and ensure rational 
water use and allocation. 
The water quality monitoring systems will be received by both WRA and NEMA county offices 
 
 
The University of Nairobi (UoN) as a service provider will work closely with WRA to provide specialized training as part 
of the capacity building efforts proposed in this project.  UoN is a premier training institution with a track record of 
excellence. Established in 1956 as the only institution of higher learning in Kenya for a long time, the University is 
credited for training regional and Africa's high-level manpower. The University has diversified academic programmes 
and specializations in basic sciences, applied sciences, technology, humanities, social sciences and the arts.  
 
92. Kenya Meteorological Department (KMD)  
 
 
The Kenya Meteorological Department (KMD) is a department under the Ministry of Environment and Forestry with the 
overall function of provision of meteorological and climatological services to various development sectors for better 
utilization of natural resources for national development. The KMD as the National Meteorological and Hydrological 
Service (NMHS) is the authoritative source of weather and hydrological warnings and also responsible for climate, air 
quality, and tsunami warnings. The KMD continuously monitors the earth’s environment, develops predictions on 
potential changes related to weather, climate and water, and issue as timely and accurate warnings as possible of most 
hydro meteorological hazards.   The Department has been operating on Presidential Executive Order No. 1 of 5th June 
2018 which places the Department under the Ministry of Environment and Forestry. 
 
KMD is a department within the Ministry of Environment and Forestry and therefore it doesn’t have a legal 
personality as an independent entity. Kenya Meteorological Department as an executing entity will be representing 
the Ministry of Environment and Forestry. 
 
Kenya Meteorological Department is headed by the Director of Meteorological services supported by 6 Deputy 
Directors. Other senior staffs are 15 Senior Assistant Directors and 35 Assistant Directors who are in charge of various 
divisions in the Department.   KMD has decentralized its services according to the devolved government in Kenya. It 
has a County Director of Meteorological Services (CDMS) in each county who reports to the Director of Meteorological 
services. Further, KMD has 39 manual synoptic stations which are manned by trained KMD staff. Other stations are 
Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) distributed in the whole country that collect weather information and send to the 
headquarter automatically. KMD has a capacity of over 500 staff based in Nairobi, all county headquarters and in 39

=== PAGE 38 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 73 
 
manual synoptic stations. KMD hosts the National Flood Forecasting and Early Warning Centre (NFFEWC) based at 
the headquarters in Nairobi which is charged with collection of data, analysis, modelling and forecasting of flood.  The 
projects that KMD has conducted are as listed below: 
 
 
  
Kshs Budget 
USD equivalent 
Kshs 
Expenditure 
USD equivalent 
2013/2014 
102,298,345 
1,022,983.45 
90,345,456 
903,454.56 
2014/2015 
435,398,098 
4,353,980.98 
401,764,915 
4,017,649.15 
2015/2016 
1,286,762,629 
12,867,626.29 
1,124,275,197 
11,242,751.97 
 
 
93. Table 4 summarizes the activities for each executing entities: 
 
Table 4. Summary of project activities and executing entities 
 
Executing Entities 
Activities to be implemented 
Water Resources Authority - WRA has demonstrated a 
strong 
framework 
on 
preparedness 
for 
project 
implementation. WRA will dedicate operational capacities 
for Project execution of their proposed activities 
Activity 1.1.1 
Activity 1.1.2 
Activity 1.1.3 
Activity 2.2.1 
Activity 1.2.1 
Activity 1.2.2 
Activity 1.2.3 
Activity 1.3.1    
Activity 1.3.2      
Activity 3.1.2 
Activity 3.3 
Kenya 
Meteorological 
Department 
(KMD) 
is 
responsible for implementation of some of the activities; 
KMD will dedicate operational capacities for the Project 
execution of their proposed activities. 
Activity 1.2.1 
Activity 1.3.1        
Activity 1.2.4 
NEMA  
NEMA will act in its role as an Accredited Entity that allows 
for implementation of the proposed activities in line with its 
accreditation credentials and work in close collaboration 
with the Executing Entity and the County governments 
that are key stakeholders in project activities implemented 
within their jurisdiction.  
In this project, the beneficiary county governments will be 
as outlined: Nyandarua, Kiambu, Nairobi and Machakos. 
Activity 1.4.1  
Activity 1.2.2 
Activity 1.3.1        
Activity 1.3.2   
Activity 2.1.1 
Activity 2.1.2    
Activity 3.1.1 
Activity 3.1.2 
Activity 3.1.3 
Activity 3.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
94. Grant financing is requested from the GCF to enhance adaptive capacity of the communities in the upper Athi 
catchment, an area with high risk on water resources due to climate change. Although Government of Kenya 
develops and implement climate change adaptation measures based on National Water Master Plan, it is not 
enough to resolve the issues associated with frequent water deficit and floods, the limited technical and institutional 
capacity to cope with climate change, limited range of products, services for climate resilient development, low 
awareness and inadequate regulatory framework for water resource management are key barriers to overcome.  
 
95. The proposed project purpose is to create a best practice of climate change adaptation practice of the water sector 
in Kenya to overcome those barriers by developing climate-informed decision support capability of institutions and 
communities with ICT based information products based on modernized hydro-meteorological monitoring systems. 
Upgraded water infrastructure and strengthened regulatory framework with updated county-based action plans will 
enhance awareness and its impact on community level. The County Environment Action Plan (CEAP) is futuristic 
and helps in better planning of both relevant interventions and available resources to combat the effects of climate 
change.  GCF funding is sought to fill the gap that exists in the developing the statutory document that is key in 
planning the measures to address climate change impacts and allocating available resources to the same cause.

=== PAGE 39 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 73 
 
 
7 Adapting to climate change: water management for urban resilience, Mike Muller 
 
96. The project aims to enhance institutional capacity by building up systems and infrastructures that directly contribute 
to national adaptive capability; it is not a readiness project which concerns preparatory capacity of institutions for 
full project. Stakeholder engagement in this project is has been extensive during the planning stage and public 
participation is embedded in the Kenyan constitution and hence will be upheld during the implementation of the 
project. 
 
Without GCF Funding. 
 
97. The National Water Master Plan (NWMP) was launched in 2014 to enhance a capacity of water sector in Kenya. 
However, a lack of financing has limited the efficiency of this Plan. 7The costs of adapting existing urban water 
infrastructure in Africa have been estimated at between US$ 1,050 million and US$ 2,650 million annually, implying 
this budget might be not affordable to developing countries in Africa. 
 
98. Information system, comprising from monitoring climatic and hydrological data to distributing useful information to 
local communities, has not been working properly due to the lack of equipment and facilities. Furthermore, the 
capacity of water supply and storage service systems is still not enough to respond to variability in precipitation. 
However, a substantial investment is essential to improve these systems. 
 
99. The institutional capacity cannot be improved. Furthermore, unawareness of local communities on the issues on 
the water sector limits a success of NWMP at local scales. Appropriate financing for capacity-building of institutions 
and raising awareness is required. 
 
100. 
Low compliance to water quality regulations due to inadequate capacity to enforce and consistent monitoring. 
Inadequate information system and lack of institutional capacity might constrain adaptive measures to disasters. 
As risks of disasters (drought and flood) are expected to increase in the future, according to the feasibility study 
report, solutions on these circumstances are urgently required. 
 
With GCF Funding: 
 
101. 
The measures proposed in this project will increase to water security, resilience to people, ecosystems and 
economies in the four target counties 
102. 
GCF funding will strengthen hydrological and meteorological information services to deliver relevant, accurate 
and timely climate information to local communities, and also to support decision making and policy development 
in the water sector. This will be achieved by investments in optimized hydro-met monitoring networks, more 
effective management and exchange of hydro-met data; and improving the capacity to forecast future water and 
weather conditions. Ultimately, this information will be used to strengthen early warning systems. Requisite training 
programmes will run along the proposed investments 
103. 
GCF Funding will support investment improving and rehabilitating prioritized water infrastructure in the target 
counties so as to increase water security. 
104. 
GCF funding will improve compliance to water quality regulations through strengthened capacity and consistent 
monitoring. 
105. 
Capacity-enhancement of the water related governmental institutions becomes possible by GCF funding. This 
will increase effective management of water resources, thus decreasing the impacts of climate change. Training 
and Raising awareness of local communities derives change in behavior against disasters. 
106. 
Furthermore, once this project is implemented successfully with GCF funding, it can play as an exemplary case 
with which the Kenyan government can leverage other funding sources from a variety of other funding providers 
such as MDBs and bilateral aid agencies.  The success of the project that focuses on water catchment will be 
replicated in other catchments in Kenya and it will serve a point of reference and the documentation. The lessons 
learnt will be informative to the future processes hence ensuring high success of future implementation of a similar 
project. 
107. 
The project activities are subject to the VAT as the proposed activity items are not zero-rated products in Kenya. 
 
 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 40 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 73 
 
108. 
The project will be led and implemented by local institutions including the Water Resource Authority and the 
Kenya Meteorological Department to ensure ownership from existing relevant institutions and for capacity building. 
It is expected that the project will further the work that NEMA, WRA and KMD are currently executing and are 
mandated to do. This will ensure that project activities continue beyond the lifetime of the project.  The institutional 
mandates of the executing entities and the involvement of the county governments coupled with the public 
participation involving the community members which is a mandatory requirement in the Kenyan Constitution will 
ensure that the sense of ownership of the proposed interventions are inculcated early in the project development 
and planned implementation. This will ensure sustainability of the project assets and processes. The management 
committees established that will constitute of the representation of the WRUA members as part of the Operation 
and Maintenance will provide for sustainability of the project interventions. 
 
109. 
KMD and WRA have put across appropriate structures to ensure sustainability beyond the project period. The 
institutions have decentralized its services to the county government in line with the devolved government. 
Therefore, the budget for Operation and Maintenance is going to be factored in when funding County offices after 
the project closure. 
 
 
 
110. 
Additionally, Water Resource Users Associations -WRUAs has established by WRA are a vehicle for 
community participation to enhance ownership and sustainability of interventions on the ground. They are an 
association of water users, riparian landowners, or other stakeholders who have formally and voluntarily associated 
for the purposes of co-operatively sharing, managing and conserving a common water resource. With WRUAs in 
place as an organized group sustainability is also assured. 
 
Close engagement with local governance structures at community level  
111. 
Implementation will also involve local/community level water resource 
governance structures, in this case WRUAs, CECs among others. Engagement and collaboration will lead to 
enhanced participation from communities in water resource management and planning. It will also allow 
communities to address their present needs with regards to water resources.  
 
Strengthened institutional capacity and awareness   
112. 
The institutional capacity of NEMA, WRA and KMD will be strengthened to ensure appropriate water resource 
management for climate change adaptation planning. Capacity building will be a key activity with regards to use of 
climate data for resource planning and will also be supported by participation in training for a for expert courses in 
the areas of integrated water resource management and climate change.  This will further enable for transfer of 
knowledge and expertise to communities and other stakeholders. 
 
Establish feedback mechanism systems  
113. 
To ensure that the climate information coming into the catchment area meets the users demands it will be 
important to create a feedback mechanism. This feedback mechanism will contribute to long-term sustainability 
through keeping the relevance of hydromet services. 
 
Operation and Maintenance 
114. 
During the installation and initial operation for the first half of the project period, comprehensive operation and 
maintenance work will be assessed. Through legislation process of such community plans, the assessed roles and 
responsibility on the operation and maintenance will be included and distributed to the different stakeholders and 
government institution. Contribution from government of Kenya during the project implementation will be in-kind 
support through commitment of staff time, office space and part of travel expenses.  
115. 
To ensure sustainability of the new stations and structures beyond the project period, WRA and KMD will 
request the government to allocate more O&M funds for their sustainability beyond the project period and the county 
government will carry out the O&M of the rehabilitated / established structures after project hand over. WRA has 
an average annual budget for ground water and surface water O&M as 300,000 USD and 500,000 USD 
respectively. Additionally, the beneficiary County Governments have confirmed and committed to conduct O&M of 
the project adaptation investments through the project life span and beyond as they have an annual allocation for 
the O&M of water works. The average annual allocation for O&M in the counties is 830,000 USD, 480,000 USD 
and 400,000 USD for Machakos, Kiambu and Nyandarua county respectively. Annex 21 (O&M plan) has annexed 
the commitment letters from the respective beneficiary County Government

=== PAGE 41 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 73 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) 
Requested 
GCF 
funding (i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
9,526,603.26 
million 
USD 
($)million 
USD 
($)million USD ($)million USD 
($)million USD ($)million USD ($)  
GCF financial instrument Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) 
Subordinated loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) 
Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter 
% 
equity return 
 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable grants Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) 
Grants 
9,526,603.26 Million  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-based 
payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) 
Co-financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
473, 380 
million 
USD 
($)million 
USD 
($)million USD ($)million USD 
($)million USD ($)million USD ($) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
National 
Environment 
Management 
Authority 
(NEMA) 
In kind 
242,560.00Gov. 
of Kenya 
 
Options 
USD ($) 
Enter 
years 
 
Enter% 
Options 
Water Resources Authority 
(WRA) 
In kind 
220,820.00 
Options 
USD ($) 
Enter 
years 
 
Enter% 
Options 
Kenya 
Meteorological 
Department (KMD) 
In kind 
10,000.00 
Options 
USD ($) 
Enter 
years  
Enter% 
Options 
Click here to enter text. 
Options 
Enter amount 
Options  
Enter 
years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
9,999,983.26  
million USD ($)  
(d) 
Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions (max. 250 
Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from 
any type of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).

=== PAGE 42 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 73 
 
words, approximately 0.5 
page) 
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including 
tax exemptions and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme.  
N/A 
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and 
disaggregate by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output. 
Provide the summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4. 
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other 
annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable. 
 
In case of a multi-country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in annex 
17, if available. 
 
Component 
 
Output 
 
Indicative cost 
OptionsUSD($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
OptionsUSD($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Component 1. 
Enhance 
hydrological 
and 
meteorological 
monitoring 
system to 
support 
decision 
making, 
planning and 
policy 
development 
in water and 
climate 
change sector   
 
1.1 Support 
establishment of 
National 
Information 
Centre for 
Integrated 
Water Resource 
Management 
349,310.00 
179,050.00 
Grants 
 
170,260.00 
 
 
In Kind 
WRA 
1.2 Establish 
modernized 
hydro-
meteorological 
observation, 
monitoring, and 
testing systems 
and related 
networks 
2,026,113 
2000113.00 
Grants 
10,000.00 
12,000.00 
4,000.00 
 
 
 
In Kind 
KMD 
WRA 
NEMA 
1.3 Support 
training and 
capacity building 
programs 
 
200,000.00 
200,000.00 
Grants 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4 Support 
development of 
State of the 
Environment 
(S.O.E) reports 
from the 
information 
developed 
169,325.00 
149,325.00 
Grants 
20,000.00 
 
 
 
In Kind 
NEMA 
Component 2. 
Improve 
climate water 
resilience by 
building, 
enhancing and 
rehabilitating 
prioritized 
water 
infrastructure 
and 
implementing 
conservation 
2.1
 
Develo
p and upgrade 
water sources 
and 
infrastructure for 
domestic use 
considering 
present and 
future impacts of 
climate change. 
4,866,540.26 
 
4,770,540.26 
Grants 
96,000.00 
 
 
 
 
 
In Kind 
NEMA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WRA

=== PAGE 43 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 of 73 
 
activities in the 
catchment 
 
2.2
 
Suppor
t conservation of 
water    
catchment areas 
as climate 
change 
adaptation 
measure. 
128,411.00 
128,411.00 
Grants 
 
 
Component 3. 
Strengthen 
water and 
adaptation 
planning, 
institutional 
and regulatory 
framework to 
respond to 
changing 
climatic 
conditions   
3.1
 
Enhanc
e compliance of 
water 
regulations 
within project 
area and 
improve 
adaptation 
planning. 
813,229.00 
 
808,829.00 
 
Grants 
22,000.00 
22,000,00 
In Kind 
WRA 
NEMA 
3.2Development 
of 4 County 
Environment 
Action Plans 
(CEAPs) 
including climate 
change 
adaptation 
considerations 
226,950.00 
178,950.00 
 
Grants 
48,000.00 
 
 
In Kind 
NEMA 
3.3 
Development of 
8 (eight) Sub-
Catchment 
Management 
Plans (SCMPs) 
including climate 
change 
adaptation 
considerations  
166,135.00 
166,135.00 
Grants 
0 
 
 
Support to 
Programmes 
activities 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
414,000.00 
414,000.00 
Grants 
0 
 
 
 
Development of 
Knowledge 
products 
150,000 
150,000 
Grants 
 
 
 
Project 
Management 
Unit 
Programme 
operational 
costs 
 
439,970.00 
370,850.00 
Grants 
34560.00 
34,560.00 
 
In Kind 
NEMA 
WRA 
Contingency 
 
50,000.00 
50,000.00 
 
 
 
 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
9,999,983.26 
9,526,603.26 
473,380.00 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☐      No ☐ 
116. 
The project aims at developing and implementing a capacity building, training and education program including 
formal training and retraining to build the capacity of NEMA, KMD and WRA staff on integrated water resource 
management and climate change for provision of accurate and timely information to Communities, County

=== PAGE 44 ===
C 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 of 73 
 
governments and relevant stakeholders in the Athi River Catchment for use in water resources management and 
adaptation planning

=== PAGE 45 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 40 of 73 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in 
the GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Expected Increased resilience of health and well-being, and food and water security 
117. 
Water security contributes to job creation, increased gross domestic product (GDP) and enhanced 
development across most sectors – health, energy, agriculture, environment, mining, industry and social protection. 
It also improves the adaptive capacity of communities to climate change effects.  The project expects to target 
1,156,620 beneficiaries directly (49% male and 51% female) through increased access to water sources i.e. water 
storage, rainwater harvesting and rehabilitation of degraded structures. This increased access to water will also 
ensure that water for agricultural production is available. In addition, it will reduce time taken to fetch water among 
communities. The project will ensure that water is accessible in good quality by enforcing existing water regulations 
thus reducing incidences of water borne diseases and overall increasing the community’s wellbeing.  
 
Expected strengthening of institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and 
development (PMF- A 5.0 and related indicator(s): 
118. 
The project will aim to strengthen the capacity of NEMA, WRA and KMD in data collection, synthesis and 
dissemination to a larger audience. The project will help provide the necessary equipment and training to WRA and 
KMD to set up telemetric hydromet stations that will offer timely data for decision making. At the grass-root level 
the project will work at equipping WRUAs to incorporate and implement climate change issues within their SCMPs 
and enforce policies related to water use.   
 
Expected increase in generation and use of climate information in decision-making (PMF- A 6.0 and related 
indicator(s)): 
119. 
The project aims to boost quality hydromet data collection in the selected catchment areas and ensure timely 
relaying of the data. The project will further expand the system to have a decision support system that is aimed at 
supporting key decision making with regards to water resource management at catchment level. The data shall be 
analyzed to provide useful information for all stakeholders. It is envisaged that the information will be utilized for 
decision making.  
 
Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks (PMF- A 7.0 and related 
indicator(s)), focusing particularly on the most vulnerable population groups and applying a gender-sensitive 
approach: 
120. 
The use of climate information in planning for water resources will allow development planners to consider 
climate risks with an aim to reduce exposure for communities. Additionally, the provision of warnings of flooding 
events will reduce the risk of disasters, loss of lives and economic losses leading to reduced exposure to climate 
risks for vulnerable communities.  
 
Expected strengthening of awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes (PMF- A 8.0 and related 
indicator(s)): 
121. 
A key aspect of the project is building the capacity of local institutions including NEMA, WRA, KMD and County 
Governments on climate change impacts and the potential risks that come with it. This approach will allow these 
institutions to strengthen their awareness of climate risk while understanding the options and interventions required 
for risk reduction. The information generated from the DSS will be relayed to the communities in order to create 
awareness on climate threats and risks and the requisite risk reduction mechanisms.  
 
122. 
Direct beneficiaries are calculated as the number of persons who will directly participate in the project and draw 
direct benefits from improved access to water as determined during feasibility study. Indirect beneficiaries: Total 
number of persons in the 4 counties within the catchment who derive indirect benefits from the project – reduced 
flooding, water resource conflicts, information, ecological function of the ARC, agricultural and livestock value 
chains, among others. 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
123. 
The proposed project aims to enhance the resilience of communities and ecosystems in the ARCA through 
provision of hydromet information, mainstreaming climate change adaptation into sub catchment management

=== PAGE 46 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 41 of 73 
 
planning, development of a decision support tool and rehabilitation of riparian areas and degraded water structures. 
Short term benefits will include reduced travel time to water points, improved health/reduction of waterborne 
disease cases and increased access to water whilst the long term benefits will include reduced economic losses 
from flooding events, improved water resource management and strengthened decision making and development 
planning.  
 
124. 
The proposed project’s approach on use of hydromet information has been established globally as best 
adaptation practice to reduce and manage climate risk. In Kenya it is yet untested, and the implementation of this 
project will be the first of its kind. The paradigm shift in this case will be local government involvement in use of 
climate information for development planning and resource management through the integration of meteorological, 
hydrological, hydrogeological and water quality data for improved water resources management at national and 
county levels. The country has yet to adequately mainstream climate change adaptation into its development 
planning to reduce climate risk. County governments working with WRA and KMD will establish mechanisms for 
sharing hydromet information to determine current and future climate risks and plan development interventions 
especially in the water sector with this information in mind. It is anticipated that the approach will be successful, 
and lessons learnt from implementation may influence scaling up to the other catchment areas in the country.  
125. 
Lessons learnt from the implementation will also establish best practice and build the capacity of county 
governments in adaptation planning at local levels which will also assist them in enhancing climate risk 
management measures. The project will emphasize lesson and knowledge sharing between the EEs and other 
counties along the Athi river, to enhance sustainability and capacity of the regional and national offices and create 
awareness at the county level.  
126. 
The executing entities (both KMD and WRA) are National Government Agencies hence implementing policies 
formulated at the National Government level. However, these agencies have decentralized their functions at the 
county government level. Therefore, the national policy and planning will be implemented at the county / local 
government through the decentralized functions and therefore easier to replicate these projects to other five 
catchments 
 
D.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
 
127. 
All EEs, shall be required to institute a protocol on how to capture knowledge, aggregate it per audience and 
disseminate it. All project specific activities that relates to training on the proposed acquisition of modern hydromet 
equipment, shall be documented for future referencing. Knowledge products will be developed for the programme 
to document and disseminate the lessons learnt and the successes during project implementation. They will 
constitute of brochures, magazine, bi annual programme status reports, banners and information posters. 
Knowledge sharing workshops will be conducted. 
128. 
The project presents several opportunities for learning ensuring that the knowledge and lessons generated 
through this project will be captured and disseminate through direct (RANET broadcasting) and indirect measures 
(knowledge products and adaptation planning tools). Knowledge sharing platforms will be employed and will include 
impact stories, videos, journal articles and others.  
129. 
The proposed activities will entail hiring of a consultant to undertake content creation and development for the 
programmes knowledge products, data collection and validation workshops. The expected topics for sharing 
include; building climate change resilience for water resources, creating awareness of climate change and water 
resource management, women as drivers of change in managing climate-resilient water resources among others 
 
D.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
130. 
During the project period, government entities, private sector, researchers and local communities will be 
involved. In order to ensure effectiveness and sustained participation, the project shall strongly focus on institutional 
strengthening and capacity building, communication enhancement as well as improvement in service provision. 
The activities will also include coordinated dissemination of hydromet information, development of county policies 
and incentives for innovative water conservation solutions. This will allow for participation of the county 
governments, private sector, water resource management institutions and communities to create an enabling 
environment for participatory water resource management. The project will also enable coordination between public 
and private institutions to ensure benefits reach the most vulnerable and are sustained.  
131. 
The project activities are meant to catalyze private sector involvement for sustainability of the adaptation 
interventions that ensure their businesses adjust well to consequences of climate change. Stakeholder engagement

=== PAGE 47 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 42 of 73 
 
through compliance inspections, trainings, awareness creation, audits, and adherence to license conditions among 
other actions will encourage industries to promote integrated water resource management and climate change 
adaptation. This engagements are expected to contribute significantly to a paradigm shift in the attitudes and 
behavior of the various stakeholders towards better awareness on climate change and sustainable water use. 
D.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
132. 
The Project supports the implementation and operationalization of several key national policies strategies and 
plan, including the National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS), National Climate Change Action Plan 
(NCCAP), National Adaptation Plan (NAP), the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) and the 
National Water Master Plan (NWMP) 2030. 
133. 
The NCCRS and NCCAP prioritize water resource management as a key strategy to address drought. The 
NCCAP expounds that water resource management is linked to Kenya’s expected economic and social 
transformation and is directly linked to food security, health and GDP growth especially in the ASALs. The project 
will support the implementation of listed water sector priority adaptation actions to improve water management 
specifically increased domestic water supply and participatory water resource management.  
134. 
The NWMP 2030 seeks to implement water policy to meet social water demand up to 81% % through 2030–
2050, which only 14% was attained in 2010. The project will also support the implementation of the NWMP 2030 
specifically with the actions focused on the Athi River Catchment area. The project components are anchored on 
the recommended actions in the plan for the catchment area. The project is expected to strengthen mainstream 
climate change adaptation into the water sector and allow for adaptation planning.   
D.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
135. 
Kenya is highly endangered by serious natural disasters; the country is extremely exposed to droughts 
and floods. Naturally the country is highly vulnerable to climate condition caused by movement of the 
Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) and the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO). The problem faced in 
Kenya is that this rainfall pattern, duration of dipole rainy season, and the amount of precipitation has been 
changed due to global climate change. Since the 1960s, precipitation has also been changed; greater rainfall 
has been observed during the short rains, and the long rains have become increasingly unreliable in 
locations.  
 
136. 
Kenya has been determined to be one of the highly vulnerable countries in the world and the country 
need practical supports to survive under this unpredictable condition. In terms of water sector, even though 
Kenya recently graduated from the list of Least Developed countries (LDCs) ranking by the UN, its water 
coverage as at 2015 (63% in the Joint Monitoring Programme report by the United Nations) was lower than 
both the LDC’s average of 69%, and Sub-Saharan Africa average of 68%. According to the water supply 
statistics data presented by JMP for 2015, the Kenyan portion of people without safe drinking water is close 
to 3% of the global figure.  
 
137. 
It is clear that challenges facing the water sector, range from water scarcity, water quality, population 
pressure, climate change and others. Traditionally, women bear the primary responsibility for providing water 
and ensuring its quality in developing countries like Africa region and women in Kenya are regularly 
confronted with violence during their chores, especially gathering water. Close to half of Kenya’s population 
(45.9% in 2006) is considered poor and more than three-quarters of them (79% in 2006) live in rural areas. 
In Kenya, rural areas are characterized by dispersed settlements thus making it costly to invest in piped water 
systems. Thus, majority of the water sources are point sources. It is estimated that 40% of the households 
in rural areas of Kenya use more than 30 minutes for round trip to obtain drinking water from the source.   
 
138. 
The improved hydromet services and decisions on the water resources management together with 
improved water infrastructure will enhance the access of the water resources in more sustainable manner. 
Community based planning and implementation of the management plan will increase ownership of climate-
informed water resources management leading to better perception of project outcomes.

=== PAGE 48 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 43 of 73 
 
139. 
The projects would have co-benefits of Improved sanitation and hygiene from improved access to water 
as reflected in the decreased prevalence of water-borne diseases and Catchment rehabilitation of the riparian 
areas will improve biodiversity and air quality.     
140. 
The project would have the following co-benefits: a) 
Improved sanitation and hygiene from improved 
access to water as reflected in the decreased prevalence of water-borne diseases and b) Catchment 
rehabilitation of the riparian areas will improve biodiversity and air quality. One of the beneficial impact of the 
project is on people’s health. This is because the project will eliminate the currently high dependence of 
communities on contaminated water supplies for drinking and basic hygiene, and therefore the significant 
negative impact this has on people’s health and wellbeing. 
 
D.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
D.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
141. 
The table below illustrates the vulnerability of the counties within the Athi River Catchment Area with a focus 
on poverty, access to water and education rates. The counties are included as the focus area for the project. The 
project will focus on the most vulnerable areas and impact of the project. 
County 
Climate Change Related Impacts  
Poverty8 
Access 
to 
improved 
sources 
of 
water9 
10Percentag
e 
of 
population 
with 
no 
education 
Nairobi 
• 
High temperature. 
• 
Resource based Conflict 
• 
Damage from floods,  
• 
Waterborne diseases 
22.5 
84% 
11% 
Kiambu 
• 
Flooding and soil erosion 
• 
Extinction of some crops like plums 
• 
Drying of small streams and wells 
• 
Drying of wetlands e.g. Manguo in Limuru, Ng’arua 
in Ngesha 
• 
Mosquitoes have found new habitats due to 
increase in temperature, e.g. even in Limuru, 
consequently a rise in malaria and other vector-
borne diseases 
• 
A rise in the incidences of water-borne diseases 
such as typhoid during floods 
• 
Landslides are a common occurrence e.g. in 
Gatundu South, Mundara 
• 
Recent: frost that affected tea in most parts of the 
country including Limuru 
• 
Low agricultural production-both livestock and crops 
leading to loss of livelihoods, and increase in poverty 
levels 
• 
Water rationing 
• 
Destruction of infrastructure, e.g. submergence of 
waste water treatment facility in Kiambu Town, 
roads, the power line with the Juja sub-station 
blowing up recently in April 2012  
27.2 
74.9% 
12% 
 
8 County Fact Sheets, Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey 
9 Exploring Kenya’s Inequality, Pulling Apart or Pooling Together, National Report, Society for International Development, Kenya 
National Bureau of Statistics 
10 ibid

=== PAGE 49 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 44 of 73 
 
 
142. 
The percentage of the population with no education in relation to climate is high and hence the exposure to 
climate risk. This is due to lack of climate change information and awareness. 
• 
Displacement and deaths of people by floods, e.g. 
Thindigwa in Kiambu and Gatwanyaga in Thika 
• 
Loss of human and animal life, e.g. recently in 
Kabete, from floods 
Machakos 
• 
Poorly performing crops/wilting, low crop yields and 
livestock deaths  
• 
Drying up of rivers, earth dams due to increased 
evaporation rates 
• 
Human-wildlife conflicts 
• 
Flooding, water logging during flash floods 
• 
Delayed onset of short rains 
• 
Soil erosion 
• 
Displacement of people 
• 
Reduced livelihood options, poverty increase and 
increase in crime rates 
• 
Scarcity of water for domestic consumption and 
watering of animals  
• 
Inter-clan and inter-community conflicts over 
diminishing resources  
• 
Electric power shortages, reduced industrial output, 
leading to unemployment  
• 
Water-borne diseases-malaria, asthma, etc 
• 
Outbreak of pests and parasites associated with 
changes in climatic conditions-caterpillars, army 
worms and coffee thrips 
59.6 
38.6% 
15% 
Nyandarua 
• 
Destruction and degradation of infrastructure like 
roads with negative economic consequences, e.g. 
milk spoilage as it takes too long to get to the 
markets  
• 
Receding water bodies, e.g. Lake Olbolosat, 
Milangine dam, and Karia Ka Ndagi dam 
• 
Decline in biodiversity, e.g. the endangered Sharpes 
Long Claw of the Kinangop plateau and Maccoa 
duck of L. Olbolosat  
• 
Perennial rivers turning into seasonal ones, e.g. 
Rivers Kinja, Turasha, Mukungi and Olkaria 
• 
Crop failure due to droughts (and recently also due 
to frost), 
• 
food insecurity 
• 
Human wildlife conflicts 
46.3 
68% 
16% 
D.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
143. 
The proposed project if financed will be contributing towards implementation of the National Water Master plan 
and the National Climate Change plan as well as the Vision 2030. The project will enhance the resilience of the 
Athi River Catchment area and water resources within it that supports economic development and livelihood 
improvement. Populations in the area will have increased access to water which will enhance their resilience and 
support their livelihoods. Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that 
prevents from addressing the needs of the country, and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
144. 
GCF contribution to the project is critical to ensuring the resilience of the communities to climate change. 
Without GCF support, this project as designed cannot proceed. The cost of ensuring the climate resilience of the 
water systems and communities among the target counties is significant. GCF support is essential due to Kenya’s 
climate vulnerability and the severe economic and fiscal constraints it faces in addressing these climate change 
challenges.

=== PAGE 50 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 45 of 73 
 
145. 
Kenya has mainly been receiving funding for mitigation. However, there has been a huge gap in adaptation 
financing. This project will be contributing to increasing the amount of financing for climate change adaptation 
efforts in the country. Furthermore, investments in the water sector have been limited and this project will be 
providing financing for water sector interventions in the country. Additionally, Kenya is a third world country and 
climate change adaptation funds are scarce and inadequate, thereby the request for a grant from GCF. 
146. 
The project’s approach is to work with water governance structures, especially at local levels, who have 
limited capacity in climate change adaptation interventions. The project will work to enhance the capacity of these 
institutions as well as strengthen their coordination efforts across local and national levels. There is  Need for 
strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. 
 
 
D5.  COUNTRY OWNERSHIP 
Beneficiary country’s ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
D.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including 
NAMAs, NAPAs and NAPs 
147. 
Kenya is a party to the UNFCCC and has committed to implementation of policies to adapt to climate change 
and effectively develop climate risk management measures. The country has also submitted its Intended Nationally 
Determined Contribution (INDC) to the UNFCCC that included both adaptation and mitigation measures. However, 
the country has placed a significant focus on adaptation. Kenya in these documents recognizes that participatory 
water resource management will strengthen the country’s economic growth and address poverty reduction through 
improving food security and health.   
148. 
The project is well aligned with national priorities and measures identified in the NCCAP, NAP and NDC. The 
prioritized water sector actions in these documents are being operationalized through the proposed project. The 
project is also linked with the NDC action on the water sector i.e. “Mainstream climate change adaptation in the 
water sector by implementing the National Water Master Plan (2014)”. The project components are strongly linked 
to the National Water Master plan but additionally promote the mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into 
the water sector at the catchment area level. 
 
DE.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
Accredited Entity (AE) - National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) 
149. 
NEMA was established in 2004 as the principal government agency mandated to implement environmental 
policies, exert supervision and coordination on all matters environment. NEMA as the Accredited Entity (AE), takes 
the greatest responsibility for successful implementation of the project and will perform the roles of Project 
management, Reporting and project budgeting. NEMA has s robust technical team in the 8 core departments in 
NEMA, namely, Directorate, Environment Education, Information and Public Participation Department, Legal 
Services Department, Environmental Planning and Research Coordination Department (EPRC), Compliance and 
Enforcement department (C&E), Finance and Administration Department and Coastal, Marine and Fresh Waters 
Sub-Department. Hence a complementary relationship that allows for efficiency and effectiveness. NEMA has 
operational county offices in all the 47counties in Kenya. 
150. 
NEMA is also the National Implementing Entity with the Adaptation Fund Programme and is currently 
implementing a USD 10,000,000 Programme aimed at building resilience to climate change and adaptive capacity 
of vulnerable communities in Kenya, undertaken in 14 counties in Kenya.  
151. 
NEMA will implement some project activities under this project in line with its accreditation credentials. 
 
Capacities of the Executing Entities (EEs) 
Water Resources Authority (WRA)  
152. 
Water Resources Authority (WRA) is a state corporation under the Ministry of Water and Sanitation, established 
as a corporate body under the new Water Act (2016) that was operationalized on the 21st of April 2017 vide Special 
Issue Kenya Gazette Notice No. 60. The organization has been in existence for the past 12 years following its 
establishment as Water Resources Management Authority (WRMA) under the Water Act (2002) that has now been 
replaced by the new Water Act 2016. WRA’s mandate is to regulate, monitor, assess and allocate the water 
resources; and to collaborate with other institutions as required for better water resource management. WRA has 
adopted Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) approach in its operations as a means ensure 
stakeholder participation and to adopt a holistic view of management of the water resources incorporating the 
environmental, social and economic context of the water resources. WRA is a technical institution with the 
Headquarters is in Nairobi, 6 Regional offices and 26 Sub Regional offices with a total of 750 staff of different 
cadres (technical, legal, finance, accounts, supply chain & procurement, administration, communication, ICT, and

=== PAGE 51 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 46 of 73 
 
records) distributed across the country. WRA has governance structures at local level through the WRUAs, with 
capacity to implement local activities at county level, in collaboration with other stakeholders. WRA has in the past 
implemented various projects geared towards securing water resources and is currently implementing projects 
across the country with funding support from both GOK and development partners. WRA’s combined project 
implementation portfolio for both past and current projects is approximated at Ksh. 6 Billion. 
Kenya Meteorological Department - KMD  
153. 
Kenya Meteorological Department hosts the National Flood Forecasting and Early Warning Centre (NFFEWC) 
based at the headquarter Nairobi which is charged with collection of data, analysis, modelling and forecasting of 
flood. KMD has the required facilities for monitoring and forecasting flood and drought hazards, such as real-time 
rainfall data, evaporation, and storm monitoring tools (satellite imagery, lightning and thunderstorm detectors), and 
quantitative rainfall forecasts (numerical weather prediction products) are available at KMD. The department also 
has high capital investment facilities connecting it to regional and Global Telecommunication System (GTS) hydro 
meteorological information sources necessary for forecasting of flood and drought hazards.  
154. 
The department is charged with provision of meteorological information and early warning services for the 
safety of life, protection of property and conservation of the natural environment as a contribution to sustainable 
development of the nation and has a clear mandate as defined by the WMO Convention (1947 and revised in 
2007), and Conventions of the World Hydromet. Observing Stations. It has trained manpower in various fields of 
Meteorology, Operational Hydrology, Numerical Weather Prediction and related services with requisite expertise 
to undertake data analysis, forecasting and delivery of services to the specific users. Staff in KMD have been 
trained on climate change modelling 
 
D.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
155. 
The NDA has been widely consulted and engaged in the development of this proposal. The NDA was the chair 
of the Kenyan GCF Project Steering Committee whose membership comprised of, various government institutions, 
AE, and readiness service providers. The NDA also had representation in the Project Development Teams (PDT) 
that developed this proposal. The PDTs comprised of institutions with water related mandates, University of Nairobi, 
Observers from Pan African Climate Justice Alliance and Transparency International also were part of the process. 
The NDA also convened some of the meetings and consultations that were held for this proposal. 
 
Steps taken in the development of this proposal are detailed in the following Table.  
 
Table 4: Steps undertaken during proposal development 
 
Date  
Activity 
February 2016 
Establishment of the GCF Steering Committee (SC) by the NDA. Composition includes 
NIE, MENR, UNEP and CDKN. 
Terms of reference for the SC approved by the NDA. 
NDA convened an inception workshop to begin the process of writing GCF proposals. 
Over 50 stakeholders from ministries, agencies, departments, civil society, observers 
and private sector attended 
Work-plan to develop GCF proposals developed and approved by stakeholders. 
March 2016 
NIE convened a GCF training on prioritization of adaptation actions. The training was 
attended by: the NDA, members of the SC, and representatives from government 
entities, including Ministry of water, Ministries of Devolution and Planning; Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries; Industry, Communications, Technology and Innovation; 
Environment and natural resources; Industrialisation and Enterprise; Kenya Association 
of Manufacturing; civil society actors.  
April 2016 
The NDA convened a training workshop on GCF proposal development and cost benefit 
analysis. Workshop was attended by over 20 people. Representation was from 
Ministries of Devolution and Planning; Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries; Environment 
and natural resources; Industrialisation and Enterprise and civil society actors 
April 2016 
NDA convened a meeting Technical Working Group meeting to prioritise potential GCF 
concepts. Prioritisation is based on NCCAP, INDC and NAP priorities. 
NDA and NIE appoint 25 individuals (Project Development Teams) from various 
ministries, civil society and private sector to assist in the development of 3 GCF 
proposals 
May 2016 
NDA and the NIE conducted the induction of PDTs 
GCF proposal writing begun

=== PAGE 52 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 47 of 73 
 
June 2016 
NDA convened planning meetings for the PSC 
GCF proposal writing continued 
July 2016 
GCF proposal writing continued 
NIE trained PDTs on environmental and social safeguards 
August 2016 
GCF proposal writing continued 
September 2016 
Letter of no objection 
2017 
NEMA secures technical support  from Korea Environmental Industry and Technology 
Institute (KEITI) to undertake feasibility studies 
2017/2018 
County/Community level stakeholder consultations 
2018 
ESMF, Feasibility studies, Gender action plan 
2018 
Validation workshops for ESIA at the County level 
November 2018 
Finalization  and submission of revised  FP 
22nd April  2019 
1st Feedback on the Completeness check on the Water proposal submitted 
30th May 2019 
2nd Feedback on the Funding Proposal Review 
August 2019 
3rd  Feedback on the Funding Proposal Review 
December 2019 
4th Feedback on the Funding Proposal Review 
January 2020 
GCF review team call with the AE to discuss the  5th review comments 
February 2020 
AE responds to the 5th review comments 
March 2020 
GCF introduces a consultant to the AE to assist in the finalization of the F.P in 
preparation for B.26 
May 2020 
AE receives ITAP Assessment findings of the submitted proposal 
June 2020 
AE has a call with ITAP to discuss the assessment findings 
October  2020 to 
date 
AE updates the FP and Annexes , GCF task team guides the process 
 
 
156. 
The process of developing this proposal began with a high level tripartite meeting with the Director General of 
Budget, Fiscal and Economic Affairs from the National Treasury, the National Climate Change Secretariat (NCCS) 
and the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) which approved the project activities, work-plan, 
roles and responsibilities of different project structures. Thereafter agreements were reached with United Nations 
Environment Program (UNEP), CARE, World Resources Institute (WRI) and the United Nations Development 
Program (UNDP) on how to offer complementary capacity building activities as opposed to duplication as they are 
all involved in assisting the government in GCF proposal development.  The first Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
meeting endorsed the roles and responsibilities of the different project structures and the inception meeting 
endorsed the project work-plan. A stakeholder analysis was conducted, and various stakeholders were mapped 
against their power and influence and classified according to their level of interest in the project. In addition, a multi-
stakeholder plan which includes negotiation, partnerships and participation procedure, grievance resolution 
mechanism and stakeholder involvement in project monitoring was developed. As detailed in section E 5.3 more 
than 50 institutions have been involved in the process of developing this process in various stages as shown in E 
5.3. They have assisted in data collection, formulation of text and peer review of the project’s content. 
 
 
D.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
D.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
157. 
The net economic benefits and costs in the analysis of the overall project were derived by comparing the 'with' 
and 'without' project scenarios. The project aims to strengthen the resilience to climate change of communities and 
increase water security in the Athi River Catchment Area in Kenya, which will lead to the resulting benefits: (i) 
reduction in flood related losses; (ii) reduction in water sanitation and supply related diseases incidents and costs 
thereof; and (iii) time savings by households in accessing water. The desired interventions and outcomes are purely 
public in nature and they will not be displacing any existing mechanisms present in the targeted areas to cope with 
the challenges. 
 
158. 
The results of economic analysis are all positive despite the analysis having used conservative estimates with 
regards to the benefits expected and attributable to the project. The economic analysis was done over 30 years, 
over which the project assets will likely yield benefits assuming that operations and maintenance activities 
described in the proposal and feasibility study are undertaken.

=== PAGE 53 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 48 of 73 
 
 
159. 
The project uses a discount rate of 12% as base case scenario and accounts for flood protection, health, and 
avoidance of social costs (e.g. time for water collection). The economic analysis was done at 30, 20 and 15 years 
and the results are presented as below; 
 
 
30 years, 12% 
discount rate 
20 years 12% 
discount rate 
15 years 12% 
discount rate 
NPV (USD) 
 9,747,248.48  
 7,585,142.92  
 5,551,275.52  
IRR  
13% 
12% 
11% 
Discounted payback 
period 
 7.22  
 7.22  
 7.22  
AEV (USD) 
 1,210,059.08  
 1,015,489.68  
 815,061.81  
Benefits/Costs Ratio 
 1.78  
 1.63  
 1.48  
 
 
A detailed economic analysis and financial analysis for the project are included as an annex 3 and 3ii to the funding 
proposal. 
D.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
 
160. 
The Government of Kenya (GOK) is expected to offer support to the project from Year 1 and throughout the 
project in terms of office space, staff time, vehicles, and utilities. These figures have been estimated as at Year 0 
and grown over time with the average inflation rate. The figures for Year 0 are presented in the table below. The 
analysis has also assumed that the Gok will support the project from Year 5 to a tune of USD 531,784 and this 
figure has been assumed will remain constant for a lack of a better estimate. This operations and maintenance 
(O&M) estimate supported by an O&M plan (attached) 
 
Item 
USD 
Description 
Office 
Space 
27,000.0
0 
USD 45,000million per month * 12 months * 5% of 
office space 
Staff time 
30,000.0
0 
50 staff * Average salary of USD 1,000 per month * 
12 months * 5% of staff time. 
Gok 
Vehicles 
1,500.00 
3 vehicles, worth USD 50,000 each, depreciated 
over 5 years (20% pa), and used for the project only 
5% of the time. 
Utilities 
2,400.00 
Utilities estimated at USD 200 per month for 12 
months. 
Totals 
60,900.0
0  
 
          Gok support to the project in year 0 
 
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged). 
D.6.3. Financial viability  
161. 
An economic feasibility analysis is conducted to estimate the economic feasibility of a project by comparing 
and analyzing the costs and benefits of the projects in monetary terms. The economic feasibility of a project 
depends on the sustainability of the project and its impact. Unlike an economic feasibility analysis, the main purpose 
of financial validity analysis is to figure out whether the return on investment from the project achieves the expected 
profit. If not, the analysis makes basic data available to set up plans to make the project feasible.

=== PAGE 54 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 49 of 73 
 
 
162. 
Beyond the Fund intervention, the project is will still be viable as indicated by the positive at year 14. Results 
indicate that the benefits will be realized after the project period and hence the proposed investment of GCF 
resources can be seen to be a cost-effective investment which will create net economic benefits that are about two 
times greater than the initial GCF investment. The project assets handed over for operation and management to 
the county governments. The management committees of the established assets shall be trained on sustainability 
measures that will ensure project benefits are up scaled and sustained beyond the Programme cycle. 
 
D.6.4. Application of best practices 
163. 
KMD successfully implemented the Nzoia Flood Early Warning System (NFEWS) under Western Kenya 
Community Driven Development and Flood Mitigation Project (WKCDD&FMP) in Western Kenya funded by the 
World Bank and the Kenya Government. The broad objective of flood management within the project was to reduce 
vulnerability of the community to adverse outcomes associated with recurrent flooding. This was addressed 
through; Preparation of multi-purpose long term flood management, Enhanced flood plain management in the 
Budalang'i plains and Development and institutionalization of proactive mechanism for a community-based flood 
early warning system. 
 
164. 
The project will take forward lessons from similar projects across the world including the Integrated Study 
Project on Hydro-Meteorological Prediction and Adaptation to Climate Change in Thailand (IMPAC-T) which has 
been operating in Thailand since 2009. IMPAC-T involved enhancing Thailand’s decision-making support system 
for adaptation strategies that address water-related issues, specifically those caused or exacerbated by climate 
change in Thailand. 
 
D.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF 
core 
indicator
s 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation only) 
 
(a) Total project financing 
US$_______  
(b) Requested GCF amount  
US$_______  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
_______ tCO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
US$_______ / tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / 
c) 
US$_______ / tCO2eq 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators (d) and (e) above. 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in 
a comparable context.   
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result 
of the Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in 
a comparable context. 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-
benefit generated as a result of the project/programme) N/A 
 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.

=== PAGE 55 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 50 of 73 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management 
Framework to which the project/programme contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programmes logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management 
Framework to which the project/programme contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.2. Core indicator targets 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent 
with the information provided in section A. 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (mitigation and cross-cutting 
only) 
Annual 
Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq 
Lifetime 
Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions (mitigation 
and cross-cutting only) 
(a) Total project financing 
_____   Cho
(b) Requested GCF amount  
_____  Choo
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
_____  t CO
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
_____   C
CO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed (e = 
b / c) 
_____   C
CO2eq 
E.2.3. Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation and cross-cutting only) 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
_____   Cho
(g) Public source co-financed 
_____   Cho
(h) Private source finance leveraged  
_____   Cho
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
_____   
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
_____  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
_____

=== PAGE 56 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 51 of 73 
 
E.3. Fund-level impacts 
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more 
than one indicator may be selected per expected impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above. Add rows as needed.  
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means 
of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
A1.0 Increased resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most vulnerable 
people, communities and regions 
A1.1 Change in expected losses of 
lives and economic assets (US$) due 
to the impact of extreme climate-
related disasters 
 
 
Third 
party 
monitoring 
 
0US$ 
 
 US$ 1,751,647 
flood related 
benefits at end of 
year 2 
 
US$ 1,836,018 
flood related 
benefits at end 
of year 4 
 
a) 
10% of the population 
in 
the 
targeted 
counties will utilize the 
EWS to move property  
b) 
Per capita cost of 
floods 
at 
USD 
2,276.85 in real terms 
will remain fixed over 
the years 
c) 
5% 
of 
the 
total 
property that families 
could save from floods 
in responding to EWS 
d) 
Only 5% of the total 
cost saved could be 
attributable 
to 
the 
project 
A2.0 Increased resilience of health and 
well-being, and food and water security 
A2.3 Number of males and females 
with yearround access to reliable and 
safe water supply despite climate 
shocks and stresses 
Annual 
Project 
M&E 
Progress 
reports 
Male: 0 
 
Female: 0 
Total: 90,000 
 
Male: 44,100 
Female:45,900 
Total: 
1,156,620 
 
Male: 566,744 
a) 
Water 
supply 
from 
springs 
sources 
is 
more than adequate to 
benefit up to 1.6M 
E.2.4. Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries, (disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
 1,156,620  
51% of female 
Indirect 
3,693,380  
51% of female 
For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here 
and provide the data per country in annex 17. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries relative to total population (disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
0.4  (Expressed as %) of country(ies) 
Indirect 
10.32  (Expressed as %) of country(ies) 
For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per 
country in annex 17.

=== PAGE 57 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 52 of 73 
 
Female: 
589,876 
individuals over 40-
year period assuming 
a 2.65% population 
growth rate 
b) 
Only 
36,500 
individuals will benefit 
from boreholes 
c) 
Only 10% of the total 
population 
of 
the 
catchment 
will 
significantly 
reduce 
the time to the water 
source 
 
A3.0 
Increased 
resilience 
of 
intrastructure and the built environment 
to climate change 
 A3.1 Number and value of physical 
assets made more resilient to climate 
variability and change, considering 
human benefits 
Installation report 
 
Monitoring reports 
 
Number: 0 
 
Value: 0 
Number:26  
 
 
16 water 
pans 
7 
springs 
2 Boreholes 
1 catchment 
rehabilitated 
 
 
Value: 
USD 
27,497,475.63 
Number: 40 
 
 
22 water pans 
7 Springs 
8 Boreholes 
1 Sand dam 
2 
catchment 
rehabilitated 
 
Value: 
USD 
54,994,951.26 
Project activities will be on 
schedule and there will be 
no or insignificant cost 
overruns  
 
 
 
E.4. Fund-level outcomes 
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as 
appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected outcome. Add rows as needed. 
Expected Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term) 
Final 
A5.0 Strengthened institutional and 
regulatory systems for climate-
responsive planning and development 
A5.1 Institutional and regulatory 
systems that improve incentives for 
Expert review using 
Score Card approach 
will be used to 
0 
2 County 
governments 
have climate 
4 County 
governments 
have climate 
Institutional collaboration 
will be adequate.

=== PAGE 58 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 53 of 73 
 
climate resilience and their effective 
implementation  
measure improvement 
of the   Institutional and 
regulatory systems 
(From level 0 (Non -
existent), 1 
Prepared/approved, 2  
partially implemented, 
3 substantially 
implemented, 4 ( Fully 
Implemented)  
 
County Environment 
Action Plans (CEAPS) 
 
Sub Catchment 
Management Plans 
(SCMPs) 
 
County State of 
Environment Reports 
(SOEs) 
 
 
responsive 
policies/plans 
and at level 1  
responsive 
policies/plans 
and at level 3 
Existing regulatory 
system will provide an 
enabling environment  
 
 
 
A6.0 Increased generation and use of 
climate information in decision-making 
A6.2 Use of climate information 
products/services in decision making in 
climate sensitive sectors 
Assessment reports on 
use of Climate 
information 
products/service 
available at market -   
(Daily / monthly/ 
seasonal weather 
forecast, 
Water situation reports, 
Air quality data, 
Flood forecast report,) 
 
Installation report 
 
Low use of 
climate 
information 
in decision 
making (due 
to lack of 
information 
products, 
capacity, 
and 
framework)  
Moderate use 
(some 
information 
products are 
produced and 
used in some 
decision 
making) 
 
 
 
1 
RANET 
station 
established 
Substantial 
use (majority 
of information 
products are 
produced 
and used in 
most 
decision- 
making)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capacity to generate and 
use climate information 
will be developed and 
sustained beyond project 
period  
 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive capacity 
and reduced exposure to climate risks 
A7.1 Use by vulnerable households, 
communities, businesses and public-
sector services of Fund-supported tools 
Midterm and end of 
project Survey of 
project 
 
0 
 
5% of the 
population in 
the targeted 
 
10% of the 
population in 
the targeted 
The county government s 
will support the 
Programme 
implementation and

=== PAGE 59 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 54 of 73 
 
 
 
instruments, strategies and activities to 
respond to climate change and 
variability  
 
counties will 
utilize the 
EWS 
information to 
avoid flood 
risks  
 
 
counties will 
utilize the 
EWS 
information to 
avoid flood 
risks  
3% 
of 
the 
diarrheal 
incidents 
could 
be 
averted 
due 
project 
interventions 
 10% as the 
time savings 
attributed 
to 
the 
project 
interventions 
communities will have 
Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced 
exposure to climate risks 
There will be Increased 
access to portable water 
Sufficient awareness to 
the communities on EWS 
will be created, and the 
system 
will 
be 
easily 
accessible 
A8.0 Strengthened awareness of 
climate threats and risk-reduction 
processes 
A8.1 Number of males and females 
made aware of climate threats and 
related appropriate responses  
Assessment report 
 
Male: 0 
Female: 0 
Total: 14,000 
 
  
Male: 6,860  
Female: 7,140  
 
Total: 27,539  
 
 
Male: 13,494  
Female: 
14,045 
 
 
Community members are 
receptive to awareness 
raising activities and have 
Improved compliance to 
relevant climate related 
regulations 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators 
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF 
monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as needed. 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
1. 
Water resources monitoring 
systems 
enhanced 
for 
improved 
adaptation 
planning 
to 
support 
No. of installed and operational 
water 
resources 
monitoring 
equipment/stations/laboratories 
 Report 
10 
 
69 
70 
The county government and the local 
community will support the project

=== PAGE 60 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 55 of 73 
 
decision making and policy 
development in water and 
climate change sector   
(Operational means the equipment 
are maintained and in use)   
Adequate resources for O&M will be 
available.   The security of the installed 
gadgets will be assured 
The 
Global 
System 
for 
Mobile 
communication will be operating at 
optimum levels 
The system will be an Integrated water 
resources 
information 
with 
Decision 
support capability   
There will be no turnover of trained 
laboratories staff 
 
2. 
Improved decision making 
in water and climate change 
sector    
 
 
Operational IWR monitoring and 
Information system and Decision 
Support System (DSS) 
 
IWR monitoring 
and Information 
system 
Reports  
0 
2 
2 
The system will be fully operational.  
 
Impact to be measured through survey on 
number of institutions and households 
using the DSS to reduce potential climate 
threats and risks. 
 
 
Operational 
Decision 
Support 
System customized to ACA  - Athi 
Catchment Area 
Installation 
report 
Data 
Analysis 
reports 
0 
1 
1 
Completely 
installed 
and 
functional 
system in place  
Data sharing protocols effected 
 
No. of developed State of the 
Environment  (S.O.E.) reports 
S.O.E reports 
Meeting reports 
0 
4 
4 
The County Environment Committees - 
CECs will support the process 
3. 
Strengthened 
institutions  
in water and climate change 
sector    
Number of staff trained to operate 
and apply IWR information and 
DSS  
Training, reports 
0 
40  
80  
Staffs and personnel of NEMA, WRA, 
KMD, 
County 
governments 
and 
communities will use the information for 
decision making  
 
 
4. 
Increased access to potable 
water for domestic use 
considering 
present and 
future impacts of climate 
change. 
 
 
Access to potable water for 
domestic use all year round for 
project beneficiaries 
 
 
 
 
Assessment 
report  
14% 
30% of 
direct 
project 
beneficiaries 
have access 
to portable 
water all 
year round 
 
 
60% of 
direct 
project 
beneficiaries 
have access 
to portable 
water all 
year round 
 
The county government and the local 
community will support the project  
 
Rain 
water 
harvesting 
policy 
and 
guidelines on rain water harvesting put in 
place.

=== PAGE 61 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 56 of 73 
 
5. 
Conservation 
of 
water   
catchment areas as climate 
change 
 
adaptation 
measure. 
Km of riparian land rehabilitated 
 
 
Reports,  
Trees/vegetative 
options 
grown 
on 
targeted 
riparian land 
50km 
100km 
150km 
The trees planted in the water catchment 
areas will survive 
The weather will be favorable 
The WRUAs will support the initiative 
6. 
Strengthened 
institutional 
and    regulatory framework 
for 
 
climate 
change 
adaptation 
  
Increased enforcement actions to 
improve water quality  
 
 
Enforcement 
and 
water 
quality reports 
 
20% 
 
40%  
 
60% 
Operational 
water 
quality 
monitoring 
systems 
 
Community compliance to regulations 
Water quality data available for decision 
making 
 
The regulated stakeholders will participate 
in the meetings and have enhanced 
compliance to the regulations 
 
 
 
No. of CEAPs developed and Sub-
Catchment Management Plans 
(SCMP) updated 
 
CEAP 
reports 
developed 
Meeting reports 
 
Sub-Catchment 
Management 
Plans 
(SCMP) 
updated 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
The County Assemblies will  endorse the 
developed CEAPS 
 
WRUAs supported to implement relevant 
parts of SCMPs. 
County Governments will implement the 
recommendation 
of 
the 
planning 
documents – CEAPs, SCMPs 
 
 
 
No. of workshops Conducted with 
regulated stakeholders to enhance 
compliance 
Improved 
compliance 
among 
regulated stakeholders  
 
Attendance 
list 
on workshops / 
meetings 
Workshops 
/ 
meetings reports 
- 
 
6 
 
12 
 
measurement of the uptake of the 
trainings will be done to determine their 
effectiveness 
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed. 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables

=== PAGE 62 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 57 of 73 
 
Activity 1.1.1 Set up an institutional 
mechanism for sharing information and 
getting feedback (data sharing protocol 
among players in the water sector e.g, 
through MOUs) 
A National Information Centre for IWRM 
at WRA headquarters will act as a hub of 
water resources monitoring information 
and will be equipped with proper ICT 
system for processing, analysis of 
information to produce integrated water 
resources 
information 
for 
informed 
decision making 
•  Policy 
dialogue 
Meetings 
aimed 
at 
developing data sharing protocols (between 
NEMA, 
WRA, 
KMD) 
and 
strategy 
for 
continuous communication between the user 
communities and county governments. 
 
Data sharing protocols and MoUs among the 
executing entities 
Functional 
water 
resource 
management 
information system 
 
Water Resource Information products 
1.1.2 Support the development of a 
National 
Information 
Centre 
for 
integrated water resource management 
(under the WRA HQ) by equipping it with 
necessary 
hardware 
and 
software 
facilities. 
 
 
• 
Acquire and install the centralized 
integrated 
water 
resource 
management 
information system (server, HDD 1TB, monitors, 
network facilities, UPS with additional batteries) 
with necessary software (operating systems, 
database, visualization, web server and other 
utilities). 
 
Activity 
1.1.3 
Support 
information 
analysis, forecasting and knowledge 
sharing platforms through an integrated 
database 
for 
weather 
and 
water 
resources-related information 
 
In order to have sustainability for project 
inputs, capacity building and training 
programs will be provided. 
• 
Develop an integrated analysis tools 
with visualization from monitoring information. 
The Decision Support System will assist in data 
entry, storage, analysis and reporting of 
collected data 
• 
Develop a shared system of weather 
forecast information for development of early 
warning and install a flood and drought warning 
system in flood prone areas in Kiambu and 
Machakos counties 
• 
Develop web services for sharing 
information with stakeholders 
Enhanced staff capacity on integrated water 
resource management and climate change 
Enhanced staff capacity on use of data generation 
and modeling software  
Activity 1.2.1 Install and rehabilitate 
surface hydro-meteorological monitoring 
and network systems and rehabilitate 
existing monitoring systems (Nyandarua, 
Nairobi, Kiambu, Machakos county) 
 
Hydro meteorological infrastructure will 
enhance protection from weather and 
climate shocks such as droughts and 
floods and improve the capability for 
gathering hydro meteorological data 
which is critical for monitoring and 
predicting extreme events. 
• 
Installation of surface hydro-meteorological 
monitoring and network systems and 
rehabilitate existing monitoring systems 
(Nyandarua, Nairobi, Kiambu, Machakos 
county).   
• 
Install 25 Automatic Weather stations within 
the upper Athi catchment. all the stations will 
be equipped with Remote Terminal Units 
(RTUs), GSM/GPRS Modems, and the solar 
PV systems with solar battery, data 
protection equipment such as noise filters, 
surge protective devices. 
• 
Install 23 surface water level monitoring 
stations with multi-parameter water quality 
Necessary equipment procured and installed at 
designated sites. 
 
Operators of the network trained on use of new 
equipment

=== PAGE 63 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 58 of 73 
 
sensors for 20 stations. 5 rainfall monitoring 
stations. All the stations will be equipped 
with 
Remote 
Terminal 
Units 
(RTUs), 
GSM/GPRS Modems, and the solar PV 
systems with solar battery, data protection 
equipment such as noise filters, surge 
protective devices. 3 Water Level Stations 
will be manual hence will not require the 
sensors. The 5 rainfall monitoring stations 
will be distributed in specific sites in the 
project 
area 
and 
located 
within 
the 
Automatic Water Level Station (AWLs) 
compound. 
 
Activity 1.2.2 Upgrade water quality test 
laboratory at WRA and NEMA (purchase, 
install, 
calibrate, 
test 
laboratory 
equipment /stations) 
Acquire and calibrate devices for water 
quality test such as atomic absorption 
spectrophotometer, oxitops, Chemical 
Oxygen 
Demand 
(COD) 
digester, 
incubators, sediment analysis kit, High-
performance 
liquid 
chromatography, 
Procure operational materials such as 
laboratory chemicals, reagents, and 
glassware 
• 
Acquire and calibrate devices for water 
quality 
test 
such 
as 
atomic 
absorption 
spectrophotometer, oxitops, Chemical Oxygen 
Demand (COD) digester, incubators, sediment 
analysis 
kit, 
High-performance 
liquid 
chromatography, Procure operational materials 
such as laboratory chemicals, reagents, and 
glassware. Both NEMA  and WRA will  be 
allocated funds for upgrading their water quality 
test laboratories 
 
Activity 1.2.3 Establish 10 groundwater 
monitoring stations  
Develop 8 new monitoring wells in 
Nairobi, Kiambu and Machakos counties 
and 
Install 
necessary 
sensors 
to 
measure 
water 
level, 
conductivity, 
temperature, RTUs and other equipment 
for automated data transfer 
• 
Develop10 new monitoring wells in 
Nairobi, Kiambu and Machakos counties and 
Install necessary sensors to measure water 
level, conductivity, temperature, RTUs and other 
equipment for automated data transfer 
Ground water monitoring stations established 
Activity 1.2.4  Setting up of a RANET 
broad casting station in Machakos 
County 
Establish a RANET station 
• 
Installation of  a  “RAdio InterNET”  
broadcasting  in approximately 50 – 75 
Kilometers radius in  the local dialect, Kiswahili 
and English for 24 hours, with an estimated   
audience of 1,000,000 listeners 
Necessary equipment procured and installed 
 Activity 1.3.1 Support capacity building 
and training for government institutions 
with water and climate change mandates 
within the project area 
In order to have sustainability for project 
inputs, capacity building and training 
programs will be provided. 
i. 
The executing entities will identity 
capacity building and trainings for their relevant 
institutions with water and climate change 
mandates within the project area and NEMA will 
approve and disburse fund accordingly

=== PAGE 64 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 59 of 73 
 
Activity 1.3.2 Support capacity building 
and 
training 
for 
relevant 
water 
governance structures and communities 
within the project area (Water Resource 
Users Associations -WRUAs, County 
Environment 
Committees 
- 
CECs, 
County 
Adaptation 
Committees, 
Community Based Organizations -CBOs 
among others) 
In order to have sustainability for project 
inputs, capacity building and training 
programs will be provided. 
i. 
The executing entities will identify  
capacity building and training for relevant water 
governance structures and communities within 
the project area, develop training plan and 
manuals and NEMA  will approve training plans 
and disburse fund accordingly 
 
Activity 1.4.1 Support development of 
State of the Environment (S.O.E) reports 
from the information developed 
Availability of data and documentation of 
environment is critical in projecting future 
scenarios, 
thereby 
reducing 
susceptibility and improving disaster 
preparedness. 
Through 
the 
SOE 
process, baseline data, trends of drivers 
and 
pressures 
impacting 
on 
the 
environment will be established, future 
scenarios 
will 
be 
projected, 
and 
appropriate 
policy 
interventions 
recommended. 
Consultative workshops to develop the S.O.Es. 
County State of the Environment (S.O.E) reports 
developed 
Activity 2.1.1:  Construct water storage 
and supply infrastructure  
 
 
In selected counties within the ARCA, 
appropriate water storage infrastructure 
will be constructed  
• 
rehabilitate two boreholes, twelve water 
pans, two springs in Nyandarua county 
• 
build a new borehole, water pan, two 
springs and rehabilitate three boreholes, two 
water pans, two springs in Kiambu county 
• 
build two new boreholes, rainwater 
harvesting tanks and rehabilitate nine water 
pans, one spring and one sand dam in Machakos 
county 
Appropriate 
water 
storage 
infrastructure 
constructed 
Improved access to water for domestic use 
Activity 
2.2.1: 
Rehabilitation 
and 
reforestation activities within the selected 
counties in collaboration with WRUAs 
  
The restoration of degraded water 
catchment areas will be done through 
engagement of communities through 
existing water resources governance 
structures (WRUAs)in the counties in 
rehabilitation/renewal/conservation and 
protection of degraded water catchment 
areas. 
The 
activities 
will 
include 
Establishing 
tree 
nurseries 
for 
rehabilitation and reforestation within the 
selected counties, perform catchment 
protection through tree planting in two 
Rehabilitation and reforestation activities within 
the 4 target counties  in collaboration with 
WRUAs 
• 
Establish tree nurseries for tree planting at 
new and rehabilitated water structures 
within the selected counties  
• 
Undertake planting of indigenous trees in 
two catchment areas with high risk of 
erosion in the target counties 
• 
Riparian marking and pegging (using 
indigenous tree) of 20km along Riara and 
Ndarugu Rivers 
Awareness on catchment conservation Improved 
Catchment areas rehabilitated and conserved

=== PAGE 65 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 60 of 73 
 
catchment areas with high risk of erosion 
in the target counties, 
• 
Construction of terraces (1000m) and 
1500m gabions (gulley healing by planting 
vetiver grass and or installation of gabion 
boxes) in selected sites in Kiambu and 
Nairobi counties).  
 
Activity 3.1.1: Provide water quality 
monitoring 
systems 
to 
support 
enforcement 
of 
the 
water 
quality 
regulations 
 
 
Activity 3.1.2: Sensitize the regulated 
communities to enhance compliance 
Implementation of the provisions of 
existing legislations through compliance 
and environment management tool s will 
enhance climate change adaptation. 
Degraded water and water quality 
treatment systems, if not monitored emit 
gases such as NH3 and CO2 which are 
greenhouse gases. In addition, water of 
poor quality could be a source of 
waterborne 
diseases 
that 
will 
compromise human health and their 
resilience to climate change. 
3.1.1 Provide water quality monitoring systems 
to support enforcement of the water quality 
regulations. The tools will include; 8 (eight) Multi 
parameter sonde (new hydrolab HL7) and ICT 
with ability to measure pH, temperature, 
nutrients (nitrates and phosphates), dissolved 
oxygen, 
total 
dissolved 
oxygen, 
salinity 
(conductivity), depth, chlorophyll, Rhodamine, 
blue-green algae, Ammonia, Chloride,  etc.  
basically parameters that show effect of climate 
change on water quality;  and its accessories; a 
Water testing kit for Microbiology analysis 
(POTALAB) with ability to detect Ecoli (Faecal 
contamination), 
Coliform 
(bacterial 
contamination), 
Salmonella 
(Typhoid), 
Pseudomonas (ENT infections); 3 (three)  
Potable 
Heavy 
metal 
detection 
meters 
(Portable Metalyser for Heavy Metals) with the 
ability to measure Arsenic (III and Total), 
Antimony, Cadmium, Chromium, Cobalt, Gold, 
Mercury, Lead, Magnesium, Nickel, Selenium, 
Thallium, Tin, Zinc  
3.1.2 Sensitize the regulated communities to 
enhance compliance: 
 
i) Promote WASH practices through hygiene 
awareness campaigns aimed at promoting water 
disinfection methods and hygiene practices in 
collaboration 
with 
the 
beneficiary 
county 
governments 
 
ii)Carry out Compliance Management Action 
Plan trainings / workshops to ensure compliance 
with the water sector laws and standards in 
Kenya (Both NEMA and WRA will identify 
stakeholder among the regulated communities to 
Improved compliance to existing legislations on 
water quality 
Compliance licenses issued

=== PAGE 66 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 61 of 73 
 
be sensitized, develop workshop schedules / 
plans and implement the activity. NEMA and 
WRA are government agencies with clear 
mandates in the water sector that require a 
coordinated approach to ensure compliance) 
 
 
Activity 3.1.3 Conduct water quality 
pollution survey for point and non-point 
sources of pollution 
The survey is a regulatory safeguard 
measure for sustainable protection of 
both 
surface 
and 
ground 
water 
resources.  
i. 
Field survey and Consultant meetings 
Water quality pollution survey for point and non-
point sources of pollution report 
Activity 3.2: Support development of 4 
County 
Environment 
Action 
Plans 
(CEAPs) as an adaptive action 
 
 
Environmental Action planning at the 
county level is critical in prioritizing 
environmental 
issues 
including 
adaptation and mitigation measures to 
be 
adopted 
in 
addressing 
county 
environmental 
challenges 
including 
those associated with climate change. 
Workshops and meetings 
 
County Environment Action Plans (CEAPs) 
developed 
County Prioritized adaptation activities identified 
for action 
Enhanced awareness on environmental action 
planning at the county level 
 
Activity 3.3  Development of 8 (eight) 
Sub-Catchment 
Management 
Plans 
(SCMPs) 
including 
climate 
change 
adaptation considerations 
Water resources are at risk from the 
adverse impacts of climate change 
hence it’s important to mainstream 
climate change related interventions in 
Sub-catchment management plans. 
Development, 
review 
and 
implementation of sub-catchment plans 
and climate risk management with 
regards to water resource management 
is crucial to ensure that catchment plans 
incorporate climate risk management 
approaches and activities. WRUAs will 
be supported in the implementation of 
activities 
in 
the 
sub-catchment 
management plans.  
i. 
Capacity 
building 
and 
SCMP 
development workshop  
Sub-catchment management plans reviewed / 
developed and implemented 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) is one of implementing measures that support successful delivery of this proposed project. Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting 
for the project will follow NEMA’s Monitoring and Evaluation Policy. A key aspect of the project will be learning and documenting of lessons as well as developing 
capacities of players of Executing Entities (EE.  The M&E function will be carried out by the accredited entity. NEMA as the AE has a Monitoring and Evaluation section 
that conducts post project monitoring over the life span of the Authority’s projects. The project results monitoring process after final evaluation will be collaborative 
activity together with the county governments that will be the custodians of the adaptation assets rehabilitated / constructed. The EE that have specific mandates in the

=== PAGE 67 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 62 of 73 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Forex 
High 
Medium 
Description 
hydrological and meteorological monitoring systems will undertake the monitoring of the established assets and carry out routine operation and maintenance to ensure 
the investments are in proper working conditions throughout the predicted lifespan.   
 
M&E process will be undertaken using participatory methods/process, especially with the EEs to enhance continuous learning and promoting iterative project 
implementation. In addition, M&E system of this project will be gender sensitive and will follow guidance from the GCF and comply with GCF M&E policy, ensuring that 
the project maintains a simple and interactive monitoring system allowing for regular collecting data for ensuring progress, reporting and evaluating at all levels The 
responsibility for day-to-day project monitoring and implementation will rests with the Executing Entities - EEs. The EEs will develop quarterly and annual work plans to 
ensure the efficient implementation of the project. The EEs will inform the AE of any delays or difficulties during implementation, including the implementation of 
the M&E plan, so that the appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. The EES will also ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of 
transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results. It is expected that it will be based on the following core activities: 
 
• 
Activity Recording/Process Documentation: Progress monitoring and reporting will provide evidence on accomplishment of the planned activities under each Output and 
Activity, by assigning milestones and implementation timelines. This will help the strategic and operational managers to identify which activities are properly taking place or 
not. The accredited entity of Kenya, NEMA, and executing entities will be responsible for ensuring routine monitoring on the use of inputs (including finances) and 
implementation of activities.  
 
• 
Annual Progress report/Annual Performance Assessment: The annual project report/Annual Performance Assessment will be included but are not limited to; quarterly project 
reports, Annual reports, Project Outputs delivered per project Outcome, financial report, lessons learnt/good practice, and annual Work Plan (for the following year).  
 
• 
A mid-term review: A Formative Evaluation process will be carried out Year 2 in order to analyze the progress of the proposed project and to suggest possible adjustments 
and improvement for the sake of efficiency, effectiveness, and sustainability before the end of the project period.   
 
• 
End of project review and final evaluation: A summative evaluation will take place no later than 6 months prior to operational closure of the project. The terms of reference, 
the review process and the final terminal evaluation report will follow the standard templates of the Government of Kenya.

=== PAGE 68 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 63 of 73 
 
Inflation and dollar fluctuation. Kenya shilling has not been stable against the dollar and due to inflation in the country most prices for services and products 
change.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project has factored in 5% inflation change. 
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
 
Resistance from the riparian adjacent landowners to have some of the riparian areas marked and protected 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will ensure proper sensitization of the community is done to have all stakeholders on board at the beginning of the project. Additionally, the 
community members will be made aware of benefits from riparian rehabilitation and protection at a community level. 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Lack of County Government goodwill of the planned activities 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
To mitigate against this risk, the project implementation will involve a wide range of stakeholders including local political and administrative leadership to 
allow for participation and decision making. The county governments participated in the county stakeholder’s forum during the feasibility hence are well 
informed of the programme. 
Selected Risk Factor 4

=== PAGE 69 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 64 of 73 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
High 
Description 
There is possibility of vandalism and/or theft of installed equipment. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
To avoid against this risk, the water monitoring equipment and other installations will be set up within institutions that have adequate security. Where this 
is not possible, the equipment will be put within reinforced burglar proof structures with arrangements for emergency security response and ensures regular 
checks on the equipment. An incident reporting mechanism will be developed to ensure community members can report to the relevant authorities. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
High 
Description 
Poor maintenance of equipment 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The feasibility study includes details on operations and maintenance plans including training of staff, inclusion of after sales service in procurement 
contracts, and preventive maintenance practices such as calibration and regular checks. Operations and maintenance costs are included in the project 
budget for the duration of the project. Relevant government agencies will cover O&M costs beyond the project lifetime. The mitigation measures lower the 
level of impact to medium. 
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
High 
Description

=== PAGE 70 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 65 of 73 
 
Installation of equipment on private land and potential for expropriation 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Whenever possible, the project will install equipment in public or government-owned land. In cases where observation or monitoring equipment will be 
installed in private land, relevant formal agreements will be signed to govern the protection of the equipment. The mitigation measures lower the impact to 
medium. 
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
High 
Description 
Extreme events such as heavy rains prevent timely implementation of activities, particularly infrastructure rehabilitation 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Annual work plans will be carefully drafted to avoid construction activities during heavy rains. In case of damage during construction, any damages and 
reconstruction costs will be covered by contractors' insurance. The mitigation measures lower the risk impact and probability to low.

=== PAGE 71 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 66 of 73 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
165. The project seeks to strengthen environmental management through activities such as protection of riparian areas and 
strengthening water governance structures.  The other activities revolve around rehabilitation of existing water infrastructure i.e. 
degraded water pans, sand dams and boreholes.  However, an Environment Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the 
activities proposed under this project has been undertaken as part of Kenya’s larger GCF project implementation strategy. 
Recommendations have been provided for in the report to ensure proper due diligence procedures are adhered to during project 
implementation. The project placed under risk category B. The project activities vis a vis the GCF environment and social 
safeguards are discussed below: 
 
Performance Standards 
Risk Level (A,B 
&C)11 
Mitigation measures 
Labor and Working Conditions 
The project will adhere to existing Kenyan laws 
on labour (Cap 226) in engagement of staff and 
consultants, which are also in tandem with GCF 
ESS standards. The project will source unskilled 
labour locally and will tap any skilled labour within 
the community, thereby providing locals with an 
opportunity to earn income. 
 
C 
In sourcing for any skill and unskilled labor, the project 
will seek to hire locals from the area of implementation. 
This will ensure buy in and provide opportunities for 
incomes to local people 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention 
The project activities that will involve rehabilitation 
of water storage structures e.g. water pans and 
sand dams may include some aspects of 
construction and use of cement and building 
material.  
B 
The project will work to ensure resource efficiency 
such as efficient water utilization through promotion of 
water efficient technologies (eg drip irrigation, piping 
rather than furrows, flooding or canal use) as provided 
in the water act of 2002. In any construction of water 
storage structures, the use of local materials will be 
promoted as much as possible  
Community Health, Safety, and Security 
It is expected that local community members may 
be used during WRUA activities as well as used 
as unskilled labour for some of the construction 
activities.  
. 
 
B 
The project will ensure adequate safety and security 
precautions in line with the Occupational health and 
safety act of 2007. During the construction and 
operational phases of the project, workers, project 
managers and all visiting the project site will be 
provided with relevant personal protective equipment. 
Adequate signage will be put in place to warn, inform 
and alert all on potential dangers and what is required 
of them. The rehabilitated water pans will be fenced as 
a security measure to ensure public safety and water 
security 
Land 
Acquisition 
and 
Involuntary 
Resettlement 
To install monitoring stations and equipment, land 
may be required. It is not expected that any 
acquisition or resettlement will be required.  
C 
The projects will be implemented on public land and 
there will be no need for land acquisition 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable 
Management of Living Natural Resources 
A number of activities will be implemented by the 
WRUAs focusing that may be dealing directly with 
biodiversity and natural resources including 
riparian restoration.  
C 
Protection of riparian areas within the catchment will 
have a positive impact on biodiversity as it will enable 
rejuvenation of fauna and flora within the buffer zone 
thus established. The WRUAs under the project will be 
involved in tree nursery establishment under which 
indigenous tree species will be propagated, some of 
which have medicinal and cultural value to the 
community.  
Cultural Heritage 
During implementation of WRUA activities there 
may be close contact with community members 
and cultural heritage sites.  
C 
The project will not have any negative impacts on the 
cultural heritage of the target beneficiaries. The 
implementation approach will seek to understand the 
cultural heritage of communities in the target counties 
and seek to gain guidance. The nomadic lifestyle of the 
Maasai will be enhanced through availability of water 
from rehabilitated springs.  
 
 
11 Risk Level has been categorized into three level: (A) Significant adverse risks that are irreversible, (B) Mild adverse 
risks that could be reversible, and (C) Minimal or no adverse risks

=== PAGE 72 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 67 of 73 
 
Table 6 Environmental and Social Management plan 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
166. 
The gender assessment identifies and proposes remedies to gender based inequalities that could exacerbate 
existing or generate new forms of disparities in the way the project impacts on men, women and other vulnerable 
populations within the catchment areas. A cross-sectional gender analysis using qualitative methods was employed 
and emphasis was on making the process participatory through focus group discussions, key informant interviews, 
observation and workshops in Nyandarua, Kiambu, Machakos and Nairobi counties.  
 
167. 
The stakeholder consultations were conducted among community participants, service delivery officers and 
policy makers in the water and environment management sectors, and gender mainstreaming oversight institutions.  
The assessment focus was on various elements of gender equality and equity that include: Access to resources, 
Level of knowledge acquisition and skills, Cultural beliefs and perceptions, Participation and decision making, Legal 
rights and status, and Time availability and space concerning location of water points.  
 
168. 
The planning and design of the program adhered to the constitutional principle of public participation that 
requires consultation with stakeholders affected by public policy/project. Consultation Meetings were held at 
inception with project beneficiaries in Nyandarua, Kiambu, Nairobi and Machakos.  35% of the participants during 
these stakeholder forums were women hence in line with the constitutional two thirds gender representation 
requirement. Further, the project technical design team comprising technical teams key lead agencies was gender 
balanced. The project has also carried out a gender analysis and further developed a gender action plan that will 
ensure 51% participation of women in project activities and decision making. The gender action plan will ensure a 
gender-sensitive approach during project implementation. Further, the gender action plan has integrated gender 
sensitive indicators that will be tracked during project implementation. The accredited entity (NEMA) through GCF 
readiness support is developing a Gender Mainstreaming action plan to enhance gender integration in projects and 
programs. The project will also be cognizant of the Access to Government Procurement Opportunities (AGPO) 
which focuses on the fair, equitable, transparent and cost effective procurement of goods and services (Article 55 
of COK 2010 which focusses on affirmative action in public procurement). The contractors will also be compelled 
to have 51% women involvement in works by introducing a clause in the contract 
 
169. 
The gender analysis established that women and girls are the vulnerable gender majorly because they are 
responsible for finding water resource that their families need to survive - for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and 
hygiene and by extension they are also responsible for watering the livestock. They walk long distances to collect 
water, they also brave long queues in water collection points and in drought seasons they are forced to pay 
exorbitant amounts of money to secure water which is often very time consuming and arduous. The impacts of 
climate change that results in water shortage exacerbates the vulnerability of women and girls leading to 
exploitation and abuse.  
 
170. 
Based on the gender assessment, a gender action plan was developed highlighting gender responsive actions 
that will be implemented against each project activity such as Constitution of a gender inclusive committee to gather 
and disseminate relevant climate information from local water catchment communities and county governments, 
development of  an integrated database for weather and water resources-related information by ensuring that men 
and women receive seasonal forecast in a timely manner, promotion of gender balanced staffing during the 
technical training on operation of monitoring and information systems, ensuring public awareness and inclusiveness 
in the participation of men and women in the water catchment protection and management processes among 
others. 
171. 
Key outcomes to be achieved from implementation of the gender action plan is reduced gender inequality and 
beneficial contribution of men and women in the project leading to reduced vulnerability, especially of women and 
girls. 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
172. 
NEMA as the accredited entity has the responsibility of financial management, accounting and reporting. NEMA 
may appoint the EEs to undertake procurement of any goods and services for this project in line with the activities 
executed and based in the government procurement procedures.  
173. 
Procurement of goods and services shall be guided by the public procurement and disposal Act 2015.  NEMA 
shall be responsible for preparation of a disbursements schedule and shall prepare financial requests to the GCF.

=== PAGE 73 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 68 of 73 
 
 
174. 
NEMA shall also coordinate with the national auditing framework to ensure the Programme is audited in 
accordance with the Kenya National Laws. The funds shall be provided in advance to the Executing Entities on a 
quarterly basis and against a criterion that will ensure prudent use of resources. The expenditure shall be audited 
by NEMA internal audit section as well as the Kenya National Audit Office – KENAO to ensure compliance with the 
Kenya National Laws 
 
175. 
Additionally, NEMA as a fast-track accredited entity under the Adaptation Fund has the basic fiduciary 
standards concerning transparency and accountability. The application of these standards will reduce any risks of 
money laundering (ML) or terrorism financing (TF) in the project.  
 
176. 
NEMA has the following basic fiduciary standards concerning transparency and accountability: 
• 
The NEMA draft Corruption Prevention policy is anchored in Chapter six of the Kenyan Constitution 2010, 
Article 232 of the Kenyan Constitution 2010, Leadership and Integrity Act 2012, Public Officer Ethic Act 2016, 
Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes 2016 
• 
NEMA Code of Conduct and Ethics 
• 
NEMA has an established mechanism of receiving complaints and the procedure requires that NEMA reports 
third party complaints to the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission - EACC that provides for a platform to 
address fraud issues with the third parties 
• 
Kenya has a draft whistle blowing Act that allows another avenue for reporting fraud. Additionally, NEMA has 
draft Whistle Blowing Policy, 2017, that provides for recourse on NEMA dealing with third parties on corruption 
issues 
• 
NEMA has a Corruption Risk and Mitigation Plan that is under implementation 
• 
Draft NEMA Corruption Prevention Policy is implemented through the appointment of Corruption Prevention 
committee –CPC and Integrity Assurance Officers committee IAO 
• 
NEMA as the NIE has draft Anti – Corruption Policy and Finance and Procurement Manual 
• 
NEMA also has a police unit seconded from the National Police Service, who largely investigate environmental 
crime, but also play an advisories role in all investigative functions. 
 
 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. 
 
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. 
Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding 
proposal, including all annexes: 
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, 
together with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for 
confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing 
confidential information.

=== PAGE 74 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 69 of 73 
 
 
ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
ANNEX 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
ANNEX 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
ANNEX 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ OTHERS (PLEASE SPECIFY – E.G.  RESETTLEMENT ACTION PLAN, RESETTLEMENT POLICY FRAMEWORK, INDIGENOUS 
PEOPLE’S PLAN, LAND ACQUISITION PLAN, ETC.) 
☒ 
ANNEX 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
ANNEX 8 
Gender assessment and project/Programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 9 
LEGAL DUE DILIGENCE (REGULATION, TAXATION AND INSURANCE) 
 
☒ 
ANNEX 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 12 
AE fee request (template provided) template 
☒ 
ANNEX 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
ANNEX 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
ANNEX 15 
EVIDENCE OF INTERNAL APPROVAL (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/Programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22 
Indigenous People and Chance Find Procedure 
☒ 
Annex 23 
Updated ARCA Technical report 
☒ 
Annex 24 
BoQ of proposed water structures 
☒ 
Annex 25 
Peizometric surface trend analysis 
☒ 
Annex 26 
Climatology of Kenya 
☒ 
Annex 27 
WASH in Athi River Catchment project Area 
☒ 
Annex 28 
No. of beneficiaries breakdown - ARCA funding proposal 
☒ 
Annex 29 
Impact of Future projected Climate on the Upper Athi River basin Water Resources Report 
☒ 
Annex 30 
ARCA Basin Level - Rainfall and temperature trend analysis 
☒ 
Annex 31 
Basin Level-Analysis of projected  rainfall changes 
☒ 
Annex 32 
Potential evapotranspiration (PET) for the baseline (1981-2010) and for the 2011-2040 for the three emission pathway 
projections

=== PAGE 75 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 73 
 
 
 
 
Page 70 of 73 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable 
supporting documents.

=== PAGE 76 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 78 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Enhancing community resilience and water security in 
the Upper Athi River Catchment Area, Kenya 
Existence of subproject(s) to be 
identified after GCF Board 
approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
National Environment Management Authority of Kenya 
(NEMA) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific location(s) of 
project or target country or 
location(s) of programme 
Country: Kenya 
1. Kiambu County
2. Nairobi County
3. Nyandarua County
4. Machakos County
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
Wednesday, May 20, 2020 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
English is an official language of Kenya. 
Link to disclosure 
http://www.nema.go.ke/images/Docs/NIE%20Docss/
Annex%206%20ESMF%20for%20GCF%20funding%2
0proposal.pdf  
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a 
Category B project is contained in the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF). 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
Wednesday, May 20, 2020 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
English is an official language of Kenya. 
Link to disclosure 
http://www.nema.go.ke/images/Docs/NIE%20Docss/
Annex%206%20ESMF%20for%20GCF%20funding%2
0proposal.pdf 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a 
Category B project is contained in the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A

=== PAGE 79 ===
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of report/disclosure 
on accredited entity’s website 
The Indigenous Peoples Framework and Chance Find 
Procedure/ Wednesday, May 20, 2020 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
English is an official language of Kenya. 
Link to disclosure 
http://www.nema.go.ke/images/Docs/NIE%20Docss/
Annex%2023%20ARCA-%20Indigenous%20%20Peopl
e%20and%20Chance%20find%20procedure%20.pdf   
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
The framework is developed as a precautionary 
measure for mitigation of adverse impacts on the 
vulnerable and marginalized groups, should screening 
indicate the presence of Indigenous People. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Wednesday, May 20, 2020 
Place 
The Registry and NIE Section in NEMA Head Quarters: 
 
Popo Road, South C, off Mombasa Road 
National Environment Management Authority, 
P.O.BOX: 67839-00200, 
Nairobi. 
Fax: +(254)-020-6008997 
Tel No: 
020-2101370, 020-2183718, 020-2307281, 020-
2103696 
Mobile: 0724 253398, 0735 013046, 0723 363 010 
Email: dgnema@nema.go.ke 
 
NEMA County Offices (Nyandarua, Machakos, Kiambu): 
District Commissioner’s Complex. 1st Floor, RM 10 
P. O. Box 1756 – 20300 Nyahururu 
 
KFS Machakos Office Complex 
Machakos- Kathiani Rd 
P. O. Box 2 -90100 MACHAKOS 
 
Mapa House, 5th FLR Kiambu Town 
P. O. Box 427-KIAMBU 
 
WRA County office: 
Athi Basin Area  
P.O Box 1159-90100  
Machakos-Kitui Road - Machakos Office 
 
Upper Athi 
P.O Box 1864-00900 
Hospital Road, 
Opposite Kiambu District Hospital 
KIAMBU

=== PAGE 80 ===
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s Board 
meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, October 4, 2021 
Note: This form was prepared by the Accredited Entity stated above.

=== PAGE 81 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 81 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP175 
Proposal name: 
Enhancing community resilience and water security in the Upper 
Athi River Catchment Area, Kenya 
Accredited entity: 
National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) 
Country/(ies): 
Kenya 
Project/programme size: 
Micro 
I.
Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths 
Points of caution 
Linking hydrological, meteorological and water 
quality monitoring systems across Kenya’s Water 
Resources Authority (WRA), Kenya 
Meteorological Department (KMD) and Kenya’s 
National Environment Management Authority 
(NEMA) presents a paradigm-shifting opportunity 
towards climate-informed water resources 
management at both national and county levels. 
Operation and maintenance (O&M) of equipment 
and infrastructure, which will be critical to long-
term impact, has previously been an issue with 
similar investments in the project area. A 
thorough O&M plan has been developed to 
mitigate this risk. 
Providing alternative water sources for the most 
vulnerable inhabitants of the Upper Athi River 
catchment area will improve their well-being and 
livelihoods, while alleviating water stress in the 
catchment. 
Community participation in O&M of water 
infrastructure and sub-catchment management 
planning will foster a greater sense of ownership 
of and responsibility for the water resources. 
Building partnerships with ongoing water, 
sanitation and hygiene (WASH) initiatives into the 
proposal will ensures that the supply of water will 
not lead to an increase in waterborne diseases 
and related health and safety issues.  
2.
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XVIII, titled “List of proposed
conditions and recommendations”.
II.
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 
Project background 
3.
Kenya´s people and economy are highly vulnerable to water availability, thus making
water security a key issue for the country. Water security concerns in Kenya are compounded

=== PAGE 82 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 82 
 
 
by climate change, which directly impacts on the quantity and quality of the nation’s water 
resources. Kenya has limited freshwater and faces chronic water scarcity along with additional 
challenges related to high inter-annual and intra-annual rainfall variability. 
4. 
Among Kenya’s six water catchment areas, the Athi River Catchment has a negative 
water balance, in terms of water demand versus availability, and is the least water-secure 
region. It is also the most vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change. Among the 12 
counties that compose the Athi River Catchment Area, four counties have experienced the 
highest drought and flooding risks: Kiambu, Machakos, Nairobi and Nyandarua, in that order. 
These are the four counties targeted by the proposed project.  
5. 
In the target project area, most tributaries have recorded significant reductions in river 
flows, with some drying up entirely. In addition, climate change has impacted groundwater 
levels with knock-on effects for the water available to recharge the underlying aquifer. 
Groundwater resources in the project area have also been negatively impacted by higher 
temperatures leading to increased evaporation rates. Due to the decreased availability of 
surface water, reliance on groundwater has increased to meet demand, further straining 
resources. Water supply infrastructure and water resources management are simply not 
adequate to cope with these changes, which are exacerbated by climate change.  
6. 
The project’s climate objective is to increase water security and strengthen 
communities’ resilience to climate change in Kenya’s Upper Athi River Catchment area in Kenya. 
These counties were selected due to their high exposure to climate-impacted floods and 
droughts and climate-exacerbated water scarcity. The objective will be addressed through three 
sets of interventions related to: hydrological and meteorological information management; 
installing and rehabilitating water infrastructure; and strengthening planning and regulatory 
frameworks for water resource management.  
7. 
In terms of environmental and social safeguards (ESS), the project is categorized as B for 
a moderate level of risks. The Secretariat’s assessment of ESS documentation, underlying 
project risks and mitigation measures can be found later in this document. 
8. 
The project proposal seeks USD 9.53 million of GCF grant funding alongside a combined 
USD 0.47 million in-kind co-financing from NEMA, the accredited entity (AE) and the two 
executing entities (EEs), Kenya’s Water Resources Authority (WRA) and the Kenya 
Meteorological Department (KMD). 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis  
Component 1: Enhance hydrological and meteorological monitoring system to support decision 
making, planning and policy development in water and climate change sector (total cost: USD 2.74 
million; GCF cost: USD 2.53 million, or 92 per cent) 
9. 
This component aims to facilitate climate-risk informed decision-making on water 
resources management in the upper Athi River sub-catchment. Establishment of a National 
Information Centre for Integrated Water Resource Management will provide a central 
repository for meteorological, hydrological and water quality data and facilitate processing of 
that data into information essential for water use planning. Modernisation of the hydrological 
and meteorological observation networks will ensure that real-time data is available to guide 
decision-making, for example water releases from dams to prevent disasters. Groundwater 
monitoring wells will also be set up to facilitate decision-making about groundwater abstraction 
and required treatment. Capacity-building of the relevant government institutions will ensure 
that the monitoring networks and information system are effectively used and maintained. The 
integration of surface water, groundwater, precipitation and water quality data will be a first for 
Kenya and the region, with good potential for replication in neighbouring catchments and

=== PAGE 83 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 83 
 
 
countries. A broadcasting station will also be installed to disseminate weather and climate 
information. 
Component 2: Improve climate water resilience by building, enhancing and rehabilitating 
prioritized water infrastructure and implementing conservation activities in the catchment (total 
cost: USD 4.99 million; GCF cost: USD 4.90 million, or 98 per cent) 
10. 
It is predicted that the Upper Athi River sub-catchment will continue to experience 
increasing frequency of both droughts and floods as a result of climate change. Annual rainfall 
across the four counties shows an overall increasing trend, but the river catchment is highly 
stressed by multiple competing uses and a lack of water storage. Thus, it seems plausible that 
construction/rehabilitation of small-scale water storage infrastructure, as well as a limited 
number of boreholes and associated water supply networks, will improve water availability for 
the most vulnerable without exacerbating demand for water from the river. 
11. 
Furthermore, to improve ecological integrity and functioning of the river, there is need 
to revegetate the headwater and banks. Tree nurseries will be established to provide saplings 
for restoration of degraded water catchment areas. The physical work required will be provided 
by the beneficiary communities, engaged through the local water resources user associations. 
Community participation in catchment restoration is likely to deter any future degradation of 
the catchment. 
Component 3: Strengthen water and adaptation planning, institutional and regulatory framework 
to respond to changing climatic conditions (total cost: USD 1.21 million; GCF cost: USD 1.15 
million, or 95 per cent) 
12. 
Water resources are at risk from the adverse impacts of climate change, hence the 
importance of mainstreaming climate change considerations into sub-catchment management 
plans. The development and implementation of climate risk informed sub-catchment 
management plans is crucial to ensuring that water resources are allocated and distributed so 
as ensure that priority uses, such as drinking water, are secured under a changing climate. The 
project will also conduct a water quality survey to further safeguard water quality.  
13. 
Beyond water resources management, there are other ecosystem management decision-
making frameworks that need to be redeveloped to factor in climate change responses. In 
Kenya, one such framework is county environmental action planning. With NEMA leading this 
process, the beneficiary counties will be better equipped to manage multiple climate related 
risks. 
14. 
Community sensitisation to influence compliance with water quality regulations is 
considered likely to result in improved ambient water quality in the river and its tributaries, 
thereby reducing the need for water treatment by both domestic and commercial users. Though 
difficult to estimate these diffuse emissions reductions, it is evident that better water quality in 
the river would mean less energy use at water treatment plants and perhaps reduced need for 
water boiling at household level, resulting in reduced deforestation. 
15. 
Thus, it is the Secretariat’s view that this project’s approach towards improving both 
water quality and quantity available in the Upper Athi River catchment through climate-
informed water management is holistic and sustainable. 
Monitoring and evaluation (total cost: USD 0.56 million; GCF cost: USD 0.56 million, or 100 per 
cent) 
Project management costs (total cost: USD 0.44 million; GCF cost: USD 0.37 million, or 84 per cent) 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria

=== PAGE 84 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 84 
 
 
3.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
            
         Scale: N/A 
16. 
The standard of living and livelihoods of the communities within the Athi River 
Catchment are very sensitive to climate variability and change. The demand for water far 
exceeds supply in the Athi River Catchment due to its negative water balance, making it one of 
the least water-secure regions in the country. Four out of 12 counties (Kiambu, Machakos, 
Nairobi and Nyandarua) in the basin have experienced the highest drought and flooding risks. 
The proposal’s feasibility study on the analysis of the climate and hydrological cycle of the Athi 
River Basin established that the frequency and intensity of drought will increase under the 
projected global warming. The feasibility study also shows that the projected increasing 
temperature will lead to increasing evapotranspiration and will further exacerbate the negative 
water balance situation of the Athi River Basin. The proposed interventions will lay the 
foundation for an integrated and comprehensive solution to addressing the Basin’s water 
security risk associated with climate variability and change.  
17. 
The project is expected to directly benefit 1,156,620 people and indirectly benefit 
another 3,693,380 people. The AE includes direct beneficiaries as those with increased access to 
water sources for domestic and agricultural uses. The project also emphasizes water quality and 
the integration of a broader WASH approach by enforcing existing water regulations thus 
reducing incidences of waterborne diseases and increasing the community’s well-being overall.  
18. 
The project calculates indirect beneficiaries as the total population of the counties of 
Kiambu, Machakos, Nairobi and Nyandarua in the Upper Athi River Catchment area who derive 
wider project benefits of reduced flooding, avoided water resource conflicts, improved 
hydrological information and improved ecological functioning of the catchment.  
19. 
Overall impact will depend on how well the investments made in this project can be 
maintained over time. The project has developed an adequate operations and maintenance 
(O&M) plan, but previous similar investments have been undermaintained.  
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential     
 
 
                                 Scale: N/A 
20. 
 The proposal adopts an integrated water resources management approach where the 
biophysical and socioeconomic determinants of climate variability and change within the Athi 
River Basin are considered. The proposal identifies three areas of intervention: (i) enhance 
hydrological and meteorological monitoring systems to support decision-making, planning and 
policy development in the water and climate change sector; (ii) improve climate resilience and 
water resilience by building, enhancing and rehabilitating prioritized water infrastructure and 
implementing conservation activities in the catchment; and (iii)  strengthen water and 
adaptation planning, and the institutional and regulatory framework to respond to changing 
climatic conditions. 
21. 
Beyond the water infrastructure to be installed or rehabilitated, the project’s strongest 
aspect of paradigm shift potential is in the shared hydrometeorological systems and 
strengthening of institutional capacity of the key institutions, county governments and 
communities. These shared systems for water resource management, which link NEMA, WRA, 
KMD and the counties, will be an innovation for Kenya.  The integration of WASH as part of an 
integrated and comprehensive approach to addressing water demand and supply will ensure 
that the investments will not lead to an increase in water-related diseases, environmental and 
public health risks. 
22. 
A closely related strength is county government use of climate information for improved 
water resource management. County governments will be better positioned to manage water 
resources through the integration of meteorological, hydrological, hydrogeological and water 
quality data. As noted in the funding proposal, county governments will work with WRA and

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 85 
 
 
KMD to establish hydromet information-sharing mechanisms, which will in turn help them 
determine current and future climate risks. Based on those new climate risk assessments, 
county governments will be better positioned to plan development interventions, particularly in 
the water sector. The approach, if successful, could be replicated in the other catchment areas in 
Kenya.  
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
           
         Scale: N/A 
23. 
Currently, water demand far exceeds supply, with demand projected to increase to 
about 281 per cent by 2030. Water users within the project site consist of urban and rural 
population, small and heavy industries, farming communities, livestock and wildlife that place 
significant demand on water resources (both surface and ground water aquifers). Drought and 
floods present significant challenges to the region. The targeted areas experience seven dry 
months and five wet months annually, which results in women and children in the communities 
spending hours walking long distances to fetch water daily.   
24. 
The proposed interventions will significantly reduce the risk of climate variability and 
change to lives, assets and livelihoods. The environmental, social and economic co-benefits to be 
derived from the project will be significant in that it will allow substantial costs to be avoided 
via sustainable provision of potable water for its various users. It will also enable businesses to 
derive increased and predictable revenue as a result of enhanced water security to sustain their 
operations.  Co-benefits will also take the form of improved sanitation and hygiene from 
improved access to water. In addition, the water is expected to be of higher quality as a result of 
the project’s focus on water quality testing and control. Improved sanitation and hygiene should 
be reflected in the decreased prevalence of waterborne diseases.  Additionally, co-benefits will 
also include improved biodiversity and air quality as a result of the rehabilitation of the riparian 
areas in the catchment. The proposal does not quantify or estimate these co-benefits, and future 
funding proposals would benefit from this type of quantification.  
25. 
The risk management benefits to be derived from hydromet services would also be 
significant since climate variability and change will be predictable through early warning and 
early action systems and protocols that will be established across all scales. The proposal is 
aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), Kenya’s nationally determined 
contribution (NDC) and Sendai Framework. 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
                     Scale: N/A 
26. 
In terms of climate vulnerability, Kenya’s Athi River Catchment area is the least water 
secure of Kenya’s six water catchments. In the context of climate change, the analysis in the 
feasibility study demonstrates that the majority of the catchment is ranked as highly vulnerable. 
Droughts, which are projected to become more severe by 2030, threaten the catchment’s 
residents with the per capita water availability being less than half of the global standard. 
Climate change worsens the catchment’s ongoing water deficits, pointing to a need for better 
planning and management of water resources. This is aligned with needs expressed in the NDC, 
SDGs and national and county long-term development plans. 
27. 
The proposal makes the case that government funding is not sufficient to resolve 
droughts and floods, limited technical and institutional capacity, low compliance and an 
inadequate regulatory framework for water resource management. GCF funding will contribute 
to water security (projected to become substantially less secure in the next 10 years), 
strengthen hydrological and meteorological information services to deliver better improved 
information to local communities, and support decision making and policy development in the 
water sector.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 86 
 
 
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
                                 Scale: N/A 
28. 
The proposal is strongly supported within the country and is among the first prepared 
by NEMA for GCF funding. The process of issuing a no-objection letter in Kenya seeks to ensure 
a fit between the proposed project and the country’s climate strategies and plans, including 
Kenya's National Climate Change Action Plan, national adaptation plan and NDC. Just as 
importantly, the project activities are based on climate change adaptation measures and needs 
consistent with the National Water Master Plan. 
29. 
More importantly, the core components of the proposal have been developed using local 
expertise and resources, demonstrating the strong ownership the Government has in the design 
and subsequent implementation of the project if approved. It will be implemented mainly by 
national institutions, counties and local communities which will integrate local knowledge, best 
practices and lessons learned to ensure the uptake and sustainability of the investments.  
30. 
This proposal is the first brought forward to the GCF Board for approval. NEMA does 
have experience with other multilateral-funded projects, as it is also the national implementing 
entity with the Adaptation Fund programme. NEMA is currently implementing a similarly sized 
programme aimed at building climate resilience and adaptive capacity in 14 counties in Kenya.  
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
                     Scale: N/A 
31. 
Based on the public goods nature of the interventions, GCF grant financing is assessed to 
be an appropriate financial instrument. However, the requested GCF grant financing leverages a 
relatively low amount of co-financing in the form of in-kind contributions from NEMA, WRA and 
KMD.  
32. 
The proposal has established that the economic and financial viability of the project are 
positive and robust. At 12 per cent discounting rate, the Net Present Values (NPV) are estimated 
to be approximately USD 9.75 million, USD 7.58 million and USD 5.55 million for 30 years, 20 
years and 15 years respectively. The respective Internal Rate of Returns (IRRs) are 13 per cent, 
12 per cent and 11 per cent. The Benefits-Costs-Ratios are 1.78, 1.63 and 1.48 for 30 years, 20 
years and 15 years respectively. This demonstrates that the return on investment from the 
project will lead to the expected economic and financial benefits.  
33. 
The proposal also provides socio-ecological benefits through the restoration of 
ecosystem functions and services, such as healthy soil-vegetation-atmosphere interactions, 
which improve the hydrological cycle and broader local climates leading to improved 
livelihoods. The hydromet services and institutional effectiveness will also be improved through 
capacity development and technology transfer interventions.   
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
34. 
 Environmental and social risk category. The AE has assigned a risk category of the 
project as Category B due to the scale of the activities and the fact that most of them would only 
involve rehabilitation of existing facilities. The Secretariat confirms the Category B 
classification. Under Component 1, the project would install and/or rehabilitate surface hydro-
meteorological monitoring and network equipment, including weather, surface water and 
rainfall monitoring stations, and upgrading of an existing water quality testing laboratory. 
Under Component 2, the project would: (i) rehabilitate existing water sources and facilities, 
consisting of 8 boreholes, 23 water pans, 5 springs, 2 weirs, and a sand dam; and (ii) develop 2

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 87 
 
 
new springs and 2 new boreholes; and installation of 80 new water tanks. It will also implement 
2 existing catchment protection schemes.  
35. 
Safeguards instruments and disclosure. The AE has submitted an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Summary of Consultations and Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan and an Indigenous People's Framework (both as separate Annexes to the 
Funding Proposal) which were disclosed in the English language on the AE’s and GCF’s websites. 
The ESMF provides for a more detailed assessment and management planning to be undertaken 
at the subproject levels. The ESMF also provides for the processes and steps of screening, 
assessment and review of the subprojects. The levels of impacts and risk category of individual 
activities (or subprojects) dictates the required assessment instruments which would also 
depend on the scale and locations of the subprojects, among other considerations. An 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is likewise provided in the ESMF which 
indicates the management actions, responsible parties, monitoring indicators including an 
indicative budget for its implementation.   
36. 
Key Environmental and Social Issues. The ESMF contains an extensive baseline 
characterization of the environmental and socioeconomic conditions of the Upper Athi 
Catchment Area (ACA). The key impacts identified include those related to hydrology, 
vegetation clearing, soil erosion and sedimentation, air quality as regards dust and emissions 
from construction equipment and earth moving, generation of noise and solid wastes. The 
project may have potential impacts during water abstraction on the water balance, possible 
increase in water-borne diseases due to establishment of water pans, risk of encroachment into 
protected areas in the development of new water sources and catchment protection, concerns 
on community health and safety, and possible displacement of informal settlers or farm 
occupants in the target areas. 
37. 
 Construction works of individual subprojects are expected to be small-scale but should 
workers from outside the locality be brought in, behaviours may clash with the local culture and 
traditions. To avoid this, the project intends to source skilled and unskilled labour from the 
locality and allow for opportunities for additional income to local people. Depending on the 
storage capacities and locations of the reservoirs (water pans), these could also pose safety risk 
to the communities. The rehabilitation and construction of new water infrastructure could affect 
people in the vicinity of the structures depending on the land use status of the sites. For the 
rehabilitation works, this would depend on whether it would entail expansion of the footprint of 
the facility or whether the construction and maintenance would need additional easements. 
While the ESMF indicated that all the identified water infrastructures including the monitoring 
stations and equipment will be located on public utility lands, the project has to ensure that 
indeed there are no settlers in the project sites that would be displaced, including in the sites of 
the two new springs to be developed during project implementation. 
38. 
The AE’s preliminary assessment indicates that it is unlikely that indigenous peoples 
will be affected in the project’s area of influence. Nonetheless, the project has developed an 
Indigenous Peoples Framework as a guide to mitigate adverse impacts on vulnerable and 
marginalized groups and should further screening of any of the subproject indicates the 
presence of indigenous peoples. The AE notes that the project expects that the nomadic lifestyle 
of the Maasai will be enhanced through availability of water from rehabilitated springs. The 
project has also prepared a chance find procedure in the event of possibility of presence of any 
cultural heritage or sacred sites near or within the project areas. 
39. 
Stakeholder engagement and grievance redress. The project conducted discussions 
with user groups, specifically with the Water Resource User Associations (WRUAs) which 
allows the project to gather issues and concerns of the stakeholders. This also included 
interviews with technical officers from various government representatives. The AE has also 
prepared a Summary of Consultations and Stakeholder Engagement Plan which summarized the 
stakeholder consultations and engagements undertaken so far and the planned stakeholder

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 88 
 
 
engagements during project implementation. The ESMF also provides for establishment and 
designation of an Independent Redress Committee (IRC) which shall be composed of various 
representatives from the community, the government and from non-government organizations, 
among others. It also provides for a designation of a grievance officer within the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) who will handle concerns and grievances during the course of 
project implementation. It should be noted that the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy also states 
that the GCF independent Redress Mechanism and the Secretariat’s indigenous peoples’ focal 
point will be available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made. 
4.2 
Gender policy 
40. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan and therefore 
complies with the requirements under the GCF Gender Policy.  
41. 
The gender assessment provides information on the existing enabling environment for 
promoting gender equality and women’s empowerment. Kenya’s constitution and bill of rights 
recognizes the primacy of addressing inequality and discrimination and has provisions to 
remedy gender inequalities. The National Gender and Equality Commission was established to 
ensure that national and county development processes are responsive to alleviation of 
inequality. Despite these legal and institutional frameworks inequality between women and 
men persists across all facets of development in the country.  
42. 
The gender assessment illustrates the gender gaps in the four project counties. 
Information for the assessment was gathered through focus group discussions held with men 
and women and community leaders. The assessment provided information on the disparity 
between women and men in accessing resources such as land, knowledge, practices and 
participation in economic activities and legal rights. Disparities also exist in relation to 
household chores, balance of power, decision-making, and social status, while commonly held 
beliefs and perceptions further impede opportunities for women, leaving them at a 
disadvantage and contributing towards their current status of inequality in Kenya. 
43. 
The assessment recognizes the central role water has for development, health, 
livelihoods, food security, and poverty reduction. Furthermore, the assessment analyses the 
obstacles faced by women accessing affordable water and highlights the following findings:  
(a) 
Accessibility: As a result of droughts which have led to water shortages, it is necessary 
to travel ever greater distances to access water. This in turns leads to time poverty 
directly impacting women’s participation in the formal and informal economy and 
compromises women’s security when travelling to and from water sources. In addition, 
limited control over land and land ownership by women directly impacts their control 
over water resources as access is based on a permit system linked to land rights under 
formal tenure. Women have limited land rights; 
(b) 
Cost: The purchase of water due to its limited availability has become an important 
source of household spending directly impacting poor households, especially female-
headed households; 
(c) 
Sufficiency: Inadequate irrigation has a direct impact on crop production where women 
have a preponderant role; and 
(d) 
Safety: There are also physical safety concerns regarding access to clean water. 
44. 
In the counties of Kiambu, Machakos and Nyandarua access to clean water for domestic 
consumption and irrigation, and improved drainage systems, were identified as priorities for 
the communities. The project responds to these needs by investing in institutional governance 
and integrated water resource management and increased access to potable water for domestic 
use.

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 89 
 
 
45. 
Contexts related to the project and areas of intervention are also discussed in terms of 
access to climate information, which is less available to women. The assessment also indicates 
that female-headed households are a vulnerable group due to burdens of domestic, communal 
and productive roles with limited assistance. 
46. 
Though the assessment is based on consultations in the form of focus group discussions, 
key informant interviews, observations and workshops in Kiambu, Machakos and Nyandarua 
counties, in many cases men and women from the same area have different perceptions on the 
same issues, such as access to resources (land, extension and income-generating activities), 
membership participation, roles and responsibilities. The assessment also indicates that 
patriarchy prevails in the counties and considers men to have a superior role in society 
compared to women, thus defining and prescribing roles that are challenging for women. A 
survey conducted into the division of labour and time use indicates that women and girls are 
assigned tasks that are time consuming, burdensome, considered low status and are 
unremunerated. This is in addition to the challenge that women face in accessing economic 
opportunities. The assessment concludes that in the four project counties women and girls are 
responsible for water resources, entailing long distances to collect water, time spent queuing 
and exorbitant payments for water. 
47. 
The AE, in fulfilling the requirement of the Fund’s Gender Policy, has provided a gender 
action plan. The gender action plan submitted includes activities that provides space for women 
to participate in gender assessment and consultation process and other activities, performance 
indicators with some sex-disaggregated targets and timelines for all activities. During the first 
year of the project, the action plan will be updated based on the consultation findings and 
further updates will take place as needed. 
48. 
The activities included in the action plan are expected to address the challenges to 
gender equality as identified through the gender assessment.  The activities included in the 
action plan are expected to address the challenges to gender equality as identified through the 
gender assessment. The activities are expected to provide opportunities to meet women’s 
employment needs through their engagement in the rehabilitation and construction of water 
storage and supply infrastructure; engaging women in consultations prior to  
rehabilitation/new construction of water points; providing employment opportunities for 
women in civil works; reviewing the existing legal and regulatory frameworks in the water 
sector to ensure gender issues are mainstreamed; and participation of women in the County 
Environment Action Plan and other consultations.  
49. 
The gender action plan also assigned roles and responsibilities to a gender expert that 
will be hired for the project to support with the implementation of the activities included in the 
gender action plan. The AE has allocated budget for the implementation of the gender action 
plan as part of the project’s monitoring and evaluation cost. 
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall project assessment (medium risk) 
50. 
 GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 9.5 million to enhance community resilience 
and water security in the Athi River Catchment area in Kenya. The AE and two EEs (WRA and 
KMD) are providing a total of USD 0.4 million in-kind contribution to the project.  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current project 
(medium risk) 
51. 
 NEMA will play a role as both AE and co-EE for this project. As a direct access entity, 
NEMA was established in 2004 to implement environmental policies in Kenya. NEMA has

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 90 
 
 
operational county offices in all 47 counties and experience in managing projects funded by 
external donors (e.g. USD 10 million from the Adaptation Fund).  
52. 
In addition to NEMA, there are two co-EEs: WRA and KMD. WRA is a state corporation 
under the Ministry of Water and Irrigation and is currently managing an average of USD 20 
million per year since 2013. KMD has been managing projects with a budget between USD 1 
million to USD 12 million for the past seven years. 
4.3.3. 
Project-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
53. 
O&M risk: the funding proposal has identified risks related to O&M such as poor 
maintenance, potential vandalism and potential expropriation. The project budget includes 
O&M costs during the implementation period and the government agencies will cover the cost 
beyond the project implementation. To avoid the risk of vandalism, the equipment will be 
installed in places with adequate security and burglar proof structures. As for the potential of 
expropriation, formal agreements will be signed to protect the equipment in case this has to be 
installed in private land.  
54. 
Water tariff: the funding proposal states that the water service provider that is owned 
by the county government is established as a public institution and will manage public water 
services and assets on behalf of the public. According to the AE response, water service 
providers have their jurisdiction and collect the tariffs, but the revenue is not necessarily re-
invested in the water management system as each county government has its own priorities. It 
is necessary that for steady operation of the project, the tariff determined by the county 
government is commensurate with the ability of the end users to pay. Also, the project will 
benefit if county governments reinvest the tariffs collected to cover the O&M cost for water 
resource management.  
55. 
Project viability/concessionality: the economic analysis accounts for project benefits as 
avoided costs from flood damage, health treatment and travel time for water collection. The 
analysis results in the economic internal rate of return of 21.7 per cent. The net present value 
remains positive in sensitivity scenarios of 10 per cent increase in cost and 10 per cent 
reduction in benefits, with corresponding economic internal rate of return of 17.9 per cent and 
14.8 per cent respectively.  
4.3.4. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk) 
56. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains non-
material and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration level, results area or single 
proposal. 
4.3.5. 
Compliance risk (medium risk) 
57. 
The proposed activities do not indicate an unusually high risk for money laundering, 
terrorist financing, or prohibited practices in themselves. Nevertheless, the capability to install 
internal controls may vary. The AE has described its approach toward assessing risks for illicit 
practices and will monitor and mitigate such risks. Based on the information provided, 
compliance risk is assessed as medium, subject to modification should additional details evolve. 
4.3.6. 
Summary risk assessment and recommendation 
Summary Risk Assessment 
Rationale 
Overall project 
Medium

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 91 
 
 
Accredited entity/executing 
entity capability 
Medium 
The project aims to strengthen the water 
management governance and monitoring 
system. The AE will implement the construction 
of the water infrastructure and coordinate with 
other EEs and county governments for soft 
interventions. Steady support for O&M of the 
project by county governments will be critical 
for the sustainability of the project.  
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
58. 
NEMA have the role of both AE and co-EE to implement some of the proposed activities. 
As the AE, NEMA shall be responsible for overall project planning, execution, coordination, 
monitoring and evaluation, and reporting. It shall also be responsible for reporting and the 
overall project budgeting based on the agreed work plans prepared by the executing entities. 
59. 
NEMA has identified WRA and KMD as the co-executing entities for some proposed 
activities in line with their mandates. The implementation will be conducted by the EEs but will 
be guided by the National Project Steering Committee through quarterly meetings. The 
committee will ensure that project implementation is conducted according to the country’s 
priorities. 
60. 
GCF will disburse funds to the AE while NEMA will disburse funds to the EEs (WRA and 
KMD) based on the approved work plans and requisite reports. The funds shall be provided in 
advance to the EEs on a quarterly basis and against a criterion that will ensure prudent use of 
resources. 
61. 
NEMA as the AE has the responsibility of financial management, accounting and 
reporting. It will ensure project performance audits by the NEMA internal auditors and Kenya 
National Audit office.  
62. 
In terms of the procurement implementation arrangement, it is noted that the multiple 
EEs are foreseen to be involved in procurement execution. It is noted that the EEs are 
government agencies with dedicated procurement, finance, and internal audit departments, 
guided by the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 and are subjected to regular and annual 
external audits by the Auditor General’s Office as well as general oversight by the State 
Corporations Advisory Committee in order to reinforce transparency and accountability in their 
operations. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
63. 
This project seeks to build resilience in three ways. First, the project strengthens 
hydrological and meteorological information services to deliver relevant, accurate and timely 
climate information to local communities, and to support decision-making and policy 
development in the water sector. Secondly, this project seeks to increase water security by 
investments in improving and rehabilitating prioritized water infrastructure in the target 
counties so as to increase access to portable water for domestic use. Finally, the project seeks to 
improve adaptation planning in the target area.  
64. 
This is an adaptation project and is meant to increase the resilience of 192,770 
households, with 1,156,620 direct beneficiaries, 51 per cent of whom are female. The project 
also aims to strengthen 150 km of catchment areas, and develop more resilient assets with a 
total value of USD 45 million. Finally, the project will also support local communities and it is

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 92 
 
 
expected that at least 60 per cent of the beneficiaries will have more than 10 per cent increase 
in income towards the end of the project.  
65. 
The project will contribute to achieving three fund-level impacts, namely:  
(a) 
Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods for the most vulnerable people, 
communities and regions; 
(b) 
Increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment to climate change; and  
(c) 
Increased resilience of health and well-being, and food and water security. 
66. 
Regarding the theory of change, there is a clear causal linkage between the barriers and 
proposed interventions with clear reference to assumptions and risks are made. 
67. 
Regarding the timetable of implementation, earlier comments have been addressed and 
the project now conforms with the standard GCF format.  
68. 
For the logical framework, the revised funding proposal incorporated most of the 
comments and suggestions provided by the Secretariat and conforms with GCF performance 
measurement frameworks and risk management frameworks.  
4.6 
Legal assessment 
69. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 20 June 
2016 (the “AMA”), and it became effective on 22 April 2021. 
70. 
The Accredited Entity has provided a legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. 
71. 
The proposed project will be implemented in Republic of the Kenya, country in which 
GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other things, GCF 
is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be 
further assessed. The Secretariat provided a draft agreement on privileges and immunities to 
the NDA on 11 December 2015. Discussions are still in progress and the last communication 
was on 05 October 2018. 
72. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
73. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions: 
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and 
(b) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 93 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP175 
Proposal name: 
Enhancing community resilience and water security in the Upper 
Athi River Catchment Area, Kenya 
Accredited entity: 
National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) 
Country/(ies): 
Kenya 
Project/programme size: 
Micro 
I.
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel1
1.1 
Impact potential 
  Scale: N/A 
1.1.1. 
Adaptation impact 
1.
Aimed at reducing the impact of drought in the Upper Athi River Catchment Area
(ARCA), the project has three components: (1) supporting decision-making, planning and policy
development in the water and climate change sectors through the enhancement of the hydro-
meteorological monitoring and information management systems; (2) constructing and
rehabilitating water supply and storage infrastructure to improve climate resilience; and (3)
strengthening institutional capacity and regulatory frameworks.
2.
The technical features of component 1 include installing 25 automatic weather stations
and 23 surface water level monitoring stations with multi-parameter water quality sensors,
upgrading the water quality testing laboratories for the National Environment Management
Authority (NEMA) and the Water Resources Authority (WRA), and establishing 8 groundwater
monitoring stations to measure water level, conductivity and temperature. To address the need
for coordinated governance of water resources, this component would support the development
of a “National Information Centre for integrated water resource management” (under the WRA)
by: (i) equipping it with necessary hardware and software facilities; (ii) developing integrated
data analysis tools, a system of weather forecast information and a flood warning system; and
(iii) developing data sharing protocols for institutions in the water sector and the community.
Capacity-building and training would be provided to relevant government institutions and to
the Water Resource Users Associations (WRUAs), which are the local-level water governance
structures. In a subsequent submission, the proposal added the installation of a RANET radio
and internet broadcasting station in Machakos County, to serve as an improved method of
disseminating weather and climate information to target communities, and as a learning
institution for students in environmental and climate-related studies. The direct beneficiaries
will be the community settled within the project area in Machakos County.
3.
Component 2 would include the construction and rehabilitation of boreholes, water
pans, springs, sand dams, rainwater-harvesting tanks, and pipelines. The previous submission of
this proposal failed to provide schemes and main dimensions of the proposed water systems. In
the previous submission, annex 8 showed the location in longitude and latitude of the points of
intervention, while annex 9 showed sketches of the specific interventions (e.g. a layout of a dam,
1 This assessment is based on the funding proposal submitted to the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) on 
7 July 2021 and the responses to the independent TAP’s questions provided by the accredited entity.

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 94 
 
 
or of a borehole), but there were no descriptions or schematics of the systems as a whole. The 
present submission includes an accurate description of all proposed infrastructure 
rehabilitation and construction works, including a detailed provisional bill of quantities. 
4. 
The original proposal, submitted in previous rounds of reviews, did not include an 
adequate water balance (demand and supply) for each system, on a seasonal basis, and for the 
years of project life expectancy with the climate change variability included. Since the driving 
force for this project is responding to aggravated seasonal drought due to climate change, the 
water balance is crucial under future conditions with the climate change variable incorporated. 
Questioned by the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) on this point, NEMA introduced 
in this latest funding proposal submittal annex 29, which has a water demand and supply-based 
analysis for the target catchments of the Upper Athi River. Taking into consideration the fact 
that the data density leaves no choice but to use CHIRPS gridded datasets for the hydrological 
model analysis, the methodologies used for the analyses are adequate and the results obtained 
are clearly explained. Indeed, the potential evapotranspiration (PET) will increase for the 
January–March dry season by 1.7 to 3.2 per cent over the baseline PET in the Upper Athi 
catchment area under different plausible future scenarios. If future expansions in irrigated 
agriculture in the same catchment areas are taken into account, the extent of change in climate-
change-induced PET appears much higher, indicating a greater probability of occurrence of 
drought despite an increase in water flow. The apparent increase in water flow in the dry 
season does not fully compensate for the losses in topsoil moisture due to perhaps much greater 
effects of increasing temperatures for the 2011–2040 period. 
5. 
The funding proposal sets the direct beneficiaries of the project, based on the 
beneficiaries of the water infrastructure of component 2, at 198,000 households, or 
approximately 1,150,000 people. A subsequent submission included an estimation of direct 
beneficiaries from each piece of water infrastructure rehabilitated or constructed by the project. 
6. 
Although the project recognizes that sand harvesting, poor agricultural practices, 
wetland and forest area encroachment, untreated effluent discharges and vegetation clearing 
are among the main catchment degradation issues, the only proposed activities to address 
catchment degradation in the previous submission were limited to the establishment of tree 
nurseries and tree planting in two catchments.2 A subsequent submission also included riparian 
marking and pegging (using indigenous trees) of 20 km along the Riara and Ndarugu rivers, and 
construction of terraces and gabions (gulley healing by planting vetiver grass and/or 
installation of gabion boxes) in selected sites in Kiambu and Nairobi counties. The budget for 
this activity was increased from USD 64,000 to USD 128,000. 
7. 
Component 3 is almost exclusively focused on institutional strengthening with the 
objectives of enhancing compliance with water regulations (specifically effluent discharge) and 
developing County Environmental Action Plans and Sub-Catchment Management Plans. 
8. 
With the objective of reducing the discharge of untreated effluents to water bodies, 
therefore enhancing water quality, activity 3.2.1 involves “consultative forums” with 
representatives from industries and other activities that discharge effluents to surface water 
bodies, to inform and promote compliance with the existing good practices and regulations.3 
Paragraph 56 of the funding proposal indicates that “…The proposed safeguards for the 
structures to be constructed among other are as follows; Monitoring through the established 
integrated Water Quality & Pollution Control networks, Enforcement through waste disposal 
control plans, Issuance of effluent discharge permits / licenses, Enforcement of the set waste 
disposal standards and effluent discharge control plans”. However, in the previous submission 
of this proposal to GCF, the project was criticized for not incorporating sufficient measures to 
reduce contamination of the receiving water bodies. Given it included no funding to build solid 
 
2 Funding proposal, p 25. 
3 Funding proposal, p. 25.

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 95 
 
 
waste systems and wastewater treatment infrastructure, it was not clear how the project would 
achieve significant pollution control on water sources. The proponent was asked for the project 
to be implemented in conjunction with a sanitation project aiming to solve water contamination 
issues or, at the least, to include a specific study assessing water quality in the water sources 
targeted by the project and guarantee that without adequate wastewater treatment for that 
targeted area, the project would still be able to use water of acceptable quality. In response, the 
accredited entity (AE) included a new activity (3.1.3) focused on conducting a “water quality 
pollution survey for point and non-point sources of pollution”, with a total budget of USD 
350,000. As described in the funding proposal, the objectives of this activity are to generate 
water quality and pollution information for planning, policy formulation and implementation, to 
provide technical guidance to develop and implement waste disposal control plans, and to 
enforce the prescribed regulatory waste disposal guidelines/standards and effluent discharge 
control plans. As per the detailed budget plan (annex 4), the funds allocated for this activity are 
for hiring consultancy services for the “assessment of water resources, field data and 
information gathering, identification and inventory for point and non-point sources of 
pollution”. In addition, 23 surface water quality monitoring stations with multi-parameter water 
quality sensors will be installed to monitor water quality under activity 1.2.1 and a water 
quality testing laboratory will be established under activity 1.2.2. 
9. 
The present proposal also adds that: (i) the project would raise awareness of the 
beneficiaries of improved water infrastructure through hygiene campaigns aimed at promoting 
water disinfection methods and hygiene practices; (ii) all water assets would have “draw pipes” 
and “disinfection dispensers”4; (iii) all beneficiary counties in this proposal are implementing 
community-led total sanitation initiatives that seek to ensure all Kenyan communities are ‘open 
defecation free’, among other water and sanitation initiatives; and (iv) the project would seek to 
network and build on the achievements of the USAID-funded Kenya Integrated Water, 
Sanitation, and Hygiene Project, which seeks to increase access to improved water, sanitation, 
and hygiene in Nairobi among eight other counties (only Nairobi being inside the project area). 
10. 
Activity 3.1.1 includes funds for the procurement of water quality monitoring systems to 
support enforcement of the water quality regulations.5 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
         Scale: N/A 
1.2.1. 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
11. 
The project allocates a significant portion of the budget for institutional capacity-
building, technical training, and data and knowledge generation and management. A quarter of 
the budget for component 1 (on enhanced hydro-meteorological monitoring) would be used for 
activities involving support for the establishment of a “National Information Centre for 
Integrated Water Resource Management”, technical trainings, and the implementation of a 
system for data analysis, forecasting and knowledge-sharing platforms. 
12. 
Component 3 would support data generation through the provision of equipment for 
water quality monitoring, focused on the control of effluent discharge. 
13. 
The project monitoring and evaluation plan is adequately described in annex 11, 
including sources of data, collection tools, frequency, indicators and indicative budget. Annex 11 
contains most indicators that should be monitored during the project implementation and 
afterwards, but some formulations provided are very general and without further clarification 
 
4 When questioned on this by the independent TAP, the AE explained that disinfection dispensers would be provided 
with a 30 per cent chlorine solution to be used at a rate of one drop per 20 litres (a dosage of approximately 2 
mg/L). 
5 For details on the proposed equipment see the detailed budget plan (annex 4).

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 96 
 
 
might not be effective (e.g. what will be monitored as “reliable/year-round water supply”? Will 
it be unlimited daily supply or litres per person? Thresholds should be established for indicators 
classified as high, medium and low). Logically, annex 11 should be more detailed than the same 
indicators are described in Log-Frame (sections E.3–E.5) because the funding proposal is 
limited in pages; however, in this case, sections E.3–E.5 in the funding proposal provide more 
detailed descriptions of indicators than annex 11. Some of the indicators from sections E.3–E.5 
are oriented towards activities instead of results. Indicator A.7.1 is formulated correctly and is 
oriented towards results; indicator A.6.2 should be similar. Indicator A.1.1 is particularly 
important, but it is not consistent with annex 3ii, cost-benefit analysis (CBA). Indicator A.1.1 
from the funding proposal reports that baseline, mid-term and final monitoring values will be 
established prior to the submission of the inception report; however, without the baseline 
losses and assumptions on improvements at mid-term and at the final stage the CBA could not 
be conducted. This indicator should be consistent with the assumptions made in annex 3ii. 
14. 
The project includes a fund allocation of USD 150,000 for the development of knowledge 
products to document and disseminate the lessons learned during project implementation. 
Knowledge products would comprise brochures, magazines, biannual programme status 
reports, banners and information posters, and knowledge-sharing workshops. 
1.2.2. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
15. 
The cost of operation and maintenance (O&M) for the new and rehabilitated water 
infrastructure is estimated at approximately USD 600,000 per year. When questioned by the 
independent TAP on this matter, the proponent responded that “…WRA is mandated with the 
management of the monitoring boreholes and this status will remain post project 
implementation. WRUAs are recognized by law as the managers of community water 
infrastructure, consequently, the respective WRUAs in the various project sites will be 
responsible for the day to day running of the water projects and will work together with the 
County Governments which are responsible for the maintenance of the water infrastructure 
which will be developed/rehabilitated. The Water Act 2016 gives the County Governments 
responsibility for water service prfovision. Additionally, upon completion of the project, the 
infrastructure will be handed over to the County Governments who will be responsible for their 
maintenance post project.” The County Governments have provided letters to confirm that the 
lion’s share of finance for implementing the O&M plan will be shared by the local government 
institutions. During one of the interviews with the independent TAP, the AE indicated that water 
pumps, rainwater harvesting tanks, water ponds and sand dams by design are expected to have 
very low to negligible O&M costs. Installation of silt traps in water ponds will allow community 
members to maintain these systems with locally available labour. The AE indicated that the 
O&M cost of boreholes (relatively higher than the rest) will be covered by fees charged for their 
use. In addition to this, and in response to questions raised by the independent TAP on the 
coverage of O&M costs, the AE stated: “To ensure sustainability of the new stations and 
structures beyond the project period, WRA and KMD will request the government to allocate 
more O&M funds for their sustainability beyond the project period and the county government 
will carry out the O&M of the rehabilitated / established structures after project hand over.” The 
AE also added that post-project O&M for structures under water service providers in Kiambu, 
Nyandarua and Machakos would be the responsibility of the water companies. Water 
infrastructure under the management of committees would require that they register as water 
users’ associations under the Water Sector Trust Fund - Community Project Cycle framework 
for community water supply, and would incorporate a water tariff to cover O&M costs.6 
1.2.3. 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies 
 
6 Paragraph 115 of the funding proposal.

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 97 
 
 
16. 
Although there are no specific activities aimed at modifying the regulatory framework, 
activity 3.1 would support strengthening the authority’s ability to control compliance with 
existing water regulations, specifically effluent discharge regulations.  
17. 
Regarding policies, the project would support the development of County 
Environmental Action Plans and Sub-Catchment Management Plans. 
1.2.4. 
Scalability and replicability 
18. 
The moderate scalability potential of the project resides in the capacity-building that 
would be provided at the national level for the NEMA, WRA and the Kenya Meteorological 
Department (KMD), that would partially facilitate upscaling the project to cover other counties. 
19. 
With respect to replicability, the project will emphasize the sharing of knowledge and 
lessons learned between the executing entities and other counties along the Athi River. The 
proposal includes specific activities related to the development of knowledge products for the 
dissemination of the lessons learned during project implementation.  
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
         Scale: N/A  
1.3.1. 
Environmental co-benefits 
20. 
Environmental co-benefits of the project would arise from activity 2.2, which would 
involve the establishment of tree nurseries, planting 50,000 native trees at catchment riparian 
areas, especially in abandoned quarry sites at the Riara, Kamiti and Ndarugu rivers, the 
construction of terraces and gabions, and riparian marking and pegging of 20 km along the 
Riara and Ndarugu rivers using indigenous trees. The budget allocation for this activity in 
relation to the total budget is relatively small (1.3 per cent).7  
21. 
Potential environmental co-benefits include increased biodiversity, reduced soil erosion 
and river siltation, and better water quality in downstream surface water sources. However, the 
target performance indicators8 assume this activity would cover 150 km of riparian land which, 
at a total of 50,000 trees, gives a planting density of 333 trees/km. This represents one line of 
trees in each river margin, at one tree every 6 meters. This density seems to be too low to 
generate appreciable positive impacts. 
1.3.2. 
Social co-benefits 
22. 
The social co-benefits are the central objective of the proposal, and include enhanced 
water and food security. Water would be used for domestic and agricultural purposes. Reduced 
drought and flood impacts would be achieved through the rehabilitation of the water systems 
and the installation of a flood warning system for flood-prone areas.  
23. 
Increased water availability would result in health benefits. Activity 3.1.2 includes 
hygiene awareness campaigns to promote, among other things, water disinfection methods and 
hygiene practices. 
1.3.3. 
Economic co-benefits 
24. 
The economic co-benefits include reduction in costs from flood damage, health 
expenditures and timesaving. 
 
7 Detailed budget plan, annex 4. 
8 Funding proposal, section E.5.

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 98 
 
 
1.3.4. 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
25. 
The participation of women in consultations during the project design was not 
described in the previous submission of this proposal. When questioned by the independent 
TAP on the level of women’s participation at the stakeholder engagement meetings held with 
non-governmental organizations, community-based organizations and WRUAs during the 
project design phase, the proponent explained that “…The WRUA Development Cycle (WDC), 
which is the framework that guides WRUA participation and engagement allocates 30% 
representation of woman. Further, the framework also makes provision for women to be 
engaged in leadership positions within the WRUAs, aside from just membership. Towards this 
end, one leadership position (chairman, secretary, treasurer) is always reserved for a woman. 
The WDC framework will therefore ensure equal participation of the women in the WRUAs”. 
This describes the framework that guides women’s representation at WRUAs, but participation 
of women in the project inception remained unclear. The present submission clarified that 35 
per cent of the participants of consultation meetings held at inception with project beneficiaries 
were women, that the project technical design team was gender balanced, and that the 
contractors would also be required to have a 51 per cent involvement of women in works by 
introducing a clause in the contract. 
26. 
The equal participation of women in management and leadership positions is crucial for 
the sustainability of water systems. However, other than citing current regulations and laws, the 
funding proposal fails to show how equal participation will be achieved. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
         Scale: N/A 
1.4.1. 
Vulnerability of the country and climate rationale 
27. 
About 75 per cent of the population depends directly on land and natural resources for 
their livelihoods. The national economy is highly dependent on agriculture. Therefore, Kenya is 
vulnerable to the variability of rainfall patterns.  
28. 
The AE indicates that the funding proposal is mainly focused on addressing drought 
impacts. Although the proposal states that “Kenya has experienced frequent floods and droughts 
resulting from climate change impacts” and that “climate change has adversely affected water 
availability especially during frequent drought conditions”, the expressed causality between 
climate change and drought risk is not demonstrated in the proposal, failing to prove the 
observed and projected climate change impacts in water stress. 
29. 
The analysis of historical data in the previous submission was carried out using gridded 
data (CRU TS 3.21). Upon the independent TAP’s request, the present submission includes a 
trend analysis based on observed data from 33 stations. However, the trend analysis is made at 
a national scale, and only 3 of the 33 stations are representative of the project area. This 
indicates poor data density for the target region. The analysis at basin level seems to be limited 
to paragraph 23 of the funding proposal, which states that “Despite the projections on the 
Global Circulation Models, the local data results for annual and seasonal rainfall across the 4 
counties show an overall decreasing trend”. The inference is drawn from analyses involving 
gridded datasets, largely due to the non-availability of longitudinal time series meteorological 
datasets from stations around the target catchments. However, this statement is not supported 
by time series charts of historical data or projections at basin level.  
30. 
The impacts of future climate on the water resources of the Upper Athi River Basin are 
assessed in annex 29. The study uses rainfall projections from the Rossby Centre regional 
atmospheric model (RCA4 with a horizontal grid spacing of approximately 50 km). The specific 
model variant (MPI-ESM-LR) under RCA4 is found to reproduce large-scale signals such as El

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 99 
 
 
Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and Indian Ocean Dipole, which generally have significant 
influence on the overall climatology of the Eastern Africa region in general and Kenya in 
particular. In the absence of long-term longitudinal climatological datasets for the specific 
catchments, the model is validated using CHIRPS gridded datasets, where accumulated 
(monthly) rainfall figures for the period 1981–2005 are found to have a high correlation 
involving the model output with respect to CHIRPS datasets. The AE has made efforts to use a 
climate model for future projections under Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 
(also for RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5 scenarios) for the period 2011–2040 using MPI-ESM-LR. 
31. 
The models used to make climate projections described in annex 26 (Climatology of 
Kenya) are validated against gridded data in the absence of high-density observational datasets. 
32. 
The results from hydrological modelling based on those climate projections conclude 
that eight out of nine simulations indicate increased flows in the Upper Athi River Basin in the 
future (2011–2040) and that seasonal flow patterns indicate an increase of flows in the 
generally drier months from December to March. The proposal argues that, in spite of this, the 
net water deficit would increase due to increased temperatures, among other factors. Data 
analysis provided in the present submission shows that the increase in PET at catchment level 
for the months of January–March (i.e. generally the drier months) is 1.7 to 3.2 per cent higher 
than the baseline PET for the period 2011–2040. This incremental change in PET is completely 
attributable to climate change, where the rise is temperatures will be the dominant cause, 
overpowering the beneficial effects of increase in rainfall during the drier months. However, 
when such changes in PET takes into consideration future plans for the expansion of irrigation 
in the catchment areas of the Upper Athi River, the projected impact becomes much bigger than 
the “no expansion” scenario. This leads to the inference that the system needs to enhance its 
water retention capacities so that the restored stream flows due to increased rainfall could be 
utilized for irrigation purposes. 
33. 
The proponents indicate that access to water is likely to become more difficult due to 
population growth, economic expansion, unsustainable management of water and forest 
resources, and changes in rainfall patterns. Yet it fails to indicate how much of the growing 
demand may be attributed to change in rainfall pattern (or decline in water availability). Since 
rainfall would only increase, as indicated, in two seasons, net availability should not be reduced 
as such. The funding proposal also states that water is the core input for most economic 
activities: irrigated and rain-fed agriculture, hydroelectric power that constitutes over half the 
installed capacity of electric power, sanitation and the provision of drinking water. Yet neither 
rain-fed agriculture nor hydroelectric power would be impacted by an increase in seasonal 
rainfall patterns. 
34. 
The drought risk assessment contained in the feasibility study (section 2.3.2.1) of 
previous submissions concluded that “It appears that the drought risk is likely to rise in the 
future, especially in Kiambu and Machakos County”. However, this statement was not 
demonstrated by data on current and projected rainfall patterns, which should include data on 
monthly precipitations. The present submission includes a more thorough description of 
projected drought and flood risks. These inferences are based on the outputs of a model which 
is validated only by using CHIRPS datasets. Therefore, the reliance over projection data is poor. 
Nonetheless, due to poor data density involving catchment scale observational data, the 
independent TAP accepts the projection analysis. 
35. 
As seen in figure 19 of the feasibility study, the difference in drought risk in the Upper 
Athi River Basin for the periods 1975–2005 and 2011–2040 is not very significant. Moreover, 
the modelling-based projection for 2011–2040 portrays a picture of water deficit, despite the 
trends of increasing water availability in the critically dry months, as observed in the recent 
past (i.e. 1975–2005). The rate of evapotranspiration under climate change due to rising 
temperature during the drier months plays a greater role than the increase in rainfall in

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 100 
 
 
corresponding months, which is why there is a gradual build-up of drought during the peak dry 
season (January–March). This is also seen in the Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration 
Index (SPEI) analyses at catchment scale, presented in this submission, where the extreme 
drought condition (SPEI value >-2) will be increasingly observed in the catchment areas. In 
contrast, due to higher seasonal rainfall in future, the currently observed floods will occur with 
higher frequencies than in the baseline period. 
36. 
The funding proposal states that changes in annual rainfall and extreme precipitation 
patterns will affect groundwater recharge and that climate change has already affected 
groundwater levels and river flows through its influence on precipitation and 
evapotranspiration. However, the proposal does not present trend analyses regarding the 
height of the piezometric surface of the aquifer or references to or descriptions of the studies to 
provide evidence to justify this claim. 
37. 
Flood damage analysis is based on one extreme flood event; therefore, it does not tell 
whether or not climate change is responsible for the occurrence of such a flood event. There is 
no trend analysis, based on past/historical evidence, and globally acceptable indicators are not 
being used for such analysis.9 
1.4.2. 
Economic and social development 
38. 
Kenya is one the most developed countries in East Africa, as well as one of the most 
unequal countries in the sub-region: 42 per cent of its population of 44 million lives below the 
poverty line. Agriculture, forestry, and fishing are the largest sectors in the Kenyan economy, 
accounting for about 22 percent of the gross domestic product. 
39. 
As per the Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation, 57 per cent of 
Kenyans in rural areas had access to improved drinking water sources in 2015 and 14 per cent 
of Kenyans in rural areas were reported as having access to piped water through a domestic 
connection. From 1990 to 2015, access to improved water sources in rural areas increased from 
33 per cent to 57 per cent. 
40. 
Specific climate change vulnerabilities for each targeted county are adequately defined 
in the proposal. 
1.4.3. 
Absence of alternative sources of financing 
41. 
The absence of alternative sources of financing is not expressly demonstrated in the 
proposal. However, given Kenya’s economic development, it could be assumed that funds for 
climate change adaptation are scarce, thereby justifying the request for a grant from GCF. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
         Scale: N/A  
1.5.1. 
Alignment with national climate strategy and policies 
42. 
 The project is well aligned with all the national policies, strategies and plans related to 
climate change, including the National Climate Change Response Strategy, National Climate 
Change Action Plan, national adaptation plan, the intended nationally determined contribution 
and the National Water Master Plan 2030. 
1.5.2. 
Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver 
 
9 Funding proposal, paragraph 21.

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 101 
 
 
43. 
As the AE, NEMA would have the responsibility of project management, reporting and 
budgeting. NEMA was established in 2004 as the principal government agency mandated to 
implement environmental policies, and supervise and coordinate all environmental matters. 
NEMA has operational county offices in all the 47 counties in Kenya, and is currently 
implementing a USD 10 million programme aimed at building resilience to climate change and 
adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities in 14 Kenyan counties. 
44. 
The executing entities would be the WRA and the KMD.  
45. 
The WRA is a state corporation under the Ministry of Water and Sanitation, mandated to 
regulate, monitor, assess and allocate the water resources, in coordination with other relevant 
institutions. The WRA has 6 regional offices and 26 sub-regional offices, with a total of 750 staff 
distributed across the country. The Water Users Associations are WRA’s governance structures 
at the local level. WRA’s experience with projects related to water security represent a 
combined project implementation portfolio for both past and current projects of approximately 
USD 50 million. 
46. 
The KMD hosts the National Flood Forecasting and Early Warning Centre, which is 
responsible for data collection, analysis, modelling and forecasting of floods, and has the 
required facilities for monitoring and forecasting flood and drought hazards, such as real-time 
rainfall data, evaporation, and storm monitoring tools, and quantitative rainfall forecasts. The 
department has staff trained in meteorology, operational hydrology, numerical weather 
prediction, data analysis, forecasting and delivery of services to specific users, and climate 
change modelling. 
1.5.3. 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
47. 
The Summary of Consultations and Stakeholder Engagement Plan describes the 
consultations with stakeholders carried out during the preparation phase, including 
engagement with the national designated authority, county and community representatives and 
public consultations. As previously expressed, the rate of participation of women in these 
consultations is unknown. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
                     Scale: N/A 
1.6.1. 
Financial adequacy 
48. 
For the economic analysis, previous submissions of this FP considered a period of 50 
years. However, this assumption seemed excessive given that most of the proposed water 
infrastructure (such as water pans, rainwater harvesting systems, and spring protection works) 
would not last that long. This type of project generally uses a maximum period of 25 years for 
the economic analysis. The current submission presents an economic analysis for a period of 30 
years, which is more reasonable. 
49. 
The proposal estimates that monetary health benefits would be approximately USD 
250,000–300,000 per year, arising from avoided diarrhoea treatment costs. The monetarized 
timesaving is estimated at USD 700,000–800,000 per year and the avoided costs from flood 
damage are estimated at approximately USD 2 million per year. Avoided flood damage was 
estimated based on the recorded per capita costs of the 2009 floods, assuming 5 per cent of the 
total damage could be saved, and from that, 5 per cent as a result of project activities. 
50. 
The bill of quantities included in previous submissions segregated individual costs for 
each infrastructure work, but the cost estimation was not complemented by a scheme and 
general description of each system. The current submission includes a detailed description of 
each infrastructure work together with the bill of quantities.

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 102 
 
 
1.6.2. 
Amount of co-financing 
51. 
The USD 9.5 million grant from GCF would be complemented by an in-kind contribution 
by the Government of Kenya to the amount of USD 470,000. 
1.6.3. 
Financial viability 
52. 
The project would not generate direct revenues. For this reason, a financial analysis is 
not applicable. The economic analysis considers three benefits: reduced flood damage, reduced 
health expenditures and timesaving. The estimated reduction in health expenditures is minimal 
in comparison to the estimations for flood damage and timesaving. 
1.6.4. 
Best practices 
53. 
For the installation of the flood warning system, the KMD would build on the experience 
of the Nzoia Flood Early Warning System, successfully implemented under the Western Kenya 
Community Driven Development and Flood Mitigation Project in Western Kenya funded by the 
World Bank and the Government of Kenya. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
54. 
The analyses on climate relevance of the project are weak, mostly due to a lack of data 
density involving long-term longitudinal observation data for the target catchment areas. 
However, this is typical of an African country that has graduated from least developed country 
status only recently. Given the structural deficiencies in presenting appropriate climate 
rationale and also recognizing the nominal risks associated with proposed adaptation response 
measures to address droughts in an African country, the independent TAP accepts the weak 
climate rationale as the basis for the proposed climate responses. 
55. 
The results from hydrological modelling based on climate projections prepared by the 
AE conclude that there will be increased flows in the Upper Athi River Basin in the future 
(2011–2040) in the drier months from December to March. The proposal argues that, in spite of 
this increase in water availability in the drier months, the net water deficit would increase due 
to increased temperatures and changes in rainfall patterns, among other factors. However, the 
proponents also indicate that access to water is likely to become more difficult due to 
population growth, economic expansion, and unsustainable management of water and forest 
resources. The AE indicates that the increase in water supply projected by their climate 
modelling for the dry months would be counterbalanced by a major increase in moisture loss 
from the topsoil, which would lead to drier conditions. Previous submissions of this funding 
proposal did not provide data to substantiate these claims. The revised annex 29 to the present 
submission includes projections on irrigation water demand based on current and projected 
PET and irrigation area, showing that the apparent increase in water flow in the dry season 
would not fully compensate for the losses in topsoil moisture due to perhaps much greater 
effects of increasing temperatures for the 2011–2040 period. 
56. 
Based on this assessment, the independent TAP endorses this funding proposal.

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.07 
Page 103 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP175) 
Proposal name: 
Enhancing community resilience and water security in the Upper 
Athi River Catchment Area, Kenya 
Accredited entity: 
National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) 
Country/(ies): 
Kenya 
Project/programme size: 
Micro 
Impact potential 
The AE notes of the iTAP comments 
Paradigm shift potential 
The AE notes of the iTAP comments 
Sustainable development potential 
The AE notes of the iTAP comments 
Needs of the recipient 
The AE notes of the iTAP comments 
Country ownership 
The AE notes of the iTAP comments 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
The AE notes of the iTAP comments 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
The AE notes the iTAP endorsement

=== PAGE 104 ===
1 | P a g e
National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) and 
the Korea Environmental Industry and Technology Institute 
(KEITI) 
Gender Analysis for Enhancing the Resilience of Communities 
and Ecosystems in the Athi River Catchment Area 
Fourteen Falls, Kiambu County 
Tunay Africa, 2018 
Gender documentation for FP175

=== PAGE 105 ===
2 | P a g e  
 
Acknowledgement 
As a productive resource, water intersects with multiple other resources such as land and 
labour to determine the impact of development initiatives. Access to adequate and safe water 
mediates attainment of food security and health indices for households. Women’s 
instrumental role in procurement of water and its use across various domestic and 
commercial platforms renders a gender sensitive approach imperative. We therefore 
unreservedly congratulate NEMA and KEITI for committing to undertake a gender analysis of 
the Athi River Catchment Area to enhance the resilience of communities and the ecosystem.  
 
Leaders and policy makers in Nyandarua, Kiambu, Machakos and Nairobi counties participated 
in stakeholder forums and created ample opportunities for the research team to interact with 
community members which lead to generation of authentic data for the gender analysis. We 
recognize this exemplary contribution to the gender analysis as we express special 
commendation to the leaders and policy makers the professional and impressive dedication 
to the exercise.  
 
Information sharing is a crucial ingredient of development as it shapes and directs policy 
formulation and service delivery. This exercise is thus pricelessly indebted to the women and 
men who volunteered information either as community members or experts in response to 
the gender analysis exercise. We are confident that this report attests to the reality embodied 
in the voices of all those who shared their views and affirms the validity of their aspirations.  
 
Planning and executing the gender analysis exercise that spanned across four counties was a 
daunting task that called for exceptional people skills, imagination, dedication and resilience. 
Staff and relevant stakeholders of NEMA and KEITI respectively demonstrated these qualities 
that immensely inspired the TUNAY Africa team to deliver on the assignment. We profoundly 
appreciate the professional guidance provided and believe that this report resonates with their 
expectations. 
 
It is incumbent upon all duty bearers interacting with this report to facilitate its transition 
from data to pragmatic actions and tangible results in the lives of women and men in 
communities who narrated their experiences and spell out their dreams. We believe that the 
recommendations proposed and endorsed by stakeholders will alleviate the challenges faced 
by women and men in the four counties in accessing water and being protected against the 
vagaries of climate change. It is time to acknowledge that the proof of the pudding is in the 
eating, and a journey of a thousand miles starts with one step!

=== PAGE 106 ===
3 | P a g e  
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
Acknowledgement .............................................................................................. 2 
Table of Contents ............................................................................................... 3 
List of figures ....................................................................................................... 6 
Acronyms and Abbreviations ............................................................................ 7 
Executive Summary ............................................................................................ 8 
1.1 Country Context .......................................................................................................................... 10 
1.2 Water Resources in Kenya ........................................................................ 11 
Table 1: Water Available vs Demand for Water (Unit: MCM/year) .......... 11 
1.3 Gender and Inequality Highlights for Kenya ........................................................................... 12 
Table 2: Kenya Ten Point Fact Sheet ............................................................. 13 
1.4 Gender and Water Resource Intersection ............................................................................. 13 
1.5 Mainstreaming Gender in Global Climate Fund Programmes ............................................ 13 
2.1.1 
Step 1: Inception ................................................................................................................. 14 
2.1.2 
Step 2: Desk study .............................................................................................................. 14 
2.1.3.1 Focus group discussions ............................................................................................................ 14 
2.1.3.2 Key informant interviews .......................................................................................................... 14 
2.1.3 
Step 4: Data analysis ........................................................................................................... 14 
2.2. The Athi Catchment Area ......................................................................................................... 15 
2.3 Enhancing the resilience of communities and ecosystems in the Athi 
River Catchment Area ..................................................................................... 16 
3.0 Methodology ................................................................................................ 17 
3.1 Gender Analysis Approach, Framework and Domains .......................... 17 
3.2 Study Design ................................................................................................ 17 
3.3 Key Research Questions ............................................................................ 18 
Broad Gender Analyis  Questions ................................................................................................ 18 
Specific Gender Analysis Questions ............................................................................................. 18 
3.4 Organization of Gender Analysis and Quality Assurance ..................... 19 
3.5 Compliance with Research Ethics ............................................................ 19 
3.6 Research Constraints and Limitation ....................................................... 19 
3.7 Structure of the Gender Analysis Report ................................................ 19 
4.0 Findings ........................................................................................................ 20 
4.1 Kenya’s Gender Profile .............................................................................. 20 
4.1.1 Population ............................................................................................................................ 20 
Table 4: Rural and Urban Population Sizes ................................................... 20 
4.1.2 Health ................................................................................................................................... 20

=== PAGE 107 ===
4 | P a g e  
 
4.1.4 Household Headship ............................................................................................................ 21 
4.1.6 National Priorities ................................................................................................................ 22 
4.2 Access to Resources .................................................................................................................... 22 
4.2.1 Educational Attainment for Men and Women ..................................................................... 22 
4.2.2 Main Sources of Livelihoods and Income for Women and Men ..................................... 25 
4.2.3 Land as a Productive Resource ............................................................................................ 27 
4.2.3.1 Ownership and Control of Other Productive Resources and Assets ............................. 29 
4.2.4 Crops Grown by Women and Men ............................................................... 31_Toc1478989 
4.2.6 Access to Credit .................................................................................................................. 34 
4.2.8 Levels of Income and Wages for Men and Women ............................................................ 36 
4.2.10 Needs and Priorities .......................................................................................................... 40 
4.3. Practices and Participation ......................................................................................................... 41 
4.3.1 Division of Labour between Men and Women ................................................................... 41 
4.3.2 Household Care Work ........................................................................................................ 42 
Table 21: Household Care Work ................................................................................................. 42 
4.3.3 Participation in Formal and Informal Economy .................................................................... 43 
4.3.4 Climate Risks and Impact ..................................................................................................... 44 
4.4 Balance of Power and Decision Making ................................................................................... 47 
4.4.1 Decisions on Household Resources, Assets and Finances ............................................... 47 
4.4.2.1 Institutional Membership ................................................................................................... 49 
4.5 Legal Rights and Status .............................................................................. 50 
4.5.1 Access to Legal Documents .................................................................................................... 50 
Table 27: Legal Documents ............................................................................. 51 
4.6 Knowledge, Beliefs and Perceptions ......................................................... 52 
4.6.1 Traditional Knowledge of Men and Women ....................................................................... 52 
4.6.2 Common Beliefs and Perceptions .......................................................................................... 52 
4.7 Time and Space (Gender Daily Activity) ................................................. 53 
5.0 CHAPTER FIVE .......................................................................................... 56 
5.1 Introduction ................................................................................................. 56 
5.2 Summary of findings ................................................................................... 56 
5.3 Discussion of Findings ................................................................................. 56 
5.4 Nyandarua County ...................................................................................... 56 
5.4.1Water Access and Sources ....................................................................................................... 56 
5.4.2 Water Resources and quality ................................................................................................. 56 
5.4.3 Climate risks ............................................................................................................................... 56

=== PAGE 108 ===
5 | P a g e  
 
5.5 Machakos ..................................................................................................... 57 
5.5.1 Water Sources and Distances ................................................................................................ 57 
5.5.2 Water Scarcity ........................................................................................................................... 57 
5.5.3 Sand Harvesting.......................................................................................................................... 57 
5.5.4 Climate Change .......................................................................................................................... 57 
5.6 Kiambu ......................................................................................................... 58 
5.6.1 Water sources and access ....................................................................................................... 58 
5.6.2 Climate risks impact.................................................................................................................. 58 
5.6.3 Challenges on Water Resources ........................................................................................... 59 
5.7 Nairobi County............................................................................................ 60 
5.7.1 Water sources and access ....................................................................................................... 60 
5.7.2 Water Resources ...................................................................................................................... 60 
5.7.3 Water and Sanitation ................................................................................................................ 60 
5.7.4 Water management .................................................................................................................. 60 
6.0 Glossary of terms .......................................................................................... 62 
ANNEXURE 1 GENDER ACTION PLAN FOR ENHANCING THE 
RESILIENCE OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS IN THE ATHI 
RIVER CATCHMENT AREA ........................................................................... 64 
7.0 References ................................................................................................... 68

=== PAGE 109 ===
6 | P a g e  
 
 List of figures 
Figure 1: Household Headship ......................................................................................... 21 
Figure 2: Gender Parity Index (GPI) in Kenya ............................................................. 24

=== PAGE 110 ===
7 | P a g e  
 
Acronyms and Abbreviations 
 
NEMA 
National Environment Management Authority 
KEITI  
Korea Environmental Industry and Technology Institute 
GCF    
 Global Climate Fund 
WRA  
Water Resource Authority 
WRUAs 
Water Resource Users Associations 
GAP  
Gender Action Plan 
FGD  
Focus Group Discussion 
PRA  
Participatory Rural Appraisal 
KII  
 
Key Informant Interview 
IR 
 
Inception Report 
CG 
 
County Government 
ACA  
Athi Catchment Area  
TCA  
Tana Catchment Area  
ASAL  
Arid and semi-arid land  
ARCA 
Athi River Catchment Area 
LVNCA 
Lake Victoria Norths Catchment Area  
 LVSCA 
Lake Victoria South Catchment Area  
RVCA 
Rift Valley Catchment Area  
ENNCA 
Ewaso Nyiro North Catchment Area  
KNBS  
Kenya National Bureau of Statistics

=== PAGE 111 ===
8 | P a g e  
 
Executive Summary  
This report presents findings of a rapid gender analysis study commissioned by the National 
Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) in Kenya through partnership and technical 
assistance from the Korea Environmental Industry and Technology Institute (KEITI). The 
gender analysis was predicated on enhancing the resilience of communities and ecosystems in 
the Athi River Catchment Area focusing on Nyandarua, Kiambu, Machakos and Nairobi 
counties. Specifically, the gender analysis sought to identify and propose remedies to 
development gaps that manifest gender based inequalities and forestall possible outcomes of 
the project that could exacerbate existing, or generate new forms of disparities in the way 
the project impacts on men, women and other vulnerable populations within the catchment 
areas. 
The gender analysis was cross-sectional, using qualitative methods. Emphasis was placed on 
making the process participatory through focus group discussions, key informant interviews, 
observation and workshops in Nyandarua, Kiambu, Machakos and Nairobi counties. The study 
was framed around access to resources; knowledge, beliefs and perceptions; practices and 
participation; balance of power and decision making; legal rights and status; and time and space 
as domains that manifest gendered disparities. Study respondents included community 
participants, service delivery officers and policy makers in the water and environment 
management sectors, and gender mainstreaming oversight institutions.  Qualitative data was 
majorly collected through extensive desk reviews. The main findings of the study are were 
also coined around various elements of gender equality and equity that include: Access to 
resources, Level of knowledge acquisition and skills, Cultural beliefs and perceptions, 
Participation and decision making, Legal rights and status, and Time availability and space 
concerning location of water points.  
The constraints encountered in undertaking the study were lack of data on gender issues at 
the county level attributed to the formative nature of devolved units in the country. National 
data was thus used as proxy data to inform the situation in counties. Most counties do not 
have dedicated gender officers which contributed to inadequate capacity to understand and 
articulate development issues through gender lens.  The main limitation of the study is the 
contextual nature of qualitative data which may not be generalized across other different 
development settings.

=== PAGE 112 ===
9 | P a g e  
 
This report is organized in six main areas as follows:  
Chapter One: Introduction – This section contextualises development progress in Kenya 
and goes further to highlight the interface between water and gender issues.  
Chapter Two: Gender Analysis – This section of the report briefly articulates the 
programming purpose of undertaking the gender analysis. 
Chapter Three: Methodology – This part of the report summarises the research process 
followed in undertaking the gender analysis.  
Chapter Four: Findings – This section of the reports articulates and analyses feedback 
received through various methods of undertaking the gender analysis, including literature 
reviews.  
Chapter Five: Summary and Recommendations – This part of the report condenses the 
findings and outlines measures in response to the same.  
Annex – This section of the report presents an action plan based on the findings and 
recommendations.

=== PAGE 113 ===
10 | P a g e  
 
1.0 Introduction 
1.1 Country Context 
Kenya underwent re-basing in September 2014 that conferred on the country the lower 
middle income status with the fourth largest economy in sub-Saharan Africa after Nigeria, 
South Africa and Angola.   Despite women’s population standing slightly higher at 19, 417, 639 
above men that was 19, 192, 458 out of the total 38, 610, 097 as per the 2009 Kenyan census, 
which is projected to reach 67.84 million people by 2030, they still remain the most vulnerable, 
including being victims of injustices. This demographic gallop has exerted pressure on the 
country’s resources for sustenance, highlighting the critical and precarious interplay between 
environmental concerns and community needs.  
 According to the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS, 2019) census results, there is 
an increment in population level. Men’s number is 23, 548, 056 while women 24, 014, 716, 
indicating 50.5% increase of women, equivalent to 466,660 more numbers gap above men. 
Intersects were factored in the Government- led survey and recorded as 1, 524. The total 
National population as at current is 47, 564, 296. Household size has reduced from 4.2m in 
2009 to 3.9 in 2019. It is a confirmation that women are more than men as per the trend. 
Unfortunately, the worry is that women still remain the most vulnerable, subordinated and 
discriminated against within socioeconomic and political set-ups.  
Further analysis on cross- sectional surveys indicate that 72% of household related tasks are 
done by women and girls, justifying the power and roles relation gaps that still exist between 
men and women. Nairobi and Kiambu counties are also listed by the KNBS 2009 as the top 
most populated devolved units. Though Household headship in the four counties- Nairobi, 
Machakos, Kiambu and Nyandarua presents that males surpass at 67.6% against females 32.4%, 
women still form the bigger lot regarding water collection and use, and demonstration of 
consciousness towards its proper conservation and management. The Constitution of Kenya 
2010 through the Bill of Rights and Affirmative Action, as well as mandates of the National 
Gender and Equality Commission is accorded preference as an instrument towards addressing 
and redressing the gender gaps. The CIDPs for the respective counties on water resource 
and services management will form part of guiding avenues on water intervention- access to, 
and control by women and men, similarly girls and boys.

=== PAGE 114 ===
11 | P a g e  
 
Territorial area for Kenya is 582,646 km², divided into water area of 11,230 km² and land area 
of 571,416 km². The major part of the inland water surface area is covered by a portion of 
Lake Victoria and Lake Turkana.  Of the land area, approximately 490,000 km² (more than 
80% of the land area) is classified as arid and semi-arid land (ASAL).  The remaining area of 
about 81,000 km² is classified as non-arid and profitably usable lands, sustaining a substantial 
portion of Kenyan economy and human population. 
The main economic blue print and road map of the Kenyan State is the Kenya Vision 2030 
(2008 – 2030) which aims to transform Kenya into a newly industrialized, “middle-income 
country providing a high quality of life to all its citizens by the year 2030”.  The Vision 2030 is 
founded on the triad of economic, social and political pillars. The economic pillar is designed 
to catalyze a GDP growth rate of 10% per annum as from 2012 while the social pillar has the 
architecture of promoting justice, equity, societal cohesion and observance of prudent 
environmental conservation practices. The political pillar seeks to secure the country’s 
democratic traditions and human rights of all and sundry. The Kenya Vision 2030 has entered 
its Third Medium Term Phase (2018-2022) which has prioritized the “Big Four Agenda” that 
outlines agriculture, universal health coverage, manufacturing and housing as the main 
development milestones over the next five years. The 2010 Constitution is the foundation of 
legal, institutional and governance reforms in the country, including the advent of devolved 
units (counties).1  
1.2 Water Resources in Kenya 
Kenya is divided into six water catchment areas, namely Lake Victoria Norths Catchment 
Area (LVNCA), Lake Victoria South Catchment Area (LVSCA), Rift Valley Catchment Area 
(RVCA), Athi Catchment Area (ACA), Tana Catchment Area (TCA) and Ewaso Nyiro North 
Catchment Area (ENNCA). According to the Kenya Water Master Plan, the amount of water 
available in each of the catchment areas vis-à-vis the demand for the same resource between 
2010 and 2030 is as shown in Table 1. The water deficit in the ACA (58,639 km²) is glaring 
due to large water use as demonstrated by high water demand/water resource ratio of more 
than 40%2, partly driven by the comparatively high population density of the area.3 The Kenya 
Hydro-Economic Analysis4 concurs that the Athi catchment, as of 2010 water use is already 
exceeding environmentally sustainable limits by a substantial margin. Catchment degradation, 
which increases hydrological variability (i.e. increases the risk of droughts and floods) is the 
challenge most widely faced, and one that increases risks for all water users, including farmers, 
energy producers, industry, and pastoral groups.5 
 
Table 1: Water Available vs Demand for Water (Unit: MCM/year) 
2010 
2030 
2050 
 
1 Kenya is divided into 47 counties according to the 2010 Constitution. The gender analysis will cover Kiambu, 
Nyandarua, Nairobi and Machakos counties.  
2 Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources. (2013). The Project on the Development of the 
National Water Master Plan 2030. 
3 Population density is 167 persons/ km². 
4 2030 Water Resources Group. (2015). Water Resources in Kenya: Closing the Gap. 
5 Ibid., pg.5

=== PAGE 115 ===
12 | P a g e  
 
Catchme
nt Area 
Water 
Resourc
es (a) 
Water 
Dema
nd (b) 
(a)/(
b) 
Water 
Resourc
es (c) 
Water 
Dema
nd (d) 
(c)/(
d) 
Water 
Resourc
es (e) 
Water 
Dema
nd (f) 
(e)/(
f) 
LVNCA 
4,742  
228 
5% 
5,077  
1,337 
26% 
5,595  
1,573 
28% 
LVSCA 
4,976 
385 
8% 
5,937 
2,953 
50% 
7,195 
3,251 
45% 
RVCA 
2,559 
357 
14% 
3,147 
1,494 
47% 
3,903 
1,689 
43% 
ACA 
1,503 
1145 
76% 
1,634 
4,586 
281
% 
2,043 
5,202 
255
% 
TCA 
6,533 
891 
14% 
7,828 
8,241 
105
% 
7,891 
8,476 
107
% 
ENNCA 
2,251 
212 
9% 
3,011 
2,857 
95% 
1,810 
2,950 
163
% 
Total 
22,564 
3,218 
14% 
26,634 
21,468 81% 
28,437 
23,141 81% 
Source: Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources, 2013 
1.3 Gender and Inequality Highlights for Kenya 
Kenya has made significant progress in promoting and sustaining equality as a human rights 
and development imperative through legal instruments, policy frameworks and institutional 
structures and processes. The Constitution of Kenya (2010)6 recognizes the primacy of 
addressing inequality and discrimination as prerequisites for nurturing a progressive and stable 
society. The Bill of Rights in the Constitution and affirmative action provisions are enacted to 
remedy gender inequalities, among other forms of deprivation experienced by women, 
children and marginalized men. Equitable development in the country is the basis of devolved 
government where resources and opportunities are contextualized within counties as 
stipulated in the Constitution. Devolved government mechanisms are therefore expected to 
engage with and remedy barriers that generate inequality, including those that are gender 
based. The mandate of institutions like the National Gender and Equality Commission 
(NGEC)7 is to ensure national and county development processes are responsive to 
alleviation of inequality.  Yet, despite the robust normative frameworks inequality between 
men and women and boys and girls persists across all facets of development in the country 
(Table 2).  
 
 
 
6 Republic of Kenya. National Council for Law Reporting (NCLR). Constitution of Kenya 2010. Nairobi: NCLR, 
2010. 
7 Republic of Kenya. National Council for Law Reporting (NCLR). National Gender and Equality Commission 
Act 2011. Nairobi: NCLR, 2011.

=== PAGE 116 ===
13 | P a g e  
 
Table 2: Kenya Ten Point Fact Sheet 
Subject 
Performance 
Source 
Population 
Male19,192,458; 
Female19,417,639 
KNBS, 2016 
Development Index 
44% 
NGEC, 2016 
Health Index 
67% 
NGEC, 2016 
Education Index 
61% 
NGEC, 2016 
Social Justice and Civic Participation Index 
71% 
NGEC, 2016 
Labour Index 
64% 
NGEC, 2016 
Gender Equality Index 
38% 
NGEC, 2016 
Link between Equality and Inclusion Index 
59% 
NGEC, 2016 
HIV Prevalence 
5.6% 
NACC, 2016 
Sexual Violence 
Male, 
3.8%; 
Female,13.3% 
KDHS, 2014  
1.4 Gender and Water Resource Intersection 
Water is a critical factor of production that affects access to livelihoods for both men and 
women. Access to water underlies women’s and men’s participation in reproductive (water 
for domestic use) and productive work, including irrigation, fisheries, livestock and industrial 
use.  UNICEF has reported that despite 66% of the urban population in Kenya has access to 
drinking water that is free from contamination in 2015 compared to 70% in 2000.  This can 
be a severe constraint to women and girls who are majority of those involved in collection of 
water for domestic use. A meta-analysis of household surveys across 45 developing countries 
found that 72% of daily household water-related tasks were done by women and girls. 
Improved water provision and a more equal distribution of unpaid work between women and 
men would mean women have more opportunity to devote time to other aspects of life, such 
as livelihoods and education.8 Extensive and balanced involvement of women, men, 
transgender, and intersex people in the use, enjoyment and valuation of ecosystem services 
is necessary to create just, legitimate and effective policies and institutional arrangements. 
Interventions for water environmental services.9 Feminist political ecology (FPE), a growing 
field of political ecology treats gender as a critical variable in shaping resource access and 
control, interacting with class, caste, race, culture, and ethnicity to shape processes of 
ecological change (Cole, 2017).  
1.5 Mainstreaming Gender in Global Climate Fund Programmes 
The GCF’s commitment to gender equality centers on gender-responsive country 
programmes and initiatives that benefit everyone, women and men. This requires gender 
analysis to understand the social, economic and political factors underlying climate change-
exacerbated gender inequalities, and the potential contributions of women and men to 
mitigating and adapting to climate change, and building climate resilience. It further entails 
adopting methods and tools to promote gender equality and reduce gender disparities in 
climate funding by mainstreaming gender in the project cycle. Finally, it means measuring the 
outcomes and impacts of project activities on women’s and men’s resilience to climate change 
through gender-responsive monitoring and evaluation (M&E). Gender mainstreaming should 
shape the entire project cycle, from project identification to M&E. 
 
 
8 Australian Water Partnership. (2016). Gender & SDG 6: The Critical Connection. 
9 Ibid., pg 3.

=== PAGE 117 ===
14 | P a g e  
 
2.0 Baseline survey on building resilience in the ACA 
2.1 Baseline had four steps 
2.1.1    Step 1: Inception  
At this phase, preliminary consultations were conducted with NEMA, KEITI staff and other 
stakeholders. The purpose of inception phase was to discuss the proposed protocol, 
proposed methodology for undertaking the study-including data collection tools, work 
schedules as well as proposed support (to the research team). Following these initial 
consultation meetings the consultants submitted the proposed methodology as informed by 
the inception meeting, data collection tools, processes and analytical tools as well as a 
comprehensive list of key stakeholders and informants to be met during the course of the 
baseline survey.   
2.1.2 Step 2: Desk study  
Key project documents reviewed as part of the evaluation were:  
The Constitution of Kenya 2010, the Beijing Platform of Action 1995, CARE International. 
Women’s Empowerment SII Framework at 
http://pqdl.care.org/sii/Pages/Women%27s%20Empowerment%20SII%20Framework.aspx and 
other documents that are used in connection with the strategic focus areas of NEMA. 
 
Step 3: Field work  
The gender analysis was cross-sectional, using mostly qualitative methods. Emphasis was 
placed on making the process participatory through focus group discussions, key informant 
interviews, observation and workshops in the four counties. The consultants used purposive 
sampling method. This sampling methodology was used in order to have a statistically 
acceptable and defensible distribution of respondents as a representation of the entire focus 
population within the project areas.  
2.1.3.1 Focus group discussions 
Focus group discussions (FGD) were used to obtain views of groups of stakeholders. In all 
the target areas visited, FGDs was conducted with a minimum of 8 participants. The 
participants were purposively selected to get the views of water sector stakeholders and the 
community (men, women and community leaders) in the target areas.  
2.1.3.2 Key informant interviews 
Detailed interviews using semi-structured checklists were conducted with key informants. 
The key informants included the following: 
• Chief water and irrigation Officer (Machakos) 
• Director of Gender and Culture (Kiambu) 
• Deputy Director water Resources (Kiambu) 
• Deputy Director Environment (Nyandarua) 
• Gender Officer (Nyandarua) 
2.1.3 Step 4: Data analysis 
Qualitative data was analysed it involved coding into various categories in line with the focus 
area of enhancing the resilience of communities and ecosystems in the Athi river catchment 
area project

=== PAGE 118 ===
15 | P a g e  
 
 
2.2. The Athi Catchment Area 
ACA is located in the southern part of the country as shown in Figure 1.3.1 and borders on 
the Tana Catchment Area in the north, the Indian Ocean in the east, Tanzania in the south 
and the Rift Valley Catchment Area in the west. The Aberdare Range, one of the Five Water 
Towers, lies in the northern edge of the area. Total area of ACA is 58,639 km², corresponding 
to 10.2% of the country’s total land area. Based on the Census 2009, population of the area 
in 2010 is estimated at 9.79 million, or 25.4% of the total population of Kenya. Population 
density is 167 persons/ km².  
The topography of ACA varies, from the highland in the Aberdare Range at around 2,600 m 
amsl to the coastal area at sea level. ACA is divided into three zones, with the upper zone at 
2600-1500 m amsl, middle zone at 1,500-500 m amsl, and coastal zone at 500-0 m amsl.  
The Athi River flows from the southeast of Nairobi north-eastward in the upstream reaches 
and then turns to the southeast in the north of Ol Doinyo Sapuk National Park and flows 
along the catchment area boundary with Tana Catchment Area and pours into the Indian 
Ocean in the north of Malindi. The drainage area of the Athi River is 37,750 km², or 64.4% of 
the Athi Catchment Area. The Lumi River, Lake Jipe, and Lake Chala flow into Tanzania and 
the Umba River flows from Tanzania to Kenya. Other rivers such as the Rare, Mwachi, Pemba, 
and Ramisi rivers flow into the Indian Ocean and the total drainage area is 19, 493 km². There 
are several springs in ACA such as Mzima, Kikuyu, Njoro Kbwa, Nol Turesh springs, etc.  
ACA is classified as a semi-arid land except the upstream area of the Athi River which is 
classified as non-ASAL. The mean annual rainfall ranges between 600 mm in the central part 
of the area to 1,200 mm in the upstream area of the Athi River. The catchment area average 
mean annual rainfall is 810 mm. The renewable water resources, which is defined as 
precipitation minus evapotranspiration, is estimated at 4.54 BCM/year in 2010 for ACA and 
the per capita renewable water resources is calculated at 464 m3/year/capita. 
Source: Source: Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources, 2013

=== PAGE 119 ===
16 | P a g e  
 
2.3 Enhancing the resilience of communities and ecosystems in the Athi 
River Catchment Area 
The National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Kenya’s nationally accredited 
entity to the Green Climate Fund (GCF), in collaboration with the Korea Environmental 
Industry and Technology Institute (KEITI), is developing a $ 10 million project titled ‘Enhancing 
the resilience of communities and ecosystems in the Athi River Catchment Area’ for submission to 
the GCF.  
 
NEMA submitted a draft proposal of the project to the GCF Secretariat in 2016 to acquire 
initial feedback and received a list of additional tasks that need to be carried out further to 
completion of the comprehensive proposal whose objectives were to increase water security 
through Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) and to enhance the health and 
well-being of the vulnerable populations within the Athi River Catchment Area (ARCA).  
The ARCA is classified as semi-arid land and suffers from frequent drought and flooding 
events exacerbated by climate change. During the long rainy seasons, extreme heavy rains 
give rise to bursting of the river banks especially in the upper and lower catchments. The 
floods experienced in March, April and May 2018 lend credence to the climatic and 
environmental fragilities of the catchment areas. Apart from roads becoming impassable, 
thousands were displaced, farmlands destroyed and several people died during the floods.10  
The project is therefore aimed at addressing environmental and water related challenges of 
the ARCA through modernized monitoring and utilization of water, and enhancing actions for 
sustainable livelihoods. Specifically, the gender analysis is designed to identify and propose 
remedies to development gaps that manifest gender based inequalities and forestall possible 
outcomes of the project that could exacerbate existing, or generate new forms of disparities 
in the way the project impacts on men, women and other vulnerable populations within the 
catchment areas. The focus on gender and inclusion demonstrates compliance with national 
statutes11 on participatory development and ensures adherence to human rights concerns in 
the design and delivery of initiatives. Recognition that environment and gender12 are sacredly 
intertwined is the fundamental principle that underpinned the analysis whose objective was 
to examine gender related socio economic dynamics and prepare a Gender Action Plan.   
 
 
 
10 Kenya Red Cross Reports  
11 The Constitution of Kenya 2010 
12 The Beijing Platform of Action 1995

=== PAGE 120 ===
17 | P a g e  
 
3.0 Methodology 
3.1 Gender Analysis Approach, Framework and Domains 
The analysis adopted a gender and development approach whose main focus is the unequal 
relations of power between men and women that prevent equitable development and 
women's full participation. Gender and development strategies and projects seek to empower 
disadvantaged women and men to achieve more equitable relationships by addressing their 
practical needs and strategic interests. The analysis invoked the Women’s Empowerment 
Framework13 whose components are agency, structures and relations. This particular 
framework was useful in elevating the analysis to respond to the global mantra14 of promoting 
gender equality and empowering women. The gender analysis domains that guided the study 
were access to resources; knowledge, beliefs and perceptions; practices and 
participation; balance of power and decision making; legal rights and status; and 
time and space.   
 
3.2 Study Design 
The gender analysis was cross-sectional, using mostly qualitative methods. Emphasis was 
placed on making the process participatory through focus group discussions, key informant 
interviews, observation and workshops in Nyandarua, Kiambu, Machakos and Nairobi 
counties. Respondents included community participants, service delivery officers and policy 
makers in the water and environment management sectors, and gender mainstreaming 
oversight institutions.  Qualitative data was majorly collected through extensive desk reviews.  
 
 
 
13 CARE International. Women’s Empowerment SII Framework at 
http://pqdl.care.org/sii/Pages/Women%27s%20Empowerment%20SII%20Framework.aspx 
14 Inference to Sustainable Development Goal Number 5 at

=== PAGE 121 ===
18 | P a g e  
 
3.3 Key Research Questions 
The analysis responded to the following key research questions that were investigated 
through literature reviews and participatory methodologies Table 3.  
Table 3: Research Questions 
Broad 
Gender 
Analyis  Questions 
Specific Gender Analysis Questions 
What is the context? 
 What demographic data disaggregated by sex and income, including the 
percentage of women-headed households, are available? 
 What are the main sources of livelihoods and income for women and men? 
 What are the needs and priorities in the specific sector(s) to be addressed by 
the planned intervention? Are men’s and women’s needs and priorities 
different? 
 What impacts are men and women experiencing due to specific climate risks?  
 What is the legal status of women?  
 What are common beliefs, values, stereotypes related to gender?  
Who has what? 
 What are the levels of income and wages for women and men? 
 What are the levels of educational attainment for girls and boys? 
 What is the land tenure and resource use situation? Who controls access to or 
owns the land? Do women have rights to land, and other productive resources 
and assets?  
 What are the main areas of household spending?  
 Do men and women have bank accounts? Have they received loans?  
 Do men and women have mobile phones, access to radio, newspapers, TV?  
 Do women and men have access to extension services, training programmes, 
etc.? 
Who does what? 
 What is the division of labour between men and women, young and old, 
including in the specific sector(s) of intervention?  
 How do men and women participate in the formal and informal economy?  
 Who manages the household and takes care of children and/or the elderly?  
 How much time is spent on domestic and care work tasks?  
 What crops do men and women cultivate?  
Who decides? 
 Who controls/manages/makes decisions about household resources, assets and 
finances? Do women have a share in household decision-making? 
 How are men/women involved in community decision-making? In the broader 
political sphere? 
 Do men/women belong to cooperatives or other sorts of economic, political 
or social organizations? 
Who benefits 
 Will the services/products of the proposed interventions be accessible to and 
benefit men and women?  
 Will the proposed interventions increase the incomes of men/women? 
 Will the proposed interventions cause an increase/decrease in women’s (and 
men’s) workloads?  
 Are there provisions to support women’s productive and reproductive tasks, 
including unpaid domestic and care work?

=== PAGE 122 ===
19 | P a g e  
 
3.4 Organization of Gender Analysis and Quality Assurance 
Workshops in Nyandarua, Kiambu, Machakos and Nairobi counties were used as entry points 
for data collection and identification of sites for project interventions. This was followed by 
community meetings with men, women, leaders and key people deemed to be having specific 
expertise. The data collection was undertaken by gender and community development 
specialist assisted by research assistants drawn from similar fields. The senior researchers and 
research assistants underwent comprehensive training on the gender analysis broadly and 
specifically on the research tools that entailed comprehensive peer review.  The qualitative 
data obtained was transcribed and subjected to qualitative analysis strategies and techniques. 
The data was largely analysed using a comprehensive thematic matrix that facilitated 
identification of common patterns and trends arising from the narratives. Content analysis of 
the data was undertaken in order for inferences, judgments and conclusions to be as accurate 
as possible.  
3.5 Compliance with Research Ethics 
Participation in the gender analysis was voluntary and based on informed consent. It entailed 
providing study participants with information on the assessment and its approach, their role 
in the gender analysis, benefits of their participation (both directly and indirectly) and finally 
obtaining consent from each respondent willing to participate in the assessment. The 
participant’s right to anonymity and confidentiality was given due attention. The interaction 
between the research team and the participants as well as among the study participants 
themselves was based on mutual respect and trust.  
3.6 Research Constraints and Limitation 
The main research constraints of the study were lack of data on gender issues at the county 
level attributed to the formative nature of devolved units in the country. National data was 
thus used as proxy data to inform the situation in counties. Most counties do not have 
dedicated gender officers which contributed to inadequate capacity to understand and 
articulate development issues through gender lens.  The main limitation of the study is the 
contextual nature of qualitative data which may not be generalized across other different 
development settings.  
3.7 Structure of the Gender Analysis Report  
This report is organized in six main areas as follows 
Chapter One: Introduction – This section contextualises development progress in Kenya 
and goes further to highlight the interface between water and gender issues.  
Chapter Two: Gender Analysis – This section of the report briefly articulates the 
programming purpose of undertaking the gender analysis. 
Chapter Three: Methodology – This part of the report summarises the research process 
followed in undertaking the gender analysis.  
Chapter Four: Findings – This section of the reports articulates and analyses feedback 
received through various methods of undertaking the gender analysis, including literature 
reviews.  
Chapter Five: Summary and Recommendations – This part of the report condenses the 
findings and outlines measures in response to the same.  
Annex – This section of the report presents an action plan based on the findings and 
recommendations.

=== PAGE 123 ===
20 | P a g e  
 
4.0 Findings  
4.1 Kenya’s Gender Profile  
4.1.1 Population 
Kenya sustained tremendous population growth in the last five decades after independence. 
During the first post-independence census in 1969 the country had a population of 10.9 million 
people compared to 38.6 million people enumerated during the 2009 Population and Housing 
Census, representing a 35% increase from the 1999 census figures. The 2009 census revealed 
marginal although demographically significant differences between males (19,192,458) and 
females (19,417,639).  A youth bulge is another feature of the Kenyan population which 
promises demographic dividends in 2030. Most Kenyans (68%) live in rural areas as confirmed 
by the 2009 censuses.  
Table 4: Rural and Urban Population Sizes  
Residence 
Male  
Female 
Total 
Rural 
12,913,647 
 
13,209,075 
26,122,722 
Urban 
6,278,811 
 
6,208,564 
12,487,375 
Total  
19,192,458 
19,417,639 
38,610,097 
Source: Population and Housing Census 2009 
4.1.2 Health 
Maternal mortality ratio in Kenya is estimated at 362 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births 
(KDHS whereas the infant mortality rate is 39 deaths per 1,000 live births, and under-5 
mortality is 60/1,000 for boys and 52/1000 for girls.15 The latest Kenya AIDS Indicator Survey 
(KAIS) data on HIV prevalence in Kenya indicated that women and girls still bear the disease 
burden.16 Accordingly, prevalence among females aged 15 to 64 years is 6.9% which is higher 
than the national average of 5.6% whereas prevalence among males within the same age 
category is 4.4%.17 The KAIS report revealed that 21% of new HIV infections in Kenya occur 
among girls and young women aged 15-24 years.18   
The prevalence of gender-based violence (GBV) in Kenya has been documented during 
stability and humanitarian emergencies. The National Crime Research Centre (NCRC) 
undertook a study on GBV across 13 counties in 2014 and established rape as being a 
prevalent violation in both rural and urban settings.19 The Commission of Inquiry into Post-
Election Violence (CIPEV) reported numerous cases of gender based violence during the PEV 
period in 2007-08.20 Female genital mutilation / cutting (FGM/C) is declining slowly over time. 
 
15 Republic of Kenya. Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2014: 
Key Indicators. Nairobi: KNBS, April 2014.  
16 National AIDS and STI Control Programme (NASCOP), Kenya. Kenya AIDS Indicator Survey 2012: Final Report. 
Nairobi, NASCOP. June 2014. 
17 Ibid. 
18 Ibid. 
19 Republic of Kenya. National Crime Research Centre (NCRC). Gender Based Violence in Kenya. Nairobi: NCRC, 
2014.  
20 Commission of Inquiry into Post Election Violence in Kenya (2008). Commission of Inquiry of Inquiry into Post 
Election Violence Report available at http://kenyastockholm.files.wordpress.com/2008/10/the-waki-report.pdf

=== PAGE 124 ===
21 | P a g e  
 
The 1998 KDHS reported 38 % of women in Kenya having been circumcised, which declined 
to 32 % in 2003, 27 % in 2008-09, and 21 % in 2014.21 This can be attributed to innovative and 
robust awareness creation programmes and strategies that target structural factors such as 
the alternative rites of passage initiatives and transformative dialogue with community gate 
keepers. Enactment and gradual strengthening in the enforcement of the Prohibition against 
Female Genital Mutilation Act (2011)22 have also triggered the impetus against the practice.  
 
4.1.4 Household Headship 
 
Most households in Kenya are male-headed (67.6% male and 32.4% female) with an average 
size of four members.23 Women constitute lower proportions of household headship in both 
in both rural and urban areas at 35.9% and 27.8%, respectively.24 Majority of household heads 
(52.4%) fall within the 25-44 age bracket. The highest proportion of 14.7% of household heads 
was in the 30-34 years age group. Nationally, households headed by persons aged 65 years 
and above accounted for 11.6% of households.25 Household headship in Kiambu, Nyandarua, 
Nairobi and Machakos counties is shown in Figure 1 which reveals a patriarchal pattern that 
is highest in the more cosmopolitan counties of Nairobi and Kiambu. 
 
Figure 1: Household Headship 
 
 
 
Nairobi leads in the male household headship and contrary bottoms in female side. It is 
followed by Kiambu, Nyandarua then Machakos. However, Machakos was found oo be the 
county with the highest number of female headed households, followed by Nyandarua, Kiambu 
and Nairobi consectively. The women are burdened with triple roles as they multitask on 
both domestic, communal and productive roles in order to get an income for sustaining their 
families. Some of the female household heads have difficulties in creating ample time away 
 
21 Republic of Kenya. Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2014: 
Key Indicators. Nairobi: KNBS, April 2014. 
22 Republic of Kenya. National Council for Law Reporting (NCLR).Prohibition Against Female Genital Mutilation 
Act 2011. Nairobi: NCLR, 2011. 
23 Ibid. 
24 Ibid. 
25 Ibid. 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Kiambu
Nyandarua
Machakos
Nairobi
75.0%
66.1%
63.6%
76.0%
25.0%
33.9%
36.4%
24.0%
Male
Female

=== PAGE 125 ===
22 | P a g e  
 
from home duties to participate in forums regarding water resources management including 
right to access and usage.   
Source: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 2018 
4.1.6 National Priorities  
Kenya’s development blue print is Vision 2030 which is premised on transformation of the 
country into a prosperous middle income nation. The Third Phase of the national vision is 
contextualized within sustainable development goals, zeroing in on universal health coverage, 
access to affordable and decent housing, growth in manufacturing and expansion in agriculture 
for subsistence and commercial income as the main priorities dubbed the “Big 4 Agenda.”  
4.2 Access to Resources 
4.2.1 Educational Attainment for Men and Women 
Access to both basic and tertiary education in Kenya has grown exponentially in the last 15 
years since declaration of free primary education (FPE) in 2003 and free day secondary 
education (FDSE) in subsequent years. Policy reforms have also contributed to expansion in 
access to tertiary and university education in Kenya especially after promulgation of a new 
constitution in 2010 that re-emphasized the primacy of education as a human right.26  
 
Nationally, the gross attendance ratio (GAR)27 for pre-primary school is 94.4% (95.4% for 
males and 93.5% for females) while for primary school it rises to 107.2% (109.0% for males 
and 105.4% for females).28 The same trend of higher school attendance for boys than girls is 
maintained at secondary school level with a GAR of 66.2% (67.2% for males and 65.2% for 
females).29  
 
Table 5: Gross Attendance Ratio (%) 
County 
Pre-Primary 
Primary 
Secondary 
Mal
e 
Femal
e 
Tota
l 
Mal
e 
Femal
e 
Tota
l 
Mal
e 
Femal
e 
Tota
l 
Nyandaru
a 
110.
2 
81.4 
95.4 
107.
8 
112.6 
110.1 
81.7 
81.1 
81.4 
 
Kiambu 
106.
2 
74.8 
92.9 
105.
4 
113.5 
109.2 
76.2 
74.5 
75.3 
 
Nairobi 
74.5 
86.4 
80.8 
100.
5 
102.2 
101.3 
81.3 
94.0 
88.4 
 
Machakos 
67.0 
76.4 
71.0 
127.
4 
116.0 
121.
1 
74.3 
88.0 
81.1 
 
Source: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 2018 
 
 
26 The Universities Act (2012), Technical and Vocational Training Act (2013), the Basic Education Act (2013) and 
the National Education Sector Plan (2014) are some of the policy milestones in the  education sector that have 
triggered exponential growth in access despite existing and credible reservations about quality. 
27 Gross Attendance Ratio (GAR) is the total number of persons attending school regardless of their age, 
expressed as a percentage of the official school age population for a specific level of education. 
28 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). Basic Report Based on 2015/16 Kenya Integrated Household 
Budget Survey. Nairobi: KNBS, 2018. 
29 Ibid.

=== PAGE 126 ===
23 | P a g e  
 
Nyandarua (95.4%) and Kiambu (92.9%) counties have the highest aggregate GAR for the pre-
primary level although they also manifest the most glaring differences between boys and girls 
(Table 6). Machakos County reported the lowest GAR at pre-primary for both boys (67.0%) 
and girls (76.4%) but drastically improves to post the highest aggregate GAR at primary 
(121.1%). Nairobi County had a consistently higher GAR for girls at pre-primary (86.4%), 
primary (102.2%) and secondary (94.0%) than for boys. Overall, female pupils have the highest 
GAR at primary across all the four counties which is critical for significant transition to 
secondary.

=== PAGE 127 ===
24 | P a g e  
 
Table 6: Net Attendance Ratio (%) 
County 
Pre-Primary 
Primary 
Secondary 
Mal
e 
Femal
e 
Tota
l 
Mal
e 
Femal
e 
Tota
l 
Mal
e 
Femal
e 
Tota
l 
Nyandaru
a 
73.9 
67.6 
70.6 
88.4 
91.3 
89.8 
46.6 
52.0 
49.1 
 
Kiambu 
79.2 
63.5 
72.5 
88.6 
94.4 
91.3 
62.5 
58.7 
60.5 
 
Nairobi 
68.6 
78.8 
74.0 
90.1 
91.1 
90.6 
62.4 
67.0 
65.0 
 
Machakos 
58.6 
64.9 
61.3 
95.3 
95.3 
95.3 
41.3 
58.2 
49.6 
 
Source: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 2018 
 
The Net Attendance Ratio30 (NAR) shows better access to education by girls than boys across 
pre-primary, primary and secondary levels. The NAR for girls at primary school was 
consistently higher than for boys in all counties except for Machakos County where they were 
at par in primary school (95.3% each) and Kiambu County where boys had a higher NAR at 
secondary school (62.5%). Nairobi County had the highest aggregate NAR for pre-primary 
school (74.0%) and secondary school (65.0%) compared to the other three counties while 
Machakos County had the highest NAR for primary school (95.3%).  
 
Figure 2: Gender Parity Index (GPI) in Kenya 
 
 
 
Source: Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, 2014 
 
The national Gender Parity Index (GPI) for pre-primary schools (1.05), primary (0.97) and 
secondary (0.92) is skewed in favour of boys.31 Structural factors such as child marriage, female 
genital mutilation, household poverty and discrimination against girls and women expose them 
to low participation in education. Disability and geographical drivers of inequality in access 
and participation are legitimate dimensions of delivering on the education commitment in 
Kenya.  
 
 
 
 
30 Net Attendance Ratio (NAR) is defined as the total number of persons in the official school age group attending 
a specific level to the total population in that age group. 
31 Republic of Kenya. Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MoEST). Basic Education Statistical Booklet. 
Nairobi: UNICEF, 2014. 
1.05
0.97
0.92
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
GPI
Secondary
Primary
ECDE

=== PAGE 128 ===
25 | P a g e  
 
Table 7: Tertiary and University Education 
County 
Mid-Level Colleges 
University 
Male 
Female 
Male  
Female 
Machakos 
3.1%  
4.4% 
 
5.6% 
1.8% 
Nyandarua 
4.1%  
4.0% 
 
1.2% 
0.8% 
Kiambu 
7.2% 
9.8% 
6.3% 
5.4% 
 
Nairobi 
14.9%  
 
13.5% 
10.8% 
8.3% 
Source: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 2018 
 
Almost equal number of males (5.9%) and females (5.6%) attend mid-level colleges in Kenya 
but the gap widens at university level where there are more male students (3.7%) than females 
(2.6%).32 The number of men attending university education in Machakos County is three 
times (5.6%) higher than that of women (1.8%) although there are more women (4.4%) than 
men (3.1%) in mid-level colleges. Nyandarua County showed slight differences between men 
and women attending mid-level colleges (4.1% men and 4.0% women and university (1.2% men 
and 0.8% women). Kiambu County had the second highest proportions of women and men 
attending tertiary and university education as shown in Table 8. Nationally, the proportion of 
literate population is 84.8 per cent with a higher proportion in urban areas (93.2%) compared 
to their rural counterparts (78.8%). More men (89.0%) than women (80.2%) in Kenya are 
considered literate.33 Overall, the national education inequality index is 61%.34 
4.2.2 Main Sources of Livelihoods and Income for Women and Men 
Key Findings 
 Women recognize water as the main source of livelihood and income. 
 Men recognize land as the main source of livelihood and income.  
 
The main productive resources and social amenities that anchor livelihoods in Nyandarua, 
Kiambu and Machakos counties water, hospitals, schools, roads and buildings, according to 
women. Accordingly water is important for both domestic consumption and agricultural 
activities that rely on irrigation. On their part, men in the three counties recognized land as a 
critical source of livelihood followed by water and schools. This position was similarly 
expressed by leaders who ranked land as the foremost source of livelihood and income 
followed by water. It is therefore water that cuts across all cadres of respondents as an 
important source of livelihood although more preferred by women just as men would lean 
more towards land (Table 9).  
 
 
32   Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). Basic Report Based on 2015/16 Kenya Integrated Household 
Budget Survey. Nairobi: KNBS, 2018. 
33 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). Basic Report Based on 2015/16 Kenya Integrated Household 
Budget Survey. Nairobi: KNBS, 2018. 
34 National Gender and Equality Commission (NGEC). Status of Equality and Inclusion in Kenya. Nairobi: NGEC, 
2016.

=== PAGE 129 ===
26 | P a g e  
 
Table 8: Sources of Livelihoods and Income 
County 
Responden
t 
Identification and Ranking Sources of Livelihood and Income 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Nyandaru
a 
Women 
Water 
Roads 
Buildings 
Crops 
Skills 
Men  
Land 
Water 
AGR 
Forests 
Infrastructur
e 
Leaders 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Kiambu 
Women 
Hospita
l 
School
s 
Water 
Infrastructur
e  
Land 
Men  
Land 
Water 
Infrastructur
e 
Hospital 
Education 
Leaders 
Water  
Land 
Schools 
Hospital 
Energy 
Machakos 
Women 
Water 
Health 
Education 
Roads 
Land 
Men  
Land 
School
s 
Hospital 
Water 
Road 
Leaders 
Water 
Land 
People 
Hospitals 
Schools 
 
Key informant interview sessions generated a wide range of livelihood and income sources 
associated with women in Nyandarua County. These included subsistence farming, group 
savings and loans associations (chamas), dairy and poultry keeping, running grocery businesses, 
retail shops, and provision of mobile money services (Mpesa). Women also work in the hotel 
industry, banks and micro-finance institutions. Soap making, poultry keeping, horticulture, 
table banking and merry-go-rounds, working as labourers and crushing ballast for sale were 
cite as sources of income for women in Machakos County.  They also worked for the county 
government, banks, SACCOs and MFIs. Women in Kiambu participate in formal employment, 
small and micro-enterprises, agricultural activities (green houses, dairy farming, pig keeping, 
crop farming (maize, beans, sweet potatoes, and arrowroots), and poultry keeping, according 
to key informants. Various livelihood and income generation activities that men in Nyandarua, 
Kiambu and Machakos engage in are presented in Table 9.  
 
Table 9: Livelihood and Income Activities for Men 
County  
Livelihood and Income Activities 
Nyandarua  
 Dairy keeping 
 Crop farming peas, irish potatoes, carrots and maize) 
 Men’s saving groups (buy and sell property) 
 Boda boda, retail shops (electronic equipment), Mpesa shops.  
 Work for county government, banks, SACCOs and micro-finance institutions.  
Machakos 
 Sand harvesting and general quarry business 
 Boda boda  
 Mpesa outlets and retail shops (electronics) 
 County government employment  
 Agro-forest nurseries 
 Sell of coffee (coffee is a man’s crop) 
 Horticulture 
Kiambu 
 Real estate business 
 Dairy farming 
 Informal employment commonly referred to as casual jobs 
 Cash crop farming (tea, coffee, pineapple, French beans, avocados, macadamia, bananas) 
 Boda boda and Mpesa and retail shops (electronics)  
 Work for county government, banks, SACCOs and micro-finance institutions

=== PAGE 130 ===
27 | P a g e  
 
 
4.2.3 Land as a Productive Resource 
Land as a productive resource was consistently highly ranked by men and community leaders 
in all the three counties. The men explained the primacy of land as residing in its high value 
when sold and as a factor of production. Women in Kiambu reported that land is valuable 
because of farming but still ranked it as the last item among their sources of income and 
livelihood. They observed that both men and women have access to land but control (title 
deed and selling family land) was solely by men. Contrary views were stated by men in the 
county who asserted that women had access to land, and both men and women enjoyed equal 
levels of control and benefit. Low ranking of land as a source of livelihood by women in 
Machakos was attributed to the small sizes of the parcels that are owned which they have to 
be shared with their sons. They reported that women and men had access to land but only 
men controlled and benefitted from it. Their male counterparts intimated that women and 
men had access to and benefitted from land but only men controlled it. Women in Nyandarua 
had access to land which they also owned although they said the parcels are small (50X100 
square metres). They ranked land as the last item after livestock though both did not feature 
among their top 5 sources of livelihoods and income. They acknowledged benefitting from 
the land which they said was controlled by men who held title deeds to the land. Men in the 
same county agreed with their female counterparts on access and benefit. They also argued 
that women controlled the land on the basis of provisions in the Constitution of Kenya (2010). 
Constraints and coping mechanisms associated with land were reported as shown in Table 
10. 
 
Table 10: Land Related Constraints and Coping Mechanisms 
County 
Gender Constraint 
Coping Mechanisms 
Nyandarua 
Women 
 Small in size due to dense  
population 
 Practice 
mixed 
farming, 
allocating each crop a small 
portion. 
Men  
 Women have no control 
over land since men are 
the owners of title deeds.  
 Be loyal to men to use the 
land 
and 
maximize 
the 
opportunity they get to use 
the land. 
Kiambu 
Women   Small size of land parcels 
 
 Mainly 
grow 
crops 
for 
subsistence farming 
Men  
 Small in size, sub-division 
for children  
 Garbage disposal at the 
residential 
homes 
(sanitation) 
 Get used to it and survive 
Machakos 
Women   It 
is 
small 
and 
unproductive 
 Accept and move on 
Men 
 Rains 
are scarce 
and 
unreliable 
 Planting in the long rain 
seasons (October).

=== PAGE 131 ===
28 | P a g e  
 
Leaders in Kiambu intimated that women are culturally barred from owning land but as a 
coping initiative women are buying land for individual ownership. They alluded to provisions 
in the Constitution that allow women and girls to inherit land from their parents and spouses. 
While acknowledging that women are not allowed to own land, leaders in Machakos County 
reported that land buying and having to endure living with mean spouses were coping 
strategies used by women. They vouched for sensitization of women on matrimonial property 
laws and the Constitution as a way of addressing this manifestation of discrimination and 
inequality.   
Land acquisition in Nyandarua County is largely through inheritance (succession) which 
disadvantages women because of its patriarchal bias for men and boys, according to 
community leaders. This has led to women losing control of farm produce (carrots, cabbage 
and potatoes) despite providing much of the farm labour. The leaders reported that women 
had resorted to buying their own land and drifted to roadside markets (Soko Mjinga) to eke 
out a living through petty trade. They expressed concern that the roadside business has led 
to dysfunctional families as women gain economic traction and withdraw from relationships 
with men who cannot provide for the family adequately. Participation in table banking activities 
ad embracing family planning were also cited as women’s copying mechanisms. The leaders 
underscored expose to diseases such as HIV, malnutrition, drug abuse, and sexual violence 
(rape) as common repercussion of women lacking access and control over land in the county.  
Public officers in Kiambu and Machakos counties pointed out that freehold is the dominant 
for of land tenure which provided opportunities for credit acquisition and investment if used 
as collateral, construction of business premises (rental houses), or leasing out. This form of 
land tenure guaranteed full control of one’s land and forestalled conflicts inherent in 
communal ownership practices, according to the public officers. Some of the drawbacks that 
they associated with the freehold tenure had to do with men unilaterally deciding to dispose 
off the land without seeking consent from their spouses. Leasehold was also cited as a form 
of land tenure system in Machakos County. The public officers concurred that most women 
in the county do not own land while those who are married can only access it but not exercise 
any form of control. To alleviate this, the officers proposed empowerment of women through 
financial products to acquire and own land alongside enforcing legal frameworks that 
recognize women’s land rights.35  
Freehold tenure was similarly practiced in Nyandarua, according to expert views. This form 
of land ownership created opportunity for women in the county to own land through 
purchase, decide what to plant, have control over the farm produce, and access credit from 
banks and SACCOs using the land as collateral.  Public officers in the county observed that 
most women do not own land but a trend was emerging whereby women are increasingly 
buying land and having title deeds in their name. Generally, female landholders in the county 
have less land than male landholders. Even when women own land, their husbands are still 
perceived as de facto owners by virtue of being household heads. 
 
 
 
35

=== PAGE 132 ===
29 | P a g e  
 
4.2.3.1 Ownership and Control of Other Productive Resources and Assets 
Water is a crucial resource for development across all counties encompassed in the gender 
analysis. Women respondents in Nyandarua indicated that they had access, controlled and 
benefitted from water since they are the ones who fetch and decide on its use. They stated 
that men did not access, control or benefit from water. Similarly, women in the county said 
they accessed, controlled and benefitted from crops unlike their male counterparts who did 
not have access to and control of crops but benefitted. Notably livestock was accessed and 
controlled by men without the involvement of women. The men controlled livestock since 
they owned the land and could decide when to dispose of livestock and how proceeds would 
be expended. On the contrary, men in the county asserted that both men and women 
accessed, controlled and benefitted from water. They agreed with the women on control of 
livestock as a socially sanctioned preserve of men but expressed divergent sentiments on 
access and benefit which they associated with both men and women. The men further asserted 
that they accessed and controlled machinery within the homestead but both women and men 
benefitted from their use.  
Female community respondents in Kiambu County explained that water, schools, hospitals 
and infrastructure as sources of livelihood are accessed, controlled and benefit men and 
women equally.  The women stated that water is a basic need for all and schools enrolled 
boys and girls without discrimination as a public policy. They further underscored that the 
poor state of roads especially during the rainy season and shortage of drugs in public hospitals 
affected both men and women. Male community respondents in the same county stated that 
women accessed and benefitted from water but it was the men who controlled it. They cited 
services such as road infrastructure, schools and security (police) as being equally accessed, 
controlled and beneficial to men and women. Healthcare was entirely a responsibility of 
women, according to male respondents.  
Female community respondents in Machakos County presented the following views (Table 
13) on access and control of resources. They also indicated who benefits when resources are 
appropriated.  
 
Table 11: Access to Resources by Men and Women in Machakos County 
Resource  Access to 
Control of 
Benefit 
Men 
Women 
Men 
Women 
Men 
Women 
Land 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
X 
✓ 
x 
Water  
x 
✓ 
X 
✓ 
X 
✓ 
Livestock  
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
X 
✓ 
x 
Crops  
x 
✓ 
✓ 
X 
✓ 
x 
Roads 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
X 
✓ 
 
On their part, male community respondents in the same county reported that women 
accessed and controlled water as resource but both men and women benefitted. They further 
indicated that men and women accessed and benefitted from public amenities such as schools, 
hospitals, electricity and infrastructure (roads) although they were controlled by men.

=== PAGE 133 ===
30 | P a g e  
 
The leading sources of drinking water for residents of Nairobi County are water being piped 
into plot / yard (33.1%), into dwelling (32.2%), and into pubic tap/ stand tap (25.9%). The 
largest proportion of households in Nairobi County (53.3%) consumes between 1001-2000 
litres of water followed by 23.1% of households who consume between 0-1000 litres followed 
by 15.8% of households who consume between 2001-3000 litres. Majority of households in 
Nairobi County (50.9%) take less than 30 minutes to access the source of drinking water 
while 46.5% take neglible time (zero) to fetch water because the source is located within 
premises.  
 
Constraints and coping strategies associated with access to water in Machakos, Kiambu and 
Nyandarua counties are presented in Table 12. 
Table 12: Access to Water Constraints and Coping Strategies 
County 
Sex 
of 
Respondents 
Constraint 
Coping Strategy 
Machakos 
Women  
 Distance to water source 
 Contaminated water 
 High cost at KShs. per 20 litres 
 Ration use in the house hold. 
 Fetch from wells 
Men 
 Water scarcity 
 Water management strategies 
such as roof harvesting. 
 Boreholes also provide water 
which is sold at 5/= per 20 litre 
Jerican 
Leaders 
(male 
and 
female) 
 Long distance to water source 
 Insecurity due to long distance 
 Dig wells. 
 Buy water tanks (some) 
Kiambu 
Women  
 Floods in the region when it rains 
heavily, leading to shortage of 
water due to blocked pipes 
 Store water in tanks 
Men 
 Water on the roads when it rains  Get used to it. 
Leaders 
 Long distances 
 Water shortage 
 Rationing and buying water 
Nyandarua 
Women  
 Dirty / contaminated water  
 Lack of tap water  
 Use rain water for drinking  
 Buy drinking water from shops 
 Use water from wells and 
boreholes 
Men 
 Accessing water points which are 
very far from residential areas. 
 Transport water using donkeys 
that are not common. 
Leaders 
 Poor quality water and low 
quantity 
 Infiltration and contamination of 
wells / boreholes Flooding occurs 
 Lack of water for irrigation  
 
 Water harvesting  
 Installed water tanks  
 Drilling 
bore 
holes 
by 
Government. 
 Stopped burying to go to 
cemetery  
 Dependence 
on 
rain 
fed 
agriculture.

=== PAGE 134 ===
31 | P a g e  
 
 
4.2.4 Crops Grown by Women and Men 
Women in Kiambu County listed maize, beans, potatoes and kales as food crops that are 
widely grown mostly by women since men played a nominal role in farming. They stated that 
men only participate in farming as hired labour and therefore there is no food crop that is 
associated with men.  
 
 
For instance all activities associated with maize production (land preparation, purchase of 
inputs, selection of seeds, planting, weeding, insecticide control, harvesting and storage) are 
done by women except marketing where men come in as middle men (Table 13). The women 
also receive and bank proceeds from the sell of maize.  
 
Table 13: Participation in Maize Farming by Men and Women in Kiambu  
Stage 
Onl
y 
Men 
Only 
Wome
n 
Men 
and 
Wome
n 
Onl
y 
Girl
s 
Onl
y 
Boy
s 
Men 
and 
Boy
s 
Boy
s 
and 
Girl
s 
Girls 
and 
Wome
n 
Hired 
labou
r 
N/
A 
Land 
preparatio
n 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
Purchase 
of input 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Selection 
of seeds 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Planting 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Weeding 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insecticide 
control 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Harvesting 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Storage 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marketing 
 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Receiving 
money 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Banking 
money 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
While agreeing that maize, beans, kales and potatoes are the dominant food crops, men in 
Kiambu County stated that potatoes were considered as a woman’s crop while men were 
associated with maize farming.

=== PAGE 135 ===
32 | P a g e  
 
There was however neither restriction nor social stigma associated with women growing 
maize or men growing potatoes. The men said they participated in land preparation and 
purchase of inputs while women handled weeding and storage activities.  
They reported that selection of seeds, planting, insecticide control and harvesting of maize is 
jointly done by men and women but marketing, receiving and banking payment from the sale 
of maize is the responsibility of men.  
 
Maize, peas and beans define food crop farming in Machakos County as intimated by women 
community respondents. They said that all these crops are considered as a woman’s crop 
because women are the only once involved in their production. The women stated that men 
only get involved during harvesting so that they can sell the produce and misappropriate 
income. Social norms that would determine crops for men and those that are associated with 
men are therefore none-existent. Men’s participation in maize farming was said to be at the 
point 
of 
marketing, 
receiving 
and 
expending money (they 
don’t bank proceeds). 
The women expressed 
fear of being subjected 
to violence should they 
ask about income from 
the sale of farm produce. 
To avoid this, women 
sell a little maize in the 
absence if the man and 
keep 
the 
money 
in 
discreet places in the 
house. “We sell a few 
kilos like 5-20 kgs 
which we put it in our 
water containers on 
our way to the streams when the man is not around. Also, when going to the posho mill 
you carry more maize than is needed so that you can sell the extra,” the women 
concurred with each other.  
 
Men in Machakos County listed cassava, arrow roots, sorghum, maize, beans, wheat and 
vegetables as crops that are widely grown. They said that women grow vegetables whereas 
men grow cassava. The men explained that women are not allowed to grow cassava lest the 
produce become bitter or is poor. They explained that women who grow crops perceived to 
be men’s crops would be doing so with the consent and guidance of their spouses where as 
a man who grows a crop considered a women’s crop is viewed as weak and controlled by the 
wife. The men asserted that both men and women would take part in land preparation and 
harvesting of maize. The tasks related to maize farming that are performed by men only 
included purchase of input, insecticide control, storage, and marketing, receiving and banking 
money, according to the male community respondents. They acknowledged that women had 
the sole responsibility of selecting of seed, planting and weeding maize.  
 
Men in Nyandarua listed potatoes, beans, sukuma wiki, cabbages, tomatoes, apples, 
pyrethrum, maize, carrots and peas while women listed potatoes, cabbages, carrots, peas 
(Minji) and kales as food crops grown in the county. The men said peas and beans are 
considered as a woman’s crop while cabbages and potatoes (grown for commercial purposes) 
are viewed as a man’s crop.  On their part, women in the county stated that peas and beans 
are grown by women because of small parcels of land while men grow potatoes, cabbage and 
carrots because of the high market prices associated with these crops. Both men and women 
in the county agreed that there is no restriction on crops to be grown by a particular sex. 
The main determining factor would be the size of the parcel of land that one has.

=== PAGE 136 ===
33 | P a g e  
 
Table 14: Participation in Potato Farming by Men and Women in Nyandarua 
County  
Stage 
Onl
y 
Men 
Only 
Wome
n 
Men 
and 
Wome
n 
Onl
y 
Girl
s 
Onl
y 
Boy
s 
Men 
and 
Boy
s 
Boy
s 
and 
Girl
s 
Girls 
and 
Wome
n 
Hired 
labou
r 
N/
A 
Land 
preparatio
n 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Purchase 
of input 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Selection 
of seeds 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Planting 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Weeding 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insecticide 
control 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Harvesting 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Storage 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marketing 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Receiving 
money 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Banking 
money 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Any other:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The only aspect of potato farming that is solely undertaken by men is insecticide control. All 
other tasks, including marketing, receiving and banking money, are jointly done by men and 
women, according to male respondents. Women respondents reported that purchase of 
inputs, marketing, receiving and banking money accruing from cabbage farming is done by men 
while women carry out weeding and storage. They indicated that land preparation for cabbage 
farming, selection of seed, planting and insecticide control are done by both men and women.  
The women underscored their exclusion from proceeds generated through cabbage farming. 
“If you have a good husband he will inform you about the agreed prices though he is 
the one who receives money from brokers. Some of us don’t have a clue about the 
selling prices of cabbage. We only rely on the little money that we are given for 
shopping,” lamented a female community respondent.

=== PAGE 137 ===
34 | P a g e  
 
4.2.5 Access to Extension Services and Training 
Men in Machakos County reported having access to and control of extension services and 
training unlike their female counterparts. Women in the same county expressed contrary 
views, stating that they had access to and control of extension services which men lacked. 
They also stated that both men and women accessed and controlled training services. Men in 
Kiambu County and Nyandarua said that both women and men had access to and control of 
extension and training services but women in Kiambu contradicted this position by asserting 
that whereas both men and women had access to extension services and training, only women 
exercised control. Women in Nyandarua stated that they had access to extension services 
and training but only men maintained control despite having no access to the same.   
4.2.6 Access to Credit 
Both women and men in the three counties have access to credit although women access 
credit through a wider variety of platforms than men. For instance men in Nyandarua accessed 
credit products through banks and SACCOs while women had numerous options such as 
women’s chamas (table banking groups), Uwezo Fund, Women Enterprise Fund, Banks, MFIs, 
and SACCOs. Similarly, women in Machakos could access credit through MFIs (KWFT), 
SACCOs, churches, women’s chamas, banks, and online credit outlets such as Tala and 
Mshwari while the men secured such financial products through banks, chamas, SACCOs 
(boda boad and sand harvesting associations) and work place cooperatives. It is however 
noticeable that unlike men, women in Kiambu County access credit through individual lenders 
(Shylocks). On the other hand, men can access credit through online outlets such as Tala, 
Branch and Mshwari which were not reported as providing similar services to women. Both 
men and women in Kiambu County stated that they access credit through banks, SACCOs, 
and self-help groups. The Women in Nyandarua pointed out that men in the county are 
disinterested in credit products while their counterparts in Machakos complained of 
harassment by some banks when they defaulted and unwillingness to refund savings by some 
MFIs. This could be the reason why only 18% of households in Nyandarua sought credit (Table 
16).  
Nationally, the most preferred sources of credit are merchants or shops (28.2%); self-help 
groups/chamas (19.4%); relatives, friends and neighbours (14.0%), and SACCOs at 11.2%.36 
Other significant sources of credit include commercial banks (8.8%), mobile phone platform 
(7.6%), and micro-finance institutions at 5.3%.37 Employers (1.3%), Shylocks (1.2%), NGOs 
(1.2%) and Government funds (1.2%) are lowly rated as sources of credit.38 Male-headed 
households (34.6%) compared to female headed households (31.9%) are majority of those 
who sought credit but slightly more female headed households (90.7%) than male headed 
households (89.8%)received credit.  
 
 
 
 
36 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). Basic Report Based on 2015/16 Kenya Integrated Household 
Budget Survey. Nairobi: KNBS, 2018. 
37 Ibid. 
38 Ibid.

=== PAGE 138 ===
35 | P a g e  
 
 
 
Table 15: Access to Credit 
County  
Access to Credit 
 
Proportion of households that 
sought credit (%) 
Proportion of households that 
sought and accessed credit (%) 
Nyandarua 
18.2 
88.9% 
Kiambu 
31.5 
94.4% 
Nairobi 
33.9 
89.2% 
Machakos 
38.5% 
96.9% 
Source: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 2018 
4.2.7 Access to Information and Technology 
The survey noted that there was limited access to Climate Information by residents, and more 
so women yet they are the major partakers in search for water. Both men and women in 
Kiambu, Nyandarua and Machakos counties stated that they have access to and control of 
mobile phones. Nairobi County has the highest proportion of residents who have access to 
mobile phones (85.8%), followed by Kiambu County (83.7%) and Machakos (65.1%).39 
Nyandarua has the least proportion of the population that has access to mobile phones 
(61.5%) which brings to the fore disparities in access to ICT between urban and rural counties. 
Overall, radio (79.1%), mobile phone (62.8%), and television (47.8%) are the most prominent 
ICT equipment used for populations aged 3 years and above. Internet (16.6%) and computer 
(9.5%) are the less patronized ICT equipment. The leading consumers of ICT equipment and 
services fall within the 18-35 years age group; mobile phone (90.1%), radio (83.5%), television 
(60.5 %), internet (36.8%) and computer (18.4%).40 It was also established that a high 
proportion of the population aged 70 years and above used radio (66.2%) and mobile phone 
(59.2%) while their use of computer and internet was negligible.41 Table 16 presents use of 
ICT equipment in Kiambu, Nyandarua, Nairobi and Machakos counties.  
Table 16 Access to Information and Technology 
County 
Use of ICT Equipment  
 
Television 
Radio  
Mobile 
Phone 
Computer 
Internet 
Machakos 
 33.4%  
 
 77.1%  
 65.1%  
 5.7% 
 14.8%  
Nyandarua 
 26.0%  
 
 83.9%  
 61.5%  
 3.2%  
 11.4%  
Kiambu 
 81.0%  
 
 91.1%  
 83.7%  
 14.4%  
 24.3%  
Nairobi 
88.0%  
 
89.1%  
85.8%  
29.0%  
43.8%  
 
39 Ibid. 
40 Ibid. 
41 Ibid.

=== PAGE 139 ===
36 | P a g e  
 
Source: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 2018 
Except radio where Kiambu Couty leads, Nairobi County is ahead of the rest in other 4 major 
ICT equipment used (television, 88.0%; mobile phone, 85.8%; computer, 29.0% at 43.8%). 
Access to and utilisation of computers across all four counts still lags behind all other ICT 
equipment.  
4.2.8 Levels of Income and Wages for Men and Women 
More men than women in Kenya have access to regular household income42 but women 
would have slightly higher access to non-regular income.43 The trends manifest in both rural 
and urban areas. Nationally, the highest monthly regular income (KShs. 12, 284) is rental 
income followed by pension (KShs. 2,106), and investment income at KShs. 1,265. Non-regular 
income is the lowest at KShs. 486.  
The average monthly rental income received by households in urban areas is three times 
higher (KShs. 19,976) than it is in rural areas (KShs. 6,088). Female headed households 
received lower amounts of regular income in all categories except for rental income in rural 
areas (Table 17). 
 
Table 17: National Income Levels 
Residence/ 
Household 
headship 
Regular Income (in KSh) 
Non- 
regular 
income (in 
KSh) 
Saving, 
interest 
and 
investment 
income 
Pension 
Rental 
Other 
Types 
National 
1,265  
2,106  
12,284  
925  
486 
Male headed 
1,430  
2,285  
13,174  
993  
423 
Female 
headed 
687  
1,480  
9,155  
688  
707 
Rural 
662  
2,027  
6,088  
1,165  
691  
Male headed 
766  
2,140  
5,532  
1,405  
600  
Female 
headed 
359  
1,696  
7,715  
464  
956 
Urban 
2,014  
2,205  
19,976  
627  
232  
Male headed 
2,179  
2,448  
21,804  
527  
224  
Female 
headed 
1,262  
1,102  
11,677  
11,078  
271 
 
Source: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 2018 
A key informant in Kiambu County could not estimate income and wages earned by men and 
women, attributing it to potential inaccuracies while another indicated that on average both 
men and women earned a monthly income above $100 from sectors such as dairy keeping, 
crop farming, business, formal employment, informal employment and information technology.  
 
42 Household income is the aggregate earnings of all household members. It includes all forms of income arising 
from employment, household enterprises, agricultural produce, rent, pension and financial investment. 
43 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). Basic Report Based on 2015/16 Kenya Integrated Household 
Budget Survey. Nairobi: KNBS, 2018.

=== PAGE 140 ===
37 | P a g e  
 
 
Business which generated over $100 monthly for residents of Machakos County was cited by 
key informants as the sector that generated the highest levels of income equally for both men 
and women followed by informal employment ($30), and crop farming and the dairy sector at 
$10 each.  
4.2.9 Main Areas of Household Spending 
Female community respondents in Kiambu ranked food, education and housing as three 
leading areas of household expenditure in a descending order. Food was reported to be costly 
because it is recurrent while education was said to have remained high despite capitalization 
by government. They reported that the cost of housing was generally high in the area. 
Expenditure on healthcare was ranked as the next costly item for households due to irregular 
payment of NHIF charges and perennial shortages of drugs in public health facilities. Transport 
to and fro work was placed in the fifth position by the female respondents followed by water 
which they said was supplied only twice a week, forcing them to buy from vendors at Kshs.10 
per 20 litre container, or Kshs. 700 per month for water pumped from boreholes.  Gas, 
charcoal and kerosene were ranked in the 7th position as being equally expensive due to the 
drastic rise in the cost of fuel. The women regarded expenditure on electricity, clothing and 
social functions as relatively affordable, depending on one’s individual prudence.  
 
Male community members in Kiambu County similarly ranked food as the leading component 
of household expenditure followed by housing and education. They attributed the high cost 
of food to its recurrent nature while rent was said to be generally expensive. The men ranked 
expenditure on transport in the fourth position while water was considered as the fifth most 
expensive item despite stating that rarely do they experience water related challenges. They 
ranked electricity as the 6th most expensive item due to the cost of tokens. The men pointed 
out that clothing was a pressing cost since it is mandatory while health care (which they ranked 
in position eight) would be a heavy drain on household resources when illness occurs. The 
cost of social functions was dismissed by the men as discretionary.

=== PAGE 141 ===
38 | P a g e  
 
Table 18: Main Areas of Household Spending 
Household 
Expenditure 
Item 
Ranking 
 
Women 
 
Why? 
Men 
Why? 
Food 
1 
It’s a daily purchase. 
1 
It is a basic need which is a 
recurrent expenditure. 
Education 
2 
Our children have to get 
education. 
2 
Paying of schools fees for 
good 
institution 
is 
expensive. 
Healthcare 
4 
Buy 
drugs 
or 
private 
hospital. 
3 
Health care is expensive 
because we purchase drugs. 
Housing  
8 
For 
those 
renting 
it’s 
expensive. 
9 
Most people have their 
own houses. 
Transport 
5 
When going to other places 
especially 
Machakos 
hospital. 
6 
Transport to and from 
work though it is not much. 
Water 
3 
Buying in most cases. 
4 
Buying is around 5/= per 20 
liter Jerican and it’s also 
scarce. 
Fuel  
6 
To light our houses. 
7 
Gas, charcoal, kerosene has 
become expensive. 
Electricity 
5 
Tokens get depleted very 
quickly. 
Clothing 
7 
We need to look attractive. 8 
This is not recurrent so not 
very expensive. 
Social 
functions 
(visitors, 
funerals, 
church 
activities, 
etc.) 
 
9 
Not compulsory. 
9 
Not 
expensive 
because 
these are done by many 
people. 
 
Food and education were reported by both men and women in Machakos as being the leading 
components of household expenditure followed by water for women and healthcare for men 
Table 18. Expenditure on housing and social functions is rated as manageable in the county 
because people reside in their own houses while social functions are collectively addressed 
by the community.   
 
Women in Nyandarua County identified healthcare as the most costly aspect of household 
spending because of purchasing drugs from private chemists which is expensive. They ranked 
spending on education as the second most expensive because of fees and having to spend on 
construction of buildings. The women pointed out that food would be the third most 
expensive item which they attributed to cold whether that spoiled farm produce, forcing them 
to procure from retail shops at exorbitant prices.

=== PAGE 142 ===
39 | P a g e  
 
 The women explained that the high cost of electricity (4th position) was baffling since they 
only used it in the evening when they returned from farms. They explained that the cost of 
transport rises significantly (5th position) during the rainy season when roads become 
impassable. Those who live in rental houses reported that this would be the 6th component 
when they rank household expenditure because of the high cost of rent. The women 
attributed the high cost of fuel (7th position) to frequent price increases while social 
responsibilities were said to be costly (8th position) due to preparatory processes. They cited 
the cold weather in the county as the reason why the cost of clothing is high since they have 
to purchase warm clothes. Water was ranked last (10th position) as a household expenditure 
item but they lamented that it was mostly contaminated by sewage infiltration. Men in the 
same county ranked education as the most pressing aspect of household expenditure followed 
by food, water and healthcare. Clothing, fuel and transport were ranked next in a descending 
order that concluded with social functions, housing and electricity as the least costly items.

=== PAGE 143 ===
40 | P a g e  
 
4.2.10 Needs and Priorities 
Male and female community respondents in Nyandarua, Kiambu and Machakos counties listed 
their development needs and priorities as indicated in Table 19.  
Table 19: Needs and Priorities 
County 
Sex 
Pairwise Ranking of Needs and Priorities 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Nyandaru
a 
Wome
n 
Clean 
water & 
hospital 
Educatio
n 
and 
roads 
Police 
station 
Electricity 
Markets 
Men  
Water 
Skills  
Schools 
Infrastructur
e  
Employmen
t / Capital 
Kiambu 
Wome
n 
Hospita
l 
 
Educatio
n  
 
Water 
 
Roads 
 
Electricity 
 
Men  
Roads 
Sewerage 
/ Garbage  
Health  
Education 
Water 
Machakos 
Wome
n 
Water 
Roads 
Employmen
t 
Education 
Healthcare  
 
Men  
Land  
 
Schools  
 
Hospital  
 
Water  
 
Roads 
 
Leaders in Machakos County identified education, water, income generation, roads and 
maternity units as women’s priority needs in a descending hierarchy while capacity building 
and access to capital were prioritized for men. On their part, leaders in Kiambu stated the 
foremost needs of women as water, hospitals and schools while men would need schools, 
industries and an affirmative action fund. Clean water for domestic consumption was equally 
ranked by leaders in Nyandarua as the highest priority for the community followed by roads 
and improved drainage /sewerage system. The leaders ranked water for irrigation and access 
to technical training as the fourth and fifth priorities respectively.  
Machakos stakeholders sequentially identified water, roads, employment, education and 
healthcare, mainly maternity units as women’s priorities; while men stressed on land, schools, 
hospital, water and roads, including capacity building and access to capital for productive 
businesses. On the other hand, women in Kiambu reiterated emphasis on water, hospitals, 
schools and roads; whereas men gave more value to roads, sewerage system, health, 
education and water. Nyandarua marked a unifying interest on safe accessible water by both 
women and men. But hospitals, education, roads, police station and electricity are within 
women’s priorities; while men also focus on skills, schools and infrastructure.  
The society has socialized women, more so those from Kiambu and Nyandarua to invest more 
of their time in reproductive roles, ranging from all domestic chores, communal work and 
unpaid agricultural Labour. In Nyandarua however, household farm repairs and works are 
done by both women and men. Cross-cuttingly, control over water resources is dominantly 
a men’s preserve. The cost of water too varies from county to county with Machakos 
experiencing a slight average deviation from the rest.  Women remain the key collectors of 
water for regular domestic use.

=== PAGE 144 ===
41 | P a g e  
 
 
 
4.3. Practices and Participation 
4.3.1 Division of Labour between Men and Women 
Women in Nyandarua County reported that household tasks such as fetching water, cooking, 
routine shopping, and cleaning fall within their purview of domestic duties. They are also 
responsible for taking care of livestock as productive work.  They indicated that working on 
the household farm and repair works around the compound are jointly done by men and 
women. Men in the same county acknowledged that women are solely responsible for cooking 
and cleaning while men undertake repair works around the compound and provide security. 
According to the male participants, both men and women are involved in routine shopping 
but fetching water for the household, working on the household farm and taking care of 
livestock is mostly done by men with the help of women.  
Women in Machakos and Kiambu counties asserted that they mind all reproductive and 
productive work within the household that includes cleaning, fetching water, cooking, routine 
shopping, taking care of livestock, working on the farm, and repair works around the 
compound. Those in Machakos County also intimated responsibility for provision of fees, 
security for the family and fulfilment of conjugal rights.  
 
In both counties, women with resources hire labour for taking care of livestock.  
Women in Machakos County argued that they should be compensated for running the family 
which is supposed to be done by men. They attributed men’s nominal participation in securing 
the well-being of the family to alcoholism which they said should be curbed by the government 
raising the cost of alcoholic and lower the cost of fuel so that men can find alcohol unaffordable 
and elect to stay at home. The women admitted willingness to engage in transactional sex 
despite the risk of HIV acquisition to cushion their households against extreme indigence. 
They advised that the government should improve access to affirmative action funds by young 
women so that they can venture into business and provide for their families. They explained 
that marriage was only important because it bestowed parental identity on the offspring and 
earned societal respect for the woman otherwise they would not hesitate to withdraw from 
relationships that are resource deprived. Men in Machakos County largely concurred with 
their female counterparts on the gender division of labour as shown in Table 3.  
Table 20: Gender Division of Labour 
Task 
Woman Man Woman 
and 
Man  
Mostly 
woman, 
with 
help of 
man  
Mostly 
man, 
with 
help of 
woman 
Hired 
labour 
(House 
girl 
/ 
House 
boy) 
Others 
(Male 
child, 
female 
child) 
i. 
Fetching 
water 
for 
the 
household? 
√

=== PAGE 145 ===
42 | P a g e  
 
ii. 
Cleaning 
work 
for 
the 
household? 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii. 
Cooking for the 
household 
members? 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iv. 
Routine shopping 
for 
the 
household? 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
v. 
Working on the 
household farm? 
 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
vi. 
Takes care of 
livestock? 
 
 
 
√ 
 
 
√ 
 
vii. 
Repair 
works 
around 
the 
homestead?  
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
The only tasks that are solely undertaken by men in Kiambu County, according to male 
community respondents are repair works around the homestead and counselling young men. 
They confirmed that women in the community are responsible for cleaning, cooking, fetching 
water and taking care of livestock. The men said routine shopping is done by both men and 
women but working on the household farm is the responsibility of hired labour.  
 
4.3.2 Household Care Work 
Table 21: Household Care Work 
Household Care Task 
Nyandarua 
Kiambu 
 
Machakos 
Man  
 
Woman Man  
Woman Man  
Woman 
i. 
Taking care of child aged 
0-5 years? 
X 
√ 
x 
√ 
x 
√ 
ii. 
Taking children to school 
in the morning? 
X 
√ 
x 
√ 
x 
√ 
iii. 
Picking child from school 
in the afternoon? 
x 
√ 
x 
√ 
x 
√ 
iv. 
Caring for elderly family 
members? 
x 
√ 
x 
√ 
x 
√ 
v. 
Taking care of the disabled 
in the family 
x 
√ 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
Female community respondents in Nyandarua, Kiambu and Machakos counties asserted that 
they were responsible for all the care work in their households which included care of children 
aged 0-5 years of age, taking and picking children from school and caring for elderly members 
of society. Women in Nyandarua County also indicated that they are responsible for the well-
being of PWDs in the society. Men in Kiambu were affirmative about the care roles played by 
women (Table 21) but also reported that although taking care of children aged 0-5 years was

=== PAGE 146 ===
43 | P a g e  
 
mostly done by women hired labour (house girl / house boy) would also be used to provide 
support. On their part men in Machakos County intimated that taking children to school in 
the morning is done both men and women, and hired labour. Similar was submitted by men 
in Nyandarua County who admitted that it is mostly women who took and picked children 
from school but both the man and woman took care of sick elderly members of family.  
4.3.3 Participation in Formal and Informal Economy 
The analysis of wage employment by industry and sex is presented in Table 22. The only 
sectors where employment of females was above that of males in 2015 and 2016 was in human 
health and social work activities, and activities of households as employers; undifferentiated 
goods - and services-producing activities of households for own use. Agriculture, fishing and 
forestry slightly above 30% of female labour in 2015 (33.9%) and 2016 (33.1%). Women’s 
representation in the manufacturing industry remained dismal in 2015 (16.7%) and 2016 
(16.1%) just the way they marginally participated in water supply; sewerage, waste 
management and remediation activities in 2015 (20.6%) and 2016 (22.0%). The education 
reported narrow margins of disparity in numbers of male and female employees in 2015 and 
2016 at 47% females and 53% males for both years. Casual employment registered a 7.9 per 
cent growth with the proportion of casuals to total employees rising from 21.8 per cent in 
2015 to 22.8 per cent in 2016.44  
Table 22: Wage Employment by Industry and Sex, 2015 and 2016 (`000) 
Industry 
2015 
2016 
Male 
Female Male 
Female 
Agriculture, forestry and fishing  
222.6     114.4       225.1     111.6       
Mining and quarrying  
12.2      2.2          12.7      2.5         
Manufacturing  
246.1     49.4        252.1     48.7      
Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply 
12.6      4.3          12.8      4.5         
Water supply; sewerage, waste management and 
remediation activities  
9.2        2.4          9.9        2.8         
Construction  
103.6     44.4        114.9     48.1     
Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor 
vehicles and motorcycles   
179.3     52.7        185.7     54.2    
Transportation and storage  
62.5      20.1        64.8      20.8        
Accommodation and food service activities     
53.7      22.4        54.6      22.8        
Information and communication  
69.9      35.7        72.9      37.7      
Financial and insurance activities          
46.3      27.0        47.5      28.2        
Real estate activities         
3.1        0.9          3.1        1.0   
Professional, scientific and technical activities  
49.7      18.9        51.4      19.3   
Administrative and support service activities 
4.7        0.5 
4.9        0.5          
Public administration and defence; compulsory 
social security 
142.5     79.5        148.3     83.0 
Education        
267.9     239.5       275.6     249.0      
Human health and social work activities 
59.9      64.1        61.3      66.3     
Arts, entertainment and recreation  
4.9        2.0          4.8        2.2     
Other service activities          
21.3      10.4        22.9      10.3        
 
44 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. Economic Survey Report 2017. Nairobi: (KNBS), 2017

=== PAGE 147 ===
44 | P a g e  
 
Activities 
of 
households 
as 
employers; 
undifferentiated goods- and services-producing 
activities of households for own use 
48.4      65.7        48.6      65.8      
Activities of extraterritorial organizations and 
bodies    
0.8        0.3          0.9        0.3          
TOTAL 
1,621.2  856.8       1,674.8  879.6   
Total of which casual employees        
375.3     164.9       406.3     176.5      
Source: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, 2017 
4.3.4 Climate Risks and Impact 
Nationally, 61.9% of households reported experiencing a shock of some kind.45 The 
proportion of households that reported at least one shock was 68.7 per cent in the rural 
areas compared to 53.4 per cent in urban areas. A higher proportion of households that 
experienced shocks were in Kitui (96.0%), Migori (92.0%) and Baringo (91.0%).46 Among 
counties included in the gender analysis, Machakos County recorded the highest proportion 
of households that had experienced at least one shock (70.5%) followed by Nairobi County 
(58.6%) and Nyandarua County (45.3%). Kiambu County (16.8%) is apparently the least prone 
to shocks.  The specific types of shocks and their different levels of magnitude in each of the 
counties are shown in Table 23.  
Kiambu (22.7%) and Nairobi (10.9%) counties present the highest proportion of households 
that are lileky to experience robbery / burglary and assault cases as a result of shocks.  
Machakos (2.2%) and Nyandarua (2.8%) would experience lower levels of similar violence in 
the wake of shocks.47  
Table 23:  Proportion of households by the first severe shock and County 
County  
Droughts 
or Floods 
 
Crop 
disease 
or 
crop 
pests 
 
Livestock 
died 
 
Large rise 
in 
agricultural 
input 
prices 
Severe 
water 
shortage 
Household 
business 
failure, 
non-
agricultural 
 
Loss 
of 
salaried 
employment 
or 
non-
payment of 
salary 
 
Large 
fall in 
sale 
prices 
for 
crops 
 
Large 
rise 
in 
price 
of 
food 
 
Machakos 
11.5  
 
0.2 
5.1 
0.2 
12.2 
4.3 
12.4 
0.6 
8.9 
Nyandarua 2.5  
 
15.6 
12.6 
2.3 
0.3 
4.5 
1.9 
1.9 
15.0 
Kiambu 
0.0  
 
0.8 
6.5 
1.3 
0.0 
1.6 
7.9 
2.5 
14.6 
Nairobi  
2.5  
 
1.8 
3.2 
0.7 
4.2 
7.3 
9.5 
1.0 
29.9 
Leaders in Machakos County identified prolonged dry spells that affect farming activities and 
flooding that leads to destruction of houses and displacement of families as some of the climate 
risks impact experienced in the County.  
 
45 A shock is an event that may trigger a decline in the well-being of an individual, a community, a region, or even 
a nation. It is worth noting that the same shock could affect different households differently. 
46 
47

=== PAGE 148 ===
45 | P a g e  
 
They underscored that floods destroyed roads, making them impassable. Disease outbreaks 
due to lack of clean drinking water and emergence of pests that destroy crops during the dry 
season were also cited by the leaders as adverse manifestations of climatic changes.  
The Agriculture Officer interviewed in the County stated that water shortages occasioned by 
drought forced women to walk long distances in search of water which consumed a lot of 
their productive time. The officer also indicated that the shrinking forest cover had 
constrained access to wood fuel which forced women to opt for the more expensive cooking 
gas. The high cost of farm inputs due to emergence of pests caused by harsh climatic 
conditions, and inadequate water for irrigation affected men, according to the agriculture 
officer since they have to divert money meant for family subsistence to purchase pesticide 
and address crop diseases associated with aridity.  
The impact of climate risks on communities in Machakos County were further explained by 
the Chief Officer Water and Irrigation as leading to decline in the productivity of crops, 
migration of male labor and decreased household food supply with little or no surplus produce 
for commercial use. As an equally significant climate risk in the area that affected both men 
and women, the Chief Officer submitted that floods interfered with water pathways and have 
adverse effects like sweeping animals and children away.  
Generally, floods would lead to loss of human life, damage to property, destruction of crops, 
loss of livestock, and deterioration of health conditions owing to waterborne diseases.  
The Officer also observed that floods cause decreased household food supply and reduced 
margins of profitability accruing from commercial farming.  
 
Leaders in Kiambu County associated soil erosion as a result dust bowls attendant to drought 
with vulnerability to disease especially water borne ailments among children and due to 
desperation for water. A gender expert in the county intimated that drought in the area 
affected both men and women due to reduced food production and supply in the household, 
compelling household members to seek work as hired labour that constrained family 
relationships. The expert also observed that the area experienced floods which precipitated 
low household food production and intake, disease outbreaks, and children dropping out of 
school due to lack of fees. Heavy floods would also sweep away animals and affect household 
livelihood. A water, sanitation and hygiene (WSH) expert in Kiambu County agreed that 
drought and floods are the major climate related risks in the county whose impact included a 
decline in crop and animal productivity due to aridity and erosion. Loss of human life, damage 
to property, destruction of crops, loss of livestock, and deterioration of health conditions 
owing to waterborne diseases were also cited by the WASH Officer as consequences of 
floods in the area. Leaders in Nyandarua County identified climate risks and impacts shown 
in Table 24.

=== PAGE 149 ===
46 | P a g e  
 
Table 24: Climate risks and their impact 
Sex 
Specific 
Climate Risks 
Impact  
Wome
n  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drought  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Floods  
 The most immediate consequence of drought is a fall in 
crop production, due to inadequate and poorly 
distributed rainfall. 
 Covering long distances to fetch water and look for food 
 Low rainfall causes poor pasture growth and may also lead 
to a decline in fodder supplies from crop residues. 
 Plants and animals depend on water, so when drought 
occurs, their food supply can shrink and their habitat can 
be damaged.  
 
 Floods damage standing agricultural crops and in some 
instances also carry away the top soil making the land 
barren. 
 Floods lead to loss of human life, damage to property, 
destruction of crops, loss of livestock, and deterioration 
of health conditions owing to waterborne diseases. 
 Diseases outbreaks due to drainage challenges associated 
with flooding.  
 
 
 
Men 
 Drought 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Floods 
 Plants and animals depend on water, so when drought 
occurs, their food supply can shrink and their habitat can 
be damaged.  
 Drought and famine leads to Male labor migration and may 
become permanent in some instances. 
 Drought contributes to decreased household food supply 
and little or no crops surplus for sale 
 
 
 Floods lead to Male labor migration and may become 
permanent in some instances. 
 Floods contributes to decreased household food supply 
and little or no crops surplus for sale 
Expert views in Nyandarua County asserted that floods and drought occurred in the area, 
leading to low productivity that affects women’s and men’s capacity to provide for their 
families, loss of property and increased vulnerability to animal and human diseases.  
The expert pointed out that women are compelled to espouse negative coping mechanisms 
like sex work while men drift away from homes in search of employment opportunities. As 
significant 30.5% of households would do nothing when floods or drought are experienced 
due to limited capacity.48

=== PAGE 150 ===
47 | P a g e  
 
4.4 Balance of Power and Decision Making 
4.4.1 Decisions on Household Resources, Assets and Finances 
The participation of women in Nyandarua County in making decisions related to household 
resources, assets and finances is dismal, as reported by female community respondents (Table 
25). Apparently, the only decisions autonomously made by women are those that relate to 
the number of children and seeking medical care while decisions to do with management of 
credit, expenditure of money acquired through credit and institutions that children should 
attend are jointly decided by men and women. The women said that they had the latitude to 
decide on the number of children to bear depending on the income of the family and attributed 
their inordinate role in healthcare to the broad spectrum of childcare responsibilities. They 
observed that in most cases it is women who attend school meetings. On the contrary, male 
community participants submitted that men and women play an equal role in making all 
decisions (Table 25) except deciding on working away from hone which is the prerogative of 
men.  
Table 25: Decision Making 
Decision  
Only 
men  
Only 
women 
Both the 
same  
Women, 
with the help 
of men  
Men, with 
the help of 
women 
Who saves money /bank 
  
 
 
 
 
Who keeps money 
  
 
 
 
 
Who receives credit / loans 
  
 
 
 
 
Who manages credit / loans 
 
 
  
 
 
What to spend on 
 
 
  
 
 
What to rear / crop to grow 
  
 
 
 
 
What to sell and when to do it  
  
 
 
 
 
Who participates in extension services? 
  
 
 
 
 
Who joins membership and participates in 
producer organizations? 
  
 
 
 
 
Who works outside the community 
  
 
 
 
 
How many children to have? 
 
  
 
 
 
Where the children attend school 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Who participates in community work 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Who participates in courses and 
workshops / training activities 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Look for medical help  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
According to female community respondents, the visible role of women in decision making in 
Kiambu County was because men have abdicated their responsibilities.  
The women pointed out that the only decision solely made by men had to do with working 
outside the home while women decided on who receives credit / loans, who manages credit 
/ loans, what to spend on, what to rear / crop to grow, what to sell and when to do it, how 
many children to have, and who participates in community work. 
 They said that decision jointly made by men and women included who saves money /bank, 
who keeps money, who participates in extension services, who joins membership and 
participates in producer organizations, where the children attend school, who participates in 
courses and workshops / training activities, and who looks for medical help.

=== PAGE 151 ===
48 | P a g e  
 
Men in the same county asserted that they unilaterally made decisions to do with what to sell 
and when to do it, who participates in extension services, who joins membership and 
participates in producer organizations, who participates in community work, and who 
participates in courses and workshops / training activities. They reported that women had 
absolute autonomy to decide on who keeps money, what to spend on, how many children to 
have, where the children attend school, and seeking medical care. Decisions that the men said 
are jointly made by both men and women included who saves money /bank, who receives 
credit / loans, who manages credit / loans, what to rear / crop to grow and who works outside 
the community. The men said that they recognized women as custodians of family money. 
However they stated that women are discreet when they acquire credit products. “When it 
comes to loans in most cases you won’t know if she took one unless you learn from a 
third party,” a male respondent said during a focus group discussion. The men showed 
disdain for community work, saying it is for lazy people who loiter around with nothing to do 
in the community except passing time. 
Patriarchal dominance in decision-making in Machakos count was underscore by male 
community participants indicated that they made virtually all decisions (Table 25) except 
decisions involving what to rear / crop to grow, how many children to have, and who 
participates in community work. 
Similarly women in the county stated that they were responsible for most of the decisions 
made in the household except what to sell and when to do it, and where the children attend 
school. They acknowledged that decisions involving saving / banking money are jointly made 
by men and women as equals. The women explained that should they cannot afford to 
contribute towards schools fees needs due their limited resources.  
 
4.4.2 Participation in Community Decision-Making 
Most decisions at the community level in Nyandarua County are apparently made by men as 
reported by community leaders. These include decisions concerning roads and construction 
of schools. Women attend public participation meetings but it is men who exercise de facto 
authority when deciding on key actions to be implemented. Broader political participation in 
the county is also dominated by men and male youth. Women’s role is restricted to voting 
since they cannot join politics without the consent of the spouse.  
The participation of women and men in decision-making in Kiambu County was affirmed by 
leaders at the community level who said that although men make most of the decisions the 
involvement of women is deliberately sought and meaningfully harnessed.  
The leaders further stated that the broader political platform manifests the heavy involvement 
of men but women remain influential and are significantly engaged due to their numerical 
strength as a voting bloc.   
Men in Machakos County contribute to community development projects and participate in 
social forums to discuss development matters while women are involved in women 
committees in markets and development projects, according to community leaders. Both men 
and women participate in broader political activities. The level of men’s and women’s 
involvement in broader political leadership at the county and national levels is presented in 
Table 26.

=== PAGE 152 ===
49 | P a g e  
 
Table 26:  Participation in Community Decision-Making 
Position 
Elected  
Nominated 
Total 
% 
women 
Elected 
+ 
Nominated 
Male  
Female Male  
Female 
 
 
President 
1 
0 
- 
- 
1 
0% 
Deputy President 
1 
0 
- 
- 
1 
0% 
Senator 
44 
3 
2 
18 
67 
31% 
MNA 
267 
23 
7 
5 
302 
9% 
WMNA 
0 
47 
- 
- 
47 
100% 
Governor 
44 
3 
- 
- 
47 
6% 
Deputy Governor 
40 
7 
- 
- 
47 
15% 
MCA 
1334 
96 
97 
650 
2177 
34% 
Total  
1731 
179 
106 
673 
2689 
32% 
 
All governors and senators for Kiambu, Nairobi, Machakos and Nyandarua counties are male. 
Machakos County has 34% female Members of County Assembly (MCAs), while Nyandarua 
(13), Kiambu (30) and Nairobi County (41) has 33% each. The comparatively better 
representation of women at the County Assembly level and Senate is attributed to the 
provision in the Constitution that not more than two-thirds of the members of elective public 
bodies shall be of the same gender (Article 81) and that Parliament shall enact legislation to 
promote the representation in Parliament of (a) women; (b) persons with disabilities; (c) 
youth; (d) ethnic and other minorities; and (e) marginalized communities (Article 100).49 
4.4.2.1 Institutional Membership 
Women in Nyandarua County stated that unlike men who only belonged to political 
formations and social groupings, women are members of cooperatives, economic 
empowerment entities such as chamas, political parties and church based groups. They gave 
examples of cooperatives such as the Moki Dairy Cooperative and the Kinangop Dairy 
Cooperative. The women reported that men are reluctant to establish or join chamas (table 
banking groups) and even those that are church based have very few men who are members. 
On the contrary, men in the county asserted that both men and women belonged to 
cooperatives, economic empowerment entities, political formations, and social groupings.  
In Kiambu County, female community respondents said both men and women belonged to 
cooperatives, economic empowerment entities, political formations, and social groupings 
except chamas that only women established and supported. A divergent view by men indicated 
that membership of cooperatives and political parties was a preserve of men while both men 
and women participated in economic empowerment initiatives such as chamas and social 
groupings.  
Cooperative societies are not an aspect of social organization in Machakos County according 
to female respondents who also indicated that they belonged to chamas, political parties and 
church based groups. The women expressed concern that most men don’t permit their 
women to join chamas but there are also women who fear interaction with others through 
such gatherings.  
 
49

=== PAGE 153 ===
50 | P a g e  
 
4.5 Legal Rights and Status 
4.5.1 Access to Legal Documents  
All women in Nyandarua County have identification cards (IDs) while majority have voter’s 
cards which illustrates their role in civic processes in the county. Some have marriage 
certificates but few have birth certificates, school/college certificates, title deed and hospital / 
NHIF card PIN number. None has a passport letter of employment, and milk supply number. 
They said they don’t know how a passport looks like and could not get letters of employment 
since they were self-employed.  
Only women-headed households would be expected to have title deeds to land but only men 
are expected to access milk supply numbers. A similar picture of women exclusion from 
accessing legal documents emerged in Machakos County where women said that all of them 
have voter’s cards and IDs, few have birth, school and marriage certificates but none has a 
passport, title deed, Hospital / NHIF card, and PIN number. They said that title deeds belong 
to men while they use the husband’s NHIF card. “My father took mine to the bar in 
exchange for alcohol. Going for another one is very expensive,” one female FGD 
participant explained the reason why she doesn’t have a school certificate. Access to legal 
documents by women in Kiambu County is comparatively better as shown in Table 27.

=== PAGE 154 ===
51 | P a g e  
 
Table 27: Legal Documents  
Document 
All 
have 
Majority 
have 
Some 
have 
Few 
have 
None 
has 
N/A 
Comment 
Birth 
certificate 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School 
/ 
college 
certificate 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ID Card 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Passport  
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marriage 
certificate  
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Deed 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Voter’s card 
 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hospital 
/ 
NHIF card 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
They have card but 
they dont contribute 
Employment 
letter 
 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
Most 
are 
self 
employed 
 
Milk 
supply 
number 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PIN number  
 
√

=== PAGE 155 ===
52 | P a g e  
 
4.6 Knowledge, Beliefs and Perceptions 
4.6.1 Traditional Knowledge of Men and Women 
Leaders in Machakos and Kiambu County associated women with management of household, 
organizing social activities, farming and religious matters. In Nyandarua County women are 
associated with Harvesting of potatoes, Sukuma, transporting and selling cabbages and milking. 
However, men in Kiambu County are associated with property inheritance and cultural issues. 
In Machakos County its construction projects and transport industry example bodaboda.Men 
in Nyandarua County are associated with Grazing animals, Brokerage of food crops, Packaging 
vegetables [cabbages, potatoes], Harvesting carrots and cabbages, Transporting milk, counting 
crops, receiving payment, milking and selling of products. 
4.6.2 Common Beliefs and Perceptions 
Some of the myths according to female community respondents in Kiambu County about 
women are that what a man can do a woman can while in Machakos women one must get 
married even if it’s for the sake of the children to inherit a name. In Kiambu County the myths 
about their men is that they are best with home repairs. 
In Kiambu County it is believed that women who are self-accomplished are too arrogant. 
However, the Kiambu female respondents believe that their men are better leaders than 
women Values of a woman according to Kiambu female respondents are a real woman takes 
care of her husband and children while in Machakos a woman builds her home. Men in Kiambu 
valued to be providers while in Machakos County they are the heads in their homes. 
Some of the stereotypes according to female respondents in Kiambu County are that women 
are like children while in Machakos County they said that a woman’s job is reproductive work. 
Some of the stereotypes associated with men in Kiambu County are that men eat a lot while 
in Machakos County men say that family planning destroys their bodies and kills their sexual 
desires. 
According to male community respondents in Machakos County some of the myths 
surrounding women are Women are not to eat the tail of a sheep it makes them unfaithful in 
their marriages while their counterparts in Nyandarua county claim that Women keep on 
saying they will go back to their maternal home and they will rarely go. This happens due to 
domestic quarrels. Men from Nyandarua on the other hand say that Even if women say what, 
you don’t agree immediately, you will take time to think and agree later. 
Male community respondents in Machakos County believe that their women are short 
tempered hence cannot manage people and Politics is not safe for women while in Nyandarua 
What women say men don’t believe immediately, it will take several days for them to believe, 
don’t just believe on mere facial expressions. Men from Machakos County believe that Men 
are good leaders. 
Some of the values highlighted on women by male respondents from Machakos are home 
keeper while in Nyandarua Being generous, Faithfulness, Honesty, Ambitious and 
hardworking. 
Men 
in 
Nyandarua 
were said 
to 
have 
this 
values 
generosity, 
faithfulness,honesty,ambitious and hardworking compared to their counterparts in Machakos 
who are providers. 
Stereotypes associated with women in Machakos County were a woman’s place is home while 
in Nyandarua County they have a mark around their legs due to constant wearing of boots.

=== PAGE 156 ===
53 | P a g e  
 
Men in Machakos County are attested to being better decision makers than their Nyandarua 
men who cannot sire children. 
4.7 Time and Space (Gender Daily Activity) 
This baseline study analysed the major household chores that most women do and the amount 
of time allocated to each activity. The Female FGD discussants indicated that, apart from doing 
the household unpaid work, they must supplement the little income available by getting casual 
jobs such as washing other people’s clothes or other manual jobs. With this acute time 
poverty, women have little time for these economic activities and therefore perpetuating their 
paucity state. Culture is a key definer of social roles between women and men in Africa. In 
most cases, it defines roles that brings inequality posing inherent gender dimensions leaving 
women with time poverty and therefore limited access to economic rights. The allocation of 
time between women and men in the household and in the economy is a major gender issue 
in the evolving discourse on time poverty. The baseline analysed the allocation of roles 
between women and men through a gender daily activity clock exercise and presented in 
Table 28.

=== PAGE 157 ===
54 | P a g e  
 
Table 25: Gender Daily Activity Clock 
 
The study established that in the project focus areas, the patriarchal systems prevailed where 
men are considered to be superior to women in the society and this aspect defines the gender 
roles. The allocator of roles is the man who is seen as the head of household therefore 
controlling women’s time and labor. From the gender daily activity clock exercise undertaken 
with men and women during the survey, it was clear that women and girls are allocated 
critically important and time-consuming responsibilities, which overburden them with work 
in the reproduction, economic, household, and community spheres. The functions of 
reproducing and household chores are considered low-status activities, unremunerated and 
unrecognized in the national accounting system. This phenomenon affects the status of women 
in the society where they are seen as only dependent on men.  
The women indicated that, apart from doing the household unpaid work, they must 
supplement the little income available by getting casual jobs such as washing other people’s 
clothes or other manual jobs. With this acute time poverty, women have little time for these 
economic activities and therefore perpetuating their paucity state. 
The discussion indicated that, by the time women are retiring to bed at night, they are usually 
tired and exhausted. 
  
 
 
Activity by gender 
TIME 
MEN 
WOMEN 
4:00am 
Sleeping  
Awake  
5:00am 
Sleeping 
Preparing breakfast 
6:00am 
Taking shower  
Escorting kids to school 
7:00am 
Leaving for work 
Start house chores 
8:00am 
Already at work  
Go look for casual labor 
9:00am 
At work 
Go look for casual labor  
10:00am At work 
Go look for casual labor 
11:00am At work  
Start washing peoples clothes  
12:00pm At work 
Washing peoples dishes and houses 
1:00pm 
At work 
Back at home for lunch preparation 
3:00pm 
At work 
Go pick up kids from school 
4:00pm 
At work 
Wash kids uniform and shower them 
5:00pm 
At work 
Go fetch food for supper 
6:00pm 
Back from work 
Help kids with homework 
7:00pm 
Watching news 
Preparing supper 
8:00pm 
Having supper 
Having supper as 
9:00pm 
Relaxing in bed 
Washing clothes and ironing their 
morning clothes 
10:00pm Already in bed 
Polishing their shoes 
11:00pm Wondering why the wife is not 
coming to bed for sex. 
Take a shower 
12:00am Sleeping  
Sleeping, Breasting feed, Changing 
diapers

=== PAGE 158 ===
55 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Women who spend all their time performing these tasks are often considered as “not 
working.” This is a key impediment to their economic security because they are overburdened 
with activities which have less economic/monetary returns while their male counterparts are 
working and getting income for their roles.  
This has restricted women from having equal economic opportunities with men. Women’s 
economic empowerment and the realization of women’s rights to and at work are essential 
for the achievement of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development (United Nations, Economic and Social Council, 2016).  This can 
allow them to pursue education and carriers.  
Women dedicated most of their time on reproductive activities at home while men barely 
put in sufficient hours on economic activities. This was quite evident in Machakos County. 
Additionally, the study ascertained that women in Kiambu County were industrious than men. 
This was demonstrated by the number of hours spend on income generating ventures as well 
as domestic chores. The same pattern was reflected in Nyandarua County.  
The participants cited many reasons that had precipitated the discrepancies in time spent by 
women and men. The following are reasons that were linked to this occurrence: 
Age-old customs: Retrogressive customs laced with patriarchal patronage that burdens 
women with domestic chores. This denies women opportunity to successful engage in 
commerce and change their economic disposition. Men are expected to be the providers and 
consequently take up activities that either generate or are perceived to generate income for 
the households. 
Drug –abuse: While men are supposed to assume the position of the sole provider 
unfortunately most of them have succumbed to rigors of drug abuse especially alcohol. This 
is more pronounced in Kiambu County; this has forced women in Kiambu to assume dual 
roles of being providers through trade and performance of domestic chores. 
Women are work-horses: Participants especially women were of the view that 
traditionally women are work-horses and were naturally inclined to outperform men in 
working at home and in business. This assertion was supported by the fact that men had more 
hours to rest and partake in leisure activities and idle. 
Duty Allocation: Both male and female FGD participants proposed that men and women 
are built for different duties.  For instance, men are built for heavy lifting while women are 
specialists in performing light duties.  
 
 
“The society will be very fast to condemn a woman who leaves her 
children in the house and goes to look for a job but if a man does the 
same, it will be considered normal”, said a male respondent in an 
FGD discussion from Mua, Machakos

=== PAGE 159 ===
56 | P a g e  
 
5.0 CHAPTER FIVE 
5.1 Introduction 
This chapter presents a summary of the findings of study, discussions, conclusions and 
recommendations.  
5.2 Summary of findings 
Through the gender analysis carried out it the four counties on building resilience of 
communities in the athi river catchment area it was noted that women and girls are majorly 
responsible for finding water resource that their families need to survive - for drinking, 
cooking, sanitation, and hygiene and by extension they are also responsible for watering the 
livestock. They walk long distances to collect water, they also brave long queues in water 
collection points and in drought seasons they are forced to pay exorbitant amounts of money 
to secure water which is often very time consuming and arduous. 
5.3 Discussion of Findings 
The discussionws of the findings in this study are based on the outputs from the analyses of 
the data obtained from the study in the four counties as follows:  
5.4 Nyandarua County 
5.4.1Water Access and Sources 
Most of the households depend on water from shallow wells, roof catchments and rivers. 
The average distance to the nearest water point is 1.5km. Some of the households have 
access to piped water while a few households have access to portable water.  
5.4.2 Water Resources and quality 
The county has inadequate water resources and the situation has been aggravated by the 
degradation of water catchments leading to reduced ground water recharge. As a result, 
boreholes have medium to low yields. Main source of water for domestic use is dams, roof 
catchment and shallow wells. Most of the water used is untreated which poses great health 
risk to the population. Aberdare forest, providing water resource with high quality, has been 
destroyed by illegal harvest and deforestation activities. Consequently, the quality and 
quantity of water from this forest has also deteriorated 
5.4.3 Climate risks 
The county has witnessed a change in climate over the years. Cases of crop failure e.g. Irish 
potatoes have been common due to extremely low temperatures at night leading to frost 
bite.  
Livestock farming has also been affected leading to reduced productivity especially for dairy 
and beef products.  
The county over time has experienced climate risks due to increase in unregulated quarrying 
activities (especially in Olkalou, Kipipiri and Kinangop) and sand harvesting in Miharati; silting 
of dams and rivers and deforestation of the catchment areas.

=== PAGE 160 ===
57 | P a g e  
 
Recommendations for Nyandarua County 
NEMA in collaboration with other stakeholders to enhance mechanisms for: 
• Enforcing the laws and regulations regarding encroachment of river banks, forests, 
wetlands and other riparian reserves by encouraging both women and men’s 
constructive participation and opinions in decision making.    
• Repossessing illegally acquired forests, riverbanks and wetlands where they have been 
grabbed to attain a friendly and clean environment with maximum vegetation and 
catchment capacity for people’s use, especially women.  
• Encourage active participation of men and women in tree planting in the project area 
to boost their ownership spirit and sustained community driven zeal for environmental 
conservation and management.  
5.5 Machakos County 
5.5.1 Water Sources and Distances 
The overall average distance to the nearest water source is 6 kilometers. Climate change 
factor has played a major role in increasing the average distance to the nearest water source 
especially in rural areas. The prolonged dry season for instance, has led to drying up of rivers, 
springs, boreholes, wells and dams subsequently increasing the average distance to the nearest 
water source.  
5.5.2 Water Scarcity 
Water scarcity affects women and girls both in the rural and urban areas of the county since 
they are charged with the responsibility of ensuring the household needs for water are met. 
In the process, they are denied the opportunity to engage in other economic activities and 
schooling. Most of the existing water facilities are old and dilapidated and require rehabilitation 
and augmentation in order to meet the present and future demands of the fast growing 
population of Machakos.  
The adequacy, equity and reliability of government rural water supply projects in the County 
have deteriorated due to; inadequate budgetary provision, facilities have not been upgraded 
to cope with increasing demand, and technical performance has declined with increasing age 
of equipment and inadequate maintenance. 
5.5.3 Sand Harvesting 
Rampant, Uncontrolled and unsustainable sand harvesting has led to substantial decrease in 
water holding capacity of rivers. This has caused drying of rivers resulting to water scarcity 
for both domestic and commercial use. Sand harvesting has led to severe environment 
degradation leading to change in the regime of some of the rivers and loss of retention 
capacities of some of the seasonal rivers. A good example of affected water mass is River 
Thwake. Mwania and Mania river which are the major sources of water for Machakos have 
also been affected.  
5.5.4 Climate Change 
 Negative impacts are prolonged periods of drought, erratic rainfalls and rise in average 
temperatures which have led to low agricultural production.

=== PAGE 161 ===
58 | P a g e  
 
Most of the County residents use unsustainable cooking methods such as firewood and 
charcoal as the major source of fuel. This has resulted to deforestation in most areas leading 
to rampant and expansive soil erosion. 
Recommendation for Machakos County 
• Proper Licenses for Sand harvesting governed by the Sand harvesting guidelines to 
address environmental concerns including those that attach on women and men’s 
livelihoods in order to avoid haphazard scooping that would lead to distraction of the 
environment. 
• Involve women and men through support initiatives that will increase water supply by 
inculcating  effective harvesting and storage methods. For example, promoting rain 
water harvesting to guarantee an improved water source for a majority of the 
households. 
• Support the adaptation strategies including livestock and crop zoning, and introduction 
of drought resistant crops and livestock breeds benched on gender sensitivity and 
responsiveness approach. 
5.6 Kiambu County 
5.6.1 Water sources and access 
 The average distance to the nearest water source averages between 0.5 -1km. There is major 
degradation of forests and Rivers. Kinale and Kieni forests have faced major deforestation due 
to population demand for shelter and fuel and encroachment for farming demand. In addition 
rivers like Athi River have experienced much pollution through dumping of waste which 
comprises of effluents, agricultural chemicals and industrial waste. 
The major contributors to environmental degradation are; increased population leading to 
massive deforestation and encroachment of water catchment areas. In addition, industries 
have emissions that have led to lot of air and water pollution especially in Thika. Farming has 
also led to pollution due to the release of various agrochemicals in the water sources. 
5.6.2 Climate risks impact 
The County are manifested through changes in rainfall patterns, distribution and amounts. 
The county experiences less drought and flooding effects in comparison to other counties. In 
drought periods, the water levels within the rivers and wetlands are reduced resulting in ripple 
effects of reduced water flows hence less water supply within the county for industrial, 
household and agriculture. This affects women and girls because they are charged with the 
responsibility of collecting water. From the FGD discussions the county has several water 
collection points that are on average about 0.5-1km from the dwellings. They brave the long 
queues and pay an average amount of between Kes 5-20 for a 20litre jerican depending with 
the water need at that particular season. 
Kiambu County is currently experiencing fast population growth with major land use changes 
being conversion of land from agriculture to urban centers and settlement. This has put a 
strain to the county water resources, e.g. riparian and wetland encroachment through 
construction and farming activities. There is increased environmental degradation as a result 
of the soil erosion, deforestation, and changes of wetlands into other landforms, through 
encroachment.

=== PAGE 162 ===
59 | P a g e  
 
5.6.3 Challenges on Water Resources 
 Some water resources are highly polluted, making them unsafe to use. This is due to pollution 
of water sources from effluent waste, disposal of waste water from treatment plants, raw 
effluent discharges in urban and semi urban settlements, and agro-chemical in the agricultural 
areas. There is high depletion of vegetal cover due to deforestation within the water 
resources, including wetlands within the county. This is attributed to population pressure and 
increased demand for both environmental and forest resources especially for timber. 
Depleted vegetation cover therefore exposes water resources to high evapotranspiration 
rates, more runoff and less/low recharge of ground water aquifers.  
There is high rate of depletion of ground water resources due to over extraction, low 
recharge and environmental degradation. Majority of the water resources have challenges of 
encroachment of riparian zones and wetlands. Some of the riparian lands are under farming 
of agricultural crops, loosening the soils and clearing the vegetation, hence soils erosion and 
increased levels of evapotranspiration.  
Recommendation for Kiambu County 
• Regulate water vendors to ensure quality and guard against exploitation of consumers 
while giving gender sensitive focus on women’s concerns and challenges.  
• Invest in sustainable access to clean and safe water through effective and gender-
inclusive approaches in management of the water resources.  
• Enforcement of the laws and regulations barring encroachment, and pursuant to 
the protection of wetlands, forests and riparian reserves to stop and reduce cases 
of water pollution to reduce vulnerability rate, especially among women who 
interact the most with water.   
• Encouraging women’s participation in conservation efforts and management of 
available water resources.  
• Improve compliance on licensing of water harvesting and use considering the 
water needs of women.  
• Awareness and capacity building of the community and stakeholders on the most 
appropriate techniques of water harvesting and storage to address women’s 
concerns and needs including other specific gender issues.  
• Upscaling the representation and participation of women in project planning and 
representation.  
• Empowerment on the constitutional rights of both women and men, that any 
person is entitled to land ownership and utilization against retrogressive cultural 
beliefs and perceptions.

=== PAGE 163 ===
60 | P a g e  
 
5.7 Nairobi County 
5.7.1 Water sources and access  
The main sources of water for the residents in Nairobi County are from Sasumua Dam in 
Nyandarua, Kikuyu Springs, Ruiru Dam, Thika Dam and Ngethu water works. Although 
Nairobi River is permanent, its water is unsafe for human consumption. There are residents 
that use borehole water, water kiosks especially those in slums, wells and roof catchments. 
Over 80 per cent of the residents have access to piped water. On average, 52.5 per cent and 
24.7 per cent of the population takes 0 and 1-4 minutes respectively to fetch water. Only 0.9 
per cent of the population takes 30-59 minutes to nearest water point. (Nairobi County 
Integrated Development Plan, 2018). Consequently, this is a serious setback to residents, 
especially women who interact more with, and use water the most for domestic and other 
purposes. Women have to move distances during scarcity times, at times in risky 
conditions thus escalating their vulnerability to insecurity. 
 Women’s access safety in access to water services is basically limited as attributed to security 
fears owing to the fact that slums are densely populated with poor construction planning. 
Some path ways or routes to water points are narrow and act as hot spot joints for criminal 
activities. Time when water becomes available stands as the primary determinant to women 
and children’s safety. Such conditions are indeed part of the contributing drivers to sexual 
gender based violence, for example; defilement, rape, sodomy, gang rape, attempted rape and 
other kinds of indecent acts, mostly against women and girls. HIV, some chronical diseases 
with inclusion of sexually transmitted infections are resultant health effects of the vices.  
5.7.2 Water Resources  
Nairobi County has no main water tower; most of the supply is from the Tana Basin and is 
pumped to the City from distances of around 50 Km. This bulk water-supply is not reliable 
during periods of drought, and is also endangered by siltation of the reservoir due to 
deforestation in the catchment areas. The supply problem is further aggravated by the poor 
state of the distribution system, which results in about 50 per cent losses due to leakage, 
illegal connection and inefficient and wasteful use of water by some consumers. (Nairobi 
County Integrated Development Plan, 2018) 
5.7.3 Water and Sanitation  
Nairobi County has no major water tower and relies on other neighboring counties within 
Tana Basin for its water supply which is around 50 Km from the city. This bulk water-supply 
is not reliable during periods of drought, and is also endangered by siltation of the reservoir 
due to deforestation in the catchment areas. The supply problem is further aggravated by the 
poor state of the distribution system, which results in about 38 per cent losses due to leakage, 
illegal connection and inefficient and wasteful use of water by some consumers. (Nairobi 
County Integrated Development Plan, 2018) 
5.7.4 Water management  
The responsibility for water supply and sewerage in Nairobi is shared between an asset 
holding company, Athi Water Services Board (AWSB), and an operating company, the Nairobi 
City Water and Sewer Company. Also some of water is managed by CBOs and NGOs. Water 
and sewer services in Nairobi city are provided by the Nairobi City Water & Sewerage 
Company Ltd. Service standards are set and monitored by a national water regulatory agency 
called the Water Services Regulatory Board (WASREB). There is poor quality and inadequate

=== PAGE 164 ===
61 | P a g e  
 
water supply in Nairobi. Only 40% of those with home connections receive water 
continuously. (Nairobi County Integrated Development Plan, 2018) 
Recommendation for Nairobi County 
5.8 Conclusion 
Protection of Athi river catchment area project is an important establishment in conservation 
of water resources and ecosystems management. Sustainable and well-managed water supplies 
are therefore essential to achieving access to water for all, and for ensuring the maintenance 
of water in the interests of ecological balance and the needs of future generations. 
5.9 Recommendations  
• Invest in sustainable access to adequate and clean water for domestic use and 
commercial purposes through gender sensitive approaches.  
• Invest in modern agri-business technologies that recognize and develop further the 
unique individual and corporate resources of men and women. 
• Ensure expansion of water supply sources to keep pace with ever growing population 
needs of women and men with similar consideration of girls and boys.  
• Embrace gender affirmative representation while strengthening water governance 
sector to ensure reduction of water losses by use of metered zoning system under 
monitored mandate of the Nairobi City County Water Company Services and other 
accredited agencies. . 
• Strengthen Water policies and  focus on the management of water and not just the 
provision of water 
• Strengthen the agency of women and human rights consciousness of men to remedy 
gender and social norms and practices.  
• Embrace risk informed livelihood projects that appreciate the unique vulnerabilities 
and coping capacities of men and women.  
• Research and surveillance to monitor and document the differential impact of climatic 
risks on men and women.

=== PAGE 165 ===
62 | P a g e  
 
6.0 Glossary of terms 
Gender: refers to the roles, behaviors, 
activities, and attributes that a given society at 
a given time considers appropriate for men and 
women. In addition to the social attributes and 
opportunities associated with being male and 
female and the relationships between women 
and men and girls and boys, gender also refers 
to the relations between women and those 
between men. These attributes, opportunities 
and relationships are socially constructed and 
are learned through socialization processes. 
They 
are 
context/ 
time-specific 
and 
changeable. Gender determines what is 
expected, allowed and valued in a woman or a 
man in a given context.  
Gender analysis: is a critical examination of 
how differences in gender roles, activities, 
needs, opportunities and rights/entitlements 
affect men, women, girls and boys in certain 
situation 
or 
contexts. 
Gender 
analysis 
examines the relationships between females 
and males and their access to and control of 
resources and the constraints they face relative 
to each other. A gender analysis should be 
integrated into all sector assessments or 
situational analyses to ensure that gender-
based injustices and inequalities are not 
exacerbated by interventions, and that where 
possible, greater equality and justice in gender 
relations are promoted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender Equality: This refers to the equal 
rights, responsibilities and opportunities of 
women and men and girls and boys. Equality 
does not mean that women and men will 
become the same but that women’s and men’s 
rights, responsibilities and opportunities will 
not depend on whether they are born male or 
female. Gender equality implies that the 
interests, needs and priorities of both women 
and men are taken into consideration, 
recognizing the diversity of different groups of 
women and men.  
Gender mainstreaming refers to a strategy 
for implementing greater equality for women 
and girls in relation to men and boys.  
Mainstreaming a gender perspective is the 
process of assessing the implications for 
women and men of any planned action, 
including legislation, policies or programs, in all 
areas and at all levels. It is a way to make 
women’s as well as men’s concerns and 
experiences an integral dimension of the 
design, 
implementation, 
monitoring 
and 
evaluation of policies and programs in all 
political, economic and societal spheres so that 
women and men benefit equally and inequality 
is not perpetuated. The ultimate goal is to 
achieve gender equality.  
Gender roles: These often determine the 
traditional responsibilities and tasks assigned to 
men, women, boys and girls (see gender 
division of labor). Gender-specific roles are 
often conditioned by household structure, 
access to resources, specific impacts of the 
global economy, occurrence of conflict or 
disaster, and other locally relevant factors such

=== PAGE 166 ===
63 | P a g e  
 
as ecological conditions. Like gender itself, 
gender roles can evolve over time, in particular 
through the empowerment of women and 
transformation of masculinities. 
Gender-responsive budgeting or GRB:  is 
a method of determining the extent to which 
government expenditure has detracted from 
or come nearer to the goal of gender equality. 
A gender-responsive budget is not a separate 
budget for women, but rather a tool that 
analyzes budget allocations, public spending 
and taxation from a gender perspective and can 
be subsequently used to advocate for 
reallocation of budget line items to better 
respond to women’s priorities as well as men’s, 
making them, as the name suggests, gender-
responsive.  
Gender disaggregated data: refers to any 
data on individuals broken down by sex. 
Gender 
statistics 
rely 
on 
these 
sex-
disaggregated data and reflect the realities of 
the lives of women and men and policy issues 
relating to gender. Data collected and 
tabulated separately for women and men. They 
allow for the measurement of differences 
between women and men on various social and 
economic dimensions and are one of the 
requirements in obtaining gender statistics.  
Gender action plan: A Gender Action Plan 
(GAP) is a key gender mainstreaming tool and 
mechanism 
for 
ensuring 
gender-inclusive 
design and implementation of projects. Gender 
Action Plan (GAP) forms the basis for 
operationalizing 
the 
results 
and 
recommendations of the gender analysis. It 
contains specific gender elements to be 
considered in the project design and during the 
implementation of project measures and 
activities. Moreover, it helps to monitor 
implementation 
of 
these 
measures 
and 
activities. 
The 
existing 
institutional 
capacities on Gender of the executing 
entities will oversee the implementation of 
the gender action plan during the project 
cycle. NEMA has an existing gender policy 
that will further inform the implementation 
of the gender action plan.
 
Source: (https://trainingcentre.unwomen.org/mod/glossary/view.php?id=36 )

=== PAGE 167 ===
64 | P a g e  
 
ANNEXURE 1 GENDER ACTION PLAN FOR ENHANCING THE RESILIENCE OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS IN THE 
ATHI RIVER CATCHMENT AREA 
Output 
Gender responsive actions 
Performance indicator 
Time frame 
(Financial Year) 
Responsible 
Component 1: Enhanced capacity of Government institutions to manage water resources 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1.1 Establishment of 
National Information Center 
for Integrated Water 
Resource Management 
Constitute a gender inclusive committee to gather and 
disseminate relevant, accurate and timely climate 
information from local water catchment communities and 
county governments.  
51% of women and 49% men 
involved in information gathering, 
design stages and communication 
strategies of the project 
development.  
NEMA, KMD  
WRA 
Target men and women in the development of  Early
Warning 
systems 
that 
determine 
climate-driven 
vulnerabilities and effective adaptation options  
51% of women and 49% men 
imparted with climate information 
on early warning systems and other 
risk reduction measures through 
strengthened engendered 
participation in setup of the 
systems.  
NEMA, KMD  
Develop an integrated database for weather and water 
resources-related information by ensuring that men and 
women receive seasonal forecast in a timely manner. 
 
51% of women and 49 men receive 
real time seasonal weather forecast 
information for collective and gender-
specific adaptive mechanisms. 
NEMA, KMD  
WRA 
1.2  Establishment of 
modernized 
hydro-
meteorological 
observation, monitoring, 
and testing systems and 
related networks  
 
Coordinate with gender focal points of relevant 
ministries and institutions during the Installation and 
rehabilitation of surface hydro-meteorological 
monitoring and network systems. 
50% of gender focal points engaged
during the rehabilitation and installation
of 
surface 
hydro-meteorological
monitoring 
and 
network 
systems
showing disaggregated information on
the projected percentage level of women
NEMA, KMD  
WRA.

=== PAGE 168 ===
65 | P a g e  
 
 
 
and men’s access to and utilization of the
network systems.  
1.3 Training and capacity 
building programs 
Enhance an understanding on the link between gender and 
efficient water management for water sector professionals. 
Promote gender balanced staffing during the technical 
training on operation of monitoring and information systems 
51% of female and 49% male 
government staffs trained on water 
sector and resources management 
through efficient operation of 
monitoring and information 
systems.  
NEMA, 
WRUAs, 
CECs, County 
Adaptation 
Committees, 
CBOs. 
Component 2. improving and rehabilitating prioritized water infrastructure 
 
2.1 
 
Develop 
and 
upgrade water sources 
and infrastructure for 
domestic 
and 
commercial use 
Ensure constructive participation and consideration of 
women’s employment needs in the rehabilitation and 
construction of water storage and supply infrastructure 
in the community. 
Improved level of access by women 
to employment opportunities created 
by the project through rehabilitation 
and construction of water storage 
and supply infrastructure.  
NEMA, National 
& County Govt 
 
Engage in consultative discussions with men and women on 
the rehabilitation process at every stage, with specific 
interventional considerations to issues affecting women as 
the more vulnerable gender, e.g. access to water points 
should be reviewed prior to rehabilitation/new construction 
of water points. 
At least 51%of women benefiting 
from improved access to safe and 
reliable water for domestic and 
commercial use with reduction in 
distances covered to water collection 
points towards enabling reduced 
water charges.  
NEMA, National 
& County Govt

=== PAGE 169 ===
66 | P a g e  
 
Ensure women have equal and equitable access to 
employment opportunities generated by new civil works 
during the rehabilitation of water conservation structures. 
Increased 
number 
of 
women 
employed within the new civil works 
for improved livelihoods. 
 
NEMA, National 
& County Govt 
 
2.1 Support conservation of 
water catchment areas  
Ensure public awareness and inclusive participation of men 
and women in the water catchment protection and 
management processes.  
Improved awareness level and 
participation of women and men in 
the conservation of water catchment 
areas. 
Increased number of tree nurseries 
established and number of trees 
planted by women 
NEMA, National 
& County Govt 
WRUAs 
CECs 
Component 3. Strengthen institutional and regulatory framework. 
3.1 compliance of water 
regulations within the 
project area  
Ensure that policies, institutions, coordination 
mechanisms and regulatory frameworks are gender 
sensitive and responsive through inclusive and active 
participation of women. 
Review and consider existing legal and regulatory 
frameworks in the water sector on their gender-
sensitive and responsiveness on water management 
status to instigate policy geared enforcements and 
repealing.  
More gender-friendly policies, 
institutions, coordination 
mechanisms and regulatory 
frameworks put in place and 
effectively implemented to enhance 
climate resilience capacity of the 
locals, more affirmatively for women.  
Improved compliance and adjustment 
level 
by 
existing 
water 
quality 
regulations, policies and laws to the 
gender responsive needs of women and 
men.  
NEMA, National 
& County Govt

=== PAGE 170 ===
67 | P a g e  
 
3.2 Development of County
Environment 
Action 
Plans (CEAPs) for water 
catchment conservation 
as an adaptive action 
Ensure maximum participation of women in the 
development of County Environment Action Plans 
(CEAPs) for water catchment conservation. 
 
At least 51% of women involved  in 
all the entire development process of 
CEAPs 
NEMA, County 
Govt. 
 
3.3 Development, review 
and implementation of 
sub-catchment 
management plan 
Ensure maximum engagement and active participation 
of men and women in the development, review and 
implementation of sub-catchment management plans 
(SCMPs) 
At least 51% of women and 49% 
men involved in the development, 
review and implementation of sub-
catchment management plans. 
NEMA, County 
Govt.

=== PAGE 171 ===
68 | P a g e  
 
7.0 References  
1. 2030 Water Resources Group. (2015). Water Resources in Kenya: Closing the Gap. 
2. Australian Water Partnership. (2016). Gender & SDG 6: The Critical Connection. 
3. Kenya National Bureau of Population and Statistics. (2010). The 2009 Kenya Population and Housing Census 
4. Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources. (2013). The Project on the Development of the National Water Master Plan 
2030. 
5. Republic of Kenya. National Council for Law Reporting (NCLR). Constitution of Kenya 2010. Nairobi: NCLR, 2010. 
6. Republic of Kenya. National Council for Law Reporting (NCLR). National Gender and Equality Commission Act 2011. Nairobi: NCLR, 
2011.  
7. Constitution of Kenya 2010 
8. The Constitution of Kenya 2010 
9. The Beijing Platform of Action 1995 
10. CAREInternational.Women’sEmpowermentSIIFrameworkat:http://pqdl.care.org/sii/Pages/Women%27s%20Empowerment%20SII%20Framew
ork.aspx  
11. The Universities Act (2012), Technical and Vocational Training Act (2013), the Basic Education Act (2013) and the National Education 
Sector Plan (2014) policies. 
12. Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). Basic Report Based on 2015/16 Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey. Nairobi: KNBS, 
2018.

=== PAGE 172 ===
69 | P a g e

=== PAGE 173 ===
ANNEX8i:  GENDER ACTION PLAN FOR ENHANCING THE RESILIENCE OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS IN THE ATHI RIVER CATCHMENT AREA 
 
 
Output 
Gender responsive actions 
Performance indicator 
Time frame 
(Financial Year) 
Responsible 
Component 1: Enhance hydrological and meteorological monitoring system to support decision making, 
planning and policy development in water and climate change sector   
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1.1 Support 
establishment of 
National Information 
Centre for Integrated 
Water Resource 
Management 
Constitute a gender inclusive committee to gather and 
disseminate relevant, accurate and timely climate 
information from local water catchment communities 
and county governments.  
 
 
51% of women and 49% men 
involved 
in 
information 
gathering, design stages and 
communication strategies of 
the project development.  
 
 
NEMA, KMD  
WRA 
Enforce 2/3 gender principle in Policy dialogue 
committee for developing data sharing protocols 
(between NEMA, WRA, KMD)  
2/3 gender principle adhered 
to in all technical policy 
meetings 
NEMA, KMD  
WRA 
Target men and women in the development of Early 
Warning systems that determine climate-driven 
vulnerabilities and effective adaptation options  
 
 
51% of women and 49% men 
imparted 
with 
climate 
information on early warning 
systems 
and 
other 
risk 
reduction measures through 
strengthened 
engendered 
participation in setup of the 
systems.  
 
NEMA, KMD  
WRA  
Develop an integrated database for weather and water 
resources-related information by ensuring that men 
and women receive seasonal forecast in a timely 
manner. 
  
51% of women and 49 men 
receive real time seasonal 
weather forecast information 
for collective and gender-
specific 
adaptive 
mechanisms. 
NEMA, KMD  
WRA

=== PAGE 174 ===
1.2 Establish 
modernized hydro-
meteorological 
observation, 
monitoring, and 
testing systems and 
related networks  
 
 
Coordinate with gender focal points of relevant 
ministries and institutions during the Installation and 
rehabilitation 
of 
surface 
hydro-meteorological 
monitoring and network systems. 
 
50% of gender focal points 
engaged 
during 
the 
rehabilitation and installation 
of 
surface 
hydro-
meteorological 
monitoring 
and 
network 
systems 
showing 
disaggregated 
information on the projected 
percentage level of women 
and men’s access to and 
utilization of the network 
systems.  
NEMA, KMD  
WRA. 
 
 
 
Upscale the representation and participation of women 
in project planning and representation. 
Increased representation  and 
participation 
of 
women 
during 
project 
implementation 
NEMA, KMD  
WRA. 
 
1.2.4  Setting up of a
RANET 
broad 
casting
station 
in 
Machakos 
County 
Air specific information/programs on water security 
and climate vulnerability targeting women and girls 
30% of airtime dedicated to 
airing information/ programs 
on water security and climate 
vulnerability targeting women 
and girls 
NEMA, KMD  
WRA. 
 
1.3 Training and 
capacity building 
programs 
Enhance an understanding on the link between gender 
and efficient water management for water sector 
professionals. 
 
Promote gender balanced staffing during the technical 
training on operation of monitoring and information 
systems 
 
 
Empowerment on the constitutional rights of both 
women and men on access and sustainable utilization 
of the water resources 
51% of female and 49% male 
relevant project stakeholders 
trained 
on 
water sector, 
climate change and resources 
management 
towards 
efficient 
operation, 
monitoring 
and 
effective 
information systems.  
 
NEMA, KMD  
WRA

=== PAGE 175 ===
1.3.1 Support capacity 
building and training for 
government institutions 
with water and climate 
change mandates within 
the project area.  
 
Ensure gender parity in capacity building training for 
targeted government institutions 
Gender parity and 2/3 gender 
rule achieved in training and 
capacity 
building 
of 
government institutions 
NEMA, KMD  
WRA 
1.3.2      Support capacity 
building and training for 
relevant water 
governance structures 
and communities within 
the project area (Water 
Resource Users 
Associations -WRUAs, 
County Environment 
Committees - CECs, 
County Adaptation 
Committees, Community 
Based Organizations -
CBOs among others)  
 
Ensure gender parity  in identification of  trainees  
Gender parity and 2/3 gender 
rule achieved in training and 
capacity 
building 
of 
community 
groups, 
adaptation 
and 
water 
governance structures. 
NEMA, KMD  
WRA 
Component 2. Improve climate water resilience by building, enhancing and rehabilitating prioritized water 
infrastructure and implementing conservation activities in the catchment

=== PAGE 176 ===
2.1 
Develop and 
upgrade water sources 
and infrastructure for 
domestic use 
considering present and 
future impacts of 
climate change. 
Ensure constructive participation and consideration of 
women’s employment needs in the rehabilitation and 
construction of water storage and supply infrastructure 
in the community. 
 
Improved level of access by 
women 
to 
employment 
opportunities created by the 
project through rehabilitation 
and construction of water 
storage 
and 
supply 
infrastructure.  
 
NEMA, 
National & 
County Govt 
 
 
Engage in consultative discussions with men and 
women on the rehabilitation process at every stage, 
with specific interventional considerations to issues 
affecting women as the more vulnerable gender, e.g. 
access to water points should be reviewed prior to 
rehabilitation/new construction of water points. 
 
 
At 
least 
51%of 
women 
engaged 
in 
consultative 
discussions 
for 
improved 
access to safe and reliable 
water for domestic use with 
reduction 
in 
distances 
covered to water collection 
points 
towards 
enabling 
reduced water charges.  
 
NEMA, 
National & 
County Govt 
 
Ensure women have equal and equitable access to 
employment opportunities generated by new civil 
works during the rehabilitation of water conservation 
structures. 
 
Increased number of women 
employed within the new civil 
works 
for 
improved 
livelihoods. 
  
 
NEMA, 
National & 
County Govt 
 
 
Ensure Women’s safety in the access and use of the 
water conservation structures. 
Increased number of women 
regularly accessing the water 
conservation 
structures 
leading 
to 
 
improved 
livelihoods

=== PAGE 177 ===
2.1.1:  Construct water 
storage and supply 
infrastructure  
 
Structural design of the water storage and supply 
infrastructure to incorporate gender sensitive design 
to accommodate women and girls who are mainly 
involved in search of water for domestic and other 
uses 
Gender sensitive design 
including draw off pipes, 
cattle troughs and overflow 
channels incorporated to 
improve safety, 
accommodate women and 
people with disabilities 
NEMA, WRA. 
 
 
Constitute gender sensitive project supervision 
committees for all water assets contracted for 
rehabilitation 
2/3 gender representation in 
all project management 
committees at project level 
NEMA, WRA. 
 
2.2 
Support 
conservation of water    
catchment areas as 
adaptation to climate 
change measure. 
Ensure 
public 
awareness 
and 
inclusive 
active 
participation of men and women in the water 
catchment protection and management processes to 
enhance the ownership spirit and sustained community 
driven zeal for environmental conservation and 
management.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Improved awareness level 
and participation of women 
and men in the conservation 
of water catchment areas. 
 
Increased number of tree 
nurseries established and 
number of trees planted by 
women 
NEMA, WRA, 
National & 
County Govt 
WRUAs 
 
Component 3. Strengthen water and adaptation planning, institutional and regulatory framework to 
respond to changing climatic conditions

=== PAGE 178 ===
3.1 Enhance 
compliance of water 
regulations within 
project area and 
improve adaptation 
planning. 
 
 
Review the existing legal and regulatory frameworks 
in the water sector on their gender-sensitive and 
responsiveness on water management status to 
instigate policy geared enforcements and repealing.  
 
 
 
The number of existing legal 
and regulatory frameworks 
in the water sector reviewed 
on their gender-sensitivity 
and responsiveness on water 
management  
 
 
NEMA, WRA, 
National & 
County Govt 
 
 
Encourage both women and men’s constructive 
participation and opinions in decision making toward 
compliance to laws and regulations regarding 
encroachment of river banks, forests, wetlands and 
other riparian reserves 
Increased collective 
compliance of both women 
and men to existing  to laws 
and regulations regarding 
encroachment of river banks, 
forests, wetlands and other 
riparian reserves 
 
 3.1.2: Sensitize the 
regulated communities 
to enhance compliance 
Ensure 50% gender representation during 
sensitization forums for regulated communities   
At least 50% women 
representation achieved during 
sensitization forums for 
regulated communities 
NEMA, WRA, 
3.2 Enhance compliance 
of water regulations 
within project area 
and improve 
adaptation planning. 
Ensure maximum participation of women in the 
development of County Environment Action Plans 
(CEAPs) for water catchment conservation. 
 
Increased participation of 
women and men in planning 
and implementation of CEAPs 
NEMA, County 
Govt.

=== PAGE 179 ===
3.3 Development of 
8No. Sub-Catchment 
Management Plans 
(SCMPs) including 
climate change 
adaptation 
Ensure maximum engagement and active participation 
of men and women in the development, review and 
implementation of sub-catchment management plans 
(SCMPs) 
Increased participation of 
women and men in planning 
and implementation of SCMPs. 
WRA, County 
Govt. 
GAP notes 
1.
A Technical Assistance budget allocation for a gender expert is requested for under the AE fee costs
2.
The GAP will be developed further by the Gender Expert and should be complete within the first year of project implementation
3.
The gender expert will support mainstreaming and implementation of the GAP during the project period
4.
The budget for implementing the GAP will be drawn from the M&E cost as planned in the proposed detailed budget
__________
