=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
creationDate: D:20210913155119+09'00'
modDate: D:20210913204338+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
4 – 7 October 2021 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 15 
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
14 September 2021 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum II 
Funding proposal package for FP170 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Enhancing climate resilience in Thailand through
effective water management and sustainable agriculture";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page b 
3 
70 
72 
74 
91 
106 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Secretariat’s assessment 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment 
Gender documentation 
113

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Enhancing climate resilience in Thailand through effective 
water management and sustainable agriculture 
Country(ies): 
Thailand 
Accredited Entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Date of first submission: 
2019/06/17 
Date of current submission 
2021/09/09 
Version number 
V.013

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 0 OF 59 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 1 OF 65 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or private 
sector 
Public 
 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
Not applicable  
 
 
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it. 
The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation:   
 
☐ 
Low-emission transport:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:  
 
☐ 
Forestry and land use:   
 
 
 
 
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
 
  
☒ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security: 
☒ 
Infrastructure and built environment:  
 
 
 
☒ 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution:  
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
 
 
33% 
10% 
35% 
22% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  
N/A 
A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  
Direct beneficiaries: 62,000 
people 
Indirect beneficiaries: 471,561 
(population of project districts) 
25,000,000 (population of 
greater Chao Phraya River 
Basin 
 
Respectively: 
0.1% of population of Thailand 
1% of population of Thailand 
39% of population of Thailand 
 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  
33,911,323 USD  
A.9. Project size 
Small (Upto USD 50 
million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
17,533,500 USD 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒ Grant 
17,533,500 
 
☐ Loan 
Enter number 
☐ Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐ Equity  
 
Enter number 
☐ Results-based  
 
     payment 
 
Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
5 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
20 years

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 2 OF 65 
 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
17 June 2019 
A.14. ESS category  
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme? 
Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
The Executing Entity is the Kingdom of Thailand, represented by the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Cooperatives (MOAC)  
 
(The MOAC is not a nationally designated authority) 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
1. 
Thailand is one of the 16 countries identified globally as being in the ‘extreme risk’ category of those most 
vulnerable to future climate change impacts over the next 30 years.1 An extensive coastline, rural communities highly 
dependent on agriculture, and its extensive populous urban areas, located on flood prone plains, shape Thailand’s 
vulnerability. Severe drought and flood events2 are likely to be experienced increasingly in the near and longer-term 
future, as a result of the combined effects of a more vigorous hydrological cycle and enhanced surface drying.3 The 
IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5), indicates that in Southeast Asia temperatures overall have been increasing at a 
rate of 0.14°C to 0.20°C per decade since the 1960s, and are projected to increase from 0.8°C to 3.2°C above pre-
industrial levels by the end of the century4, with differences between regions and microclimates within and across 
Southeast Asia.  A positive trend in the occurrence of heavy (top 10 percent by rain amount) rain events is also 
predicted5 with key determinants such as the amount and intensity of rainfall, and the rate of evaporation set to affect 
surface water flow and water availability.6 This results in a significantly greater frequency and intensity of flooding during 
the wet season, and extended drought periods during the dry season, presenting a significant challenge to effective 
water management in Thailand. 
 
2. 
 The frequency of extreme drought has been rising7 due to increases in evapotranspiration, combined with 
increases in rainfall variability (less frequent rain of higher intensity) 8 adversely impacts economic activities and 
agricultural livelihoods. Until a few years ago Thailand was the largest exporter of rice in the world with below-normal 
rainfall potentially crippling the agricultural sector and slowing economic growth.9 Thailand’s agricultural sector in 
particular will be impacted by changing precipitation patterns with increasingly common extreme rain events and floods 
(an increase of precipitation of 8 percent is expected by 2050)10, as well as more extensive drought periods.11 In 2011, 
66 out of 77 provinces in the country were affected by flooding, with over 20,000 sq. km of agricultural land damaged, 
and nearly 900 lives lost.12 In 2012, the World Bank reported Thailand suffered USD46.5 billion in total damages and 
loss and required an estimated USD14 billion in loans for rehabilitation and reconstruction from the 2011 flooding 
alone.13 The recent drought in 2015-2016 is estimated to have resulted in losses of USD3.4 billion. Future climate 
change projections indicate an increase in both the magnitude and frequency of drought and extreme rainfall leading 
 
1 Thailand’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), 2015 
http://www4.unfccc.int/ndcregistry/PublishedDocuments/Thailand%20First/Thailand_INDC.pdf  
2 Thampanishvong, K. 2014, Farmers’ Adaptation to Extreme Weather Events in the Chao Phraya River Basin, Thailand Development 
Research Institute, October 15 2014 
3 Limsakul, A., Chidthaisong, A. and Boonpragob, K. 2011, Thailand’s First Assessment Report on Climate Change: Working Group I-Scientific 
Basis of Climate Change. Thailand Research Fund. 
4 IPCC. 2013, Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2013 
5 IPCC. 2013, Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2013 
6 Chaowiwat, W. Boonya-aroonnet, S. & Weesakul,  S. 2016, Impact  of  Climate  Change  Assessment  on  Agriculture  Water  Demand  in  
Thailand 
7 Annex II: feasibility study, figure 32. 
8 Annex II, feasibility study, figure 25. 
9 USDA. 2015, ‘Thailand: Irrigation shortage reduces 2015/16 rice production’, Commodity Intelligence Report, United States Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) Foreign Agricultural Service, October 29, 2015: http://www.pecad.fas.usda.gov/highlights/2015/10/th/index.htm 
10 SNC 
11 NAP-Ag. Inception Report Thailand, FAO and UNDP, 2016 
12 Germanwatch (2017). Global Climate Risk Index 2017. Bonn: Germanwatch 
13 World Bank, 2012. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/677841468335414861/pdf/698220WP0v10P106011020120Box370022B.pdf

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 65 
 
to these events. Projected negative impacts are estimated to induce losses in Thailand’s agriculture nationally during 
2040 – 2049 of between USD24 billion and USD94 billion.14   
 
3. 
Climate impacts on agriculture will particularly affect poor households. Poverty in Thailand has a predominately 
rural-profile, which fluctuates according to vulnerabilities in the agricultural sector, such as faltering economic growth, 
falling agricultural prices, and droughts.15 In 2013, for example, 80 percent of the country’s poor 7.3 million live in rural 
areas, and a further 6.7 million were living within 20 percent above the national poverty line.16 Proportionally, the Central 
and Northern Regions of Thailand have the highest levels of poverty. Sukhothai, Phitsanulok, and Uttaradit Provinces, 
included as part of the Northern Central region, have higher poverty levels when compared with other parts of the 
country.    
 
4. 
With climate extremes expected to increase, climate-informed water management and climate-resilient water 
infrastructure will be critical in order to prepare for and respond to floods and droughts. In Thailand’s National Adaptation 
Plan 2018, Flood Control and drought management are both highlighted as key priorities, with a focus on Chao Phraya 
River Basin. Given the cost of upgrading existing water infrastructure across the country, the RTG is seeking to 
complement its grey infrastructure with ecosystems-based adaptation measures. As agriculture households are the 
most vulnerable to changing climatic conditions, an integrated solution which brings together water management and 
agriculture is proposed. The project therefore seeks to adapt water management and agricultural livelihoods in the 
Yom and Nan river basins to climate change induced extreme weather events (droughts and floods), through 
interventions across three Outputs:   
 
• 
Output 1:  Enhance climate and risk informed planning in the water and agricultural sectors through 
improved climate information and cross sectoral coordination 
• 
Output 2:  Improve water management through strengthened infrastructure complemented by EbA 
measures, for greater resilience to climate change impacts 
• 
Output 3:  Reduce volatility of agriculture livelihoods in drought and flood prone areas through strengthened 
extension support and local planning, investment in on-farm adaptation measures and greater access to 
finance and markets 
 
5. 
The project would directly benefit 62,000 people in the project site area, with indirect benefits reaching 471,561 
people in the project districts, and ultimately 25,000,000 of the Greater Chao Phraya River Basin. Further, better 
integration of EbA measures would have environmental benefits, while capacity building interventions of the project 
would support cost-efficient and effective water and agriculture planning. Project design, which includes artificial 
intelligence to support climate-informed planning, precision agriculture for efficient water use and applies the internet 
of things (IoT) concept for sharing and applying data, has been guided by Thailand 4.0, which aims to shift Thailand’s 
agriculture sector towards an innovation-driven and interconnected sector. At the same time, the project also supports 
low tech interventions to help farmers respond to changing rainfall patterns.  These include on-farm EbA measures 
(e.g. farm ponds), small scale equipment to support water saving farming practices (e.g. system for rice intensification 
(SRI)) and community nurseries.  Training will be provided to ensure that extension services can support farmers with 
adaptation measures, and the project will provide support to market access for products resulting from climate resilient 
practices.    
 
6. 
UNDP and FAO currently support (through a BMU funded project) support the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Cooperatives (MoAC) to enhance their agriculture sector adaptation planning, e.g. through an updated climate change 
strategy and action plan to align with the CCMP and as sectoral input to Thailand’s National Adaptation Plan (NAP). 
The MoAC is implementing the the Agricultural Strategic Plan on Climate Change (ASPCC) 2017-2021 whereby RID 
takes lead for the Strategy 2 (Adaptation Actions).  Furthermore, the Office of National Water Resource (ONWR) 
functions as the regulating agency in proposing policies, formulating master plan on water resources management, 
responsible for management and supervision as well as integration on the implementation plan of water related-
agencies in accordance with the Water Resource Management Act (2018), the ONWR has developed the 20-year 
Master Plan on Water Management (2018-2037), aimed at solving Thailand’s chronic drought, flood and wastewater 
problems. The Master Plan also stresses the importance of the need to bring in new ideas and technologies to address 
water related challenges which are exacerbated by climate change. 
 
 
14 Attavanich, W. 2012, The effect of climate change on Thailand’s agriculture, 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Witsanu_Attavanich/publication/262067789_The_Effect_of_Climate_Change_on_Thailand's_Agricultur
e/links/566a311a08ae1a797e379c9b.pdf 
15 Overview, Thailand: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/thailand/overview 
16 Overview, Thailand: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/thailand/overview

=== PAGE 8 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 65 
 
 
 
17 e.g. Limsakul, A. and Singhruck, P. (2016). Long-term trends and variability of total and extreme precipitation in Thailand. Atmospheric 
Research, 169, 301-317; Limjirakan, S. and Limsakul, A. (2012). Observed trends in surface air temperatures and their extremes in Thailand 
from 1970 to 2009. Journal of the Meteorological Society of Japan, 90(5), 647−662.; Limsakul, A., Chidthaisong, A. and Boonpragob, K. 
(2011). Thailand’s First Assessment Report on Climate Change: Working Group I-Scientific Basis of Climate Change. Thailand Research 
Fund. 
Limsakul, A., et al. (2016). Thailand’s Second Assessment Report on Climate Change: Working Group I- Updated climate change knowledge 
and information of Thailand.; Limsakul A, Limjirakan S. Suthamanuswong B. (2010). Asian summer monsoon and its associated rainfall 
variability in Thailand. EnvironmentAsia, 3, 79-89; Limsakul, A., and S. Limjirakan, (2011). Observation of surface and atmospheric climate 
change in Thailand (in Thai). Thailand’s First Assessment Report on Climate Change-Synthesis Knowledge on Scientific Basis (Eds: 
Boonpragob K, Limsakul A, Chidthaisong A). Thailand Research Fund, Thailand, 39-62. 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate rationale and context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Climate vulnerability baseline 
7. 
Pressure from climate change induced variations in precipitation patterns (rainfall volume and intensities) 
challenge the functionality of existing water management practices through the use of existing canals and flood gates, 
which are increasingly inadequate to contain increased rainfall and consequent discharges during the wet season. 
Extreme rain events enhance flood risk during wet seasons, while increasing  evapotranspiration reduces water 
availability – both present serious challenges for effective water management and a productive agriculture sector.  
 
8. 
Thailand has 25 river basin systems (including 254 sub-basins). Of these river basins – there are two principal 
systems, the Mekong and Chao Phraya River systems.  The Greater Chao Phraya River Basin Area consists of eight 
sub-river basins including Ping, Wang, Yom, Nan, Chao Phraya, Sakaekrung, Pa Sak and Tha Chin, covering an area 
of 158,586 km2 with a population of approximately 25 million people. The average annual rainfall is 1,100 mm while the 
average annual runoff is 34,600 million m3.  In the northern part of the basin, the entire storage capacity is approximately 
27,446 million m3, while the central area can store only 1,808 million m3. The Chao Phraya River will not overflow its 
banks if the discharge does not exceed 2,800 m3 per second, which was exceeded during the devastating 2011 floods 
due to higher discharges from the Yom-Nan basin.   
 
9. 
The topography of the Yom-Nan river basin in particular, and the related challenges it presents in managing 
changes in precipitation and related water flow, make the area an adaptation priority for Thailand.  The Yom River 
(watershed area 23,600 km2), and Nan River (watershed area 34,300 km2) flow from the northern mountain system 
and join together at Nakhon Sawan. Upstream along the Nan River, the Sirikit Dam reservoir (capacity 9.5 billion m3, 
catchment area 13,000 km2, built in 1974) was constructed for multiple purposes, including flood and drought 
management. There is, however, no major dam or reservoir that can regulate water throughout the year in the Yom 
River basin. Plans to build the Kaeng Sua Ten River Dam (1.15 billion m3) for flood and drought protection were not 
approved by CSOs or communities.  In the lower part of Yom and Nan Rivers, the river gradients are around 1/10,000 
to 1/15,000 which is relatively flat and the width of the Yom River at the downstream section is narrow with low capacity 
for water retention.  Specific to the Yom-Nan area, RID has designed for enhancements to the existing canal and 
regulator network in the Yom and Nan river basins at 13 critical schemes. The designs consider the increased capacities 
needed to retain water (so called ‘Monkey Cheek’ concept) in the upper reaches of the watersheds, as well as the 
policy of government to not relocate the area’s population.  Planned under RID, the estimate cost of upgrading all 13 
schemes is approximately USD 42 million over the next 20 years.   
 
 
Key climate change risks and hazards 
Increased temperatures and rainfall variability  
10. 
Thailand has experienced significant country-wide warming over the last four decades, as well as associated 
warm extremes.17 There is evidence that maximum, mean and minimum temperatures in Thailand as a whole have 
increased significantly by 0.86°C, 0.95°C and 1.45°C respectively over the 1955-2009 period (see Figure 1).  For 
temperature extreme indices, a significant upward trend is seen over the annual number of warm nights and days, the 
annual occurrence of warm spells, tropical nights, summer days, and the highest and lowest values of daily minimum 
temperatures – indicating a significant shift in the temperature distribution toward warmer conditions over the recent 
decades. In contrast, significant downward trends are observed in the annual number of cold nights and days, the 
annual occurrence of cold spells, diurnal temperature range and annual extreme temperature range.  These impacts 
are consistent with the fifth assessment report (AR5) from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 
which indicates that temperatures in Southeast Asia have been increasing at a rate of 0.14°C to 0.20°C per decade 
since the 1960s and predicts increases from 0.8°C to 3.2°C for the overall region by the end of this century.

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 5 OF 65 
 
 
 
18 Thailand’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), 2015 
19  Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, IPCC, 2013 
20 Limsakul, A. and Singhruck, P. 2016, ‘Long-term trends and variability of total and extreme precipitation in Thailand’, Atmospheric 
Research, 169, Pp 301-317. 
21 Limsakul, A. and Singhruck, P. 2016, ‘Long-term trends and variability of total and extreme precipitation in Thailand’, Atmospheric Research, 
169, Pp 301-317. 
 
Figure 1: Maximum, mean and minimum temperature18 
 
11. 
Nationwide averages of rainfall show little change in annual totals since 1950 (see Annex 2, section 1.7).  
However, the IPCC highlights the positive trend in the occurrence of heavy (top 10% by rain amount) rain events, and 
the influence of climate change on several large-scale phenomena affecting the region19.  This is consistent with simple 
daily intensity index (SDII) observations in Thailand which show a consistent increase between 1955 and 2014 both 
nationally and over the northern and central areas of the Chao Phraya basin (see Figure 2) and with recent analyses 
of 44 long record quality controlled first order surface weather stations across Thailand for the period from 1955 to 
2011, which indicate that precipitation has become less frequent throughout most areas, though precipitation events 
have become more intense.20 These results are further consistent with reduced numbers of rainy days and increases 
in mean daily rainfall intensity demonstrated for stations in the Chao Phraya basin (see FS, section 1.7). 
 
 
Figure 2: Average trends for Simple Daily Intensity Index (SDII) for the period from 1955 to 2014.21 Left – national average, right 
individual stations (solid triangle trend >95% significance) 
 
Extreme events exacerbated by climate change 
12. 
Downscaling of the ECHAM4 GCM using PRECIS, projects precipitation increases over the whole country 
under both A2 and B2 scenarios (see Annex 2, section 1.5.2). The length of rainy season are simulated to be similar

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 6 OF 65 
 
 
 
22 Naruchaikusol, S., 2016. Climate change and its impact in Thailand (TransRe Fact Sheet No. 2), Science, Results, Information. University 
of Bonn, Bonn. 
23 Ogata, T., Valeriano, O., Yoshimura, C., Liengcharenrnsit, W., Hirabayashi, Y. 2012, ‘Past and future hydrological simulations of Chao 
Phraya River basin’, Journal of Japan Society of Civil Engineers Ser. B1, 68, Pp 97-102 
24 Champathong, A., Komori, D., Kiguchi, M., Sukhapunnaphan, T., Oki, T. 2013, ‘Future projection of mean river discharge climatology for 
the Chao Phraya River Basin’, Hydorlogical Research Letters, 7, Pp 36-41. 
25 Watanbe, S., Hirabayashi, Y., Kotsuki, S., Hanasaki, N., Tanaka, K., Mateo, C., Kiguchi, M., Ikoma, E., Kanae, S. & Oki, T. 2014, ‘Application 
of performance metrics to climate models for projecting future river discharge in the Chao Phraya River Basin’, Hydrological Research Letters, 
8:1, Pp 33-38 
26 Wichakul, S., Tachikawa, Y., Shiiba, M., Yorozu, K., 2014. Prediction of water resources in the Chao Phraya River Basin, Thailand. 
Proceeding from Hydrology in Hydrology in a Changing World: Environmental and Human Dimensions, 7th Global FRIEND-Water Conference 
(IAHS). Publ. 363. Montpellier, France. 
27 Kotsuki, S., Tanaka, K., & Watanabe, S. (2014). Projected hydrological changes and their consistency under future climate in the Chao 
Phraya River basin using multi‐model and multi‐scenario of CMIP5 dataset. Hydrological Research Letters, 8(1), 27–32. 
https://doi.org/10.3178/hrl.8.27 
to the present, with increases in rainfall intensity and an increase of total precipitation by 2050.22 These results are 
confirmed through an analysis of the wider ensemble of models from the CMIP5 (37 GCMs), CMIP6 (24 GCMs) and 
CORDEX (7 RCMs) archives. These model ensembles demonstrate an expected increase in total annual rainfall of the 
order of 10-15% (Annex 2, section 1.7.4) 
 
13. 
Increasing temperatures and potential evapotranspiration have resulted inincreased incidences of severe 
droughts (as measured through the standardised precipitation evapotranspiration index, SPEI), which are likely to 
intensify in their magnitude due to climate change (see Annex 2, section 1.7.3 and 1.7.4). These increases in potential 
evapotranspiration have been shown to lead to increases in rice crop water requirements during all months, and these 
increases in requirements are greater than increases in rainfall, leading to increases in irrigation water requirements 
under climate change (see Annex 2, section 1.7) 
 
14. 
Given the above evidence and that detailed further in Annex 2 (particularly section 1.7), the following key 
climate change impacts on the Chao Phraya basin have been identified: a) Increases in potential evapotranspiration, 
crop and irrigation water requirements; b) increases in annual rainfall which will manifest mostly through increases in 
rainfall intensity; c) increases in river discharges beyond current levels (including the devastating 2011 floods). 
 
Key impacts of temperature changes, rainfall variability and extreme events on water management and agriculture 
Impact on water management in the Chao Phraya River basin 
15. 
The Greater Chao Phraya River Basin Area consists of eight sub-river basins including Ping, Wang, Yom, Nan, 
Chao Phraya, Sakaekrung, Pa Sak and Tha Chin, covering an area of 158,586 km2 with a population of approximately 
25 million people. The average annual rainfall is 1,100 mm while the average annual runoff is 34,600 million m3.  In the 
northern part of the basin, the entire storage capacity is approximately 27,446 million m3, while the central area can 
store only 1,808 million m3. The Chao Phraya River will not overflow its banks, if the discharge does not exceed 2,800 
m3 per second.  Several studies have projected the future river discharge in the Chao Phraya River Basin, using future 
climate projections indicate that peak discharges are expected to increase during the next 30 years.23 24 25  
 
16. 
Annex 2, section 1.7.4 shows that the projected increases in annual rainfall result from a relatively strong 
increase in rainfall in the peak of the rainy season (Aug-Oct). An earlier study26 of hydrological impacts of climate 
change demonstrated that even a weak rainfall increase (relative to increases projected using the full range of models 
in the CMIP5/CMIP6/CORDEX ensembles) is strongly amplified in the hydrological system to create a considerable 
impact on streamflow in the lower parts of the basin. This and the increases in runoff in the Chao Phraya simulated 
using 6 GCMs27 suggests that a wetter future will result in a considerable increase in flood discharges beyond current 
levels. This is confirmed in other data; the majority of CORDEX models (>75%) combined with a rainfall-runoff model 
simulate increases of approximately 50% (median estimate) in discharges of the Chao Phraya basin (see figure 38, 
Annex 2).  
 
17. Overall, the following is the summary of the analysis for climate change for the project: 
• 
Whilst station trends are mostly <95% significance, there are consistent trends between stations showing: 
increases in daily rainfall intensity, decreases in number of rainy days (this is consistent with future 
projections). This is consistent with existing peer-reviewed literature; 
• 
Historically, there has been an increasing risk in drought as measured by SPEI (measures rainfall-
evapotranspiration) but not SPI, implying that increases in evapotranspiration are mostly responsible and 
are greater than any increases in rainfall; 
• 
Ensemble projections [CMIP5 (37 GCMs), CMIP6 (24 GCMs) and downscaled CORDEX (4-7 RCMs)] 
clearly show future projected increases of 10-15% in annual rainfall. The MRI model is at the lower end of

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 7 OF 65 
 
 
these estimates, but still shows increases in rainfall intensities which lead to increases in discharges during 
the main rainfall season when combined with a calibrated hydrological model; 
• 
Future temperature increases of about 2°C under RCP4.5 are virtually certain and consistent with station 
and gridded datasets. This leads to increases in evapotranspiration; 
• 
Crop water requirements (due to increases in evapotranspiration) and irrigation water requirements 
(accounting for changes in rainfall) both increase in all months; growing both rainfed and irrigated rice will 
require more water and more efficient farming methods in the future; and 
• 
Significant increases (approximately 50%) in modelled maximum discharges (using CORDEX models) are 
consistent with the +10% in annual precipitation since the catchments amplify the rainfall signal and the 
increases occur during the rainy season. This is also consistent with simulated increases in runoff for the 
basin found in peer-reviewed literature. 
 
18. 
RID already practices water management in the critical Chao Phraya River basin to stave off excess flooding 
during the wet season and to ensure water availability during the dry season, using canals and regulators, including 
reservoir operations. In the upper section (upland area), dams and reservoirs are used to store and regulate the flow 
of water. In the middle section (low lying area), water is drawn into designated low-lying areas to store the water, for 
release when the rain intensifies to prevent flooding in the lower (urban) part. The Action Plan of Integrated and 
Sustainable Flood Mitigation in Chao Phraya River Basin includes a) soil improvement and conservation in the upper 
river basin by reforestation and rehabilitation of forest areas in the river basin in Ping, Wang, Yom, Nan, Sakae Krung, 
Tha-Chin and Pa Sak, as well as reservoir construction in Yom, Sakae Krung, Nan, and Pa Sak water basin.  And in 
the lower section of the basin (urban and industrial area) flood diversion canals are used to divert excess water to the 
Gulf of Thailand, and dams are used to further regulate the distribution of water for industrial and agricultural use.  
 
19. 
However, existing infrastructure, particularly in the proposed project area (Yom and Nan river basin, in the 
Uttaradit, Phitsanulok, Sukhothai provinces, middle section, low lying area), are not adequate to cope with the 
increasing pressures of climate change. With more intense wet seasons, this basin will be increasingly unable to slow 
runoff to the central plains, and the greater Bangkok area. And with drier dry seasons, the water that the infrastructure 
is able to retain is insufficient to cover the irrigation needs of farmers for the extended period. The middle section (the 
proposed project area) serves a critical function along the broader Chao Phraya River, as it has historically been able 
to slow or keep excess water from the downstream areas that cannot manage the water flow due to limited natural 
capacity. The channel capacity of the Yom River at Si Satchanalai district is 2,397cms-1, which then reduces to just 
565cms-1 by the time it reaches downtown Sukhothai. In addition, the longitudinal river slope decreases from 1:2,300 
to 1:11,000 at this point, and creates a point of overflow in the area of Sukhothai that connects Phitsanulok and Phichit 
provinces.  
 
20. 
With rainwater as the country’s most important fresh water source, increases in temperature and evaporation 
will lead to water stresses as well as water scarcity during certain periods in the Chao Phraya River Basin area.  Annex 
2, section 1.7.4 further showed a strong impact of the projected increase in air temperature and PET on agricultural 
water demand in the near future: both crop water demand and irrigation water requirement increase by up to 30%. 
 
21. 
Increased runoff during the wet season and drier dry seasons will also accelerate soil erosion and inhibit 
groundwater resources, as well as increasing downstream flooding. The central plain area of Thailand (including the 
provinces of Phitsanulok, Sukhothai and Uttaradit) is a large plain, formed through sediment deposits as a result of 
fluvial processes into flood plains, terraces and swamp areas. In terms of hydrology, the central plain is also the main 
reservoir of groundwater for Thailand. It holds eight separate aquifers. Effective water management pursuing water 
retention during wet periods, has dual-value in not only slowing water flow during periods of flood, and reducing the 
volumes of water that continue downstream during wet periods, but also serves to secure water to be saved for use 
during the dry periods, assisting to maintain soil fertility and reduce sediment loss from agricultural lands, providing 
environmental flows and retaining ecological system functions, as well as allowing recharge and permeation to 
groundwater sources. 
 
22. 
It is therefore crucial that water management provides: (i) flood protection, particularly given the risk to several 
cities located along the Yom River downstream; and (ii) adequate water storage through irrigation canals, weirs, 
backwater areas, diversion structures and embankments for farmers during the drier dry season.  
 
Impact on agriculture and agriculture livelihoods

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 8 OF 65 
 
 
 
28 Kranz N, Menniken T, Hinkel J. 2010, ‘Climate change adaptation strategies in the Mekong and Orange-Senqu basins: what determines 
the state of play?’, Environ Sci Policy, 13:648–659 
29 Secretariat of the Cabinet of Thailand, 2008 
30  Thailand’s drought weakens agricultural outlook, Oxford Business Group, May 19, 2016: http://www.thailand-business-
news.com/economics/53473- thailands-drought-weakens-agricultural-outlook.html  
31 ‘Relief as rain falls, but drought’s aftermath to linger’, Bangkok Post, http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/general/994313/relief-as-rain-falls-
but- droughts-aftermath-to-linger  
32 USDA. 2015, ‘Thailand: Irrigation shortage reduces 2015/16 rice production’, Commodity Intelligence Report, United States Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) Foreign Agricultural Service, October 29, 2015: http://www.pecad.fas.usda.gov/highlights/2015/10/th/index.htm 
33 USDA. 2015, ‘Thailand: Irrigation shortage reduces 2015/16 rice production’, Commodity Intelligence Report, United States Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) Foreign Agricultural Service, October 29, 2015: http://www.pecad.fas.usda.gov/highlights/2015/10/th/index.htm 
34 Nara, P. Mao, G. & Yen, T. 2014, ‘Climate change impacts on agricultural products in Thailand: a case study of Thai rice at the Chao Phraya 
River Basin’, APCBEE Procedia, 8, Pp 136-140  
35 Attavanich, 2013 
23. 
While flooding can damage crops and infrastructure across the country, drought affects crop production.28 
Thailand has been experiencing in recent years its worst periods of drought in decades, with significant impacts on 
overall food production and water availability. In 2008, for example, 10 million people across 55 of Thailand’s provinces, 
experienced water shortages due to severe drought.29  Drought in 2015 disproportionately impacted the agricultural 
sector, particularly subsistence farmers. The 2015 drought affected more than 250,000 people and cost USD400 million 
in government spending.  In 2016, MoAC provided USD2 billion in soft loans to farmers in order to mitigate the impact 
of water shortages (drought) to the agricultural sector.30  Estimates of total losses resulting from the 2016 drought are 
estimated at USD3.4 billion or 0.85 percent of GDP.31  
 
24. 
Thailand has, in general, two annual rice-growing periods of wet season and dry season rice crops.  Although 
called wet season rice, a portion is also irrigated.  Wet season rice accounts for around 72 percent of Thailand’s annual 
rice production32 and is heavily dependent on monsoonal rain with up to 70 percent being directly and entirely rainfed 
crop.33  The other 30 percent of wet season rice is grown in the Chao Phraya River Basin and is irrigated from the 
upper catchment reservoirs and areas of water retention and controlled water management. Rice is the main agricultural 
crop of the Chao Phraya River Basin, as the basin has the greatest production advantages in terms of highly productive 
land, and irrigated areas.34 In the Chao Phraya River basin region, climate projections show trends of increasing 
temperature with fluctuating precipitation35 resulting in increases of crop and irrigation water requirements. Calculations 
for the region, found that on average (with variations between the provinces) projections for the periods during 2040-
2049, farmland values per rai (0.16 hectares), are projected to decrease from USD2,703 to USD2,068. In terms of 
climate change adaptation activities, rice farmers currently try to reschedule their crop planning in order to adjust to the 
season, however they often lack reliable climate forecasts.  
 
25. 
Farmer households and farmer communities are the most vulnerable groups to climate change in Thailand. An 
agriculture survey conducted during the development phase of the proposed GCF project (see Annex 23), showed that 
most respondents in the Yom and Nan River basin were dependent on rice farming as a source for income (95.8 
percent of households surveyed). Household incomes in the area are split on average as THB 174,345 (USD 5,050) 
per year income generated from crop revenues, THB 31,652 (USD 918) from fishing revenue, and THB 2,895 (USD 
84) generated from livestock revenues annually. In some of the areas where interviews took place for focus group 
discussions, rice farmers attempt to do three rounds of rice cropping per year. This is not consistent, however, and 
farmers are facing increasing volatility due to rainfall variability. For instance, cropping was drastically changed during 
the 2015-2016 drought due to constrained water availability.  
 
Baseline efforts and investments 
Climate information for the water and agricultural sectors 
26. 
Given the cross-sectoral impacts of challenges related to water management, RID established the Smart Water 
Operation Center (SWOC) to link data with all relevant agencies for water resource management in a systematic 
manner during drought and flood crises. This center brings together information from the Thai Meteorological 
Department (TMD), the Hydro and Agro Informatics Institute, the Geo-Informatics and Space Technology Development 
Agency, the Department of Water Resources, and the Hydrographic Department of the Royal Thai Navy, to be compiled 
as central information for water analysis and forecasts. SWOC serves as a command center for water resource 
management for Thailand.  
 
27. 
While there is a hydro-meteorological network in place, only recently has the data from the network started to 
get systematically analyzed, tailored for use, and disseminated for agricultural and water management purposes.  
SWOC and Thailand’s research institutes have worked with the academic-King Mongkut Institute of Technology North 
Bangkok (KMUTNB) for developing a water forecast decision making tool, namely the Intelligence-based Real-time 
Decision-Making Modeling (IRDM) tool. This tool already serves RID’s decision makers in managing water in Chao

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 9 OF 65 
 
 
 
36 Thailand ‘Technology needs assessments report for climate change adaptation’ 
Phraya river basin. IRDM can calculate the amount of rainfall and inflow of water into reservoirs during the wet season 
and design water release schedules for 12-month periods, with a relatively high level of accuracy. Its mathematical 
models can be used to forecast inflows into different water sources, support water management plans for individual 
irrigation zones and estimate agricultural yield and revenue.  
 
28. 
IRDM is a collaborative effort between 5 organisations - RID, the Agricultural Research Development Agency 
(ARDA), the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT), the King Mongkut’s University of Technology North 
Bangkok (KMUTNB), and the Thailand Research Organizations Network (TRON).  IRDM is a milestone in enhancing 
the institutional coordination between the agricultural and irrigation departments, as well as to develop the public 
forecasting and modelling capacity36. However, continuous support is needed to refine and upgrade the IRDM tool in 
order to also provide forecasts for shorter time frames (e.g. monthly or weekly) and tailor and distribute risk information 
to the needs of subnational decision makers and farmers/end-users. This can, ultimately, enable farmers to enhance 
their resilience against climate change induced droughts and floods through better water management planning. 
 
29. 
The concept of integrated water resources management (IWRM) based on the river basin model, is contained 
within Thailand’s water policies and management. However, as found by a study by the World Bank (2012), Thailand’s 
water resource management framework would benefit from a number of improvements – particularly in regard to 
strengthening and streamlining the IWRM approach through sectoral planning and programming. Given the 
dependence of the agriculture sector on water availability and sustainable water management, there is a need to bring 
climate change data into the respective strategies and plans, and to strengthen collaboration between the water and 
agriculture sectors. Work is already ongoing which can be built upon for more integrated planning. A broader (national) 
expert review ideally should take place, reviewing and analyzing the extreme events to provide further lessons and 
recommendations to the Strategic Committee on Water Management for integration into any future strategic plans. This 
assessment also found that reviewing and passing the water bill, would benefit from high level championing of the 
IWRM model in instituting the political clout required to institute IWRM throughout sectoral development planning long 
term. Institutions need to strengthen their roles in coordination to ensure that IWRM can take place, with a focus on 
management instruments and an enabling environment being established to engage inter-agency and widely with 
stakeholders. 
 
30. 
With the growing challenges and particular vulnerabilities related to the agriculture sector, the RTG also seeks 
transformational change to the agriculture sector. The National Strategy - Thailand 4.0 aims to shift Thailand’s 
agriculture sector towards an innovative-driven and interconnected sector through the integration of the concepts and 
approaches from sufficiency economy, smart farm, precision agriculture, intensive agriculture, sustainable agriculture, 
green economy, and agricultural biotechnology. Thailand 4.0 is an economic model that aims to unlock the country 
from several challenges (i.e. middle income trap, growing inequality and imbalanced development) resulting from past 
economic development models which place emphasis on agriculture (Thailand 1.0), light industry (Thailand 2.0), and 
advanced industry (Thailand 3.0).  The four objectives of Thailand 4.0 are economic prosperity, social well-being, raising 
human values and environmental protection. 
   
31. 
While significant progress has been made related to data collection, analysis, and sharing of information, there 
are opportunities to improve coordination between the water and agriculture sectors, building on IRDM to ensure policy 
makers are equipped with the tailored information needed for climate-informed planning and in line with the ambitions 
of Thailand 4.0.

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 10 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
Water Management in Chao Phraya River Basin 
32. 
To cope with these additional climate-induced flood and drought risks, RID developed a 20-year roadmap 
towards Intelligent Organisation: Achieving water security and rendering value-added service within 2036 (see Annex 
2). Investment in the Yom and Nan river basin area is part of a series of interventions ongoing and planned by RID to 
enhance water management in the Greater Chao Phraya River Basin Area.  
 
33. 
RID already practices water management in the critical Chao Phraya River basin to stave off excess flooding 
during the wet season and to ensure water availability during the dry season, using canals and regulators, including 
reservoir operations. In the upper section (upland area), dams and reservoirs are used to store and regulate the flow 
of water. In the middle section (low lying area), water is drawn into designated low-lying areas to store the water for 
certain periods for release when the rain intensifies to prevent flooding in the lower (urban) part. And in the lower section 
of the basin (urban and industrial area) flood diversion canals are used to divert excess water to the Gulf of Thailand, 
and dams are used to further regulate the distribution of water for industrial and agricultural use.  
 
34. 
Existing infrastructure, particularly in the proposed project area (Yom and Nan river basin, in the Uttaradit, 
Phitsanulok, Sukhothai provinces, middle section, low lying area), are no longer adequate to cope with the increasing 
pressures of climate change. With more intense wet seasons, this basin is increasingly unable to slow runoff to the 
central plains and the greater Bangkok area resulting in flooding. And with drier dry seasons, the water that the 
infrastructure is able to retain is insufficient to cover the irrigation needs of farmers for the extended period, resulting in 
maladaptive responses by farmers. The middle section (the GCF project area) serves a critical function along the 
broader Chao Phraya River, as it has historically been able to slow or keep excess water from the downstream areas 
that cannot manage the water flow due to limited natural capacity. The channel capacity of the Yom River at Si 
Satchanalai district is 2,397cms, which then reduces to just 565cms by the time it reaches downtown Sukhothai. In 
addition, the longitudinal river slope decreases from 1:2,300 to 1:11,000 at this point, and creates a point of overflow 
in the area of Sukhothai that connects Phitsanulok and Phichit provinces.  
 
35. 
The central plain area of Thailand (including the provinces of Phitsanulok, Sukhothai and Uttaradit) is a large 
plain, formed through sediment deposits as a result of fluvial processes into flood plains, terraces and swamp areas. 
In terms of hydrology, the central plain is also the main reservoir of groundwater for Thailand, it holds eight separate 
aquifers. The increased runoff during the wet season is resulting in rapid soil erosion and inhibiting groundwater 
recharge.  
 
36. 
The RTG seeks to find greener solutions to this challenge. Investment towards effective water management 
in the Yom-Nan river basin would have multiple benefits – i) slowing water flow to downstream areas during periods 
of flood risk, ii) retaining water for use during the dry season by farmers in the immediate area, and iii) assisting to 
maintain soil fertility and reduce sediment loss from agricultural lands, providing environmental flows and retaining 
ecological system functions, as well as allowing recharge and permeation to groundwater sources.

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 11 OF 65 
 
 
 
37 Uppasit, S., Silaratana, N., Fuangswasdi, A., Chusanatus, S., Pavelic, P. & Kriengsak, S. 2013, ‘Managed aquifer recharge using infiltration 
pond: Case study of Ban Nong Na, Phitsanulok, Thailand’, Journal of Earth Science and Engineering, 1. Pp 14-22 
38  Fornes, J. & Pirarai, K. 2013, ‘Groundwater in Thailand’, Journal of Environmental Science and Engineering B, 3, Pp 304-315. 
http://www.davidpublisher.org/Public/uploads/Contribute/55078898cb5e0.pdf  
37. 
To inform needed enhancements to the broader Chao Phraya River system, RID commissioned a feasibility 
study, recommendations include:  
• 
The capacity of drainage system should be improved to enable a drainage of water from low-lying areas at the 
beginning of the rainy season. Canals and waterways are needed to be dredged to the depth that can drain 
these low-lying areas. These waterways should be managed to connect to each other. 
• 
The capacity to store water volume within the areas during the late rainy season and the beginning of the dry 
season should be increased to allow a sufficient storage of water to irrigate the area during the dry period. The 
dredging of waterways through the constructions of additional water regulators should be implemented for the 
purpose especially at the end of waterways connecting to the Yom River and Khlong Bang Kaeo Canal. 
• 
The capacity to divert water into the area should be improved. Additional infrastructure could enable the inflow 
of water from the Yom River (possibly to be drawn from the Ping River where a project is underway) and from 
the Nan Basin through the feeder canal of the Nan River- Khlong Mem and the ditch of Khlong Wang Khon. 
The construction of water regulator facilities (Khlong Muang Chang and Khlong Ta Kay) in the Yom River and 
Khlong Bang Kaeo Canal are needed. 
• 
An expansion of the irrigation zone in the area can be developed through improved water management 
planning in the Yom River Basin. This can also help in the preparation for the potential development of a large 
additional reservoir and would benefit the water co-management plan with the neighboring basins. 
• 
Specific to the Yom-Nan area, RID has developed designs for enhancements to the existing canal and regulator 
network in the Yom and Nan river basins at 13 critical schemes. The designs consider the increased capacity 
needs of the area, as well as the policy of government to not relocate the area’s population.  Planned under 
RID, the estimate cost of upgrading all 13 schemes is approximately USD 42 million over the next 20 years.   
 
Agriculture livelihoods in flood and drought prone areas 
38. 
Rain variability and drier dry periods are affecting agriculture livelihoods in the proposed project area.  Support 
is needed to both increase resilience of vulnerable agriculture livelihoods as well as to prevent maladaptation, which 
could inadvertently worsen conditions. 
 
39. 
Through consultations with communities undertaken during project development, farmers were asked about 
measures employed to respond to drought conditions. A disproportionate number resorted to groundwater resources 
for irrigation. Constructing artesian wells to access groundwater was the most widely employed on-farm response for 
dealing with drought, despite the significant costs involved.  
 
40. 
Overall, groundwater extraction in Thailand has dropped significantly since the introduction of the 2004 
Groundwater Act, and a comprehensive monitoring system is in place, using 156 monitoring stations and 474 
observation wells operates as an extensive network around greater Bangkok and its vicinity, and across the country 
1,351 monitoring wells.  There is, however, extraction of groundwater at a rate higher than can be recharged naturally 
– which has caused a decline in groundwater levels, land subsidence and seawater intrusion in certain areas.  The 
Central Plain area of Thailand, which holds the Provinces of Phitsanulok, Sukhothai and Uttaradit – is a large plain, 
formed through sediment deposits as a result of fluvial processes into flood plains, terraces and swamp areas.  In terms 
of hydrology, the Central Plain is also the main reservoir of groundwater for Thailand. It holds eight separate aquifers. 
The groundwater that farmers have increasingly come to rely on during dry periods, particularly in and around 
Phitsanulok, has faced continuous level decreases due to over-extraction for irrigation37.  Within the northeastern area, 
groundwater too is affected by drought.38   
 
41. 
Farmers have also been adapting autonomously to climate change by shifting to other crops such as fruit trees, 
and/or adopting and/or returning to use of aquaculture or aquaculture-diversified livelihoods. Similarly, fast growing 
and/or water resistant crops are used in the areas that are submerged by flood for long periods. Fishing and fish 
products are also utilized when rice and agricultural livelihood productions are inhibited by shorter grow periods and 
the early onset of rainy season or reduced rainfall and drought periods. In response to drought, farmers interviewed 
during project design, employed autonomous adaptation strategies that are wide-ranging. However, resorting to 
groundwater, and constructing artesian wells to access groundwater was widely employed as an on-farm response.  
Second was diversifying income streams with external employment. 
 
42. 
The ability of rice farmers to adopt climate-resilient practices successfully is dependent on access to knowledge 
on climate change and its impacts on agriculture and natural resources, and on alternative practices, e.g. growing more

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 12 OF 65 
 
 
 
39 Intelligent Based Real-time Decision-Making 
40 Thailand’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), 2015 
climate resilient crops and applying innovative agriculture and water saving approaches and technologies. Per 
consultations, farmers have been dependent upon their past experiences in gauging the water conditions to determine 
cropping seasons, while flood forecasting tends to rely upon information passed on by farmers further upstream. To 
reduce their risk to conditions limiting their ability to complete the cultivation season cycle – in terms of flood forecasting 
errors, or impacts of water insufficiency, most farmers in the area have settled on using short growth duration varieties 
of rice. These varieties are considered as being of lower quality than long duration rice, and the prices that farmers 
receive for this variety is less. 
 
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) 
43. 
The project targets to improve the water management capacity of the RID and local communities in the critical 
area between the Yom and Nan Rivers (Phitsanulok, Sukhothai and Uttaradit provinces) to address the core problem 
that climate-induced droughts and floods threatening agriculture livelihoods and infrastructure in Yom and Nan river 
basins, and increases flood risks downstream’ (see problem statement in Theory of Change below). The targeted river 
basins are key to Thailand’s flood risk management and irrigation system, and host some of the most vulnerable groups 
of society. Therefore, this project will address the following root causes and barriers to mitigate flood and drought risks, 
and enhance the resilience of local communities: 
 
Lack of reliable data and risk information on localized climate change impacts available  
44. 
The knowledge base on risk information and climate change impact projections is growing (e.g. the first version 
of IRDM39 tool has been developed), however, little reliable and localized projections for changing temperature regimes 
and precipitation patterns for shorter time periods exists. This reduces the ability to predict droughts, precipitation 
patterns and other weather-related information to enable a climate change responsive water and irrigation 
management, as well as to plan adaptation strategies and climate-responsive cropping patterns.  With this data, climate 
information can be further tailored for local level, as well as household level, planning.  
 
Insufficient coordination between water and agriculture sectors for effective integrated water resources management 
45. 
As detailed in its NDC, a top adaptation priority for Thailand is to promote and strengthen of IWRM practices 
to achieve water security, effective water resource management to mitigate flood and drought.  To achieve this, greater 
coordination is needed across sectors, in particular water and agriculture as the most vulnerable to climate change.     
 
Limited technical and financial capacity for the climate-informed upgrade existing infrastructure  
46. 
As an extreme risk country 40 , RTG faces daunting costs related to both response to extreme events 
exacerbated by climate change, as well as investments in adaptation. Existing water management infrastructure must 
be upgraded, to better prepare for drier dry seasons and to better manage increased rainfall during shorter periods. 
Current engineering designs for the planned upgrade to water management infrastructure (i.e. regulators) do not 
adequately take into account climate change, and could result in higher than expected repair costs or a short life of the 
investments (e.g. infrastructure needing replacement within a short period).   
 
47. 
A review of existing engineering designs is needed, and enhancement as necessary, to ensure resilience to 
climate change – ensuring efficiency and effective use of public resources.  Further, due to the high upfront costs of 
water management infrastructure, and long-term operations and maintenance (O&M) costs, financial support is needed 
to complement government investment.      
 
Limited use of EbA measures to complement grey infrastructure for water management  
48. 
Thailand generally uses grey infrastructure (e.g. regulators) for water management.  Existing plans and designs 
for the Yom-Nan project area and the Greater Chao Phraya River Basin Area do not include EbA measures. RID seeks 
to complement grey infrastructure with ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) measures however RID experience in this 
area is limited.  Combining grey infrastructure with EbA measures would not only support critical ecosystem services, 
but also reduce overall costs (i.e. lower upfront investment and long-term O&M, compared to a purely grey infrastructure 
investment).     
 
49. 
The project area is heavily altered by small settlements, farms, and cultivation; villages are scattered throughout 
the catchment area with many irrigation canals cutting through the area. While the area is significantly utilized, there 
are still different ecological habitats present. Lines of bushes and trees can be found quite often in between paddy 
fields or other farmland areas. As existing water management systems must be enhanced to be more climate-resilient, 
there is an opportunity to also introduce EbA measures to complement planned grey infrastructure investments by RID. 
An assessment on the possibility to integrate EbA measures was conducted during the development of this proposal

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 13 OF 65 
 
 
(see Annex 22). The assessment concluded that there is a high potential to integrate EbA approaches in the project 
area, with specific recommendations include:   
• 
Application of modeling comprising of three different methodologies each of which build on each other:  
hydrological river basin and water allocation modelling, hydraulic modelling, and erosion and sediment 
transport; 
• 
River restoration, with duration curves and depth-discharge curves informed by the above models; and 
• 
And the conduct of a fish survey to inform fish passes. 
 
50. 
With targeted support to RID in planning and implementing EbA measures in the GCF project site area, RID 
can then replicate or expand on use of EbA, to complement grey infrastructure, in their plans for the Greater Chao 
Phraya River Basin Area.   
 
Farmers lack of access to climate information and support to adapt to climate change 
51. 
Closely related to the lack of localized climate information, there is currently a constrained access to information 
and support about climate change and adaptation measures to communities and farmers. While communities are 
already experiencing flood and drought related impacts, without information and support there is a risk for maladaptive 
measures (e.g. such as ground water extraction for water intensive crops). Diversification to climate-resilient agricultural 
practices (e.g. adapting drought tolerant crop varieties, techniques using short cycle crops) and water saving 
technologies (e.g. on farm ponds) requires specific knowledge, skills, and technology transfer that is limited, as 
communities lack the technical assistance and support owing to limited capacities among peers and local extension 
staff.  
 
52. 
Importantly, with adaptation or change comes uncertainty. Farmers lack sufficient information on markets, and 
training on accessing new markets, to make informed decisions on changes in crops, agriculture practices and related 
risk mitigation measures.  
 
53. 
Below is the theory of change for the project:

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 14 OF 65 
 
 
 
  
Figure 5: Theory of Change 
 
 
Project objective, outcomes, and impacts 
 
54. 
The target communities of the proposed project are in three provinces of the northern region of Thailand of the 
Greater Chao Phraya River Basin, in the confluence of the Yom and Nan Rivers: Phitsanulok, Sukhothai, and 
Uttaradit. These provinces were selected by RID under MoAC, in consultation with the Office of Natural Resources 
and Environmental Policy and Planning (ONEP), given the impacts of climate change to the area’s critical function in 
water management in Thailand. The objective of the proposed project is to adapt water management and agricultural 
livelihoods in the Yom and Nan river basins to climate change induced extreme weather events (droughts and 
floods). The Fund level impacts of the project are an increased resilience of: i) infrastructure and the built environment 
to climate change threats; iii) ecosystems and ecosystem services; iii) most vulnerable people and communities; and 
iv) health and well-being, and food and water security. The GCF-related outcome of the project is Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks of green and grey water infrastructure, and agricultural 
livelihoods in the Yom and Nan river basins. The paradigm shift is to move towards climate risk informed water and 
livelihood management through tailored climate information, technical support, and the adoption of innovative 
technologies and practices, such as ecosystem-based adaptation. 
 
55. 
First the project will address the barriers related to the low availability of reliable, localized, and easily 
accessible climate and risk information, as well as the improve the inter-ministerial coordination and distribution of risk

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 15 OF 65 
 
 
information to end-users. To do this the project will: (i) strengthen institutional capacities for generating climate risk 
information, which will directly support the continuous water management and irrigation planning; (ii) enable to 
mainstream climate change risk information into public planning processes through improved inter-ministerial 
coordination; and (iii) disseminate climate change information to the community and household levels. This includes 
upgrading the IRDM tool to provide forecasts for shorter time frames (e.g. monthly or weekly) and tailor and distribute 
risk information to the needs of subnational decision makers and farmers/ end-users. This can, ultimately, enable 
farmers to enhance their resilience against climate change induced droughts and floods through better water 
management planning. 
 
56. 
Second, the project will address the barriers of limited technical and financial capacities to cope with intensifying 
climate change induced risks for water management and irrigation infrastructure in northern Chao Phraya river basin. 
GCF resources will be used to match public finance to: (i) strengthen water infrastructures and its management in the 
Yom and Nan river basins, to reduce flood risks and increase resilience of agriculture dependent communities to 
droughts; and (ii) enable RID to expand their capacities to implement ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) in their 
planning and implementation approaches, which has the potential to be transformational to Thailand’s traditional 
planning approaches that solely focussed on hard structure interventions. 
 
57. 
Finally, GCF resources will help to overcome barriers related to a low awareness of and access to resilient 
livelihood practices, lack of technical and financial capacities, and limited adoption and scalability hindering farmers to 
diversify to climate-resilient livelihoods and implement adaptive livelihood strategies. GCF resources, combined with 
leveraged RGT co-financing, will ensure that: (i) generate localized climate assessments and adaptation options 
analysis to capacitate local decision makers and agriculture based communities to integrate climate change risk 
information into climate change resilient livelihood and adaptation action planning; (ii) promoting EbA on-farm solutions 
to enhance drought and flood resilience of local farmer communities; and (iii) support farmer household capacity to 
access markets for climate resilient agriculture products. A particular focus will be given on creating linkages of local 
producer groups and farmers with buyers, including the promotion of cooperatives and organic products. 
Complementing this effort, Krungsri Bank will provide training to farmers on financial literacy, so that they are more 
aware, and can better avail themselves, of market research and financial mechanisms. 
 
58. 
Through these inter-related activities, the project will strengthen the resilience of water infrastructure and 
agriculture-reliant communities to cope with increasing climate change induced floods and droughts in the Yom and 
Nan river basins – benefiting communities and private sector through reduced damages or disruption, and relieving 
pressure on public resources related to flood and drought relief programmes. The project will also enhance the capacity 
of the RID to incorporate climate change risk information into water management planning processes and integrate 
EbA approaches into their portfolio of adaptive solutions, alongside traditionally used hard infrastructure interventions. 
Furthermore, the project will improve the quality of and access to climate change risk information available for decision 
makers at different levels and local communities. This will lead to the overall GCF, project-level outcome of 
strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks of green and grey infrastructure, and agricultural 
livelihoods in the Yom and Nan river basins. 
 
59. 
This greener, integrated approach is new for Thailand.  Best practices of the project will inform water and 
agriculture planning in the broader Chao Phraya river basin, as well as other river basins in the country.  As poverty in 
Thailand has a largely rural profile, the project can have wide impacts on addressing the climate challenges faced by 
the most vulnerable in the country.  Through partnerships and innovative approach of the project, there is significant 
potential for enhanced engagement with the private and finance sectors.  This is already happening through with the 
new parallel financing from the Bank of Agriculture and Agriculture Cooperatives (BAAC) – a line of credit of USD 16 
million through financial products with incentives for farmers to practice climate resilience.  A letter of commitment is 
included in Annex 13.  GCF resources will support the design of the financial product.     
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) 
Project objective, outcomes and impacts 
 
60. 
The target communities and schemes of this proposed project are in three Thai provinces of the northern region 
of the Greater Chao Phraya River Basin, in the confluence of the Yom and Nan Rivers (see Figure 6): Phitsanulok, 
Sukhothai and Uttaradit.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 16 OF 65 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Provincial map of Thailand. The larger area highlighted by a red dashed line is the larger Chao Phraya river basin. The 
smaller circle within that area is the site of the proposed GCF project, between the Yom and Nan rivers.   
 
61. 
These provinces were selected by RID under MoAC, in consultation with the Office of Natural Resources and 
Environmental Policy and Planning (ONEP), given the provinces’ high exposure to climate change induced floods and 
droughts, and the area’s critical function in water management in Thailand. The project site is situated in the lower area 
between two of the four main rivers that form the Chao Phraya River system - the Yom and the Nan rivers. Their basins 
provide a water retention function, slowing the flow of water before it gets to the country’s central plain, and ultimately 
the Bangkok metropolitan area and the Gulf of Thailand.  
 
62. 
With co-financing and GCF financing, the project seeks to a) support climate informed water management, 
planning and investment, and b) support vulnerable farmers in reducing volatility to changing climatic conditions.  and 
planning project seeks to enhance climate-informed and integrated planning as well as reduce disruption to smallholder 
farmers.   will achieve the objective through three complementary outputs: 
 
• 
Output 1:  Enhance climate and risk informed planning in the water and agricultural sectors through 
improved climate information and cross sectoral coordination 
• 
Output 2:  Improve water management through strengthened infrastructure complemented by EbA 
measures, for greater resilience to climate change impacts 
• 
Output 3:  Reduce volatility of agriculture livelihoods in drought and flood prone areas through strengthened 
extension support and local planning, investment in on-farm adaptation measures and greater access to 
finance and markets 
 
63. 
The project will complement ongoing efforts from RTG to enhance the resilience of the country and its citizens 
against climate change induced extreme weather events, such as floods and droughts. More specifically it will contribute 
to climate-risk informed decision making in the fields of water management and livelihoods planning processes through 
enhancing the knowledge-base on climate change, making information easily accessible for a spectrum of stakeholders 
and improve inter-ministerial coordination and information sharing. The project, furthermore, will reduce the flood risks 
within and downstream of the project site through green and grey infrastructure developments/ enhancements 
(including through ecosystem-based adaptation approaches), and increases the amount of water available for irrigation 
for local farmers during dry seasons, which are projected to increase in length due to climate change. The agriculture-
based communities in the project areas will be supported in shifting towards more climate change resilient livelihoods

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 17 OF 65 
 
 
 
41 Considering a total of 124,095 households in Bang Rakam, Prom Piram, Pichai, Kong Krailas and an average of 3.8 people per 
household. 
42 The Sufficiency Economy Philosophy (SEP) originates from the development philosophy of the late King Bhumibol Adulyadej (Rama 9) and 
builds on three pillars: (i) Moderation; (ii) Reasonableness; and (iii) Risk Management. In addition to the SEP, the New Theory of Agriculture 
(NTA) was developed to help Thai farmers to build resilience against economic crisis and natural disasters. Proposed adaptation actions 
under the NTA include multi-cropping systems, diversified land-use, focus on households rather than commercialisation (mass production), 
and promotion of resilient seed varieties. 
through the adoption of agriculture technologies and practices (e.g. using drought resilient crops), and integration of 
climate risk information in their decision-making processes. 
 
 
Rationale and methodology for targeting of the project areas and populations  
64. 
The project targets to enhance the water access and flood resilience of, particularly agricultural-based, 
households in the Yom and Nan river basins in light of intensifying climate change impacts. The targeting for the total 
direct beneficiaries is based on the entirety of people directly residing in the districts that form the Yom and Nan river 
basins, due to their high vulnerability to drought and flood impacts. The population of the targeted districts (solely based 
on population figures of each sub-districts within the proposed project site), which leads to a total of 62,000 people as 
direct beneficiaries (for output 2 and 3). The targeting for the direct beneficiaries for livelihood interventions is anchored 
in identifying the people most exposed to observed and projected drought and flood impacts, which are those household 
members currently engaged in agricultural income generating activities. The indirect beneficiaries, benefiting from 
improved water management and flood control, will comprise of the entire population in the proposed districts (471,561 
people)41, as well as the 25,000,000 people of the greater Chao Phraya river basin area. 
 
 
Output 1:  Enhance climate and risk informed planning in the water and agricultural sectors through improved 
climate information and cross sectoral coordination 
(GCF Grant: USD 1.683 million, Co-financing USD 1.532 million) 
65. 
GCF resources will support the improvement of climate risk-responsive decision making in Thailand through 
the enhanced quality and availability of tailored climate information for both water management and agriculture 
livelihoods planning. This can be reached through improved climate projections and the dissemination of tailored to 
relevant stakeholders to support the integration into policies and planning across sectors (especially the water and 
agriculture sectors) – comparing supply to use and demand, and making adjustments in line with the philosophy of 
sufficiency economy 42. This Output will also support inter-ministerial coordination, enabling stronger collaboration 
between key decision-making bodies in Thailand’s water and agriculture sectors to incorporate climate risks and 
adaptation strategies in their sectoral planning processes. Importantly, tailored climate information will be generated 
and disseminated to agriculture households for application in household level planning.  
 
Activity 1.1. Strengthening capacity to generate tailored climate information to inform water management and 
agriculture planning  
 
66. 
This Activity aims to strengthen the climate risk-informed planning and implementation of water and agriculture 
sector interventions. The work under this Output will build upon the IRDM tool, which can forecast the amount of rainfall 
and inflow of water into reservoirs on the rainy season and optimize water release schedules for a 12 months ahead (a 
tool jointly developed by integrated data sources from several Thai organisations to enhance the utilization of weather 
information and projections to inform water management and irrigation practices throughout the Chao Phraya River 
Basin. Under this output the IRDM tool will be updated to increase the level of forecasting precision as well as generate 
projections for shorter time frames than annually (current standard of the tool).  The climate analysis will also inform 
the necessary upgrades to existing infrastructure, namely the canal and regulator network in the Yom and Nan river 
basins. Per the recently-conducted feasibility study undertaken by the Royal Irrigation Department, in order to 
adequately regulate water during wet and dry season, water gates need to be upgraded and existing canals need to 
be enlarged to ensure greater climate resilience.  Other plans to be supported by Activity 1.1 include Agri-Map (a 
mandatory and key zoning policy of MoAC, endorsed by the National Economic and Social Development Council 
(NESDC)), as well as support agriculture planning at the farmer level.    This will require procurement of computing and 
measurement equipment and related training to technical staff in its use.  Training will also be provided to RID and 
TMD to tailor products with information relevant for water management, with consideration of agriculture needs, 
including rainfall, runoff, temperature, and evapotranspiration.  The Thai Meteorological Department and RID will 
develop the national scope. They will engage the national and sub-national researchers on climate change fields (policy, 
technical modelling) to the activity.                                                                                                                                
 
67. Sub-activities include:

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 18 OF 65 
 
 
1.1.1. 
Development of Terms of Reference (ToR) for the climate information processing unit mandate 
1.1.2. 
Procurement of hardware and software for enhanced generation of climate and environmental information, 
and related training 
1.1.3. 
Technical training to 30 staff from TMD, RID and relevant agencies on integration of climate change into 
water management planning, including consideration of agriculture needs  
1.1.4. 
Development of tailored climate information products to inform planning, and one-to-two week, monthly, 
seasonal, annual and long-term climate forecast models 
 
Activity 1.2. Facilitating inter-ministerial coordination for climate-informed and integrated planning 
 
68. 
In order to create an enabling environment to mainstream climate change considerations into planning 
processes in public entities of relevance to water management and livelihoods development, the project aims to 
promote the inter-ministerial coordination and flow of information. This Activity will support coordination between the 
Thai Meteorological Department, the Hydro and Agro Informatics Institute, the Geo-Informatics and Space Technology 
Development Agency, the Department of Water Resources, and the Hydrographic Department of the Royal Thai Navy 
for improved information sharing. The project will provide technical support in developing standard operating 
procedures (SOPs) for the related committee for information sharing across government stakeholders, established 
under the TMD mechanism/forum. This will entail reviewing existing practices for dissemination of climate information, 
revising in consultation with partners and related sensitization.   
 
69. 
Support from the project will ensure consideration of existing committees to ensure complementarity, including 
integration with ongoing national adaptation plan (NAP) processes, which include capacity building and coordination 
efforts.  As this project is an adaptation priority for the RTG, the project activities feed into national and international 
commitment on climate action.  The Government has established the National Committee on Climate Change Policy 
(NCCC), chaired by the Prime Minister. The NCCC is responsible for (i) national climate change policy and strategy; 
(ii) determination of national positions in international negotiations under the UNFCCC and any relevant international 
agreements; and (iii) monitoring and evaluating implementation results of government agencies, as stated in the 
national policy and strategy. There are four sub-committees under the NCCC, namely, the Sub-Committee on Climate 
Change Policy and Planning Integration, the Sub-Committee on Climate Change Knowledge and Database, the Sub-
Committee on Climate Change Negotiation and International Cooperation, and the Sub-Committee on Action for 
Climate Empowerment and Public Relations. Each Ministry has issued an order for the appointment of a Climate 
Change Focal Officer to ensure inter-ministerial coordination. According to the reporting line, the Director General of 
RID reports to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives (MoAC). Senior Management 
at RID is part of the Sub-Committees, and through this role can help ensure knowledge sharing, lessons learned from 
the project. The Sub-Committee members will be invited to the project seminar/workshop bi-annually under the Activity 
1.2.   In addition, Thailand’s National Adaptation Plan (NAP) is under the Cabinet approval process and will then submit 
to the UNFCCC. UNDP/GCF is also supporting ONEP to update and implementation of the NAP. ONEP is expected to 
get an approval by the end of this year.  
 
70. 
Sub-activities under this activity thus include: 
1.2.1. 
Development of SOPs for sharing of climate information across relevant departments  
1.2.2. 
Workshops and meetings for sensitization and collaboration in sharing of information and identifying 
opportunity for collaboration and complementarity 
 
Activity 1.3. Expanding access to climate information for application at the household level 
 
71. 
Activity 1.3. focuses on the last mile of dissemination of climate information, expanding access of information 
to the public, and in particular tailored climate information for agriculture households. Various communication means 
will be developed and employed to ensure climate information reaches a wide audience.   The website will be registered 
under the RID; RID will own and manage the website. KMUTNB would proceed with copyright registration of the app 
under their institution, potentially together with RID. This point to be further consulted and finalized during the project 
inception. Intellectual property rights related to the app and website will be captured under the related clauses of 
cooperation agreements with partners.   
 
72. 
Importantly, consideration will be given to what information is needed and how it is communicated, so that it is 
understood and applicable.  To that end, an communications strategy will be developed, followed by the generation of 
communications products.  RID will disseminate the tailored climate change information. Target groups include 
departments with MoAC (RID and agriculture, the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment, Office of Water 
Management Policy, Thai Meteorological Department, the Hydro and Agro Informatics Institute, the Geo-Informatics

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 19 OF 65 
 
 
and Space Technology Development Agency, the Department of Water Resources, the Hydrographic Department of 
the Royal Thai Navy, financial institutions such as Krungsri Bank and the Bank of Agriculture and Agricultural 
Cooperative (BAAC), as well as agriculture households.   
 
73. 
Sub-activities include: 
1.3.1. 
Development of communication strategy for dissemination of information, including timing and media 
1.3.2. 
Development of information briefs and reports released for circulation in local and social media 
(dissemination informed by communications strategy) 
1.3.3. 
Development of smartphone and Line app with climate information that can be applied at the agriculture 
household level  
1.3.4. 
Development of complementary website for interactive information in line with information apps or 
households 
  
 
Output 2:    Improve water management through strengthened infrastructure complemented by EbA measures, 
for greater resilience to climate change impacts 
(GCF Grant: USD 9.640 million, Co-financing USD 13.485 million) 
74. 
The second Output focuses on complementing RID investment to improve water management in Yom-Nan 
river basin area. GCF resources will support the necessary assessments to ensure that existing designs for the canal 
regulators/flood gates at 13 schemes (see Figure 7 below) are adequate given future climate projections.  Given the 
high upfront costs of the basin-wide investment required to adapt to climate change, this will ensure long term 
sustainability of government investment. GCF will also complement government co-financing and planned long term 
investment by RID in the entire Yom-Nan river basin by supporting the upgrade of infrastructure at two of the planned 
schemes (13 schemes in total).   
 
75. 
Water management in Thailand is largely dependent on grey infrastructure, although there are best practices 
available where use of reservoirs has been established (i.e. Monkey Cheek). GCF resources will support RID in 
identifying and implementing ecosystems-based approaches to complement the planned grey infrastructure.  While 
ecosystems-based measures alone cannot provide address all climate risk challenges, complementing grey 
infrastructure with ecosystems-based solutions can be cost-efficient solution while also generating environmental co-
benefits.  This integration of EbA approaches has the potential to be transformational to Thailand’s traditional planning 
concepts for water management that focus widely on hard structure interventions, through upscaling across the 13 
schemes in the Yom-Nan river basin area and the greater Chao Phraya River Basin.  
 
Activity 2.1.   Climate-informed engineering designs for the 13 schemes of the Yom-Nan river basin, and 
upgrade of 2 water infrastructure  
 
76. 
The climate information and enhanced coordination of Output 1 will inform the review of existing designs for 
water infrastructure, ensuring they are adequate given climate change and importantly that they are both responsive to 
the needs of people in the immediate Yom and Nan river basin area, as well as adequate to perform the function of 
water management as part of the greater Chao Phraya River Basin under projected climate change.  Based on the 
review, enhancements will be made to the existing designs as necessary, including those to be supported through co-
financing under this project.   
 
77. 
While the review of designs will be for the all 13 schemes, GCF resources will only support the actual upgrades 
at one scheme at Khlong Muang Chang – which is considered as a critical scheme by RID as part of the canal and 
regulatory network in the Yom and Nan river basins.  GCF resources will cover the upgrade construction cost of the 
two floodgates, size 6.00 * 5.00 meters, two-drainage type - increasing drainage capacity from 50 cubic meters/second 
to 100 cubic meters/second for flood mitigation and water storage for agriculture and consumption in Kong Kailash 
district in Sukhothai, and the Bang Rakam district in Phitsanulok. The cost is estimated at USD 5 million and includes 
contractual services and equipment for the canal head regulator and related appurtenant works. Ownership of related 
immovable objects will ultimately be with RID. 
 
78. 
These upgrades alone however will not be sufficient, therefore the RTG through RID co-financing will support 
dredging canal and strengthening embankment at the Klong Muang Chang canal (USD 3 million), and operation and 
maintenance in Yom-Nan river basin (USD 4.24 million) as well as reconstruction of the Khlong Ta Kay culvert located 
in the Phrom Piram district, Phitsanulok province (USD 4 million). Further, RTG through RID has allocated resources 
for operations and maintenance of canals and regulators, including: maintenance of irrigation canals, headwork and

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 20 OF 65 
 
 
 
43 Monkey Cheek is a flood-control concept initiated by His Majesty the King of Thailand, who observed that most monkeys, when they 
obtain bananas, usually store them in their mouths, and then gradually chew and swallow them. The concept of water detention is to 
temporarily store excessive water during flooding period and afterwards gradually drain it, once the floods recede. 
road; weed eradication; canal dredging; ecosystem improvement; and related administrative costs. The dredging of 
canals to a depth that can drain these low-lying areas, will improve connection of waterways to each other. 
 
Schemes for Proposed Infrastructure Investments 
 
Figure 7: Planned upgrade by RID of water infrastructure in the Yom-Nan River basin 
 
79. 
Together, GCF and co-financing will improve the drainage capacity for these low-lying areas – protecting the 
areas during the wet season, and increasing water storage capacity in the canals for the dry season.  With the review 
of engineering designs, informed by the climate information under Output 1, there will be assurance that water 
management investments by government or other resources will be climate resilient and therefore cost-effective. 
 
80. Sub-activities include: 
2.1.1. 
Technical support to review and enhance existing engineering designs for the 13 schemes of the Yom-Nan 
river basin area, to ensure adequate integration of climate change  
2.1.2. 
Construction activities to upgrade of 2 canal head regulators along Khlong Muang Chang and Khlong Ta 
Kay Reg in the Yom-Nan river basin area 
 
Activity 2.2.  Complementing of grey infrastructure with EbA measures and Integration of EbA approaches into 
water management policy and planning 
 
81. 
Activity 2.2 focuses on the promotion of EbA approaches in Thailand in order to widen their range of adaptation 
options in the field of water management to cope with climate change induced pressures. The project seeks to retrofit 
ecosystem-based adaptation processes into the area, through the re-introduction and/or strengthening of integrated 
farming practices (such as rice-fish management), as well as the re-introduction and strengthening of vegetation and 
waterflow systems, within the reinforcement of the existing canal channels and large irrigation system structures already 
in place. Given that much of the project is focused on the retention of water in the upper tracts of the project area – 
some areas will have water areas increased (e.g. monkey cheeks43) whereby wetlands management techniques can 
be employed, and the re-introduction of some of the original fauna and flora can take place. The ‘greening’ of reservoirs

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 21 OF 65 
 
 
and canals is likely to take place through use in part of riparian vegetation sections – to act in combination with sediment 
filtration systems for more effective soil management and anti-topsoil runoff loss solutions. Ecosystem-based 
Adaptation (EbA) measures, in terms of improvements to water infrastructure through restoration principles include 
vegetating river banks, using erosion management techniques combined with vegetation buffers to conserve soil and 
maintain water quality, the slowing down of water flow, and the recharge of groundwater sources during periods high 
precipitation for water access during dry periods; soil conservation measures, among others. Appropriate measures 
will be introduced to complement the existing water management to slow water flows during flood periods and enable 
water to permeate to the ground, and to mitigate potential environmental impacts from the construction of two proposed 
hard infrastructures. These may include: wetland / floodplain / oxbow lake restoration; living weir; riparian zone 
rehabilitation / bank stabilization  by vetiver grass, buffer zones, sedimentation traps and/or an appropriate combination 
of measures (see Figure below).  Support to national partners will also include capacity building for EbA, integration of 
agriculture and biodiversity into EbA measures, floodplain development and conservation, river restoration, fish 
migration structures, and longitudinal connectivity of the Yom River. 
 
 
Figure 8: Example of a typical cross-section with berms and vegetation 
 
 
82. 
Indicative EbA measures used for proposal development are based on the variable factors of the potential EbA 
features and the physical profile of each location, and the related costs per site for budgeting are based on previous 
EbA interventions in Thailand. Assessments and analyses preceding selection will consider interventions which are 
effective while benefiting the most, in terms of both area and beneficiaries. Since the EbA measures will be undertake 
in and around the cultivated areas, the spatial coverage is indeed estimated based on these areas. The estimation will 
be vetted and refined during the participatory process with the communities whereby the final determination of the EbA 
measures will be made. A comprehensive Annex 18(b) - Lessons Learned from Baseline Projects has been included 
in the FP package detailing the process by which EbA measures will be identified/selected. In addition, the proposal 
package includes the safeguards measures to be put in place to protect farmers in the area. Please refer to Annex 6(b) 
– Environmental and Social Management Framework. 
 
Project location 
Target area 
Local Administration 
Units 
EbA feature 
Cost 
estimation 
Cultivated 
area 
Yom-Nan 
Operation and 
Maintenance 
Project under the 
Royal Irrigation 
Department, 
Ministry of 
Agriculture and 
Agricultural 
Cooperation 
(MoAC) 
Klong Mueang 
Chang  
 
 
 
 
Klong Takae 
Sukhothai province,  
Khlongkrairas District,  
Kainok Sub-district, 
Dongdueai Sub-district 
 
 
Phisanulok province, 
Sukhothai province, 
Phromphiram District, 
Khlongkrairas District, 
Wangwoon Sub-district, 
Promphiram Sub-
district, Kokrat Sub-
district 
- wetland / 
floodplain / oxbow 
lake restoration  
 - living weir 
- riparian zone 
rehabilitation / 
bank stabilization  
by vetiver grass      
- buffer zones          
- sedimentation 
trap => and/or an 
appropriate 
combination of 
those 
Cost of the 3 
EbA measures   
is based on 
different EbA 
features and 
geography of 
final locations   
27,936 rai 
 
 
 
 
 
58,964 rai

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 22 OF 65 
 
 
 
44 https://www.adaptationcommunity.net/ecosystem-based-adaptation/eba-mainstreaming-cycle/ 
 
 
83. 
Following best practices and lessons learned, final selection of the EbA measures will follow a consultative 
process, informed by vulnerability and economic assessments. GIZ is a Responsible Party for implementing this activity.  
GIZ’s framework for mainstreaming EbA employs an iterative six-step approach (known as the adaptation 
mainstreaming cycle, see below). It also provides tools and methods that for each step. This guidance is in line with 
the Voluntary guidelines for the design and effective implementation of ecosystem-based approaches to climate change 
adaptation and disaster risk reduction upon request by the CBD Conference of the Parties (COP), in its decision XIII/4, 
to which GIZ contributed44.  Further, this approach is consistent with national regulations and policies.  On 2 February 
2021, the NWRC has announced a new regulation that ‘In any area of water resource management initiatives, 
information must be provided sufficiently to the private sector, relevant people and communities to create awareness 
that will be useful in participating in the management of water resources in the area’.  The consultative selection process 
will also formalize responsibility and accountability among district authorities, the Department of Water Resources and 
RID for maintenance of the investments.  Should identified measures exceed the budget available in the GCF project, 
additional resources will be requested from government partners.   
 
 
Figure 9: Adaptation mainstreaming cycle 
 
84. 
A climate-sensitive IWRM approach needs to be applied in order to improve the framework conditions for 
sustainable water management and allow for better mainstreaming of adaptation targets, incl. EbA, into the water 
sector. The concept of climate-sensitive IWRM focusses on strengthening capacities in the planning process of water 
related bodies while integrating climate change adaptation needs in policy frameworks (national level) as well as in the 
planning and design of water management measures at river basin scale (sub-national level). This includes a 
comprehensive capacity development strategy using improved diagnostic analysis as well as emphasizing the 
prioritization and budgeting of most suitable adaptation actions. It will be essential to raise the awareness of the direct 
and co-benefits of ecosystems, their economic value and critical role for adaptation to climate change. To contribute to 
the overall monitoring and evaluation of the impact of the different measures in terms of water security, on the flood 
situation and on socio-economic developments digital tools (incl. UAVs/ drones) shall be applied. The digital solution 
based M&E methodology that will enable monitoring quantitative and qualitative changes at river basin scale is 
established and operated in collaboration with academia and linked to local and national monitoring system(s) of 
institutions like HII for the documentation of and reporting on climate change adaptation actions in the water sector.   
 
85. 
The EbA measures are to be integrated in a climate-sensitive River Basin Management approach (reflected in 
the River Basin Master Plan – RBMP) that builds on climate risk and vulnerability information and an integrated water 
resources management (IWRM) concept. Quantity & quality of societal benefits are to be reflected as well (in terms of 
impact on livelihoods e.g. source of income, reduced risks as well as in terms of ecosystem services e.g. reduced

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 23 OF 65 
 
 
erosion, extreme event buffering for flood and drought situations).  In close cooperation with the Thai water sector GIZ 
is currently in the process of developing an EbA Guidebook as a national standard for the systematic identification, 
prioritization and selection of EbA measures at river basin scale. The EbA Guidebook is to be complemented by a Code 
of Practice (CoP) for selected EbA measures that will cover specific design issues. The EbA Guidebook and CoP are 
to be finalized by end of 2021 and are planned to be published under the Thai Office of the National Water Resources 
(ONWR). RID and DWR are participating in the development of the EbA Guidebook and CoP.  The national standard 
builds besides others on the Guidebook on Climate Risk Assessment for Ecosystem-based Adaptation and joint cause-
impact chain analysis as key elements of a joint prioritization and selection process for effective EbA measures.  
https://www.adaptationcommunity.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/giz-eurac-unu-2018-en-guidebook-climate-risk-
asessment-eba.pdf.     
 
86. Sub-activities include: 
2.2.1. 
Conduct of diagnostic analysis incl. vulnerability and risk assessment, modelling, cause-impact chains and 
economic evaluation 
2.2.2. 
Based on the diagnostic analysis conduct joint prioritization of EbA solutions, finalization of design for three 
selected EbA measures, including related training and guidance materials 
2.2.3. 
Implementation of identified ecosystem-based adaptation measures 
2.2.4. 
Integration of ecosystem-based adaptation measures into water management rehabilitation plans: soil 
conservation measures, floodplain development and conservation, river restoration, fish migration passes, 
and longitudinal connection of the Yom River 
2.2.5. 
Documentation of lessons learned in terms of linking local (river basin) level planning and implementation 
experience with national level policy developments [contribution to the implementation of the NAP/NDC]  
 
 
Output 3:   Reduce volatility of agriculture livelihoods in drought and flood prone areas through strengthened 
extension support and local planning, investment in on-farm adaptation measures and greater access to 
finance and markets 
(GCF Grant: USD 5.617 million, Co-financing USD 0.361 million) 
87. 
The project area is dominated by agriculture activities.  Farmers in the area are particularly vulnerable to 
climatic conditions and would be directly impacted by any interventions in the area.  It is critical therefore that 
interventions in the project area engage farmers, and the project is informed by their experiences and needs.

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 24 OF 65 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Land use map of project area 
 
88. 
During consultations, farmers expressed the need for specific support to improve their climate resilience, (i.e. 
not just information on the design, but tailored support on implementation of measures to better cope with changing 
climatic conditions). Farmers requested guidance for on-farm measures for water storage during the dry season, 
support on drought resilient species and any related changes to agriculture practices to ensure viability of crops and 
help with business skills for better market access.  To that end, under Output 3, GCF will support training to inform 
climate-informed decision-making related to agriculture practices, technical expertise and implementation of on-farm 
interventions for farmers in the immediate project site, with related training materials that can reach across the 
agriculture sector in Thailand through Farmer Field Training (FFT).   
 
89. 
While the majority of farmers in the project sites grow rice, there are different types of agriculture and agriculture 
land in the area.  Interventions and training will be tailored to what is suitable and proven effective in those conditions. 
 
Province 
Total Land 
Paddy land 
Upland field 
Orchard and 
perennial crop 
Vegetable and 
ornamental 
plants 
Other 
agricultural 
land use 
Sukhothai 
1,823,937 
1,215,015 
393,530 
128,331 
9,548 
77,514 
Phitsanulok 
3,057,529 
1,777,793 
727,441 
345,998 
14,718 
191,579 
Uttaradit 
1,248,199 
680,842 
314,762 
153,599 
12,663 
86,332 
Total 
6,129,665 
3,673,650 
1,435,733 
627,928 
36,929 
355,425 
Percentage 
100.0 
59.93 
23.42 
10.24 
0.6 
5.8 
 
90. 
The Output will be implemented in partnership and coordination with King Mongkut's University of Technology 
North Bangkok (KMUTNB) and Krugsri Bank. KMUTNB will help to deliver training to farmers on applying water forecast 
based on climate information to household level agriculture practices; and Krungsri Bank, through co-financing

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 25 OF 65 
 
 
 
45 It should be noted that alternate wetting and drying (AWD) in Thailand has had mixed results.  Contributing factors included low lying 
areas and shallow groundwater levels, which are both present in the project area.  Roll out of such approaches will be informed by on farm 
conditions and suitability to the location, based on best practices and lessons learned. 
activities, will support farmers in developing their business skills for greater market access. Trainings under this Output 
will be coordinated for cost-savings purposes, but importantly to also ensure that extension officers and farmers get 
most of the collaborative approach of the project – brining together expertise from the water and agriculture 
departments, academia and the finance/private sector, and of course the farmers themselves.   
 
Activity 3.1. Application of climate information in household agriculture planning and strengthening related 
support through extension services 
 
91. 
Effective application of climate information into household agriculture planning will require shifting the crop 
choice and crop calendar to correspond to the changes in temperatures and rainfall patterns.  For this, inter-agency 
coordination at the local, provincial, and central levels is needed to adequately support agriculture households to make 
the necessary changes in order to successfully adapt to climate change.  
 
92. 
Based on the tailored climate information of Output 1 and a close collaboration with the IRDM programme and 
with KMUTNB, GCF resources will support knowledge sharing and training to provincial extension officers from the 
Department of Agricultural Promotion under MoAC and agriculture households on climate change impacts on 
agriculture in the Yom and Nan river basins. GCF resources will support awareness raising, informed adaptation 
measures and training to communities, such as related to appropriate timing for agriculture practices and agriculture 
crops or technologies which are less water-intensive (e.g. precision farming, application of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
(UAV)). Conservation agriculture, on-farm water storage and aquaculture, linkages to market for diversified crop options 
are some of the key supportive measures to improving agricultural livelihood resilience. 
 
93. 
Informed by vulnerability and risk assessment under Output 2 and the climate information of Output 1, district 
level action plans will be developed.  The action plans will also provide a basis for the type of support households in 
the project area will require.  For instance, where assessments indicate water scarcity issues for the village regions of 
the project target area, action plans may include the constructing of on-farm ponds. Agriculture extension officers will 
receive training to support the changing needs of farmers in the area.  
 
94. 
In partnership with King Mongkut's University of Technology North Bangkok (KMUTNB), training will be 
provided to farmers in 22 sub-districts on using and applying the information from the app developed under Output 1.  
Training will include adaptation measures such as, changes to crop choice and crop calendar which may be required 
due to climatic changes, and that result in both reliable productivity as well as more sustainable use of natural resources 
by farmers.   
 
95. 
The project will provide technical support and bring in local experience to share lessons learned and best 
practices related to principles and application of, for example, conservation agriculture, organic agriculture, 
agroecology, integrated farming, as well as water saving approaches such as water saving techniques related to rice, 
such as system of rice intensification (SRI) to respond to drier conditions and changing rainfall patterns45. 
 
96. 
Technical support applies to both extension services and Farmer Field Schools.  The Famer Field School model 
is established as a platform for farmers to provide practical learning approaches for livelihoods and in replicating good 
practice techniques. Whilst being complementary to the Agricultural Extension Services approach and provision, the 
Farm Field School differs in that it uses participatory teaching methods and is specific to adults and farmer needs – 
providing opportunity for farmer experimentation with different farming techniques and crop varieties, allowing 
demonstration, and generating observation and analysis of the outcomes.   GCF resources will support climate-resilient 
agriculture trainings to farmers through existing farmer field schools, which will serve a long-term mandate of facilitating 
a transformation in agricultural practice through the promotion of ecologically supportive climate smart practices. In 
consultations during project development, farmers expressed training fatigue, asking that training be accompanied by 
on-farm support.  The project will support on-farm and community-based activities, including demonstrations and 
regular follow ups. 
 
97. 
Thailand has recognised the potential for technology to provide positive results for improved production, quality 
and agricultural products, and importantly their ability to be resilient to climate change. The National Strategy -Thailand 
4.0 includes ambitious targets for agriculture, aiming to transit traditional agriculture to smart agriculture and increase 
farmer income by fivefold in 20 years; leveraging innovation and digital transformation. The advancement of technology 
in agriculture is also in line with Thailand’s 20 year Agricultural Development Plan (2017-2036) and “MOAC’s Digital

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 26 OF 65 
 
 
Agriculture Strategic Plan (2017-2021)” (For further details, refer to paragraph 153). Therefore, the project aims to pilot 
precision agriculture with IoT system and the usage of drones (see illustrative figure below).  
 
 
 
 
98. 
Precision agriculture will be employed at five sites, covering 50 farms. IoT sensors will be installed at the farm 
and drones with multispectral camera will be used for agricultural area survey. Data will be collected and processed on 
the cloud server by using the AI from commercial software. The data from IoT sensors and the drones will be linked 
with the result of climate change data forecasting for decision making. Related information could help inform farmers 
to divide their fields into smaller and homogeneous zones, assess water quantity needs and even predict crop yield.  
Equipment will be owned and maintained by the district, and data incorporated into activities under Outputs 1 and 2.  
Results will be documented and disseminated to farmers in the area as well as provinces/districts with similar landscape 
and climatic conditions.  As data can inform district planning, further upscaling can be done by district authorities 
through public resources – consistent with Thailand 4.0 aims to shift Thailand’s agriculture sector towards an innovative-
driven and interconnected sector through the integration of the concepts and approaches from sufficiency economy, 
smart farm, precision agriculture, intensive agriculture, sustainable agriculture, green economy, and agricultural 
biotechnology. A more tailored application of the technology may be upscaled by farmers through available loan 
instruments (for larger farms) or through the credit to be established by BAAC (see Sub-activity 3.2.5).  Trainings will 
be combined where appropriate for efficiency purposes. .  It is to be noted that in the project, district authorities would 
be responsible for O&M for this intervention and related resource commitments (e.g., personnel/finance) would be 
confirmed before roll out of interventions. 
 
 
It is not expected that individual small farmers invest in IoT/drone technology, though groups of farmers may find it 
feasible – bridging the technology gap between small and larger farms; in additional, data collected from IoT can help 
enable policy and planning therefore benefiting smallholder farms.  The use of IoT is meant not only to improve farm 
outcomes (e.g., increased yields), but also to provide information that can help with local planning and resource 
allocation (this is in line with National Strategy-Agriculture 4.0, which aims to shift Thailand’s agriculture sector towards 
an innovation-driven and interconnected sector).  By focusing on smallholder farmers for the intervention, data is 
collected from farms that need the greatest support.  IoT is an innovative technology (approx. $1M of the total GCF

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 27 OF 65 
 
 
 
46 SMART PLATFORM FOR PRECISION AGRICULTURE IN THAILAND, Tanee Sreewongchai and Sutkhet 
Nakasathien, Kasetsart University, Thailand, 2019 
47 A comprehensive solution for landscape-scale sustainable water management in rice 
Synthesis report (v 1.0), International Rice Research Institute, Philippine Rice Research Institute 
48 See USAID Mojokerto project.  
49 See www.unep.org.jp/ietc/publications/techpublications/techpub-8e/articifical.asp  
funding request) that is being adopted by the government across its many investments (government and donor funded) 
and there is a demonstrated commitment for O&M and upscaling that will ensure that these technologies become cost-
effective over time. The proposed project will undertake a technical assessment as part of the implementation of this 
activity to fully inform the design and roll-out, with a view towards replication and scale. The precision agriculture 
interventions will be based on a successful research conducted by the Kasetsart University Thailand in collaboration 
with the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives 46 and international best practices, such as  International Rice 
Research Institute47. These research indicated the IoT system and drones are especially effectively on: 
• 
Assist timing for planting; 
• 
Land preparation; 
• 
Drone usage for remote sensing (crop health data collection) and efficient herbicide / pesticide application if 
this is needed; 
• 
Enabling farmers to effectively manage water levels through better management of soil moisture levels (as 
monitored by IoT sensors);  
• 
Data collection for enabling policy and planning with local government; 
• 
Climate data forecasting for better decision making. 
 
 
99. Sub-activities include: 
3.1.1. 
Assist in the development of district level adaptation action plans through technical assistance 
3.1.2. 
Training of 20 provincial agricultural extension and land development officers in the target provinces to 
undertake climate-risk informed agricultural extension services 
3.1.3. 
Training of agricultural extension and land development officers for the project area in climate-smart 
agricultural practices and management; including appropriate crops and inclusion of climate risk responsive 
farm planning  
3.1.4. 
Precision agriculture demonstration and related dissemination of data 
3.1.5. 
Technical assistance to support farmers to apply cause-effect analysis and climate information to 
agriculture decisions at the household level (e.g. crop choice and crop calendar) 
3.1.6. 
Training through farmer fields schools in each sub-district to complement and support the activities of 
agricultural services (extension) 
 
Activity 3.2.  Implementation of on-farm climate resilient measures to improve drought and flood resilience and 
improved access to finance for sustainable agriculture 
 
100. 
Based on results of cause-effect analysis and related action plans, on-farm water storage and groundwater 
recharge mechanisms will also be explored, including on farm storage/rainwater infrastructure, installation of 
underground water traps 48 , vegetation management to promote recharge, canal and waterway management 
constructed and natural wetlands, and so forth 49. Techniques assist to prevent the dropping of the watershed. 
Groundwater recharge collects the water during the wet season for use during the dry season when the demand is 
highest. In the cases where farmers are using chemical fertilizers and pesticides – artificial recharge must only be done 
using filtration/percolation techniques as to prevent contamination. The project will, however, promote the usage of 
organic alternatives to chemical fertilizers and pesticides.   
 
101. 
To support the EbA measures of Output 2, community nurseries will be established.  The preparation for the 
seedling nursery will be in small pieces of land equipped with water pumps to drain those submerged pieces of land. 
In other cases, the project will support farmers to cooperate and establish community nurseries on higher ground.  
Importantly, this can provide means of longer term support to vulnerable farmers during periods of flooding.   Ownership 
of the community nurseries will be with the famer cooperatives in each sub-district. These cooperatives operate under 
the legal framework, managed by the Cooperative Promotion Department, under the MoCA.  GCF will also support 
investment in small scale equipment to farmers to support EbA through water conservation and better soil management 
(e.g. alternate wetting and drying technologies that measure more precisely the amount of water needed for rice).  
Selection criteria for beneficiaries will be guided by vulnerability and priority, and economic needs of beneficiaries. 
Economic needs include a) elderly farmers, b) newly graduated (unemployed) youth, households with savings not 
higher than 50,000 THB and household income not higher than 100,000 THB, and c) households with usable area not

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 28 OF 65 
 
 
 
50 The Government and UNDP have entered into an agreement to govern UNDP’s assistance to the country (Agreement between the 
United Nations Special Fund and the Royal Thai Government (RTG) concerning Assistance from the Special Fund), which was signed by 
both parties on 4 June 1960. Based on such Agreement, UNDP’s assistance to the RTG shall be made available to the RTG  and shall be 
furnished and received in accordance with the relevant and applicable resolutions and decisions of the competent UNDP organs, and 
 
larger than 50 square meters and total residential area not larger than 5 rai.  In the context of COVID-19 and the related 
economic impact, selection criteria may be revisited.                    
 
102. 
To support farmers with access to finance for investments, GCF resources will also support the co-design of a 
credit instrument for farmers practicing climate resilient agriculture.  BAAC has committed USD 16 million for this effort.  
It has been counted as parallel finance for the proposal and the commitment letter is part of Annex 13.   The BAAC 
credit will be available to small-scale farmers, community farmers/cooperatives, agriculture SMEs, as well as larger 
agricultural businesses. The range of credit available is expected to be 9,000 THB (USD 300) – 10 million THB (USD 
320,000).  The co-design of the credit instrument will follow a consultative process engaging relevant ministries and 
communities, to ensure that the product is one that both supports climate resilient agriculture investments and on-farm 
EbA measures, and suits the needs of farmers in the project area. 
 
103. 
Sub-activities include: 
3.2.1. 
Technical expertise for development of on-farm EbA guidelines for application by farmers   
3.2.2. 
Technical assistance and investment to support to farmers related to on-farm ponds and enhancing on-farm 
measures to protect irrigation channels (e.g. vegetating on farm canal buffer zones, planting shade cover areas 
to minimise evaporation of water along canal ways, and vegetating irrigation infrastructure for flood protection) 
3.2.3. 
Procurement of small scale equipment for farmers to support water conservation and soil management  
3.2.4. 
Establishment of community nurseries to provide alternative livelihood income generation during drought-
flood/non-farming periods, and to cultivate and supply climate smart crops, vegetables, and vegetation species 
for EbA measures implemented in Output 2 
3.2.5. 
Co-design of financial instrument with BAAC to support farmers with adaptation investments towards climate 
resilient agriculture 
 
Activity 3.3.  Capacity building for farmers to support market access for climate resilient agriculture products 
 
104. 
Uncertain yields due to climate change and falling prices for traditional rice varieties create volatility to farmer 
livelihoods. During consultations, farmers shared challenges faced by increased temperatures and changing rainfall 
patterns (particularly drought periods), but also expressed concerns over implementing changing due to the lack of 
knowledge about and access to markets.  Knowledge sharing workshops will be conducted, so that farmers can learn 
from each other and benefit from each other’s best practices and lessons learned.  To support market access, the 
project will establish an online market platform, providing an additional means for farmers to reach consumers. 
 
105. 
GCF resources will also support farmers with market access through training and support with identifying links 
to buyers and markets for climate-resilient agriculture products, including development of contract farming (incl. 
hospitals, schools, restaurants), linkages through rice cooperatives, linkages to local gatherers and processors, 
linkages to private sector and community support agriculture (CSA) for larger markets at Phitsanulok province, and 
comprising of larger market buyers, processors, and cooperatives.  With support from Krungsri Bank, farmers will also 
receive training on business skills to help convert networking opportunities into buyer-seller partnerships.  
 
106. 
Sub-activities include: 
3.3.1. 
Farmer to farmer knowledge sharing workshops, including reciprocal learning processes (e.g. site visits by 
farmer field schools to project schemes)  
3.3.2. 
Establishment of online market platform to increase visibility and marketability of farmers’ products  
3.3.3. Training to farmers to support market access for farmers, including capacity building related to financial literacy, 
linkages to buyers and markets, requirements for contract farming (incl. hospitals, schools, restaurants), 
linkages through rice cooperatives, linkages to local gatherer and processors, linkages to private sector and 
community support agriculture (CSA) for larger markets at Phitsanulok province, and comprising of larger 
market buyers, processor, cooperative 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
107. 
The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to the  
Special Fund to Thailand50 entered into between the United Nations Special Fund and the Royal Thai Government, the

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 29 OF 65 
 
 
 
subject to the availability of the necessary funds to the UNDP. The Agreement on Special Fund to Thailand is in lieu of the Standard Basic 
Assistance Agreements that UNDP entered into with the governments of other countries. 
Country Programme Action Plan (CPAP), and as policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP POPP (see: 
https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=245&Menu=BusinessUnit). 
 
108. 
The national executing entity - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology - is 
required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures, including 
the NIM Guidelines.  These include relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement, environmental and social 
safeguards, and other performance standards. In legal terms, this is ensured through the national government’s 
signature of the Special Fund Agreement, together with a UNDP project document which will be signed by the 
Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds. The (national) Implementing Partner for this project is Ministry 
of Agriculture and Cooperatives (MOAC). MOAC will assign RID to implement the project outputs and will be 
accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achieving 
project outcomes, and for the effective use of UNDP resources.   
 
 
 
Indicative Schematic of the Management Arrangements for the Proposed Project 
 
Project Organization Structure 
Project Board 
Output 2  
Responsible Parties: 
RID; GIZ 
 
Working Group 
RID / GIZ/ Phitsanulok 
provincial office 
Output 3  
Responsible Parties:  
RID 
 
Working Group 
RID, DoA, CPD, DOAE, DOF, LDD, Sub-
district Administrative Office (SAO) 
Output 1  
Responsible Parties: 
KMUTNB 
 
Working Group 
RID/KMUTNB 
National Project 
Director 
RID 
Senior Representative 
Project Assurance 
UNDP 
 
Project Support (PMU) 
Project Manager, Project 
Coordinator, Field Coordinator, 
Senior Finance Advisor, Finance 
and Admin Officer 
Senior Beneficiaries 
ONEP, ONWR, DOAE, RD, DoA, 
CPD, OAE, LDD, DOF, DDPM, TMD, 
Provincial Representatives 
Executive 
Director General of RID (Chair) 
 
 
Senior Supplier 
UNDP 
Technical Advisory Group 
(subject matter experts in climate 
information, water, agriculture 
and financial services)

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 30 OF 65 
 
 
109. 
The Project Board is responsible for making, by consensus, management decisions when guidance is required 
by the National Project Director. Project Board decisions will be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure 
management for development results, best value money, fairness, integrity, transparency, and effective international 
competition. In case a consensus cannot be reached within the Board, final decision shall rest with the UNDP 
Programme Country Director. The Project Board will meet every six months. 
 
110. 
Project Board will consist of a group of representatives responsible for making consensus-based strategic and  
management decisions for the project. It will oversee the project implementation; review compliance with the Royal 
Thai Government, UNDP and GCF requirements; and ensure implementation of the management plan for the risks 
identified. The Board will be comprised of: 
 
• 
An Executive (role represented by National Implementing Partner) that holds the project ownership and 
chairs the Board. The Executive will be RID (Chair). 
• 
A Senior Supplier representative providing guidance regarding the technical feasibility of the project, 
compliance with donor requirements, and rules pertaining to use of project resources. This role will be 
fulfilled by UNDP in its capacity as GCF Accredited Entity;  
• 
Senior Beneficiary representatives who ensures the realisation of project benefits from the perspective of 
project beneficiaries 
 
111. 
The National Project Director is a senior representative from RID who is responsible for the overall direction, 
strategic guidance, and timely delivery of project outputs.  
 
112. 
The Project Manager will run the project on a day-to-day basis within the parameters laid down by the Project 
Board. The Project Manager will end when the final project terminal evaluation report, and other documentation required 
by the GCF and UNDP, has been completed and submitted to UNDP. Project Manager is responsible for day-to-day 
management and decision-making for the project. The National Project Director’s prime responsibility is to ensure that 
the project produces the results specified in the project document, to the required standard of quality and within the 
specified constraints of time and cost.  
 
113. 
UNDP will transfer funds to the Royal Irrigation Department (RID), under the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Cooperative as “implementing partner”.  Once approved, UNDP Thailand will transfer funds to RID for implementation.  
The internal governmental implementation arrangements shall be formalized through a project board established by 
the Director General of RID, under the MoAC (“Project Board”), agreed minutes of the Project Board decision, 
memorandum of understanding and work plan. Furthermore, RID has agreed to select the King Mongkut Institute of 
Technology North Bangkok (KMUTNB) and GIZ based in Thailand as the Responsible Parties for Implementation 
(Output 1, Output 2/Activity 2.2 respectively). The engagement of Responsible Parties shall follow the IP regulations 
and rules. Below is a diagram of the funds flow:

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
114. 
A UNDP micro assessment was conducted for RID as implementing partner/executing entity, across all major 
categories RID is considered low risk.  In addition, the UNDP micro assessment were conducted for KMUTNB and GIZ 
as the Responsible Parties for Output 1 and Output 2/ Activity 2.2 respectively.  Please see Annex 22 for further details. 
 
115. 
UNDP provides a three-tier oversight and quality assurance role involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and 
at regional and headquarters levels. The quality assurance role supports the Project Board by carrying out objective 
and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project management 
milestones are managed and completed. Project Assurance must be independent of the Project Management function; 
the Project Board cannot delegate any of its quality assurance responsibilities to the Project Manager. The project 
assurance role is covered by the accredited entity fee provided by the GCF. As an Accredited Entity to the GCF, UNDP 
is required to deliver GCF-specific oversight and quality assurance services including: (i) Day-to-day oversight 
supervision, (ii) Oversight of project completion, (iii) Oversight of project reporting. 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
116. 
The planned interventions target the Yom and Nan river basins, in Uttaradit, Phitsanulok, and Sukhothai 
provinces, which are key to cope with increasing climate-induced flood and drought risks to enhance the resilience of 
the population living in the wider Chao Phraya River Basin, including the Bangkok Metropolitan Region with around 
15m inhabitants. As described in Section C.2, the river basins currently provide a critical function of managing the river 
flow and regulating irrigation, whereas the last water infrastructure improvement in these areas was in 1994-1995. 
However, in light of climate change the current precipitation patterns change and more frequent consecutive dry periods 
and severe flooding in wet seasons test the limits of the existing infrastructure. This enhances the flood risks as well 
as poses a serious threat to the already marginalised poor local farmers and agriculture day labourers during dry 
periods due to higher risks of losses and damages of yields and feasibility to pursue certain livelihood options. As 
existing water management infrastructure is no longer able to effectively respond to climate change induced changes 
in rainfall patterns, enlarging the storage capacity of irrigation systems, natural canals, or monkey cheeks for keeping 
excess water for later use (i.e. the second dry season rice) is needed. 
 
117. 
Alternative financing options to address transformative change for the most vulnerable farmers as well as to 
enhance the wider water management, particularly introducing innovative EbA approaches, are limited, as the planned 
interventions do not yield aggregate, large-scale financial reflows. A Financial Appraisal was conducted for the project, 
please see Annex 3.  It found that the proposed activities under Output 1 – technical training to staff of RID and TMD, 
strengthening the climate forecasting and water management tool, dissemination and distribution of climate risk 
information to at-risk households through technology – aim to strengthen climate risk-informed planning, decision 
making and inter-ministerial cooperation, generating benefits which are of larger public good in nature such as making 
available easily consumable climate risk-information for households and significant improvement in capacities of 
government agencies. Similarly, public good nature of benefits will be generated from Output 3, which will train farmers 
on climate risk-informed decision making in their agricultural practices, provide technical training on building on-farm

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 65 
 
 
water management interventions for farmers and help farmers develop business skills for developing market access. 
While the proposed activities under Output 2 build grey infrastructure in the form of upgraded floodgates and canal 
embankments, the resulting benefits are larger good in nature without directly identifiable and measurable financial 
flows to either the project beneficiaries or the project sponsor. The increased storage capacity improves access to 
water for agriculture and public consumption during dry seasons and the increased drainage capacity mitigates / 
minimizes the impact on / losses to agricultural lands. It must also be noted here that the direct beneficiaries from the 
investment in grey infrastructure are the most-vulnerable groups in the region with little or no ability to afford increased 
cash outflows.  Therefore, the proposed project will not generate any “directly identifiable, attributable and quantifiable” 
incremental financial revenues or produce any “directly identifiable, attributable and quantifiable” tangible financial cost 
recovery/savings of resources to either the project owner (Royal Thai Government - RTG) or to the project beneficiaries 
(direct beneficiaries in the targeted project area) during and after implementation of the proposed project. Due to this 
larger public good nature of the benefits derived from this funding proposal, repayment of any kind of loan from the 
project benefits / beneficiaries is not feasible.  
 
118. 
GCF involvement is critical for this proposal since there is an overwhelming evidence of that amidst other 
potential factors such as increasing population, degradation of ecosystem and poor management of the grey 
infrastructure, climate change being can be attributed as the only major factor behind the increasing frequency and 
severity of extreme climate-related flooding and drought events in the project area of The Greater Chao Phraya river 
basin. In addition, alternative financing options to address transformative change for the most vulnerable farmers are 
limited as the planned interventions do not yield any aggregate, large scale financial reflows.  
 
119. 
An integrated project such as this one, however, can usher in the paradigm shift needed to adapt to the climate 
impacts on the water and agriculture sectors in Thailand.  The project will inform water planning and investment not 
only in the Yom-Nan river basin, but also the broader Chao Phraya river basin.  Upscaling and replication will support 
Thailand’s most vulnerable/poor communities, which have a largely rural profile.  Further, the project can prove catalytic 
in mobilizing additional resources, as is already evident in the co-financing from Krungsri Bank to strengthen financial 
literacy among farmers, and the parallel financing from BAAC’s in the form of a USD 16M credit for farmers practicing 
climate informed and sustainable agriculture.  In addition, UNDP Thailand is laying the groundwork for greater 
engagement of the private sector.  UNDP Thailand has partnered with the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(approximately 750 listed companies) and Global Compact Network Thailand (50 members) to raise awareness among 
businesses on shifting from ESG to SDGs and integrating SDGs Impact Measurement and Management Framework 
into their business and investment strategies.  The first seminar was held on 24 February with over 400 participants 
attending the events, including representatives from listed companies, investors,  financial regulators, government 
officials, and academia.  In 2020, UNDP Thailand is planning to focus on introducing the SDG impact assessment 
framework called the UNDP Business Call to Action's Impact Lab to the market. UNDP Thailand will also select some 
institutional investors to test the UNDP's SDGs Assurance Standard on Private Equity and Bond. To promote the 
localization of SDGs and awareness raising among SMEs, UNDP Thailand is partnering with Thai Chamber of 
Commerce, who has the local presence in all 76 provinces across Thailand. UNDP Thailand will provide sustainability 
related workshops to local SMEs in their network as well as work with these businesses on how to engage SDGs lens 
into their business activities. And in the pipeline, UNDP Thailand is discussion on project development on plastic waste 
management with Unilever, accelerating Social Enterprises with True Digital Park, community investment funds with 
Singha Estate, as well as farming technology demonstration with the Siam KUBOTA.  Agriculture is a critical sector in 
Thailand, and each of these initiative creates opportunities to engage private and finance sector entities in related work 
to support climate resilience.  This information has been incorporated into the FP as well.Such Private sector 
participation in the geography and the sustainable agriculture and water management sector is limited to Corporate 
Social Responsibility (CSR) activities and spending budgets, which the project is already leveraging. Another potential 
option of Donor aid was explored but it typically does not include / understand evolving climate change threats and is 
usually focused on humanitarian activities.   
 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 65 
 
 
120. 
The proposed project has been designed in close consultation with and involvement of relevant government 
agencies and technical line departments, development organisations (e.g. GIZ, UNDP) and existing Water User Groups 
in the target river basin. These consultations and discussions are complemented by best practice approaches in water 
management, climate-resilient agriculture, ecosystem based adaptation (EbA), and climate information and modelling 
as detailed in the Feasibility Report (Annex 2). Building on this foundation, the project ensures that the investments as 
well as the results of the interventions are sustained beyond the project period and in the longer-term through the 
following elements of project design and implementation. 
 
121. 
Building on existing and established networks: The project will strengthen existing networks and 
coordination mechanisms, including Water User groups and farmer field schools (existent in project area), as well as 
housing climate information data centres in combination with existing monitoring and information centres – providing 
location and staff after the project duration timeframe is complete. The farmer field trainings to enhance their capacity 
to cope with climate change impacts and learn adaptation strategies, will partly be developed through farmer field 
schools and other existing local networks. This can ensure the sustainability as these knowledge hubs and networks 
will allow the aggregation of traditional knowledge and practices with climate-resilient technologies and innovative 
practices. 
 
122. 
Supporting ecological systems: GCF resources will be used to promote the application of ecological 
principles to water management to trigger a paradigm shift within the RID and RTG’s water management approaches 
towards more integrative solutions (including EbA) following a landscape-ecosystem approach based on the river 
system. Building on the experience of GIZ in the field EbA, the project will work on technical capacity development of 
key decision makers and technical officials to mainstream the, for Thailand, new approach to water management into 
their water and irrigation planning processes. The technical capacity building will be undertaken at both national and 
subnational (project area) levels to reach a variety of key public officials to sustain the efforts and reach long-term 
project goals.  
 
123. 
The project invests in institutional capacity building, so for longevity as well as for integrating cross-sectoral 
and inter-agency approaches to shared project goals. It, further, promotes institutional planning and coordination across 
government officials and communities. Project outputs will also contribute to enhancing organisational capacity of 
farmers to plan for and implement climate-risk informed local water management solutions and integrate climate 
information and advisories for water management ensuring their financial and human resource viability post-project. 
The approach is to strongly engage communities at several levels of planning and execution. By doing so, the project 
will not only ensure that the investments respond to beneficiary needs but also ensure that community organisations, 
particularly including women, will have capacity to keep improving approaches, even as climate variability increases 
and seasons become more unpredictable.  
 
124. 
Co-investments by government institutions, financial sector and communities: The project leverages 
domestic co-financing with a total co-financing contribution of the Royal Thai Government through the Royal Irrigation 
Department (RID) of USD 16.26 million during the 5-year implementation period, and an additional USD 17.26 million 
for operation and maintenance beyond the GCF-funded project period. RTG resources will support investments into 
water management infrastructures, technical capacity development of public officials, IRDM upgrade, skills transfer to 
farmers, market linkage creation, and the promotion of climate change resilient livelihoods promote. They will also 
support implementation of resilient drinking water solutions, especially shouldering the cost of project and post-project 
O&M for the implemented infrastructure, as well as aim to install the remaining 11 proposed water management 
infrastructures in the Yom and Nan river basins in the coming decades through their normal budget allocations (in case 
they can’t be constituted through EbA approaches). In addition, the project leverages financial sector resources with 
USD 113,883 from the Krungsri Bank (part of GCF accredited entity MUFG) to conduct financial literacy training for 
local farmers in the project area.  To support further investments by farmers, BAAC has committed USD 16 million in 
credit to support farmers applying climate informed practices. Investments may include, for instance, climate smart 
farming technology and supplies, online marketing and sale of their organic rice, vegetable, fruit, startup business 
capital, social enterprise set up and cash flow. The BAAC financial product will be designed through a collaborative 
process, supported by the GCF project.  
 
125. 
Ex-post plan for Operations and Maintenance of observing equipment, water management investment 
and IoT: An O&M plan (project and for post-project O&M), including the budgeting for the human and financial 
resources required for O&M for the project investments, is presented in Annex 21. The plan reflects local ownership 
and commitment for the long-term sustainability of the project activities and outcomes. The costs of developing a long-
term strategy for O&M, is provided for in the first two years, and the strategy will be reassessed towards project 
completion (final two years). GCF resources will finance and leverage financing to support the human and technical 
resources required for O&M initially, with a decreasing contribution towards the end of the project lifetime, after which

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
domestic financing (from the budgets of designated authorities as reflected in the co-financing letters) will continue to 
support O&M.  RID will maintain facilities under Output 1 and 2, and other MoAC agencies will run Output 3 under 
future government regular budget.  Please see Annex 21 for the O&M plan. 
 
126. 
As the IoT equipment (including drones) will be owned by district government, local authorities will be ultimately 
responsible for O&M.  Some of the O&M cost is built into the sale price and warrantee from the dealers in the domestic 
market (Thailand). As IoT is promoted in Thailand, there are various avenues available to secure finance for any 
additional O&M as well as for further replication and upscaling. These include: a) the regular public budget, distributed 
to government departments under MoAC, b) the regular public budget for capacity building to farmers and innovation 
research and c) the Communication Authority of Thailand (CAT). District authorities will provide commitments for O&M 
prior to any roll-out of IoT.   
 
127. 
Ownership of equipment to be provided by the project: Most of the equipment will be owned by the farmers 
themselves (eg. water pumps, water level gauges), while others will be shared and therefore owned by farmer 
groups/cooperatives (eg cultivator, rotary weeder).  For shared equipment, procedures will follow existing borrowing 
system, managed by the cooperative.  Following this borrowing system, the day-to-day operations (fuel, manpower) 
would be the responsibility of the borrower.  Maintenance would be responsibility of the cooperative, with costs covered 
by the group’s bank account.  Ownership will follow the same set up as during the project.  The project will support 
farmers groups in the budgeting process if needed, to ensure funds are planned for regular maintenance of equipment.  
Project results will be tracked and shared with farmers and cooperatives to inform decision making for further 
replication/scale up.  Should additional funds be needed for further replication/scale up, the BAAC credit will be 
available for investments in adaptation.

=== PAGE 39 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
17.534 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
(ii) 
Subordinated loans 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
(iii) 
Equity 
N/A 
 
 
N/A  
(iv) 
Guarantees 
N/A 
N/A 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable grants 
N/A 
 
 
 
(vi) 
Grants 
17.534  
 
 
 
(vii) 
Result-based payments 
N/A 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing information 
Total amount 
Currency 
16.378 
million USD ($) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Royal Irrigation Dept 
In kind 
 
16.264 
million 
USD ($)  
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Krungsri Bank 
In kind 
 
0.114 
million 
USD ($)  
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
33.911 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page) 
N/A  
C.2. Financing by component  
128. 
The project seeks USD 17.534 million in GCF support with a total co-financing of USD 16.378 million which 
includes  co-financing of USD 16.264 million from the Royal Thai Government (RTG) through the Royal Irrigation 
Department (RID) during the implementation period for operations and maintenance (O&M) of the GCF investment, as 
well as for (i) repair and improvement of the existing irrigation schemes, (ii) upgrading of the Khlong Muang Chang 
canal regulator and (iii) improvement of the Khong Ta Key culvert; and co-financing from Krungsri Bank (a member of 
MUFG-global financial group) that will contribute USD 113,883 during the project implementation period to provide 
financial literacy training to farmers in the project area – complementing GCF-funded activities under Output 3. In 
addition, the RTG has also committed USD 17.254 million for O&M for 15 years beyond the GCF-funded project period. 
 
129. 
In combination, GCF funds and co-financing will be used to realize 3 project outputs, namely to (i) enhance 
climate and risk informed planning in the water and agricultural sectors, (ii) improve water through strengthened 
infrastructure complemented by EbA measures, for greater resilience to climate change impacts and (iii) reduce volatility 
of agriculture livelihoods in drought and flood prone areas through strengthened extension support and local planning, 
investment in on-farm adaptation measures and greater access to finance and markets. To further support farmers 
access finance for adaptation measures, the Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives (BAAC) has pledged a 
line of credit of USD 16 million through financial products with incentives for farmers to practice climate resilience.  A 
letter of commitment is included in Annex 13.  This has been counted as parallel financing for this project. 
 
130. 
The Co-financing from RTG, through RID, will be a budget allocation which RID will disburse for the 
implementation of the Activities referred to above. With respect to the Co-financing to be provided by Krungsri Bank, 
the arrangement shall be formalized through a memorandum of understanding and work plan. The commitment and

=== PAGE 40 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
application of co-financing will be monitored and reported by the Accredited entity in line with the representations and 
covenants set out in the AMA and FAA. 
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
million USD 
($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million USD 
($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million USD 
($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Enhancing 
climate resilience 
in Thailand 
through effective 
water 
management and 
sustainable 
agriculture 
1. Enhance 
climate and 
risk informed 
planning in 
the water 
and 
agricultural 
sectors 
through 
improved 
climate 
information 
and cross 
sectoral 
coordination 
3.215 
1.683 
Grants 
1.532 
In-kind 
RID 
2. Improve 
water 
management 
through 
strengthened 
infrastructure 
complement
ed by EbA 
measures, 
for greater 
resilience to 
climate 
change 
impacts 
23.125 
9.640 
Grants 
13.485 
In-kind 
RID 
3. Reduce 
volatility of 
agriculture 
livelihoods in 
drought and 
flood prone 
areas 
through 
strengthened 
extension 
support and 
local 
planning, 
investment in 
on-farm 
adaptation 
measures 
and greater 
access to 
finance and 
markets 
5.978 
5.617 
Grants 
0.361 
In-kind 
RID, 
Krungsri 
Bank 
 
Project 
Management 
1.593 
0.593 
Grants 
1.000 
In-kind 
RID

=== PAGE 41 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
33.911 
17.534 
16.378 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
131. 
Under Output 1, the project will support capacity and technological needs for tailored climate information to 
inform climate resilient water management and agriculture planning, while under Output 2 the project will support 
capacity for climate sensitive integrated water resources management. Output 3 includes training to agriculture 
extension officers to support farmers with climate resilient agriculture, as well as equipment related to precision 
agriculture and development of an app to sell agriculture products. The total requested for these activities is 
approximately USD 4 million.

=== PAGE 42 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
132. 
The project will contribute to following GCF Fund-Level Impacts for adaptation:  
• 
Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions through 
the promotion of climate-resilient, sustainable and diversified livelihoods for 62,000 beneficiaries in the Yom 
and Nan river basins (Fund-Level Impact A1.0)  
• 
Increased resilience of health and well- being, and food and water security for through enhanced access to 
irrigation and water management practices (Fund-Level Impact A2.0) 
• 
Increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment to climate change threats, through the upgrades 
of the critical water regulating facilities of Khlong Muang Chang and Khlong Ta Kay Reg and EbA measures to 
reduce flood risks for 25 million people in the Chao Phraya river basin as well as build environment, including 
Metropolitan Bangkok Area with 15 million inhabitants (Fund-Level impact A3.0) 
• 
And Increased resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services, through the implementation and promotion 
of EbA measures (Fund-Level Impact A4.0) 
 
133. 
The project will reduce vulnerability by enhancing adaptive capacity and resilience of rural populations.  By 
applying a gender-sensitive approach, agriculture based communities will receive climate information and support to 
apply that information towards climate resilient agriculture practices, thereby reducing volatility brought about by climate 
change induced floods and droughts.  The project will also support institutional capacity for climate-responsive planning 
and development in water and agriculture management through the expected increase in use of climate information in 
decision making.  And support to upgrading critical infrastructure will enhance ability of water retention and 
management in the Yom and Nan river basins to cope with an intensification of extreme rain events and enhance the 
capacity to store water for irrigation purposes during increasingly drier dry periods; and strengthened institutional 
capacities, knowledge, and learning for climate-resilient water management and livelihoods security. 
 
134. 
The Yom and Nan river basins are of critical importance, as water management in this area would not only 
ease the severity of flooding for farmers in the vicinity, but also further downstream in the broader Great Chao Phraya 
river basin. In addition, adequate water management will reduce drought related risks to crops and agriculture-based 
livelihoods in the project region. The enhancements detailed would minimize loss and damage related to flooding and 
drought - benefiting vulnerable agriculture households and relieving pressure on public resources for related relief and 
programmes. 
 
135. 
The project incorporates lessons learned and best practices from several successful international efforts in 
order to enable a transformative impact through the climate informed improvement of water resource management and 
climate change resilient livelihoods planning. These incorporated best practices include the utilisation of Ecosystem-
based Adaptation (EbA) solutions for climate resilient water management and livelihood development. This integration 
of EbA approaches has the potential to be transformational to Thailand’s traditional planning concepts for water 
management that focus widely on hard structure interventions and could also be replicated (scaled-up) in the other 
river basins in Thailand (total 25). 
 
136. 
In addition, the policy support activities under the proposed GCF project and capacity development, e.g. in the 
field of water management modelling and forecasting under the updated IRDM tool and integration of EbA methods 
into climate-resilient planning and solution prioritisation processes, has the potential to be replicated in and set new 
standards for government entities involved in water management planning and livelihoods promotion in Thailand.  
 
2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 43 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
137. 
The proposed project integrates sustainability strategies and pathways for replication and scale to catalyze 
impacts beyond the project duration. RTG aims to build on this project to showcase innovative solutions in the field of 
climate resilient water management and livelihoods promotion. Successful implementation of this project can transform 
traditional approaches of hard structure focused interventions for water management, provide access of farmers to 
tailored climate information, alternative livelihood options (including a focus on organic production), create vertical and 
horizontal linkages to buyers and suppliers, and provide RID with a new planning tool for localized irrigation and yield 
forecasting. All these climate change responsive solutions can be replicated and scaled up through the integration into 
planning and implementation in other river basins in Thailand. 
 
138. 
In particular, the following activities advance the potential for transformative impact beyond the project and 
form a paradigm shift potential of the project: 
 
o 
The upgrade and enhancement of a rainfall forecasting and operating tool. The project will enable RID, and its 
key academic institutions, to build on the IRDM tool to allow RID staff to forecast local rainfall patterns and 
runoff simulation. These forecasting and operating models is a key decision-making tool to inform water 
management to prevent floods and provide sufficient water for irrigation during dry periods. The tailored and 
localised information will, furthermore, be provided to subnational public entities and farmers (end-users) 
through mobile phone applications. This can inform local and farm-level decision making in light of increasing 
climate change induced flood and drought risks, as well as enhance transparency and water distribution 
decision-making in order to mitigate potential water distribution conflicts between water infrastructure operators 
and local stakeholders. 
 
o 
Ensure costly investments in grey infrastructure are climate informed.  By integrating climate change into water 
management infrastructure planning, the project supports cost-efficient investments – extending the life of the 
investment, and reducing costs related to loss and damage related to climate impacts and subsequent 
upgrades. 
o 
Develop RID’s capacities to integrate ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) in water management. While EbA 
measures have been tested in Thailand, RID’s interventions to enhance water management in the Chao Phraya 
river basin, and other basins in Thailand are traditionally focused on engineering solutions that utilize grey 
infrastructure. This project will develop the evidence base to support complementing grey infrastructure with 
ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) measures. Given the high upfront costs of grey infrastructure, the 
successful implementation of this project could showcase a effective and sustainable solutions, which are also 
lower cost.  This can be a scalable solution to increase the resilience of Thailand’s water infrastructure and, 
consequently, of the farmers dependent on the irrigation system in light of increasing climate change impacts, 
while rehabilitating ecosystems in Thailand’s river basins.  
o 
The project sets out the process of identifying local level agricultural community vulnerabilities to climate 
change impacts and livelihood response for farmers, as well as setting forth best practice measures and 
strategies in the planning and management. In light of increasing climate change impacts it is inevitable for the 
farmers to incorporate these increasing risks into their farming activities and livelihood planning. The project 
will enable the farmers, through capacity building, financial training (delivered through a private sector entity), 
and the introduction of adaptation technologies, alternative climate-resilient crops, and farming techniques to 
cope with increasing risks. 
 
o 
Integration of finance/private sector actors (e.g. Krungsri Bank and BAAC) into implementation of EbA 
technologies, support for climate resilient and sustainable agriculture investments and capacity building of 
farmers through financial trainings. In addition, the project will create linkages between farmers and buyers of 
climate resilient agriculture products. 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 44 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
139. 
The project generates a number of co-benefits, not only technological advancement in climate change informed 
analysis, but also contributions towards social and economic development: 
• 
Reduced losses and damages due to enhanced planning for investment and preparation for slow onset climate 
change impacts as well as extreme events:  
• 
More efficient use of water resources, in line with sufficiency economy goals of the country  
• 
Promotion of less water-intensive agriculture practices to relieve pressure on water resources 
• 
Greater predictability and security for agriculture planning at household level 
 
Environmental co-benefits 
140. 
EbA measures and sustainable agriculture will promote positive environmental externalities such as soil/water 
quality, conservation and biodiversity. Investments in the water retention capacity of the area will also benefit ecosystem 
services. A study undertaken catchment wide on the upper parts of the Chao Phraya River Basin by Prattomchai (et 
al., 2014) looked at projected groundwater recharge under changing climate scenarios during the period of 2026 – 
2040, based on GCMs (MIROC, ESM, CHEM, HadGEM2, ES HadGEM and GFDK ESM2M) under scenarios RCP2.6, 
RCP4.5, RCP6.0, and RCP8.5. The study found that annual groundwater recharge (storage) is likely to reduce by 
12.9% as a result of the significant decrease in rainfall volumes in the April to June annual periods.51 It is expected that 
the retaining of water through retention options would have a positive influence on groundwater recharge, by allowing 
waters to be retained long enough to permeate to groundwater levels.  
 
Economic and social co-benefits 
141. 
By reducing volatility through support to sustainable agriculture, and expanding access to markets and finance, 
the project supports viability of agriculture livelihoods.  As vulnerable groups are prioritized for support, the project will 
support poverty alleviation, particularly for women as more than half of beneficiary households are female-headed.  
Greater viability in the sector can not only increase agriculture productivity and related income-generating capacity, but 
it can also help address challenges of youth employment and rural-urban migration.  By partnering with Krungsri Bank 
and BAAC, the project will support financial literacy and help provide access to finance to support climate resilient 
agriculture practices, thereby increasing competitiveness and economic growth potential. 
 
142. 
The project will contribute to several SDGs, namely: 1 (no poverty) and 2 (zero hunger) by focusing on 
vulnerable communities with higher incidence of poverty, 6 (clean water and sanitation) by improving water access 
during drought periods, 8 (decent work and economic growth) by reducing volatility of agriculture livelihoods, 15 (life on 
land) given the environmental benefits of EbA and 17 Partnerships for the Goals through a collaborative effort with 
government, UNDP, GCF and finance institutions (i.e. Krungsri and BAAC).  As the number of female headed 
households in agriculture is growing, the project can also contribute to SDG 5 (gender equality).  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
143. 
Over the last four decades, Thailand has made remarkable progress in social and economic development.  
However, the high exposure to climate change risks and impacts pose a serious threat to the country’s economy and 
could undermine some of the development gains achieved through investment by the RTG, partners, and communities.  
Water management in the context of changing climatic conditions is an adaptation priority. The country has relied 
largely on grey infrastructure, with related costs of necessary upgrades being formidable.  Further, agriculture is a 
critical sector for Thailand, which due to changes in rainfall patterns is being impacted.  IWRM has been stressed as a 
key to sustainable development going forward, and collaboration and joint planning across sectors will be necessary, 
which to date has been limited.   
 
144. 
In terms of vulnerability, rural areas, such as the proposed project area, will face significant climate-induced 
risks due to the relatively higher exposure to climate change impacts, as well as their socio-economic profiles. Poverty 
in Thailand predominately has a rural-profile, which fluctuates according to vulnerabilities in the agricultural sector – 
such as faltering economic growth, falling agricultural prices, and ongoing droughts.52  In 2013, for example, 80 percent 
of the country’s poor 7.3 million live in rural areas, and a further 6.7 million were living within 20 percent above the 
national poverty line.53 48 percent of Thailand’s provinces have a poverty head count of 10 percent or less, and a further 
25 percent of provinces have a poverty headcount rate of between 11 and 20 percent.54  
 
 
51 Masud, M., Soni, P., Shrestha, S. & Tripathi, N. 2016, ‘Changes in Climate Extremes over North Thailand, 1960 – 2099’, Journal of 
Climatology, Research Article, 206:4289454, Pp 1-18 
52 Overview, Thailand: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/thailand/overview 
53 Overview, Thailand: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/thailand/overview 
54 National Office of Statistics, 2015

=== PAGE 45 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
145. 
Most of Thailand’s rural society is engaged in agriculture related activities which generate around $40 billion in 
revenue, over 10 percent of national gross domestic product (GDP) 55 , 56 and account for 74 percent of water 
consumption in Thailand.57 The sectors role in job creation in the rural areas is higher than the national average of 
around 50 percent of society being dependent on the agricultural sector for their livelihoods. The total number of 
households engaged in agriculture in Thailand is almost 6 million (5,910,791 households) comprising a total 23,686,102 
(almost 24 million)58 of the country’s 67 million national population.  The agricultural sector in Thailand additionally, 
directly and indirectly, employs roughly around half of the country’s population.59 Overall, Thailand’s agriculture sector 
is dominated by smallholder farmers - most of who own their land outright, although tenancy is widespread in parts of 
the Central Plain. On average nationally, farmers own land sizes of around 20 Rai (equivalent to 3.2 hectares). 
However, in the project area, land ownership sizes tend to be larger, ranging from 25 to 29 Rai (4.00 - 4.64 hectares) 
per household with the area also employing a significant portion of the area’s population in seasonal laboring.  
 
146. 
Almost half of the population of Thailand is engaged in agricultural sector, where incomes are relatively low.  
The project target area was selected based on vulnerability and urgency, given proximity of communities to the river 
basin and reliance on water for agriculture as a livelihood. Proportionally, Sukhothai, Phitsanulok and Uttaradit 
provinces, included as part of the Northern Central region, have relatively high poverty levels. Impacts from climate 
change are more severely felt by those with higher levels of poverty, predominately due to the high level of dependence 
on natural resources, and in general, a limited capacity in terms of access to resources for responding to climate 
vulnerability and extremes.60  Higher levels of poverty for the Northern-Central region in turn, means that this area also 
has an increased level of vulnerability to climate change impacts, with lower levels of access to resources for adaptation 
strategies and in which to build climate resilience.  
 
147. 
The beneficial areas of this project are in the areas of 3 provinces of the Northern region of Thailand: 
Phitsanulok, Sukhothai and Uttaradit, where gross provincial product (GPP) from 2012-2014 of these 3 provinces was 
approximately 15.47% of the Northern region GPP. GPP of these 3 provinces from agriculture sector in 2014 were 
33.7%, 42.0% and 32.4% where the per capita GPP in 2014 were 98,126, 72,548 and 84,003 THB per person, 
respectively.  This compares with Bangkok and the surrounding area at 376,463 THB, Nong Bua Lamphu with 46,804 
as the lowest, and the national average of Thailand at 193,395 THB per capita. 
 
    Targeted population at village level (2015, figures provided by RID) 
Province 
District 
Households 
Population 
Male 
Female 
Utaradit 
Pichai 
3,342 
10,361 
4,979 
5,382 
Sukhothai 
Srinakorn 
128 
396 
190 
206 
Sukhothai 
Khongkairas 
5,420 
16,802 
8,068 
8,734 
Sukhothai 
Sawankha Lok 
431 
1,336 
645 
691 
Phitsanulok 
Promphiram 
6,739 
20,891 
10,100 
10,791 
Phitsanulok 
Bangrakham 
3,314 
10,273 
4,981 
5,292 
Phitsanulok 
Muang 
626 
1,941 
932 
1,009 
Total 
 
20,000 
62,000 
29,896 
32,104 
 
148. 
The feasibility study (Annex 2) and stakeholder engagement summary (Annex 7(a)) includes field surveys and 
interviews with agriculture households in the targeted districts of the proposed GCF project.  Field surveys and 
interviews with local administrators and community leaders of the inundated lands show that floods are not a new 
phenomenon to the households due to the geographical location of their premises at low-lying lands.  However, great 
concern was expressed about increased incidence of drought and water scarcity, as well as potentially increasing 
periods and severity of flooding.  
 
149. 
The project will combine GCF and RTG resources to address the barriers to adaptation investments and 
catalyse community, public, and private sector financing to support the needs of the targeted agriculture-based 
communities and flood and drought prone areas. Capacities will be strengthened across key decision makers and the 
communities to plan for and manage investment in livelihoods and water security in the face of a changing climate. 
 
55 Office of the National Economic and Social Development Board, 2012 
56 World Bank. 2016, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NV.AGR.TOTL.ZS) 
57 National Water Management Strategy, Thailand. 2015 
58 ‘Agricultural Statistics of Thailand for the year 2011- 2012’, Thailand Office of Agricultural Economic, 2016: www.oae.go.th  
59 National Statistical Office Thailand, 2012 
60 Abeygunawardena, P. Vyas, Y., Knill, P., Foy, P., Harold, M., Steele, P., Tanner, T., Hirsch, D., Oosterman, M., Rooimas, J., Debois, 
M., Lamin, M., Liptow, H., Mausolf, E., Verheyen, R., Agrawala, S., Caspary, G., Paris, R., Kashap, A., Sharma, R., Mathur, A., Sharma, 
M., Sperling, F. 2003, Poverty and climate change: Reducing the vulnerability of the poor through adaptation, 
http://www.oecd.org/env/cc/2502872.pdf

=== PAGE 46 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
Project will enhance the institutional framework for innovation, long-term planning for risk-informed water management 
and learning to promote an enabling environment for sustained resilience of the Yom and Nan river basins and its 
residents. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
150. 
The proposed GCF project is fully aligned with national priorities and builds on existing government 
programmes, including Thailand’s 20-year development plan, as well as the Water Management Strategy.  GCF support 
will address the identified additional activities/costs related to integrating climate change risks into government 
programmes, thereby extending the value of these investments.   
 
151. 
Thailand’s Technology Needs Assessment (TNA) report formulated in 2012 identified three highly impacted 
sectors in urgent need of adaptation technologies, namely: 
• 
Agriculture - in need of forecasting and early warning system technologies, crop improvement technologies, 
and precision farming technologies; 
• 
Water Resource Management - in need of networking (via pipes and canals) and management of 
infrastructures (including zoning), seasonal climate prediction, and sensor web using observation and/or 
modeling data; and 
• 
Modeling - in need of an integrated national data center, national data transfer/management process and 
the advanced research, weather research and forecasting (WRF - ARW) model, and an integrated model 
to address the need of agricultural sector and water resource management sector. 
 
152. 
Acknowledging the need to improve sustainable water resources management, the 12th National Economic 
and Social Development Plan (2017-2021) aims to promote economic and social growth that is environmentally-friendly, 
specifically by: 
• 
Reforming water management systems to ensure balance between users’ demand and supply as well as 
provision of access to water; 
• 
Enforcing environment acts and promote collaboration among sectors for integrated work plans and 
budgets; 
• 
Developing water resources information centers; and 
• 
And establishing water management organization at the local level, such as river basin committee and 
water users’ association. 
 
153. 
Efficiency is a priority in Thailand’s adaptation strategy, which is guided by the philosophy of Sufficiency 
Economy – moderation, reasonableness, and the need of self-immunity for sufficient protection from impact arising 
from internal and external changes. 61 Building on from the Sufficiency Economy approach – is the ‘New Theory 
Farming’, which compounds integrated farming systems, and the Buddhist approach of self-restraint combined with 
sustainable agriculture62. The 12th National Economic and Social Development Plan (2017 – 2021) aims to promote 
both ecologically sound economic and social growth. This is centred on water management system reformation to 
ensure user demand and supply balance with the provision of access to water.  
 
154. 
Thailand’s National Climate Change Policy was approved in Cabinet as well as the Strategic Plan on Climate 
Change (January 2008). It incorporates capacity building, research and development, awareness and public 
participation, and international cooperation in mitigation and adaptation. The Climate Change Master Plan (2015 – 
2050) sets out a long-term framework for the management of climate change in Thailand. The Plan focuses on 
adaptation across the water management, flood and drought sector; agriculture and food security; human health; 
tourism; natural resources sector, and; human settlement and security. This project targets two of these sectors, 
namely: (i) water management, flood and drought; and (ii) agriculture and food security.  
 
155. 
Development of Thailand’s Climate Change National Adaptation Plan (NAP) commenced in 2015 and currently 
ongoing towards completion of the NAP. The draft version of the NAP currently contains a focus on agricultural projects, 
of which the Enhancing climate resilience in Thailand through effective water management and sustainable agriculture 
project is complementary to and will strengthen and build upon the capacity building on climate information, and the 
upgraded IRDM tool (under Output 1) elements.  
 
156. 
The Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) for Thailand includes a shortlisting of adaptation key efforts. 
These include the prioritization of efforts which:  
 
61 Thailand’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), 2015 
62 Amekawa, 2010:390

=== PAGE 47 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
• 
Promote and strengthen Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) practices into achieving water 
security, and effective water resource management to mitigate flood and drought 
• 
Safeguard food security through the guidance of the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy (e.g. agriculture and 
land management that promotes appropriate resource allocation and economic diversification at a 
household level; the sustainable management of community forests in order to promote community level 
food security) 
• 
Promote both sustainable agriculture and Good Agricultural Practice (GAP) 
• 
Strengthen disaster risk reduction and reduce the population’s vulnerability to climate risk and extreme 
weather events through enhanced awareness, coordination and local community adaptive capacity, 
especially within disaster prone areas, and  
• 
Strengthen climate-modeling capacity while promoting collaboration amongst relevant agency 
 
157. 
The project will also help realize Thailand’s Commitment to Climate Resilient Agriculture and Digital 
Transformation. The project is aligned with the country’s 20 Year Agricultural Development Plan (2017-2036) whose 
objective is to lay a foundation for long-term development leading to systematic growth and solutions to problems of 
the agriculture sector. The specific goals are as follows: (1) Farmers specialize in their professions, so-called “Smart 
Farmer;” (2) Farmer institutions have an efficiency in management, so-called “Smart Agricultural Group;” (3) Quality of 
agricultural products meet the customers need, in other words, being “Smart Agricultural Products;” and (4) Agricultural 
area and sector have potential, known as “Smart Area / Agriculture.” Strategy 3: Increasing Competitiveness in the 
Agricultural Sector through Technology and Innovations, having 3 development guidelines which are: Develop 
technology and innovations to drive “Agriculture 4.0” under the “Thailand 4.0” policy; Manage the agricultural 
information technology for ready access and utilization by farmers and Develop agricultural research works and 
information toward their commercialization.  
 
158. 
Furthermore, the project entails the roll-out of innovative technologies for climate solutions and advances use 
of IoT platforms as part of the country’s “MOAC’s Digital Agriculture Strategic Plan (2017-2021)” (Ministry of Agriculture 
and Cooperatives’ Committee on ICTs,  2017). The plan maps the long-term steps to digitalize agriculture starting from 
preparing the ICT system for being digital agriculture. For the first five years, the strategy envisions to work on the 
development of paradigms and framework for digital agriculture. This strategic plan comprises of three missions, which 
are to develop agricultural information system for proactive management, to apply appropriate digital technology with 
context to agriculture sector, and to support sustainable agriculture.   
 
159. 
Finally, the project was designed with extensive stakeholder consultations. Under the guidance of ONEP (office 
of the NDA) and RID, the project design was further informed by consultations and assessments conducted during the 
project development phase, which included government ministries, development partners, academia, social enterprise 
and communities (see Annex 7(a)). 
 
160. 
The proposed project builds on past community consultations, comprising of several rounds of stakeholder 
discussions on adaptation priorities, including flood and drought risk management through enhanced green and grey 
water infrastructure, and climate-resilient agriculture-based livelihoods. Stakeholder discussions took place over the 
period of 2016-2019, initiated and led by the RID and in coordination with the ONEP (NDA).  
 
161. 
The project, through field surveys and consultations with sub-national level decision makers, communities, and 
community leaders has integrated local level perspectives into the project design (see Annex 7(a)). In addition, 
consultations with technical officials within MoAC with expertise on water management and related modeling, 
economics, agriculture, and hydromet services, as well as academic institutions in order to incorporate best 
international and national practices, and seek wide support for the project interventions.  Given their expertise and 
experience ecosystems-based water management in Thailand, GIZ was consulted to inform the design the EbA 
elements of Output 2. 
 
162. 
The private sector and social business have also been consulted to ensure a pragmatic lens to the design of 
interventions supporting farmers. These include, Siam Organic Co Ltd, which focuses on producing healthy organic 
products, while applying practical business approaches informed by market research, to help small-scale producers in 
Thailand grow their way out of poverty.  Similarly, consultations with Krungsri Bank63 regarding supporting farmers with 
business skills resulted in a partnership for the project through co-financing for Output 3.   
 
163. 
Following a multi-stakeholder approach, the project once under implementation will continue to engage with 
numerous stakeholders, both at a national and local level. These include the implementing partner, and civil society 
 
63 A member of MUFG, a global financial group

=== PAGE 48 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
organizations (CSOs), NGOs, private sector organizations, academia, Office of Agriculture Economics (OAE), and other 
public entities. The roles and responsibilities of the various stakeholders are detailed in the Stakeholder Engagement 
Plan (see Annex 7(b)).  
 
164. 
The proposal is aligned with UNDP’s comparative advantage in the areas of capacity building, providing 
technical and policy support, reducing barriers and creating enabling conditions for adaptation planning and 
investments. Specifically, the proposed project will build upon UNDP’s comparative advantage stemming from 
experience in working with governments and communities in Thailand and globally on: i) establishing and strengthening 
institutional, policy and legislative mechanisms; ii) building capacity; iii) undertaking risk assessments; iv) 
mainstreaming climate change adaptation, disaster risk reduction and early warning systems into development 
planning; and v) harnessing best practices and community-based approaches across different thematic areas for 
climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction. This includes experience with initiatives focused on transferring 
knowledge and technology via South-South cooperation. The UNDP Country Office (CO) in Thailand is well placed to 
oversee the implementation of the proposed project. UNDP has worked closely with RID on a number of projects, 
including the ongoing Climate Change Finance project, aimed at strengthening capacities of RID to formulate climate-
informed projects and secure finance for implementation. In addition, UNDP is working with the Office of Agriculture 
Economics (AOE) of MoAC through “Integrating Agriculture in National Adaptation Plans (NAP–Ag)” program. 
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
165. 
An economic analysis of the proposed project was carried out (see Annex 3a, b) in accordance with the 
Guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program.64 The economic efficiency 
of the investment was determined by computing the economic net present value (NPV) with an assumed 10% discount 
rate, and the economic internal rate of return (IRR). For consistency purposes, all proposals developed with the support 
of UNDP have opted to use a 10% discount rate, in line with the existing practice of multilateral development banks. 
  
166. 
Economic values (costs and benefits) are all measured in real terms of 2019. Economic costs of the project 
are net of taxes, duties, and price contingencies. Furthermore, the analysis assumes a shadow wage rate of 1.00 for 
unskilled and semi-skilled labour in Thailand. With an official unemployment rate estimated at less than 1.5%, this 
assumption is appropriate. Provided that the economic cost of labour in Thailand may be expected to be lower than the 
market wage rate (financial cost), we expect this assumption leads to significantly over-estimating the economic cost 
of the project, and under-estimating the true net economic value of the project.65  
 
167. 
For purpose of the economic analysis, it is assumed that the capital assets have an average longevity of 20 
years. Since, capital investment is expected to have been completed in 2025, it is assumed that this 20-year time 
horizon covers the period 2026 to 2045. Hence, the entire period of analysis covers the period 2021 to 2045. 
 
168. 
As is common when undertaking the economic analysis of investment projects, numerous assumptions were 
used to delineate the “with project scenario” from the “without project scenario”. These assumptions are presented and 
discussed in detail below. Assumptions were always made so as to under-estimate the true net economic value of the 
proposed investment project.    
 
169. 
The project realizes two important benefits of a different nature. First, climate change (projected changes in 
temperature and precipitation) are expected to have an adverse impact on agricultural productivity in the project area. 
Secondly, extreme weather events (extreme precipitation with associated floods, as well as drought) are expected to 
occur at a greater frequency and greater intensity in forthcoming decades. The proposed investment project is expected 
to alleviate both of these impacts.  
 
170. 
The net present value (NPV) and internal rate of return (IRR) of the proposed investment project are presented 
in the table below. The table shows the NPV to be positive under the assumed range of impacts of climate change on 
agricultural productivity, and an IRR in excess of 20%.  
 
Estimated Net Present Value and Internal Rate of Return 
 
 
 
64 UNDP. 2015. Guidance on the conduct and reporting of the Economic and Financial Analysis of Climate Change Adaptation and 
Mitigation Projects and Programmes. UNDP. 
65 It is generally pointed out that the presence of a large informal sector explains this low level of official unemployment. Furthermore, with 
approximately 40% of Thailand's population engaged in agriculture, there is a high degree of underemployment and off-
season unemployment in Thailand. These could equally justify the use of a shadow wage rate lower than the financial cost of labor.

=== PAGE 49 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
Scenario1 
Net present value ($) 
Internal rate of return (%) 
Minus 5% by 2042 
39,230,364 
29.3 
Minus 10% by 2042 
43,534,130 
30.8 
Minus 15% by 2042 
47,841,453 
32.2 
Minus 20% by 2042 
52,148,777 
33.6 
1 For purpose of clarity, the scenarios presented are the assumed impacts of climate change  
   by 2044 on agricultural productivity in the absence of the project.  
 
171. 
A sensitivity analysis indicates that the NVP of the project is robust to an increase in cost of 20%, a decrease 
in benefits of 20%, and a simultaneous increase in cost of 20% and decrease in benefits of 20%.  
 
172. 
In addition, a financial analysis has been carried out (see Annex 3c) in accordance with the Guidelines for the 
Financial Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program. These guidelines clearly mandate that a 
financial analysis of project cash flows be computed and FIRR calculated only for those proposed project activities or 
outputs that can reliably result in direct and quantifiable financial revenue generation (incremental earnings from 
baseline) or a direct and quantifiable financial savings potential to the project owners or to the project beneficiaries.  
 
173. 
In all there are 3 outputs and 8 activities that constitute this proposed project. However, none of the activities 
or outputs clearly result in direct and quantifiable earnings or direct and quantifiable savings to the project owners or 
the project beneficiaries. It is only pertinent to mention here that all the activities and outputs of this proposed project 
result only in non-attributable savings that are of public good in nature to the larger community of the at-risk population 
in the proposed project area. Hence, a financial modeling-based analysis has not been conducted and an FIRR has 
not been calculated for any of these activities. 
  
174. 
However, considering the GCF’s minimum concession policy, this project’s proposed activities have been 
analyzed from a macro-economic and government perspective to assess the need for GCF grant as the only feasible 
financial instrument to fund the project activities. Hence, taking into consideration the factors such as the public good 
nature of benefits arising out of the project, climate change being the key driver, disadvantaged socio-economic 
background of the target population, and the catalytic nature of GCF grants, the following is recommended:  
 
• 
With 69% of budget coming from co-financing, GCF grant requested through the funding proposal is 
tailored to the incremental cost to make the total project investment viable and hence the right level of 
concessionality has been sought.  
• 
Royal Thai Government (RTG) has no incremental ability to stretch its contributions either from internal 
budgets (due to the innovative, first-time nature of EbA-based project) or from external private capital 
participation (due to lack of tangible financial reflows) 
• 
The nature of the benefits and the socio-economic background of the vulnerable population does not 
accommodate repayment of capital in whatever form or serviceability of a loan instrument. 
• 
The nature of the beneficiaries and the level of essentiality of the water management service to their 
livelihood do not accommodate repayment of capital in whatever form or serviceability of a loan instrument.  
• 
Hence, it is recommended that in order to reduce / close the existing financing and knowledge gaps and 
barriers to improve resilience of the at-risk population in the proposed project area to climate change-
induced hazards, catalytic capital in the form of GCF grants are essential. 
 
175. 
To ensure sustainability of the investment, the RTG has committed USD 17.254 million for O&M for 15 years 
beyond the GCF-funded project period. 
 
Best practices  
176. 
A feasibility study was conducted as part of development activities for the proposed GCF project.  Conclusions 
and recommendations of the feasibility study have been incorporated into the design of the project, these are 
summarized below.   
 
Climate information for water management and agriculture planning 
177. 
Key lessons and recommendations for climate data management and information have been developed 
according to the TNA.  The IRDM is an existing tool developed utilised by RID that can calculate the amount of rainfall 
and inflow of water into reservoirs on the rainy season and design water release schedules for the next 12 months with 
a relatively high level of accuracy. Its mathematical models can be used to forecast inflows into different water sources, 
increase farming areas along the Chao Phraya River basin, work out water management plans for individual irrigation 
zones and estimate agricultural yield and revenue. Under this project the tool will be upgraded to provide forecasts for 
shorter time frames (e.g. monthly or weekly) and tailor and distribute risk information to the needs of subnational

=== PAGE 50 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
decision makers and farmers/ end-users. This can, ultimately, enable farmers to enhance their resilience against 
climate change induced droughts and floods through better water management planning.  
 
Strengthened water management infrastructure and EbA measures for greater resilience to projected climate change 
178. 
The proposed measures in the project seek to support more effective water management and an increase in 
the number of irrigated farmlands. Overall, in terms of recommended proposed improvement measures, the 
interventions primarily consist of measure for increased water storage within the irrigation network, and the use of water 
retention ponds for irrigation purposes within the dry season; enhancements to manage flood events by responding to 
higher return periods in agricultural land flood prevention; and increased protection of farmland against flooding and 
enabling two harvests per year. Specifically – activities to achieve this fall under the: dredging of canals, maintenance 
and improvement of existing weirs and diversion structures, heightening embankments and damns, and constructing 
new retention ponds within the project area.  Per the recently-conducted feasibility study undertaken by the RID, in 
order to adequately regulate water during wet and dry season, four water gates need to be upgraded and three existing 
canals need to be enlarged to ensure greater climate resilience.   
 
179. 
As part of the feasibility study for this proposal, RID requested additional assistance from Gesellschaft fuer 
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) to propose EbA approaches for responding to the risks and impacts of the Yom-
Nan area, and for integration into the proposed intervention measures included for this proposal.  By nature, Ecosystem-
based Adaptation measures are responsive and flexible in nature. Given the level of uncertainty in predicting future 
climate outcomes this is also imperative.  Such measures are linked across sectors, operating in a landscape – e.g. 
agriculture, urban land use, water management, ecosystem settings – and in order to have a future-proof approach 
should be integrated in all future planning stages, consisting of integrated adaptation measures encompassing all of 
the relevant sectors.  In order to establish such a holistic approach in integrating all the relevant aspects into future-
responsive measures, the EbA measures assessed: 
 
• 
Available modeling for the area: including hydrologic modeling for the hydrological regime and the probabilities 
of occurrence; hydraulic modeling for water levels, flow velocities, inundation maps and risk zones.  
• 
Ecosystem-based Adaptation as a basis for sustainable climate-responsive measures, using agricultural, 
biodiversity, urban and water related Ecosystem based Adaptation approaches, on principles of balancing 
provisional, regulatory and cultural ecosystem services, and a systemic approach to utilize the interplay of all 
components and their effects/impacts. 
• 
An overall integration of data management and dissemination, the infrastructure development and enhanced 
operation and capacity building – in developing a set of measures for intervention.  
 
Agricultural extension and community-based trainings on climate smart agricultural practices and climate information  
180. 
Knowledge sharing to extension officers and agricultural households on climate change impacts on agriculture 
in the Yom and Nan River basins needs to be undertaken that strengthens and works with existing practices and 
mechanisms. Interventions will support awareness raising, informed adaptation measures and training to communities, 
such as agriculture practices which are less water-intensive.  In addition to allow for effective climate-responsive water 
management planning to take place – improving climate risk informed planning information will enable farmers to 
respond and integrate appropriately climate-informed climate smart agricultural practices appropriate to their specific 
location and assist to build greater climate resilience of the agricultural sector and livelihoods of households within the 
Yom and Nan River Basin area.   
 
181. 
While further development of climate adaptive agricultural interventions is to be established through a 
consultative process during the project phase with farmers in the Yom and Nan River Basin, a number of key activities 
were identified in the feasibility phase: 
 
• 
Climate-smart-ecological adaptation processes 
• 
Integrated agriculture practices and training 
• 
Conservation agriculture practices and training 
• 
Support for additional on-farm water storage to assist with drought impacts 
• 
Diversification of crop options appropriate to the locality 
• 
Support in appropriate market development and linkages for farmers of the diversified crops. 
• 
Promotion of interspersing of trees on farms to assist on farm water retention in soil and assisting 
temperature stabilisation and protection against temperature increases. 
• 
Habitat enhancement for fish: re-stocking of irrigation canals with habitat for fish and non-fish species 
(increasing of food security options). 
• 
Diversified options with ‘back up’ of less water-intensive crop choices.

=== PAGE 51 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
 
Water Management in terms of agricultural practices 
182. 
The efficient management of water will increase water supplies for the project area in Tung Bang Rakam 
Floodplain and also be able to help in retaining water flow to the lower Yom River and the Chao Phraya River Basins 
at a certain level. However, the storage of runoff within the area would definitely increase the water supply but also 
would have adverse impacts on farmlands and farming patterns. Therefore, it is necessary to set up the appropriate 
level of water storage in accordance with the cultivating timeline of farmers. 
         
 
183. 
During the middle of rainy season with heavy rains and runoff draining from the upper area, all water regulator 
facilities should be opened in order to drain water out of the area. This is to be prepared for a large volume of runoff in 
the mid-season till the end of the rainy season. During the end of the rainy season when water level in the Yom River 
and the flooding water over the lowland subside and get close to the planned storage level, the existing water regulator 
facilities should be closed to store water then the farming activities can be started (the period around mid-October to 
late-October). The storage water volume would cover the large area of farmlands in Tung Bang Rakam floodplain at 
the level of less than 1.20 meters from the ground level. It would be difficult to drain the entire area before the cultivation 
of the second rice crops and it would cause the loss of storage water. A recommendation for the farmers is that the 
farming should begin in the area inundated for less than 0.20 meter. The preparations for rice cultivation with 
transplanting rice seedlings technique are possible to be done in the area inundated with low level of water. Farmers 
should prepare the farmlands and nurse the seedlings at the same time. The preparation for the seedling nursery 
should be in small pieces of land equipped with water pumps to drain those submerged pieces of land. Otherwise 
farmers should pool up to utilize the land on the high ground as their nursery. Two weeks after the preparation activities 
on the least flooded farmlands (of less than 0.20 meter of inundation), when water from the surroundings would be 
drawn for the farming activities, flood level is expected to be subsided. Then the preparation works can be done in the 
next less flooded farmlands and such this step can be continued until covering the entire project area. The more 
farmland is cultivated, the less pieces of land submerged. Farms located at the lowest elevation level of this planned 
flood retention area could be used for farming eight weeks after the first plots of farmlands were cultivated. 
  
184. 
According to a graph of relationship between the volume of water demand and the decreased flood volume, 
the water demand in the area was found to be higher than the amount of flood water retained by about 58.63 million 
cubic meters. This shortage amount of water should be delivered from outside sources that would be from the Yom 
River (possibly flow from the Ping River Basin) and Khlong Bang Kaeo Canal (possibly flow from the Nan River Basin 
through Khlong Wang Khon, Khlong Mem Canals under operation of the Plai Chum Pol Project).  The water flow should 
be started at the ninth week of the farming season around the end of December till early January. The in-season rice 
cultivation would start from the mid of April. The rainfed cultivation techniques would be applied. The harvesting should 
be done before the mid of August when a large amount of runoff would flow into the area.

=== PAGE 52 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes 
as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
☐ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development 
E.2. Core indicator targets 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A. 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
and cross-cutting only) 
Annual 
N/A t CO2 eq 
Lifetime 
N/A t CO2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) 
(a) Total project financing 
33,911,323   USD    
(b) Requested GCF amount  
17,533,500  USD 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
_____  t CO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
_____   Choose an item. / t 
CO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed 
(e = b / c) 
_____   Choose an item. / t 
CO2eq 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross-cutting only) 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
16,377,823   USD 
(g) Public source co-financed 
16,263,940   USD 
(h) Private source finance leveraged  
113,883   USD 
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
0.934   
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
0.928  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
0.006  
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
62,000 
32,104 (52%) female 
29,896 (48%) male 
Indirect 
471,561 (population of target districts) 
235,781 (50%) female 
235,781 (50%) male 
25,000,000 (greater Chao Phraya River basin) 
12,500,000 (50%) female 
12,500,000 (50%) male  
 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
0.1% of Thailand population  
62,000 
55% female 
Indirect 
1%  of Thailand population (indirect beneficiaries in the project 
area) 
235,781 (50%) female 
235,781 (50%) male 
39% of Thailand population (indirect beneficiaries in the greater 
Chao Phraya River Basin)

=== PAGE 53 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. Fund-level impacts 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods 
of the most vulnerable 
people, communities and 
regions 
A 1.1 Change in 
expected losses of 
lives and economic 
assets (US$) due to 
the impact of 
extreme climate-
related disasters in 
the geographic area 
of the GCF 
intervention 
Gender-
disaggregated 
household 
surveys 
undertaken by 
the project for all 
households in 
target area 
Annual 
agriculture report 
(e.g. OAE’s 
Agricultural 
Statistics of 
Thailand) 
USD 4 
million in 
losses 
 
USD 0.03 
million 
reduction 
in losses 
 
USD 2 
million 
reduction 
in losses  
 
Estimated flood 
damage cost 
reduction at each 
return period in 
case without and 
with project   
Annex 3b_Econ 
Analysis  
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods 
of the most vulnerable 
people, communities and 
regions 
A1.2 Number of 
males and females 
benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, 
agriculture, tourism, 
etc.) 
Gender-
disaggregated 
household 
surveys 
undertaken by 
the project for all 
households in 
target area 
 
Annual 
agriculture report 
(e.g. OAE’s 
Agricultural 
Statistics of 
Thailand) 
0 
Male = 
7,750 
Female = 
7,750 
Male 
=29,896 
Female = 
32,104 
Training and 
capacity building 
measures will 
result in change 
responses for 
agricultural 
activities and 
practices. 
Provision of 
climate 
information 
tailored to 
stakeholders’ 
needs will result in 
climate 
information being 
integrated into 
planning and 
decision-making 
of farmers and 
government 
stakeholders, and 
which is climate-
risk responsive.  
A2.0 Increased resilience 
of health and well-being, 
and food and water security 
A2.3 Number of 
males and females 
with yearround 
access to reliable 
and safe water 
supply despite 
Gender-
disaggregated 
household 
surveys 
undertaken by 
the project for all 
households in 
target area 
RID reports - 
water flows, 
0 
 
Male = 
7,750 
Female = 
7,750 
Male 
=29,896 
Female = 
32,104 
Water 
infrastructure 
completion and 
ongoing 
maintenance 
retained to 
effectively 
continue supply of 
water.  
12,500,000 (50%) female 
12,500,000 (50%) male

=== PAGE 54 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
climate shocks and 
stresses66 
water retention 
data at 
monitoring 
stations both in 
targeted area 
and in 
downstream 
areas for 
changes in flood 
impacts 
Annual 
agriculture report 
(e.g. OAE’s 
Agricultural 
Statistics of 
Thailand) 
Water access and 
climate smart 
agricultural 
measures will 
improve food 
security 
outcomes. 
 
A3.0 Increased resilience 
of intrastructure and the 
built environment to climate 
change 
A3.1 Number of 
physical assests 
made more resilient 
to climate 
variablility and 
change, 
considering human 
benefits 
Site visits 
RID reports -  
water flows, 
water retention 
data at 
monitoring 
stations both in 
targeted area 
and in 
downstream 
areas for 
changes in flood 
impacts 
0 
Existing 
infrastructur
e (canal 
head 
regulars 
along 
Khlong 
Muagn 
Chang and 
Khlong Ta 
Kay) has 
not been 
upgraded 
to respond 
to climate 
impacts  
0 
USD 0 
2  
 
USD 5 
million 
  
 
Extreme weather 
does not damage 
infrastructure 
works.  
 
A4.0 Improved resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem 
services.  
 
A4.1 
Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems 
protected and 
strengthened in 
response to climate 
Site visits, 
reports, River 
Basin Master 
Plan (ONWR); 
River Basin 
Committee 
meeting report 
(RBC 
Secretariat) 
0 
 
120 km2 
200 km2 
 
 
Assessment 
identified suitable 
locations for EbA 
measures to 
complement water 
infrastructure 
 
66 Beneficiaries are expected to benefit from both A1.0 and A2.0.  Water supply in this case refers to water for agriculture purposes.  
Precision agriculture supported by the project will define minimum amounts to support productivity.

=== PAGE 55 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
variability and 
change.67 
 
 
67 Midterm and Final Targets can be further defined during year 1 once measures are identified/selected 
68 Level of adoption is based on a scale where 1 = limited to no practice of climate-informed agriculture; Level 2 = households aware of climate 
impacts on agriculture and know how/where to get related technical support; Level 3 = households engaged with support activities and 
applying climate information and practices partially; Level 4 = households knowledgeable about climate-resilient practices and fully applying 
practices 
69 Level of integration is based on a scale where 1 = limited to no integration; Level 2 = climate information included in planning processes for 
water or agriculture planning; Level 3 = climate information included in planning processes for both sectors; Level 4 = evidence of collaborative 
and climate informed planning between water and agriculture sectors 
E.4. Fund-level outcomes 
Expected Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term) 
Final 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks 
A7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, communities, 
businesses and public-
sector services of Fund-
supported tools 
instruments, strategies and 
activities to respond to 
climate change and 
variability 68 
Gender-
disaggregate
d household 
surveys 
undertaken 
by the 
project for all 
households 
in target 
area.   
Household 
Level = 1  
 
0  
credit 
available 
to farmers 
practicing 
climate 
resilient 
farming 
(co-
designed 
by project) 
Househol
d Level = 
2 
 
0 
House
hold 
Level = 
4  
USD16 
million  
Climate-information 
and guidance on on-
farm measures and/or 
crop alternatives are 
adopted by 
beneficiary 
households  
BAAC commitment to 
parallel finance 
through financial 
product 
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
1. Enhance climate and risk 
informed planning in the 
water and agricultural 
sectors through improved 
climate information and 
cross sectoral coordination 
1.1. Level69 of integration 
of climate related 
information into water and 
agriculture planning 
 
1.2. Number of people 
trained on integrating 
climate information into 
planning 
Reports, 
integration 
into policy, 
planning and 
programmin
g documents  
Level = 1 
 
 
0 staff 
from TMD, 
RID and 
other 
stakehold
ers 
Level = 2 
 
 
 
 
15  
(30% 
women) 
Level = 4 
 
 
 
 
30  
(30% 
women) 
Government 
commitment to 
climate-informed 
planning  
2.  Improve water 
management through 
strengthened infrastructure 
complemented by EbA 
measures, for greater 
resilience to climate change 
impacts 
 
2.1. Climate risk informed 
upgrades and 
enhancements to the Yom 
and Nan river basin area, 
updating the canal and 
regulator network to 
effectively manage water 
for both flood and drought 
periods for efficient use. 
 
 
 
Total 
number of 
assets 
constructed 
and/or 
modified, 
according to 
type or 
upgrade/stre
ngthening 
 
 
 
0 
Existing 
infrastruct
ure (canal 
head 
regulators/
flood 
gates 
along 
Khlong 
Muang 
Chang 
and 
3 flood 
gates 
covering 
water 
distributio
n area of 
120km2 
5 
upgrades/m
odifications, 
complemen
ted by EbA, 
covering 
water 
distribution 
area of 
200km2   
 
Co-financing by 
RID to support 
infrastructure 
investment (3 
flood gates) and 
other works  
Extreme weather 
does not damage 
infrastructure 
works.

=== PAGE 56 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Khlong Ta 
Kay Reg)  
have not 
been 
upgraded 
and 
designs 
are not 
informed 
by climate 
informatio
n; 
infrastruct
ure not 
compleme
nted by 
EbA 
measures 
Climate 
information 
integration into 
upgrade designs 
will mitigate 
potential damage 
to infrastructure 
works from flood. 
 
Assessment 
identified suitable 
locations for EbA 
measures 
3. Reduce volatility of 
agriculture livelihoods in 
drought and flood prone 
areas through strengthened 
extension support and local 
planning, investment in on-
farm adaptation measures 
and greater access to 
finance and markets 
3.1. Level of action and 
application of climate 
information towards 
climate resilient practices 
by beneficiary households 
 
 
Gender-
disaggregate
d household 
surveys 
(project 
randomized 
control 
trials); site 
visits; 
reports; 
project 
monitoring;  
0 farm 
ponds 
 
0 
communit
y 
nurseries 
in 
subdistrict
s  
 
0   
Online 
market 
platform to 
increase 
visibility 
and 
marketabil
ity of 
farmers’ 
products 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
100 
  
22  
 
 
 
 
1 
 
Climate-
information is 
tailored and 
disseminated for 
use by farmers 
Guidance on on-
farm measures 
and/or crop 
alternatives is 
provided to farmer 
through extension 
services, and is 
adopted by 
beneficiary 
households  
3.2. Number of 
households with access to 
finance for climate 
resilient farming 
investment 
 
Gender-
disaggregate
d household 
surveys 
(project 
randomized 
control 
trials);  
Annual 
BAAC 
reports 
0 
agriculture 
household
s 
practicing 
climate 
resilient 
agriculture 
(e.g. on 
farm EbA 
measures, 
water 
saving 
technologi
es/IoT) 
with 
access to 
finance 
(measured 
as 
household 
or head of 
10,000  
20,000 
BAAC 
commitment to 
parallel finance 
through financial 
product

=== PAGE 57 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
household
, may also 
include 
small 
enterprise) 
3.3. Number of listed 
companies contributing to 
climate resilient 
agriculture through 
contracts to purchase 
sustainably produced 
products or investment to 
support climate resilient 
agriculture (in-kind/cash 
contributions)  
Project 
reports, 
annual co-
financing 
reporting; 
company 
reports and 
PR materials   
0 
70 
210 
Continued UNDP 
support to 
companies for 
integration of SDG 
impact 
measurement and 
management into 
business 
operations and 
strategy. UNDP 
has network of 
700 listed 
companies of the 
Thailand stock 
market  
E.6. Activities  
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Activity 1.1. Strengthening 
capacity to generate tailored 
climate information to inform 
water management and 
agriculture planning 
 
Activity 1.1 focuses on 
development of climate and 
risk information that is tailored 
for water and agriculture 
planning, with related capacity 
building.   
 
Sub-activities: 
1.1.1. 
Development of 
Terms of Reference (ToR) for 
the climate information 
processing unit mandate 
1.1.2. 
Procurement of 
hardware and software for 
enhanced generation of 
climate and environmental 
information, and related 
training 
1.1.3. 
Technical training to 
30 staff from TMD, RID and 
relevant agencies on 
integration of climate change 
into water management 
planning, including 
consideration of agriculture 
needs  
1.1.4. 
Development of 
tailored climate information 
products to inform planning, 
and one-to-two week, 
monthly, seasonal, annual 
and long-term climate forecast 
models 
Deliverables: 
• 
Monitoring equipment - 
server, flow radar, 
meteorological station, 
CCTV, drone, lake water 
level measurement 
equipment, groundwater 
measurement equipment, 
water level measurement in a 
cropping plot, soil moisture 
meter, spare parts for small 
telemetry system 
• 
Capacity building/Training 
workshops 
• 
Technical expertise 
• 
Professional services 
• 
Tailored climate information 
products 
Activity 1.2. Facilitating inter-
ministerial coordination for 
climate-informed and 
integrated planning 
 
Activity 1.2 supports inter-
agency cooperation for 
climate-informed, integrated 
planning.   
Sub-activities: 
1.2.1. 
Development of 
SOPs for sharing of climate 
information across relevant 
departments  
1.2.2. 
Workshops and 
meetings for sensitization and 
collaboration in sharing of 
information and identifying 
opportunity for collaboration 
and complementarity 
 
Deliverables: 
• 
SOPs 
• 
Inter-ministerial meetings 
• 
Technical expertise 
• 
Workshops

=== PAGE 58 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1.3. Expanding access 
to climate information for 
application at the household 
level  
Activity 1.3. focuses on 
making information and 
bulletins available for climate-
informed household decision 
making.  Sub-activities: 
 
 
Sub-activities: 
1.3.1. 
Development of 
communication strategy for 
dissemination of information, 
including timing and media 
1.3.2. 
Development of 
information briefs and reports 
released for circulation in local 
and social media 
(dissemination informed by 
communications strategy) 
1.3.3. 
Development of 
smartphone and Line app with 
climate information that can 
be applied at the agriculture 
household level  
1.3.4. 
Development of 
complementary website for 
interactive information in line 
with information apps or 
households 
 
Deliverables: 
• 
Technical expertise 
• 
Communications products  
 
Activity 2.1.  Climate-informed 
engineering designs for the 13 
schemes of the Yom-Nan river 
basin and upgrade of 2 water 
infrastructure  
 
Strengthening of water 
management infrastructure 
and existing irrigation 
networks and canals.   
Sub-activities: 
2.1.1. 
Technical support to 
review and enhance existing 
engineering designs for the 13 
schemes of the Yom-Nan river 
basin area, to ensure 
adequate integration of 
climate change  
2.1.2. 
Construction 
activities to upgrade of 2 canal 
head regulators along Khlong 
Muang Chang and Khlong Ta 
Kay Reg in the Yom-Nan river 
basin area 
 
Deliverables: 
• 
Climate-informed 
engineering designs for 13 
schemes of the Yom-Nan 
river basin 
• 
2 canal head regulators 
along Khlong Muang Chang 
and Khlong Ta Kay Reg in 
the Yom-Nan river basin 
area 
• 
Technical support 
• 
Professional services 
Activity 2.2. Complementing of 
grey infrastructure with EbA 
measures and integration of 
EbA approaches into water 
management policy and 
planning  
Activity 2.2 complements 
upgrades to grey 
infrastructure with EbA 
measures.  EbA measures will 
be informed by a diagnostic 
analysis which includes 
vulnerability and risk 
assessment, cause-impact 
chains and economic 
evaluation.  The activity will 
also support climate-sensitive 
IWRM though capacity 
building. 
Sub-activities: 
2.2.1 
Conduct of 
diagnostic analysis incl. 
vulnerability and risk 
assessment, modelling, 
cause-impact chains and 
economic evaluation 
2.2.2. 
Based on the 
diagnostic analysis conduct 
joint prioritization of EbA 
solutions, finalization of 
design for three selected EbA 
measures, including related 
training and guidance 
materials 
2.2.3. 
Implementation of 
identified ecosystem-based 
adaptation measures 
2.2.4. 
Integration of 
ecosystem-based adaptation 
measures into water 
management rehabilitation 
plans: soil conservation 
measures, floodplain 
development and 
conservation, river restoration, 
fish migration passes, and 
Deliverables: 
• 
Diagnostic analysis incl. 
vulnerability and risk 
assessment, modelling, 
cause-impact chains and 
economic evaluation 
• 
EbA measures applied at 3 
sites 
• 
Water management 
rehabilitation plans, which 
include EbA measures 
• 
Lessons learned documents

=== PAGE 59 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
longitudinal connection of the 
Yom River 
2.2.5. 
Documentation of 
lessons learned in terms of 
linking local (river basin) level 
planning and implementation 
experience with national level 
policy developments 
[contribution to the 
implementation of the 
NAP/NDC]  
 
Activity 3.1. Application of 
climate information in 
household agriculture 
planning and strengthening of 
related support through 
extension services 
 
Activity 3.1 will ensure that 
farmers receive technical 
support through extension 
services to apply climate 
information and implement 
climate resilient measure in 
agriculture activities. 
Sub-activities: 
3.1.1. 
Assist in the 
development of district level 
adaptation action plans 
through technical assistance 
3.1.2. 
Training of 20 
provincial agricultural 
extension and land 
development officers in the 
target provinces to undertake 
climate-risk informed 
agricultural extension services 
3.1.3. 
Training of 
agricultural extension and 
land development officers for 
the project area in climate-
smart agricultural practices 
and management; including 
appropriate crops and 
inclusion of climate risk 
responsive farm planning  
3.1.4. 
Precision agriculture 
demonstration and related 
dissemination of data 
3.1.5. 
Technical assistance 
to support farmers to apply 
vulnerability assessment and 
climate information to 
agriculture decisions at the 
household level (e.g. crop 
choice and crop calendar) 
3.1.6. 
Training through 
farmer fields schools in each 
sub-district to complement 
and support the activities of 
agricultural services 
(extension) 
Deliverables: 
• 
Technical 
expertise/consultancies for 
district level adaptation 
action plans and support to 
farmers 
• 
Capacity building/workshops 
• 
Software and hardware 
related to Climate Resilience 
and Smart Farming/Precision 
Agriculture demonstration 
 
Activity 3.2. Implementation of 
on-farm climate resilient 
measures to improve drought 
and flood resilience and 
improved access to finance 
for sustainable agriculture  
 
Activity 3.2 will support 
vulnerable farmers to employ 
on-farm measures that would 
improve water access during 
dry periods. Community 
nurseries will also be 
established to support EbA 
measures of Output 2.2.   
 
Sub-activities: 
3.2.1. 
Technical expertise 
for development of on-farm 
EbA guidelines for application 
by farmers   
3.2.2. 
Technical assistance 
and investment to support to 
farmers related to on-farm 
ponds and enhancing on-farm 
measures to protect irrigation 
channels (e.g. vegetating on 
farm canal buffer zones, 
planting shade cover areas to 
minimize evaporation of water 
along canal ways, and 
vegetating irrigation 
Deliverables: 
• 
Technical expertise to 
support EbA approaches at 
farmer household level 
• 
On-farm measures (incl 100 
on farms ponds) and 
community nurseries in 22 
sub-districts, and small scale 
equipment for farmers 
• 
Financial instrument 
available through BAAC to 
support farmer investments 
in climate resilient agriculture

=== PAGE 60 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure for flood 
protection) 
3.2.3. 
Procurement of small 
scale equipment for farmers to 
support water conservation 
and soil management  
3.2.4. 
Establishment of 
community nurseries to 
provide alternative livelihood 
income generation during 
drought-flood/non-farming 
periods, and to cultivate and 
supply climate smart crops, 
vegetables, and vegetation 
species for EbA measures 
implemented in Output 2 
3.2.5. 
Co-design of 
financial instrument with 
BAAC to support farmers with 
adaptation investments 
towards climate resilient 
agriculture 
 
Activity 3.3. Capacity building 
for farmers to support market 
access for climate resilient 
agriculture products 
Activity 3.3 focuses on the 
critical knowledge sharing and 
knowledge transfer to support 
market access for climate 
resilient agriculture products.  
With co-financing support 
from Krungsri Bank, farmers 
will also improve financial 
literacy so that they can better 
avail themselves of available 
markets and financial 
mechanisms for their 
products. 
 
Sub-activities: 
3.3.1. 
Farmer to farmer 
knowledge sharing 
workshops, including 
reciprocal learning processes 
(e.g. site visits by farmer field 
schools to project schemes)  
3.3.2. 
Establishment of 
online market platform to 
increase visibility and 
marketability of farmers’ 
products  
3.3.3. 
Training to farmers to 
support market access for 
farmers, including capacity 
building related to financial 
literacy, linkages to buyers 
and markets, requirements for 
contract farming (incl. 
hospitals, schools, 
restaurants), linkages through 
rice cooperatives, linkages to 
local gatherer and processors, 
linkages to private sector and 
community support agriculture 
(CSA) for larger markets at 
Phitsanulok province, and 
comprising of larger market 
buyers, processor, 
cooperative 
 
Deliverables: 
• 
Workshops/capacity building 
• 
Online agriculture product 
market platform 
 
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
185. 
Project-level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy.  
 
Oversight and monitoring responsibilities: 
186. 
The primary responsibility for day-to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the Project Manager. 
The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. The Project 
Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office of any delays or difficulties during implementation, 
including the implementation of the Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) plan, so that the appropriate support and corrective

=== PAGE 61 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
measures can be adopted. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of transparency, 
responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results. 
 
187. 
The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project-level M&E requirements as outlined in 
the UNDP POPP. Additional M&E, implementation quality assurance, and troubleshooting support will be provided by the 
UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project target groups and stakeholders including the NDA Focal Point 
will be involved as much as possible in project-level M&E.  
  
188. 
A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document is signed by all relevant parties to: a) 
re-orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence project 
implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and communication lines 
and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework, re-assess baselines as needed, and discuss reporting, 
monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; d) review financial reporting procedures and 
mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; e) plan and schedule Project Board meetings 
and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project Manager will prepare the inception report no later than one month 
after the inception workshop. The final inception report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional 
Technical Advisor, and will be approved by the Project Board.    
 
189. 
The Project Manager, the UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective 
input to the Annual Project Report (APR) for each year of project implementation. The Project Manager will ensure that the 
indicators included in the project results framework are monitored annually well in advance of the APR submission deadline 
and will objectively report progress in the APR. The annual APR will be shared with the Project Board and other 
stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office will coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the 
APR. The quality rating of the previous year’s APR will be used to inform the preparation of the next APR. The final project 
APR, along with the terminal evaluation report and corresponding management response, will serve as the final project 
report package.  
 
190. 
An independent mid-term review process will be undertaken, and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half of the 
project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review process and the final MTR report will follow the standard templates 
and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center. The final MTR report will be cleared by the UNDP 
Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor, and will be approved by the Project Board. The final MTR report 
will be available in English.  
 
GCF evaluation requirements:   
191. 
An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months prior to operational closure of 
the project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report will follow the standard templates and 
guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center. The final TE report will be cleared by the UNDP Country 
Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor, and will be approved by the Project Board. The TE report will be available 
in English.  
 
192. 
The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project terminal evaluation in the UNDP Country Office 
evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the management response to the public 
UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) (erc.undp.org). The MTR and TE will be carried out by an independent 
evaluator. The evaluation report prepared by the independent evaluator is then quality assessed and rated by the UNDP 
Independent Evaluation Office. 
 
193. 
The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex-post evaluations. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be included 
in the UNDP project document.

=== PAGE 62 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
A number of risks of varied probability have been identified for the project, as set out in detail at G2. These risks relate to project 
sustainability in terms of infrastructure maintenance in the long term, environmental risks to project investments, limited 
institutional capacity, project beneficiary target resistance/non-adoption, project timeline disruptions due extreme events (natural 
disasters, political events). 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
High 
Description 
Infrastructure investments (i.e. flood gates) are not maintained and do not serve intended purpose 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Maintenance of the investments fall under the mandate of the executing entity, RID.  Under its mandate, RID is responsible for 
maintaining water infrastructure. Co-financing from RID includes O&M during project implementation, and RID has committed 
resources for post-project O&M. The risk is therefore considered low probability.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Environmental risks associated with water infrastructure investments  
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Measures will be taken to minimize any sediment entering waterways as a result of earthworks (e.g. bioengineering around the 
canals, upgrading of flood gates).  Risks are expected to be ‘moderate’, a safeguards plan has been developed and related costs 
have been integrated into the project budget. (Please see Annex 6(b)) 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Project interventions do not have intended impacts, because behavior that is not conducive to the project objective continues (e.g. 
crop choice/calendar or related water use not informed by climate change, extraction of groundwater continues, etc.).  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Project interventions are expected to reduce volatility of agriculture in the project area, through improved water management and 
the provision of climate information, related support to apply that information in planning, and support to beneficiaries through 
capacity building and sensitization to support transformational change.  Climate data will be integrated into water planning and 
management, and related training provided to government staff - ensuring informed adaptation to changing climatic conditions and 
increasing climate risks in Thailand. 
 
Communities will be engaged throughout project implementation. Technical expertise will be provided through the project to 
ensure communities and district government staff have access to technical advice. Through regular monitoring, success of 
interventions will be measured and communicated to communities to provide assurance.   
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description

=== PAGE 63 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
Staff turnover or lack of technical capacity within executing entity      
Mitigation Measure(s) 
A capacity needs assessment has been undertaken, and RID was assessed as low risk across major categories.  RID has 
capacity to implement the project.  The project follows UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), with support provided by 
UNDP for specific activities agreed between UNDP and RID. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Extreme event disrupts implementation or damages investments, resulting in delays and/or additional costs. COVID-19 and 
COVID-19 related restrictions delay implementation. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Related to extreme events, timing of activities during implementation will be scheduled to minimize risk particularly around the 
rainy season.  The project team, with support from UNDP Thailand and national partners, will also ensure implementation follows 
national instructions related to containing the spread of COVID-19.  Where possible the project will employ virtual methods to 
conduct consultations and training.  Where necessary, timing of activities particularly if in a vulnerable area, may have to be 
reviewed and the timing adjusted to ensure compliance to government restrictions, and the safety of beneficiaries, partners and 
the project team.

=== PAGE 64 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 60 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
194. 
The project has the potential to cause moderate environmental and social impacts, and has been assessed as 
a Category B project. These include impacts to water quality through sediment movement during the replacement of 
existing infrastructure, channel and retention basin works and ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) approaches. Noise 
and air quality may also be impacted during these works. Appropriate and relevant avoidance and mitigation options 
have been proposed in the ESMF, which if put in place, will significantly reduce the potential impacts of the project to 
an acceptable level. The mitigation measures include the development of site-specific erosion, drainage and sediment 
control plans that will be developed and implemented as a mitigation measure. The plans will include disposal plans 
for soil and silt removed during earthworks, ensuring that the surrounding communities and environment are not 
adversely impacted. Where possible, the project will undertake beneficial reuse of any excess sediment. Minor impacts 
include increased waste. Measures to avoid this impact include the prefabrication of materials, including for example, 
the water control infrastructure to reduce this risk of waste being generated. 
 
195. 
The project does not require any land acquisition and/or resettlement. None of the interventions will require the 
displacement of people, involve economic displacement or will be conducted in protected areas or sensitive locations. 
 
196. 
Thailand currently has an established regime for grievances. Notwithstanding, an independent two-tier 
Grievance Redress Mechanism structure was developed to address all complaints and/or grievances in the project. 
This Grievance Redress Mechanism complies with Thailand and UNDP Safeguard procedures.  
 
197. 
Budgeting for environmental interventions and the application of risk mitigation measures to enhance positive 
impacts within the main river basins of Thailand is an investment in the future as it will reduce the environmental and 
social liability at local, regional and national levels. 
 
198. 
Please see Annex 6 for further details. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
199. 
While the impacts of climate change affect the agricultural sectors and the country, climate change and its 
impacts are not gender neutral. Inequitable access to and control over natural resources, particularly land, water, and 
forests, as well as exclusion from the policy- and decision-making processes that affect resource distribution and their 
livelihood. These disproportionately affect the rural poor, who rely on natural resources for the livelihood.  
 
200. 
While there have been significant advances in general for women in Thailand, the potentially growing number 
of women-headed households in agriculture require particular attention to their needs and challenges in the context of 
climate change.   
 
201. 
The project is aligned with national gender equality and women’s empowerment related policies and 
programmes as well as international commitments under the Paris Agreement, CEDAW, SDGs, etc.  The project will 
aim to support transformational change towards gender equality and women’s empowerment and will:  
 
• 
Seek to understand in greater depth the potentially gender-differentiated knowledge, experience, and skills of 
women and men at sub-district, district and provincial levels  as well as their needs, challenges, and 
vulnerabilities (e.g. around access to resources, decision-making, etc.) in order to strengthen project 
interventions including information sharing between implementers and beneficiaries, decision-making around 
adaptation at community and household levels, production, post-harvest, and market development decisions, 
etc. This can be done through introducing/piloting approaches such as gender-responsive participatory 
Integrated Climate Services for Agriculture (PICSA) and piloting and scaling up household methodologies 
(HHM). 70 71  Several organizations have championed these approaches which have been applied in several 
in different regions to strengthen agricultural livelihoods, production, and value chain/market development, etc. 
 
70 For more about PICSA approaches, see, for example  https://ccafs.cgiar.org/participatory-integrated-climate-services-agriculture-
picsa#.XOlq5Y9lDIU  
71 For more about Household Methodologies (HHM), see, for example 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/40198517/Household+methodologie+-
+harnessing+the+family%27s+potential+for+change.pdf/cb0ab278-bfb4-4b4c-a237-e7841bc9e9aa  
For more on Household Methodologies, particularly the Gender Action Learning Systems (GALS) approach, See Mayoux, L. 2017. Gender 
Action Learning for Sustainability at Scale:: Pilot in Kyrgyzstan, May – Nov 2016 https://gamechangenetwork.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/05/GALS-Process-for-RWEE-Naryn-Pilot_-ConsolidatedReport_Feb2017_ed.pdf

=== PAGE 65 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 61 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
• 
Ensure capacity building includes the active participation of women and men and incorporates, where relevant, 
issues around gender and climate information services, market development, farmer engagement, irrigation, 
use of innovative technology, etc.  
• 
Mitigate any negative impacts on rural women and girls (e.g. in terms of benefit sharing, labor division of labor, 
access to resources, access to technology and skills development, etc.) Where possible, enhance role of new 
generation, both female and male youth (aged 18-25) to build a new generation of famers equipped with 
knowledge and skills to build climate resilience in their community. 
• 
Include a Gender Specialist on the project staff to support data collection and mainstreaming of gender issues 
(and where relevant, strategic approaches targeted specifically at women/girls across all areas of the project;  
• 
Link with institutions who can provide training to agricultural extension workers on uptake of household 
methodologies (e.g. Gender Action Learning Systems or GALS) in their work with women and men in vulnerable 
rural households and communities to complement, strengthen, and leverage farmer to farmer sharing of climate 
information, Value Chain (VC) and market access opportunities  
• 
Build/strengthen linkages with institutions/networks that can strengthen gender approaches throughout the 
project (e.g. academic institute, agriculture and other relevant research centres, etc.).  The project should also 
consider linking to existing women’s groups, housewife groups, credit groups.  
• 
Build data collection and management in the process of capacity development at all levels. Technical support 
with integrated gender and social inclusion for each project/program. 
• 
Ensure that good practices and lessons learned from the project around integrating participatory, gender 
transformative approaches in climate adaptation are documented and shared among stakeholders including 
line ministries, policymakers, and government/non-government decision-makers/planners/implementers at 
national and sub-national level and beyond (e.g. regional/international). This may also contribute to reporting 
on international commitments such as NDCs, etc. 
 
202. 
Please see gender assessment and action plan (Annex 8) for further details.  
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
203. 
The financial management and procurement of this project will follow UNDP financial rules and regulations 
available here72. 
 
204. 
Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures available here. 
 
205. 
UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section 
of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  The policies outline formal procurement 
standards and guidelines across each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP. 
See here. 
 
206. 
The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following NIM guidelines 
available here 73 . UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity by 
undertaking an evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners/Executing 
Entities (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers - HACT). 
 
 
For more on adapting GALS in agricultural extension, Value Chain (VC) development and Village Savings and Loans Associations (VSLA), 
see PELUM. 2016. Models of Integrating GALS in Functional Adult Literacy, Agricultural Extension, Advocacy, Village Savings and Lending 
Associationshttps://uganda.oxfam.org/sites/uganda.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/Adapting-GALS-in-development-programmes-
FINAL.pdf  
72 In line with UNDP National Implementation (NIM) Guidelines, the Government is responsible for the management and procurement of the 
Project to achieve project outputs. Government regulations, rules and procedures therefore apply to project implementation to the extent 
that they do not contravene the principles of the Financial Regulations and Rules of UNDP. UNDP Financial Regulations section 16.05 
state:  
- “The administration by executing entities or, under the harmonized operational modalities, implementing partners, of resources obtained 
from or through UNDP shall be carried out under their respective financial regulations, rules, practices and procedures only to the extent 
that they do not contravene the principles of the Financial Regulations and Rules of UNDP.  
- Where the financial governance of an executing entity or, under the harmonized operational modalities, implementing partner, does 
not provide the required guidance to ensure best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency, and effective international competition 
that of UNDP shall apply.”  
73 In line with UNDP NIM Guidelines, the Project will be implemented following Government regulations, rules and procedures. The 
Government will ensure that their respective procedures do not contravene the principles of UNDP Financial Rules and Regulations.

=== PAGE 66 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 62 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
207. 
All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit 
guidelines and policies74.   
 
208. 
The NIM Guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures, as set out in the UNDP Programme 
and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP). The NIM Guidelines were corporately developed and adopted by 
UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s procurement and financial management rules and regulations. 
 
209. 
The national executing entity is MOAC - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP 
terminology - is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and 
procedures (including the NIM Guidelines).  In legal terms, this is ensured through the national Government’s signature 
of the Special Fund to Thailand, together with a UNDP project document which will be signed by the Implementing 
Partner to govern the use of the funds.  Both of these documents require compliance.  Prior to signature of the project 
document, all national Implementing Partners need to have undergone a Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer 
(HACT) assessment by UNDP to assess capacities to implement the project.  During implementation, UNDP will provide 
oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and procedures, and any specific requirements in the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed with the GCF. This may include, but is 
not limited to, monitoring missions, spot checks, facilitation and participation in project board meetings, quarterly 
progress and annual implementation reviews, and audits at project level or at Implementing partner level on the 
resources received from UNDP. 
 
210. 
The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) framework consists of four processes: (1) macro 
assessments; (2) micro assessments; (3) cash transfers and disbursements; and (4) assurance activities. Assurance 
activities include planning, periodic on-site reviews (spot checks), programmatic monitoring, scheduled audits and 
special audits. During micro-assessment, there can weaknesses identified for which actions are required to addresses 
the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addressed it will mean that the level of assurance activities 
will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that implementing partner will have to be reviewed if 
necessary. All details are available here.  
 
211. 
The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and 
together with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA. According to the current audit policies, UNDP will be 
appointing the auditors. In UNDP scheduled audits are performed during the programme cycle as per UNDP 
assurance/audit plans, on the basis of the implementing partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit 
is used to determine whether the funds transferred to the implementing partner were used for the appropriate purpose 
and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial audit or an internal control audit75. 
 
212. 
GCF resources will be provided to the implementing partner, less any agreed cost recovery amount. Under 
UNDP’s national implementation modality, UNDP advances cash funds on a quarterly basis to the implementing partner 
(executing entity) for the implementation of agreed and approved programme activities, in accordance with UNDP 
standard policies and the NIM Guidelines. The implementing partner reports back expenditure via a financial report on 
quarterly basis to UNDP. Any additional requirements will be as in accordance with the AMA as and when it is agreed. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
  
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
 
74 In line with UNDP NIM Guidelines, and in accordance with UNDP Policies and Procedures on audits, the Project shall be audited in 
accordance with HACT audit framework whereby the project can assign the national Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) to conduct financial 
audits. 
75 In line with UNDP NIM Guidelines, and in accordance with UNDP Policies and Procedures on audits, the Project shall be audited in 
accordance with HACT audit framework whereby the project can assign the national Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) to conduct financial 
audits.

=== PAGE 67 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 63 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information.

=== PAGE 68 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 64 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☐ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter  
☐ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study  
☐ 
Annex 3 (a) 
Economic analysis 
☐ 
Annex 3 (b) 
Economic analysis (excel) 
☐ 
Annex 3 (c) 
Financial analysis 
☐ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan 
☐ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones  
☐ 
Annex 6 (a) 
Social and environmental screening procedure (SESP) 
☐ 
Annex 6 (b) 
Environmental and social management framework (ESMF) 
☐ 
Annex 6 (c) 
Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) report 
☐ 
Annex 7 (a) 
Stakeholder consultation report 
☐ 
Annex 7 (b) 
Stakeholder engagement plan 
☐ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and action plan 
☐ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) N/A 
☐ 
Annex 10 
Procurement and HR plans 
☐ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan  
☐ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request 
☐ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letters 
 
☐ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet   
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval 
  
☐ 
Annex 16 
Maps indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information N/A  
☐ 
Annex 18 (a) 
Appraisal report 
☐ 
Annex 18 (b) 
Evaluation of the baseline project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking 
projects financed by the entity N/A 
☐ 
Annex 20a 
Partner Capacity Assessment Tool (PCAT) 
☐ 
Annex 20b 
UNDP micro-assessment reports  
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations and maintenance plan 
☐ 
Annex 22 
Yom-Nan operation and maintenance project 
☐ 
Annex 23 
Survey of climate change impact on community livelihoods, the Yom-Nan irrigation project 
☐ 
Annex 24 (a) 
Responses to GCF comments on Concept Note 
☐ 
Annex 24 (b) 
Responses to GCF comments on Proposal 
☐ 
Annex 25 
(Draft) LOA on UNDP support services

=== PAGE 69 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 65 OF 65 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
☐ 
Annex 26 
Climate Change in Chao Phraya Basin 
☐ 
 
OAG Letter to RID on LOA 
☐ 
 
Full package of UNDP responses to iTAP questions and comments 
☐ 
 
UNDP responses to iTAP Assessments

=== PAGE 70 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 72 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Enhancing Climate Resilience in Thailand through Effective 
Water Management and Sustainable Agriculture 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Phitsanulok, Sukhothai, and Uttaradit provinces of 
Thailand 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Thursday, September 2, 2021 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Thai 
Explanation on language 
Thai is the official language of Thailand and 
understandable to the stakeholders. 
Link to disclosure 
English and Thai 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) | UNDP in Thailand 
Other link(s) 
Royal Irrigation Department Website (English and Thai): 
CC-GCF (rid.go.th)
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)” (Annex 6a of the FP). 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Thursday, September 2, 2021 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Thai 
Explanation on language 
Thai is the official language of Thailand and 
understandable to the stakeholders. 
Link to disclosure 
English and Thai 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) | UNDP in Thailand 
Other link(s) 
Royal Irrigation Department Website (English and Thai): 
 CC-GCF (rid.go.th)
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)” (Annex 6a of the FP). 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A

=== PAGE 73 ===
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Social and Environmental Safeguards Procedure (SESP)/ 
Thursday, September 2, 2021 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Thai 
Explanation on language 
Thai is the official language of Thailand 
Link to disclosure 
English and Thai 
Social and Environmental Screening Procedure (SESP) | 
UNDP in Thailand 
Other link(s) 
Royal Irrigation Department Website (English and Thai): 
CC-GCF (rid.go.th)
Remarks 
The SESP is a UNDP document that is used for identifying 
social and environmental risks and mitigation measures. It 
does not replace or conflict with GCF ESS requirements and 
policies. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Thursday, September 2, 2021 
Place 
Yom Nan Operation and Maintenance Project 
Regional Irrigation Office 3 
8 moo 8 Thathong  
Muang, Phitsanulok 65000 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, October 4, 2021 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 74 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 74 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP170 
Proposal name: 
Enhancing climate resilience in Thailand through effective water 
management and sustainable agriculture 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Country/(ies): 
Thailand 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I.
Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The project contributes to partial protection of 
downstream areas, including vulnerable farmers 
and downstream urban areas in Bangkok, from 
increasingly frequent and intense flooding via the 
integration of ‘green with grey’ infrastructure 
leads to enhanced flood prevention and more 
resilient ecosystems and livelihoods. 
The Ecosystem Based Adaptation approaches for 
flood prevention require extensive participatory 
planning to be undertaken with communities, 
regional government, and experts. This has been 
integrated into the workplan and identified as 
important implementation stage. 
Thailand is a country regarded as in having 
amongst the most severe risks and vulnerabilities 
from climate change1.  The project addresses 
issues pertinent to the country and regarded as 
high priority within the National Action Plan. The 
project is the first project to the Green Climate 
Fund for Thailand and has high level support from 
the Thai government. This will facilitate potential 
upscale of the models, and development of grey-
green infrastructure models, innovative 
technology and supporting communities in 
adaptive livelihood development (through 
parallel finance credit line). 
There should be a plan for further upscale across 
Thailand’s watersheds and downstream areas 
developed during the project utilising this strong 
national support. 
The project includes significant financial 
contribution from the Royal Thai Government and 
Krungsri Bank and offers potential of a credit line 
from parallel finance for farmers from the Bank of 
Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives (BAAC) 
which has potential for transformative upscale of 
climate smart agriculture. 
The co-finance from financial institution needs to 
support smallholder farmers and small enterprise 
to upscale the adoption of climate smart 
agriculture. An implementation plan to upscale 
activities should be developed during 
implementation. 
1 Eckstein et al (2021). Global Climate Risk Index. Germanwatch.

=== PAGE 75 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 75 
 
 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The project demonstrates an innovative pilot to 
implement best practice in water use efficiency 
(e.g., Alternate Wet Dry / Systems Rice 
Intensification) and innovative technology in 
precision agriculture linked to sensors reporting 
on soil moisture levels to provide information to 
supporting effective water level change through 
efficient management of the irrigation system as 
has been demonstrated by International Rice 
Research Institute. This cultivation technique can 
reduce GHG emissions by up to 50% and water 
use by 30%; digital technology assists in its 
effective application at site level. This is highly 
innovative and is in line with Thailand’s strategic 
policies to support agriculture, digital 
transformation, and climate change; in line with 
Thailand’s Digital Agriculture Strategy and 4.0 
New Economic Development Plan which aims to 
harness digital technologies to make Thailand 
more competitive, manage resources efficient, 
improve livelihoods and adaptative to climate 
change. Thailand is well-placed to support 
development of digital innovation into the 
agricultural sector. 
There is need to ensure strong community 
involvement throughout project implementation, 
so that farmer behavior that is not climate 
resilient (e.g., unsuitable crop choice or farming 
calendar) is discontinued. The improved rice 
cultivation methodologies require efficient 
management of irrigation system to utilize water 
effectively and requires cooperation between 
farmers utilizing the same irrigation source. 
Developing, testing and scaling-up innovative 
technologies should be a priority for the Green 
Climate Fund. They should not be evaluated under 
the same criteria for ‘cost-effectiveness’ as well-
tested business-as-usual applications since the 
future values of the technology is not yet 
incorporated into the model.   GCF can help 
support and facilitate the innovation transition 
from innovation to adoption. 
The project demonstrates best practice in water 
use efficiency (e.g. Systems Rice Intensification) 
and innovative technology in precision 
agriculture linked to sensors reporting on soil 
moisture levels to provide information to 
supporting effective water level change through 
efficient management of the irrigation system.  
This has potential to be upscaled and contribute a 
paradigm shift for reducing water use, 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XVIII, titled “List of proposed conditions and 
recommendations,” respectively.  
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background  
3. 
Agriculture provides one of the most important sources of income and employment for 
Thailand; Thailand is the 6th largest producer of rice and 2nd for global exports. Climate change-
induced shifts in precipitation and temperature patterns have enhanced flood and drought risk, 
increasing the intensity and frequency of both. Increased flood risk translates into accelerated 
soil erosion and impeded drainage, affecting agricultural productivity. This negatively impacts 
smallholder farmers who depend on agriculture for their livelihoods. The climate analysis 
clearly shows the following:

=== PAGE 76 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 76 
 
 
(a) 
Increased drought risk – The frequency of extreme SPEI has increased, supporting an 
increase in drought.  
(b) 
Increased risk of extreme rainfall – Historical station data show spatially consistent 
positive trends in annual rainfall and measures of daily rainfall intensity. Ensemble 
projections show clearly future projected increases of about 10-15% in annual rainfall. 
(c) 
Increased discharge – Significant increases (more than 50%) in discharge from an 
ensemble of RCMs and hydrological model are consistent with the +10% in annual 
precipitation since the catchments amplify the rainfall signal.  
4. 
The Chao Phraya River Basin Area is one of two principal river systems in Thailand. It 
consists of eight sub river basins: Yom, Nan, Ping, Wang, Chao Phraya, Sakae Krang, Pa Sak and 
Tha Chin. Working towards river basin-based integrated water management, the project 
integrates ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) ‘green’ measures with ‘traditional’ grey 
infrastructure for flood control and irrigation, supported by enhanced technology and climate-
informed planning and capacity development. The objective of the project is to improve water 
management, food security, and agricultural livelihoods of inhabitants in the Yom and Nam river 
basins to respond to the increased occurrence of climate hazards in the form of floods and 
droughts. Activities at the household scale are intended to directly benefit 62,000 people in the 
Phitsanulok, Sukhothai, and Uttaradit provinces (project sites) found in the Yom and Nan river 
basins, and at the basin scale to indirectly benefit 25,000,000 inhabitants of the Greater Chao 
Phraya River Basin, who live within or downstream of the project area. The countries national 
adaptation plan was developed by its countries leading scientists and climate change experts. 
The Thailand National Adaptation Plan recognises, and prioritizes, the importance of climate 
change adaptation interventions within the Chao Praya River Basin for downstream 
communities. 
5. 
The project seeks a GCF grant of USD 17.534 million, or 51.7 per cent of the total project 
cost (USD 33.911 million). The project is classified as environmental and social safeguards (ESS) 
category B. The Royal Irrigation Department of Thailand (RID) will co-finance the project at USD 
16.264 million during the years of implementation, and Bank of Ayudhya (Krungsri) will co-
finance the project at USD 0.114 million for supportive activities such as financial literacy 
training for farmers. RID has also allocated USD 17.26 million for post-project operations and 
maintenance.  
6. 
Significant parallel financing is provided by the Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural 
Cooperatives (BAAC) via their financial products aimed at climate resilient agricultural 
investments. This is pledged as a credit line of USD 16 million to farmers, cooperatives, social 
enterprises, and other small to medium-sized businesses nationwide.  
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Output 1:  Enhance climate and risk informed planning in the water and agricultural sectors 
through improved climate information and cross sectoral coordination (total cost: USD 3.215 
million; GCF cost: USD 1.683 million) 
7. 
GCF resources will support the improvement of climate risk-responsive decision-making 
in Thailand by enhancing quality and availability of tailored climate information for both water 
management and agricultural planning. This will be achieved through improving the accuracy 
and precision of climate projections and the dissemination of tailored climate information 
products to relevant stakeholders, to support the integration into policies and planning across 
sectors, as well as comparison of water availability and demand, in order to make the needed 
adjustments.

=== PAGE 77 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 77 
 
 
8. 
This output will also enhance inter-ministerial coordination in water management, 
enabling stronger collaboration between key decision-making bodies in Thailand’s water and 
agriculture sectors to incorporate climate risk management and adaptation strategies into their 
sectoral planning processes. Importantly, tailored climate information will be generated and 
disseminated to agriculture households for application in household-level planning.  
Output 2: Improve water management through strengthened infrastructure complemented by EbA 
measures, for greater resilience to climate change impacts (total cost: USD 23.125 million; GCF 
cost: USD 9.640 million) 
9. 
This output focuses on complementing RID investments to improve water management 
in the Yom and Nan river basins area with ecosystem-based adaptation measures. GCF’s 
contribution will fund the review of designs for water infrastructure upgrades at the thirteen 
irrigation schemes in the Yom-Nan basin, to ensure that they are adequate given future climate 
projections.  Given the high upfront costs of the basin-wide investment required to adapt to 
climate change, this will support long term sustainability of government investment. GCF will 
also complement government co-financing and planned long-term investment by RID in the 
entire area of the Yom and Nan river basins by supporting the upgrade of infrastructure at two 
of the schemes. 
10. 
Water management in Thailand is largely dependent on grey infrastructure, although 
there are examples where use of ecosystem-based measures has been established. GCF 
resources will support RID in identifying and implementing ecosystem-based approaches to 
complement grey infrastructure. While ecosystem-based measures alone cannot address all 
climate risk challenges, complementing grey infrastructure with ecosystem-based solutions can 
be a cost-efficient solution while also generating environmental co-benefits.  This integration of 
EbA approaches has the potential to be transformational to Thailand’s traditional planning 
concepts for water management that focus widely on hard structure interventions, through 
upscaling across the thirteen schemes in the Yom-Nan River Basin area and the greater Chao 
Phraya River Basin. The project has significant potential for upscale within the basin and to 
other basins in Thailand, the elevated level of support from the Thai government will facilitate 
this upscale. 
Output 3: Reduce volatility of agriculture livelihoods in drought and flood-prone areas through 
strengthened extension support and local planning, investment in on-farm adaptation measures 
and greater access to finance and markets (total cost: USD 5.978 million; GCF cost: USD 5.617 
million) 
11. 
This output will involve providing training to facilitate climate-informed decision-
making related to agriculture practices, particularly implementation of on-farm interventions 
for farmers in the immediate project area. Training materials developed through this project 
will thereafter be applied throughout the agriculture sector in Thailand through farmer field 
training (FFT). The project area is dominated by agriculture activities, which are particularly 
vulnerable to climatic conditions. It is critical therefore that interventions in the project area 
engage farmers effectively.  
12. 
This output will be implemented in partnership and coordination with King Mongkut's 
University of Technology North Bangkok (KMUTNB) and Krungsri Bank. KMUTNB will help to 
deliver training to farmers on applying water forecast based on climate information to 
household level agriculture practices, and Krungsri Bank, through co-financing activities, will 
support farmers in developing their business skills for greater market access. Trainings under 
this output will be coordinated for cost-saving purposes, but importantly also to ensure that 
extension officers and farmers benefit from the collaborative approach of the project – bringing 
together expertise from the water and agriculture departments, academia, and the financial 
sector, as well as the farmers themselves.  
Project management costs, total: USD 1.593 million; GCF: USD 0.593 million.

=== PAGE 78 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 78 
 
 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential 
       Scale: N/A 
13. 
Thailand is identified as one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change risks 
and impacts due to geographical and topographical characteristics. Climate induced extreme 
weather events leading to increased flood and drought risk are reported as becoming more 
frequent and intense.  Climate analysis shows significant increase in temperature, significant 
increase in precipitation and significant increase in water discharge. 
14. 
This project directly targets existing water infrastructure (output 2) and the related 
governing institutions which need improvement, and communities which need further support 
(output 1 and 3). Stemming from a careful consideration of other subriver basins, the selection 
of the Yom and Nan river basins for infrastructure update is of particularly strategic importance 
as they retain the excess water flowing through Thailand’s central plain, Bangkok, and Gulf of 
Thailand.  
15. 
Given local social and economic conditions, it is appropriate that farming households are 
the focus of the project.  The climate resilience of 62,000 project participants (direct 
beneficiaries) in the Yom Nan River Basin and 25,000,000 (indirect beneficiaries) in the Greater 
Chao Phraya River system are expected to be improved by the interventions, as described in 
Section 2. The project selects agricultural communities in Phitsanulok, Sukhothai, and Uttaradit 
provinces (project sites) that depend on rice production as their main source of income. One of 
the main interventions of the project is the focus on capacity development. Increased 
community adaptive capacity is needed to implement more climate resilient practices for 
sustainable livelihoods (outputs 1 and 3). 
16. 
In summary, complementing ongoing work initiated by the Royal Thai Government, the 
project for climate-resilient water infrastructure is expected to result in enhanced livelihoods 
for Thailand’s most vulnerable people. Enhanced climate and risk decision-making and support 
services are not only provided to households, but also include ministries involved in water 
management and agricultural planning, and organizations across the relevant value chains.  The 
focus on agricultural livelihoods and water management is justified given Thailand’s 
development needs and goals. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
Scale: N/A 
17. 
The project aims to contribute to the shift from ‘traditional’ water management systems 
to an integrated system with the eventual careful inclusion of EbA. The inclusion of EbA with 
grey infrastructure has been shown to be less costly and promotes resilience of ecosystems and 
livelihoods by conserving and protecting existing ecosystem services (e.g., flood regulation, soil 
retention). The project is part of an overall strategy of the Royal Thai Government to support 
canal and embankment improvements of the Greater Chao Phraya River system coupled with 
improved extension services (i.e., soil rehabilitation, climate vulnerability assessments), 
focusing on low-lying areas.  
18. 
The major constraint facing farming communities lies in 1) inefficient water 
management; and 2) barriers to market access, both of which are tackled in this proposal. 
Improved information and capacity development will lead to better decision-making, especially 
as the project also seeks to improve management practices and market linkages. There is 
potential for a more profitable and climate resilient agricultural sector for project participants. 
This is underpinned by a series of proposed interventions seeking to build a more robust and 
conducive policy and institutional environment via knowledge building and exchange with 
responsible ministries. Innovation is also present, with the demonstration of a precision

=== PAGE 79 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 79 
 
 
agriculture model, which optimizes irrigation efficiency.  This is coupled with the enhanced 
intelligence-based real-time decision-making (IRDM) tool, which provides more downscaled 
rainfall and run-off information for better localised advice, will improve decision-making, and 
improve water management.  Thailand has developed a positive enabling environment for the 
integration of technology into smart agriculture. The IoT tool for water management has 
already been tested in Thailand by Kasetsart University and in Philippines by the International 
Rice Research Institute (https://waterice.irri.org/how-we-work). The project is well placed to 
further develop this technology with staunch support from Thai agencies and supported by 
Thailand’s national strategies which place an emphasis on integrating smart agriculture and 
digital technologies to transform the agricultural sector. Testing and future development of this 
highly innovative system to improve community managed rice lands, save water resources and 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions is in line with the Green Climate Fund’s strategic aims to 
integrate and develop innovative approaches to combat climate change. The GCF Secretariat 
view that as this is testing an innovative system, it should not be evaluated primarily based on 
cost-effectiveness criteria; since many emerging technologies and applications will encounter 
hurdles to move from the innovation to adoption phases. 
19. 
With respect to post-project sustainability, the project appears well-designed and 
phased to provide support to the eventual planned replication to other subriver basins and 
farming communities, though the incremental plan for eventual upscale across all river-basins 
by the Thai government is not yet clear, though it is planned in Thai national policies. Building 
on established in-country networks and refining government responsibilities, economic 
incentives for communities for more climate resilient agricultural practices are expected to be 
created, supported by government actors. For example, outputs of adaptation plans (with legal 
standing) and climate responsive cropping patterns at the household level are expected with 
on-hand implementation of on-farm measures for improved water storage and soil 
conservation, coupled with bankable agro-investments.  
3.3 
Sustainable development potential 
Scale: N/A 
20. 
The proposal contributes to Sustainable Development Goals: (1) No Poverty, (2) Zero 
Hunger, (5) Gender Equality, (6) Clean Water and Sanitation, (13) Climate Action, (15) Life On 
Land,  (17) Partnerships for the Goals. Positive environmental externalities are expected in 
improved water management leading to 1) efficient water use; and 2) controlled soil 
conservation mainly in the river and floodplain areas.  There is evidence that the project would 
enhance groundwater recharge, leading to further water availability. 
21. 
With Outputs 1 and 3, the linkages between government actors, local farming 
communities in the project sites, academic institutions (King Mongkut's University of 
Technology North Bangkok), and local financial institutions (co-financiers, cooperatives) are 
expected to increase mainly across the rice value chain. Capacity development and facilitated 
planning and coordination underpins these improved relationships. Coupled with the more 
efficient water resource use and enhanced market access, the enhanced linkages are intended to 
translate into financial benefits especially for smallholder farming communities, where female-
led households are prioritised. Overall, significant effort is made to contribute to the project 
sites’ overall self-sufficiency in health and food security. While the focus of this proposal is on 
water management for agriculture, the project may be strengthened with further discussion on 
the impacts on surrounding natural ecosystems.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient 
Scale: N/A 
22. 
As previously noted, Thailand is facing abundant climate risks: extreme rain episodes 
lead to increased flood risk and drier dry seasons lead to water unavailability. Overall, the

=== PAGE 80 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 80 
 
 
selected project sites, Sukhothai, Phitsanulok and Uttaradit Provinces, are composed of 
impoverished rural communities that are geographically at risk, as they live on flood plains, and 
are financially underserved. With their livelihoods tied to the climate sensitive industry of 
agriculture, the targeted beneficiaries and their productive assets are assessed to be greatly 
affected by climate induced extreme weather events and will be disproportionately impacted by 
their effects.  
23. 
The Provinces are part of the Yom and Nan subriver basins which form part of the 
Greater Chao Phraya River Basin area. This area is of critical importance for food production 
and flood regulation. The Yom and Nan subriver basins are in the middle section. Water is 
stored here to prevent flooding to Thailand’s capital and economic centre, Bangkok. 
24. 
National and local resources are leveraged by GCF funding. Green Climate Fund and RID 
funding is focused on enhancing infrastructure (Output 2), while GCF also funds activities 
supporting an enabling environment, namely capacity developing, planning, knowledge 
management, and coordination (Outputs 1 and 3). Other co-financiers (Krungsri Bank and 
BAAC) are focused on supporting the project gains during and after implementation, through 
supporting market access and providing further opportunities for investment. 
25. 
Institutions benefiting from the interventions were chosen based on their sectoral 
contribution and decision-making power to implement the project’s integrated water resource 
management approach. This approach targets specific institutional needs, such as the 
refinement of intelligence-based real-time decision-making modelling (IRDM), which involves 
RID, the Agricultural Research Development Agency, the National Research Council of Thailand, 
KMUTNB, and the Thailand Research Organization Network. Institutional coordination is also 
targeted, including the Thai Meteorological Department, the Hydro and Agro Informatics 
Institute, the Geo-Informatics and Space Technology Development Agency, the Department of 
Water Resources, and the Hydrographic Department of the Royal Thai Navy.  
3.5 
Country ownership 
Scale: N/A 
26. 
The proposal has strategic alignment with the Royal Thai Government’s highest-level 
development and climate policy and master plan, namely the 20-year national strategic plan 
(2018–2037), National Economic and Social Development Plan (2017-2021), and the Climate 
Change Master Plan. It addresses the top two priorities detailed in the GCF country programme: 
water resources management and food security. Related activities have been adequately 
coordinated with ongoing and planned similar projects. The AE has consulted numerous 
stakeholders including the project participants, financial institutions, and national and local 
government agencies. Reported results include the need for a strong flood control system in the 
area with adjustments to be made in controlled water levels, intake and outlet systems, 
drainage system, road system, and monitoring system.  
27. 
UNDP has a strong track record of development projects in Thailand especially focusing 
on agriculture and water management. It has a country office and will continue to work with key 
agencies and organizations. The executing entity (EE) is the Kingdom of Thailand, represented 
by the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives (MOAC). The project is implemented by RID 
who will held accountable by UNDP for the use of GCF proceeds. RID and other partners such as 
GIZ and KMUTNB have undergone the required assessments under the Harmonised Approach 
to Cash Transfers Framework. This Framework represents a common operational framework 
for UN agencies’ transfer of cash to responsible parties.  
28. 
RID is mandated to maintain water infrastructure and is uniquely posed to cater to both 
hard and soft aspects of the interventions with other partners. RID is also a co-financier and 
contributes to both the project implementation phase and post-project operations and 
maintenance. This co-investment is a clear indication of government commitment.

=== PAGE 81 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 81 
 
 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
Scale: N/A 
29. 
The level of concessionality is assessed to be justified by the expected benefits from the 
proposed interventions. This is coupled with the limited financial return of adaptation activities 
for the benefit of vulnerable rural farming communities in northern Thailand. 
30. 
Output 3 is expected to spearhead the creation of further economic opportunities for the 
project participants in selected agriculture value chains as enabled by Outputs 1 and 2, which 
work in the enabling environment and physical protection, respectively, all of which can be 
considered as public goods with low financial returns but with high economic value. Private 
sector parallel financing is present and amount to a significant percentage of co-financing at 93 
per cent of the total project cost. This will stimulate potential revenue-generating activities and 
will thus be financed by non-GCF proceeds. 
31. 
In terms of enhanced resilience, 62,000 direct beneficiaries are estimated. The project 
utilizes GCF investment of USD 282.80 per direct beneficiary, and USD 56.20 per total direct and 
indirect beneficiaries.  
32. 
Thailand has developed a positive enabling environment for the integration of 
technology into smart agriculture. The IoT tool for water management has already been tested 
in Thailand by Kasetsart University and in Philippines by the International Rice Research 
Institute (https://waterice.irri.org/how-we-work ). The project is well placed to further develop 
this technology with staunch support from Thai agencies and supported by Thailand’s national 
strategies which place an emphasis on integrating smart agriculture and digital technologies to 
transform the agricultural sector. The GCF Secretariat view that as this is testing an innovative 
system, it should not be evaluated primarily based on cost-effectiveness criteria. It should be 
noted that emerging technologies and applications will encounter hurdles to move from the 
innovation to adoption phases and cannot yet be evaluated on traditional cost-effectiveness 
since the values, and future impacts, of the technologies are at innovation stage. This is in line 
with theoretical concepts of innovation development as exemplified by historical examples, 
from mobile phones to wireless sensors and other emerging technologies. Digital technologies, 
smart agriculture and building capacity for ‘smart farmers will transform Thailand’s approach 
to tackle climate change and create resilient livelihoods in the agriculture sector in the next 
decade. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
33. 
Project background. The project aims to provide interventions to adapt water 
management and agricultural livelihoods in the Yom and Nan river basins in Thailand to 
extreme weather events such as droughts and floods, by enhancing climate and risk planning in 
the water and agricultural sectors, improve water management through strengthened 
infrastructure by integrating EbA measures, and reducing the volatility of livelihoods in these 
areas through various technical and financial support. Among the expected environmental co-
benefits of the interventions are improved soil and water quality including improved 
groundwater recharge, biodiversity conservation and enhanced ecosystem services. The social 
co-benefits include improved access to water supply during droughts, particularly for 
vulnerable groups such as female-headed households. 
34. 
Environmental and social risk category and safeguard instruments. The project is 
classified as category B since the project will have potential limited adverse environmental and 
social risks and/or impacts which are site-specific, largely reversible, and can be mitigated with 
appropriate environmental and social management measures. The project has been screened

=== PAGE 82 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 82 
 
 
against the AE’s Social and Environmental Standards Procedure (SESP) and an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared including an Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP). The Secretariat confirms that the risk category is aligned with 
GCF’s environmental and social risk categorization and is within the environmental and social 
risk accreditation level of the AE. 
35. 
Compliance with GCF’s environmental and social safeguards (ESS) standards. 
Subparagraphs (a)–(h) below summarize the programme’s compliance with GCF ESS standards 
and requirements: 
(a) 
ESS 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and 
impacts. The project has submitted an ESMF with sections containing the 
environmental and social risk assessment and management measures as provided in the 
ESMP. The impact risk assessment was undertaken using the AE’s SESP to assess the 
probability (expected, highly likely, moderately likely, or not likely) and the severity of 
impacts (critical, severe, moderate, minor, or negligible). The results of environmental 
and social risk assessment are presented and an ESMP is proposed that identifies, 
among other things, potential impact areas, required mitigation measures, and 
responsibilities of stakeholders. The potential negative impacts are on water quality 
through sediment movement during the replacement of existing infrastructure, channel 
and retention basin works; and EbA activities for wetland restoration. Noise and air 
quality may also be impacted during these works. Minor impacts also include increased 
waste from the removal of existing structures; 
(b) 
ESS 2: Labour and working conditions. The project underscores that activities will 
respond to the core labour standards per the International Labour Organization and the 
labour laws and occupational health and safety regulations of Thailand. This includes a 
number of performance standards in relation to labour and working conditions such as 
on freedom of association, elimination of discrimination in employment and occupation, 
elimination of forced or compulsory labour, and ensuring no forms of child labour. To 
limit risks and keep working conditions safe, generic contract clauses are provided as 
part of tender procedures that contractors need to comply with. These aspects will be 
monitored, and all workers will be informed and trained on the existence of a grievance 
mechanism in a continuous and systematic manner; 
(c) 
ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention. The AE has identified and 
assessed activities that generate emissions to air, noise and vibration, discharges to 
water, contamination of land and other project-associated wastes. The AE incorporated 
measures in the ESMP to avoid and/or reduce pollution and promote sustainable use of 
resources. The proposed project is expected to generate sediments during construction 
works that might lead to water and land pollution. However, the ESMP presents 
measures to manage, limit and avoid pollution including an approach to monitor and 
report environmental risks on a daily and weekly basis. In addition, an erosion, drainage 
and sediment control management plan and contaminated soil disposal management 
guidance are provided; 
(d) 
ESS 4: Community health, safety and security. The project recognizes the fact that 
issues related to site security might emerge, thus security of sites is part of the 
requirements in the works contract and should remain in force throughout the contract 
period. This also includes the management of on-site construction materials, 
construction and sanitary waste, additional strengthening of erosion control and soil 
stabilization systems and other conditions resulting from contractor activities which 
may increase the potential for damage. As regards noise, reasonable efforts to schedule 
activities during normal working hours will be made to minimize nuisance to the 
surrounding communities. This would also mean developing a public notification and 
noise management plan, as necessary. The project, through its contractors, will also

=== PAGE 83 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 83 
 
 
ensure that a traffic management plan for anticipated service disruptions will be 
prepared should transport and mobility of the communities be hampered by the 
project’s activities; 
(e) 
ESS 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. The implementation of the 
project will not require any resettlement. None of the interventions will require the 
displacement of people or involve economic displacement. There may be instances 
where there may be a need to utilize areas of land adjacent to where the structural 
interventions will be undertaken such as for water infrastructure works. However, 
where access is required, the land will be returned in the same condition as it was prior 
to any use. The ESMP further highlights that access to this type of land will only be 
obtained through voluntary agreements with landholders. Where a voluntary agreement 
cannot be concluded, the land will not be used. The project will likewise ensure full 
compliance with the AE’s social and environmental standards guidance note on 
displacement and resettlement; 
(f) 
ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources. The project area and its surroundings are rich in flora and fauna, including 
aquatic and marine species. Two protected areas are located in proximity to the project 
area, but no activities will be undertaken in these areas. The ESMP has a number of 
performance criteria that will enable project activities to limit impacts on terrestrial, 
aquatic and marine flora and fauna. The management measures that will be 
implemented during construction activities include, among others, compliance with no 
clearance of vegetation outside of the designated clearing boundaries and no 
introduction of new weed species during construction works or implementing EbA 
activities. A flora and fauna monitoring programme will also be implemented;  
(g) 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous peoples. The ESMF notes that 
ethnic minorities make up 15 per cent of the total population of Thailand and the AE has 
undertaken screening to identify the presence of ethnic minorities in the general project 
area. It notes that there are no indigenous peoples and/or ethnic minorities among the 
smallholder farming communities within the project area but that there are Thai Khrang 
villages in the highland area away from the project sites. The AE notes the intention to 
include them in the project activities. Efforts to engage these groups will include 
extending knowledge on EbA and smart farming and involvement in project design and 
implementation, particularly with respect to EbA activities; and 
(h) 
ESS 8: Cultural heritage. The ESMF identifies three sites within the overall project 
footprint including a popular touristic cultural heritage site visited by tourists. Despite 
the presence of these sites, the AE expects that activities will be implemented with 
limited or no risks, following the performance criteria indicated in the ESMP. 
Nonetheless, should there be any unexpected cultural heritage items discovered during 
project works, the AE or respective EE will immediately cease work within the area and 
will consult with the relevant authorities to arrive at an appropriate decision. 
Nonetheless, should there be any unexpected cultural heritage items discovered during 
project works, a chance finds procedure will be followed to ensure that the project 
works are immediately ceased within the area and consultations are held with the 
relevant authorities to arrive at an appropriate decision. 
36. 
  Implementation arrangements. The implementing agencies will be responsible for 
the implementation and compliance with the ESMP, in collaboration with the various partners 
and contractors. The ESMP will also be part of the tender documents. The ESMP has clearly 
defined the roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders that will be involved during 
implementation. The monitoring and evaluation oversight and responsibilities are also defined.  
The ESMP has recognized the need to carry out capacity-building such as for project personnel

=== PAGE 84 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 84 
 
 
to attend induction training that covers health, safety, environmental and cultural requirements, 
and for workers engaged in any activity with the potential to cause serious environmental harm. 
37. 
Stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanism (GRM). The project has 
conducted field surveys and interviews with beneficiary households in the targeted districts. It 
also included interviews with local administrators and community leaders in the areas. These 
consultations, including with decision-makers, communities and community leaders have 
integrated their concerns into the project design. The project has prepared a stakeholder 
engagement plan that provides an indicative list of stakeholders for the outputs and activities 
for the lifetime of this project. The project will continue to engage with stakeholders, including 
those from civil society organizations, non-governmental organizations, private sector 
organizations, academia and public organizations. The stakeholder engagement plan is a living 
document and will be revised and updated if needs arise during project inception and 
implementation.  
38. 
The project has provided a GRM for complaints on environmental and social issues. A 
safeguards officer will be stationed at the project management unit and will be designated as 
the officer in charge of the GRM at the project level. A complaints register will also be 
maintained to keep track of grievances and monitor how they are addressed. Notwithstanding 
this, an independent two-tier GRM structure has been developed to address all complaints 
and/or grievances in the project both at the activity level and at the AE level. 
4.2 
Gender policy  
39. 
The accredited entity (AE) has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan 
and therefore complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.  
40. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment based on a desk review and stakeholder 
consultation with communities including women. The assessment indicates that Thailand has an 
enabling environment based on the constitution and civil and commercial code that accords 
women and men the same rights to own, use, and make decisions regarding land and non-land 
assets. It also has laws allowing for joint land entitlement and co-ownership of property for 
married and unmarried couples. Thailand has also ratified the Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). It has a Department of Women’s Affairs 
and Family Development within the Ministry of Social Development and Human Security to deal 
with gender and women’s empowerment and social inclusion issues. While favourable policies 
and laws exist, customary laws still influence decision-making in rural areas and have impacts 
that may disadvantage women’s access to land, property, and inheritance. There is also a lack of 
clear policy directives on the integration of gender equality and limited participation of women 
in the formulation and implementation of climate policies and plans. This is further 
compounded by the lack of sex disaggregated data, which represents another key challenge in 
gender and social inclusion in climate change action. 
41. 
The gender assessment attests that women play a significant role in agricultural 
activities in the same way that men do despite having less access to mechanized technology, 
agricultural inputs, finance and credit, seeds, information, and knowledge. At the same time, 40 
per cent of the participants in the focus group discussions held during the assessment, indicated 
that, in practice, communities have access to, and decision-making power over land but are 
unsure of their formal ownership status. Further, 30 per cent of the Focus Group Discussion 
participants mentioned that new property (land as well as house) is commonly registered under 
the wife’s name because men tend to avoid paperwork and prefer to work in the field. 
Ownership of land by women seems to have increased – albeit slightly – in the northern region 
of Thailand, where women made up 28.7 per cent of the landholders in 2013, compared to 20.7 
per cent in 2003. However, a similar statistic for women landholders is not available for the 
project provinces.

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 85 
 
 
42. 
Apart from their role in agriculture, women are also tasked almost exclusively with the 
additional roles of cleaning, cooking, childcare, care (average 5.4 hours a day on domestic tasks 
and childcare, compared to 2.9 hours for men) and home gardens for household consumption. 
Water for home consumption is also the responsibility of women, adding to their burden in 
periods of water stress. Young women and children are also engaged in the latter providing 
support to their mothers by fetching water and facing the same challenges. While the 
responsibility for household consumption lies with women, the management of water usage 
groups is usually led by men with women having the responsibilities of vice president, 
financing, and accounting as well as administrative positions. Social norms, inequitable power 
dynamics, and the gendered division of labour affect women’s and men’s access to resources in 
northern Thailand, including water. Men typically have greater rights of access to, and decision-
making power over water. Women in rural areas, particularly poor and ethnic minority women, 
may face disproportionate water insecurity compared to rural men. Climate change increases 
water scarcity and water-related insecurities, even in managing water user groups, particularly 
for women who rely on natural resources for their livelihood.  
43. 
The assessment indicates that five core areas of focus could address the challenges to 
vulnerable women and benefit communities through the project. These are: access to 
information about climate change and related impacts on water and agriculture; defining the 
localized and differentiated information needed and to be disseminated; engagement in 
decision-making related to water use/management and agriculture; access to technology and 
related training to advance climate resilient agriculture; and access to finance to invest in 
climate resilient agricultural practices.  
44. 
The gender action plan provided by the AE complies with the requirement of the GCF 
Gender Policy. It has provided specific activities, targets (50 per cent women participation and 
further disaggregated by age), timelines, financial and human resources by way of gender 
expertise for the project to address the challenges raised. It will employ a pilot approach such as 
gender-responsive Participatory Integrated Climate Services for Agriculture and piloting and 
scaling up household methodologies expected to support the work on addressing and 
strengthening gender equitable intra-household work and decision-making. The action plan will 
also formulate a working group on gender with various actors to ensure that issues raised are 
addressed and solutions implemented. The project will also focus on building data collection 
and management while at the same time documenting gender disaggregated data in a planned 
vulnerability and risk assessment. It will also target women and female entrepreneurs in 
trainings that will build their skills and provide them with financial incentives and support to 
access climate resilient agricultural practices and climate change information. Overall, to 
address some of the underlying causes of inequality, the project will facilitate the creation of an 
enabling environment by working with men to alter harmful stereotypes while also designing 
strategies to monitor and mitigate the potential issue of gender-based violence.  
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall project assessment (medium risk) 
45. 
GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 17.5 million to adapt water management and 
agriculture livelihoods in the Yom and Nan river basins to climate change-induced extreme 
weather events in Thailand. The Royal Thai Government through its Irrigation Department and 
Krungsri Bank are providing in-kind contributions worth USD 16.2 million and USD 0.1 million, 
respectively. There is no co-financing from the AE.  
46. 
Thailand has investment grade credit rating, and its fiscal situation may support availing 
concessional debt from GCF. The AE has supported grant financing from GCF based on public 
good nature of the project anDd with 48 per cent of the budget coming from co-financing and

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 86 
 
 
opined that the GCF grant is needed to cover the incremental cost to make the total project 
viable. 
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current project (low 
risk) 
47. 
UNDP is the AE for this project. The AE has been operating in Thailand since 1966 and 
has an ongoing portfolio in the country with an annual budget range of USD 7–10 million over 
the past five years. The AE has its regional office representation in Thailand.  
48. 
The Kingdom of Thailand, represented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, 
(MOAC) is the EE for this project. The AE carried out the capacity assessment of MOAC, which 
resulted in low risk in all major categories. 
4.3.3. 
Project-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
49. 
Construction risks: the project implementation involves canal dredging, and 
construction related to the floodgate. A total of 54 per cent of GCF financing (USD 9.6 million) 
and 82 per cent of government co-financing (USD 13.4 million) is budgeted for Component 2. 
Under this component, GCF resources will cover the construction cost of upgrading two 
floodgates for flood mitigation and improvement of water storage for agriculture. The 
government co-financing will support canal dredging and strengthening of embankments to 
improve waterway connections. The AE has identified that the construction and on-groundwork 
may be affected by extreme weather conditions. Therefore, the implementation plan needs to be 
adaptable to such conditions.  
50. 
Operation and maintenance activities: GCF resources will complement the planned grey 
infrastructure with ecosystem-based solutions. Therefore, identifying the most appropriate2 
EbA measures for the specific project target area and responsibility for operation and 
maintenance are crucial for the infrastructure (e.g., floodgates) to serve the intended purpose. 
The design of EBA methods requires extensive participatory discussions with local 
stakeholders, including farmers, and has been integrated into the implementation plan. The 
project team plans to mobilize resources to cover the cost from different departments in the 
Government. As multiple departments are involved in the financing, the coordination and 
mobilization efforts will be important to sustainably finance the operation and maintenance 
costs. The fact that the Government will allocate USD 17.26 million for post-project operations 
and maintenance is reassuring. The irrigation department will maintain facilities under Outputs 
1 and 2, and other MOAC agencies will run Output 3 under regular government budget in the 
future. 
51. 
Economic analysis and project viability: an economic analysis has been carried out and 
results in economic internal rate of return (EIRR) ranges between 29 and 33 per cent. The 
analysis considered benefits mainly from the avoided cost of agriculture yield affected by 
climate change and damages from extreme events. The sensitivity analysis is based on the 
scenarios: 1) an increase in cost of 20 per cent; 2) a decrease in benefits of 20 per cent; and 3) a 
simultaneous increase in cost of 20 per cent and decrease in benefits of 20 per cent. The net 
present values under all scenarios remain positive.  
52. 
Concessionality of GCF financing: the AE has proposed 100 per cent grant financing thus 
asking for maximum concessionality. While the project does not lead to any direct revenue 
 
2 Standard & Poor's credit rating for Thailand stands at BBB+ with stable outlook. Moody's credit rating for Thailand 
was last set at Baa1 with stable outlook. 
(Accessed 1st June 2021: https://tradingeconomics.com/thailand/rating)

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 87 
 
 
generation, the Government of Thailand and AE may consider partial concessional debt 
financing for the intervention based on the investment grade rating of the country. Moody’s has 
rated the country as Baa1 (2020) and stated in its credit opinion that the credit profile of 
Thailand reflects strong public and external finances that give the country significant room to 
counter shocks, including the economic hit from the coronavirus outbreak. Moody’s has also 
recognized lower government debt as compared to its peers and low share of foreign currency 
debt in overall debt of the Government.  
4.3.4. 
Compliance risk (medium risk) 
53. 
UNDP (the AE) has advised that they apply a zero-tolerance policy in relation to fraud 
and corruption. The guiding principles of UNDP's commitment to prevent, identify and address 
all acts of fraud and corruption have been laid out in the UNDP Policy against Fraud and Corrupt 
Practices (the FCP Policy), which applies to all activities and operations of UNDP, including 
projects and programmes.  
54. 
The fundamental principles of UNDP's FCP Policy serve as the basis for and are 
integrated in UNDP's policy frameworks in relation to procurement, financial management, 
internal control and accountability and staff rules and regulations. Under the terms of the FCP 
Policy and related policies, UNDP has a commitment, when developing a new programme or 
project, to ensure that risks related to fraud and corrupt practices are fully identified and 
considered in the programme/project design and processes and that adequate and effective 
measures to mitigate such risks are put in place.  
55. 
UNDP has advised that the processes and requirements for UNDP's partnership capacity 
assessment require UNDP to carry out a thorough due diligence of the risks in relation to the 
programme/project it intends to engage in, as well as in relation to the potential partners who 
will be involved in the implementation of such programmes/projects. Such capacity 
assessments include, among other things:  
(a) 
A screening of all entities being considered to be contracted by or partner with UNDP 
against the Consolidated UN Security Council Sanctions List (to which UNDP, by virtue of 
being an organ of the United Nations and therefore being part of the same entity, is also 
beholden).  
(b) 
An assessment of any history of fraud, corruption, or other fraudulent practices; and/or 
(c) 
Potential conflicts of interest.  
56. 
Based on this capacity assessment, UNDP then builds an internal control output into the 
design of the project and ensures that the financial management of the programme/project 
contains adequate safeguards to prevent, monitor and address any risks and acts of fraud, 
corruption or anti-money laundering/counter-financing of terrorism that may be identified.  
57. 
UNDP has also informed that they apply a Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers 
(HACT), which represents a common operational (harmonized) framework for transferring cash 
to government and non-governmental partners (both implementing partners and responsible 
parties). The common objective of the HACT framework is to support a closer alignment of 
development aid with national priorities and to strengthen national capacities for management 
and accountability. It serves as a set of procedures on requesting, disbursing, providing 
assurance, and reporting on funds to effectively manage risks, reduce transaction costs and 
promote sustainable development in a coordinated manner.  
58. 
Cash transfers (above the threshold of USD 300,000 in a programme cycle, or otherwise 
in all circumstances where UNDP considers the operating environment to be high risk or has no 
prior experience with the partner) are presumed to present a material risk to UNDP and will 
require a HACT micro-assessment and risk rating by qualified third-party service providers.

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 88 
 
 
Spot checks, programmatic Output verification and auditing requirements are then determined 
and carried out at a frequency determined in line with the risk rating. 
59. 
As per the accreditation master agreement between UNDP and GCF, UNDP will apply its 
own policies. These include the FCP Policy,3 which sets out the processes for reporting fraud and 
ensures protection against retaliation for any person that has reported allegations of 
wrongdoing or cooperated with a duly authorized audit or investigation.  
60. 
UNDP refers to the UNDP Policy for Protection against Retaliation as its key "whistle-
blower" protection policy.4 The Office of Audit and Investigations conducts audits, 
investigations, social and environmental compliance reviews, and disclosure of internal audit 
reports.5 UNDP also has internal control protocols consisting of an Internal Control Framework 
and Anti-Fraud Policy.6 
61. 
UNDP has advised that it conducts partner capacity assessments in relation to all its 
programming and project activities. Reference is made to the Partner Capacity Assessment Tool 
(PCAT)7 and the HACT Framework.8 
62. 
UNDP has confirmed that there are no payments, vouchers, or tradeable instruments of 
value used in activities under the project. 
63. 
Recommended risk rating: The Office of Risk Management and Compliance 
(ORMC)/Compliance Team has conducted a review of the project in accordance with relevant 
GCF Board approved policies and does not find any material issue or deviation with respect to 
compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding proposal, the 
ORMC/Compliance Team have determined a risk rating of ‘medium’ and has no objection to this 
request proceeding to the next steps for processing.  
64. 
ORMC/Compliance would like to remind UNDP, as the AE, of its continuing obligations 
and responsibilities with regard to monitoring and reporting any risks for money laundering, 
terrorist financing, or prohibited practices among the intended counterparties, executing 
entities, beneficiaries, persons involved, or any of the proposed activities. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk) 
65. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains non-
material and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration level, results area, or single 
proposal. 
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
66. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment 
Rationale 
Overall project 
Medium 
 
3 https://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/documents/about/transparencydocs/UNDP_Anti-
fraud_Policy_English_FINAL.pdf  
4 https://popp.undp.org/_layouts/15/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/UNDP_POPP_DOCUMENT_LIBRARY/ 
Public/Ethics_Protection%20against%20Retaliation.docx 
5 https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/account%20ability/audit.html  
6 https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=384&Menu=BusinessUnit  
7 https://popp.undp.org/UNDP_POPP_DOCUMENT_LIBRARY/Publichttps:/popp.undp.org/UNDP_POPP_ 
DOCUMENT_LIBRARY/Public/Consolidated%20Risk-Based%20Partner%20Capacity%20Assess%20Tool%20.xlsm 
8 https://popp.undp.org/UNDP_POPP_DOCUMENT_LIBRARY/Public/FRM_2014%20UNDG%20HACT%20Framework.pdf

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 89 
 
 
Accredited entity (AE)/executing 
entity (EE) capability 
Low 
The implementation plans, especially for 
construction work, need to be adaptable for 
extreme weather conditions. Operation and 
maintenance cost and responsibility will be 
critical for the sustainability of the project. 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
67. 
The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality, 
according to the Special Fund to Thailand. As an accredited entity to GCF, UNDP will deliver 
GCF-specific oversight and quality assurance services including: (i) day-to-day oversight 
supervision; (ii) oversight of project completion; and (iii) oversight of project reporting. 
68. 
The EE for the project, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives (MOAC), will assign the 
Royal Irrigation Department (RID), to implement the project outputs and will be accountable to 
UNDP for managing the project, including monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, 
achieving project outcomes, and for the effective use of UNDP resources. A UNDP micro 
assessment was conducted for RID, across all major categories and RID is considered low risk.  
69. 
UNDP will transfer funds to RID, under MOAC for implementation. Furthermore, RID has 
agreed to select the KMUTNB and GIZ based in Thailand as the responsible parties for 
implementation (Output 1, Output 2/Activity 2.2 respectively). The engagement of responsible 
parties shall follow the Implementing Partner (in GCF parlance, Executing Entity) regulations 
and rules. UNDP micro assessments were also conducted for KMUTNB and GIZ as the 
responsible parties. 
70. 
A project manager will run the project on a day-to-day basis within the parameters laid 
down by the Project Board. The project manager’s contract will end when the final project 
terminal evaluation report, and other documentation required by GCF and UNDP, has been 
completed and submitted to UNDP. The project manager is responsible for day-to-day 
management and decision-making for the project.  
71. 
The financial management and procurement of this project will follow UNDP financial 
rules and regulations. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and 
procedures on audits, informed by and together with any specific requirements agreed in the 
accreditation master agreement. According to the current audit policies, UNDP will appoint the 
auditors.  
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
72. 
As an adaptation project, the intervention aims at enhancing climate resilience in the 
Yom and Nam river basins of Thailand through efficient water management and resilient 
agricultural practices. It is expected to benefit 62,000 direct and 471,561 indirect beneficiaries 
in the basin. 
73. 
 Overall, the funding proposal and log frame have been found to adequately apply the 
results management framework and performance measurement framework indicators. The 
outcomes, impacts, and the related indicators are aligned with GCF requirements. Pertinent 
information on Means of Verification, baseline and targets have been provided. Similarly, the 
log-frame contains clear presentation of project-level results, their indicators and other 
required information in a concise manner. Their diligent application during implementation 
would facilitate results monitoring, progress reporting, performance assessment and finally 
their delivery on the ground.

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 90 
 
 
74. 
 The implementation timetable has been found to follow the required structure and 
format. The milestones and deliverables are well articulated and reporting timelines are 
provided as required. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
75. 
The accreditation master agreement was signed with the accredited entity on 5 August 
2016 and became effective on 23 November 2016. 
76. 
The AE has provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all internal approvals 
and has the capacity and authority to implement the project. 
77. 
The proposed project will be implemented in the Kingdom of Thailand, a country in 
which GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other 
things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need 
to be further assessed. The Secretariat submitted a revised draft of the privileges and 
immunities agreement to the Government of Thailand on 5 October 2018. However, no 
response has been received yet. 
78. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant privileges 
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after 
GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country or 
has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
79. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and 
(b) 
Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 91 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP170 
Proposal name: 
Enhancing climate resilience in Thailand through effective water 
management and sustainable agriculture 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Country/(ies): 
Thailand 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I.
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel1
1.1 
Impact potential 
    Scale: N/A 
1.1.1. 
Adaptation impact 
1.
Thailand’s vulnerability to climate change resides in the geographical and
socioeconomic context: an extensive coastline, a high dependence of rural communities on
agriculture, and extensive urban areas located on flood-prone plains. The proposal argues that
the most significant impacts would be the increased risk of floods and droughts, and that the
risk has already risen since 1955, as a consequence of a higher incidence of extreme rainfall
events and increased rainfall variability. The proposal states that, according to projections,
these climate extremes will increase both in frequency and intensity.2, 3
2.
The proposed project seeks to enhance the water sector’s climate change adaptation
capacity and agriculture livelihoods in the Yom and Nan river basins, by committing to establish
an integrated water resources management (IWRM) regime that focuses on year-round water
management, taking into consideration wet-season-specific floods and dry-season-specific
droughts in an integrated approach. In doing so, both the major concerns of floods and droughts
are likely to addressed, where flood control through hydraulic structures will be complemented
by early warning and by establishing ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA), and drought will be
managed by using water that is likely to be retained in reservoirs as well as by enhancing
infiltration of water in groundwater aquifers by means of water storage and induced recharge of
aquifers. Once the availability of water for use during the dry season is ensured for
compensating the growing moisture deficit, irrigation facilities are expected to ameliorate
drought and facilitate crop production even under climate change.
3.
Adaptation in the Yom and Nan basins is likely to be achieved through three main
components: (1) informed planning in the water and agricultural sectors through improved
climate information and cross-sectorial coordination; (2) improved water management through
strengthened infrastructure complemented by EbA measures; and (3) improved climate
resilience of farmers through support for incorporating climate forecasts and knowledge of
climate change risks into planning, and for developing the market for agricultural products.
1 This assessment is based on the funding proposal submitted to the independent Technical Advisory Panel on 12 July 
2021. 
2 Funding proposal, pages 2 and 5. 
3 The project’s climate rationale is discussed in section 1.4 of this assessment.

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 92 
 
 
 
4. 
Component 1 is focused on improving the availability and quality of climate information 
and supporting its dissemination, and on facilitating interministerial coordination. The Royal 
Irrigation Department’s (RID) Intelligence-based Real-time Decision-Making Modelling (IRDM) 
tool,4 which currently aids the RID in managing water in the Chao Phraya River basin, would be 
updated to increase the level of forecasting precision as well as for generating projections for 
shorter time frames (currently, projections are made on an annual basis). Interministerial 
coordination for climate-informed and integrated planning would be facilitated through 
technical support in developing standard operating procedures (SOPs) for information-sharing 
across government stakeholders. Dissemination of climate information would involve the 
development of a communication strategy and the use of briefs, reports and smartphone apps. 
5. 
Although activity 1.1 includes the procurement and installation of climate and water 
monitoring equipment for a value of approximately USD 800,000, the original submission of this 
proposal did not include a description of this equipment. Upon the request of the independent 
Technical Advisory Panel (TAP), the accredited entity (AE) submitted a breakdown of the costs 
of the equipment. The detailed budget of the present submission was updated to include a list of 
equipment to be installed. However, as indicated below, the independent TAP questions the 
adequacy of some of the proposed equipment to achieve the proposed objectives. 
6. 
Through component 2, the project would strengthen water infrastructure through hard 
engineering works complemented with ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) measures. Activities 
related to grey infrastructure include the review and enhancement of the existing engineering 
designs for the 13 schemes of the Yom-Nan river basin area, to ensure the designs take into 
consideration climate change adaptation, and construction works to upgrade two canal head 
regulators along Khlong Muang Chang and Khlong Ta Kay Reg in the Yom-Nan river basin area. 
With increased rainfall run-off under climate change, these regulators (i.e. water 
infrastructures) would ameliorate flood vulnerability at the lower reaches of the Yom-Nan river 
basin. 5 
7. 
EbA measures are perceived to be complementary to the hard flood-controlling 
measures, with specific objectives to further strengthen flood amelioration and to enhance the 
adaptive capacity of affected communities within the river basin. EbA measures could include 
support for the implementation of integrated farming practices (such as rice-fish management), 
revegetation of riverbanks, wetlands management techniques, erosion control, and soil 
conservation measures. The German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ) is currently 
developing, together with the Thai water sector, an EbA Guidebook to be used as a national 
standard for the systematic identification, prioritization and selection of EbA measures. The 
Guidebook will be complemented by a Code of Practice that will cover specific design issues of 
 
4 IRDM is a collaborative effort involving five organizations: Royal Irrigation Department, the Agricultural Research 
Development Agency, the National Research Council of Thailand, the King Mongkut’s University of Technology 
North Bangkok, and the Thailand Research Organizations Network. IRDM is a milestone in enhancing the 
institutional coordination between the agricultural and irrigation departments, as well as in developing the public 
forecasting and modelling capacity. IRDM can calculate the amount of rainfall and inflow of water into reservoirs 
during the wet season and design water release schedules for 12-month periods, with a relatively high level of 
accuracy. Its mathematical models can be used to forecast inflows into different water sources, support water 
management plans for individual irrigation zones and estimate agricultural yield and revenue. 
5 In 2012, hydrological modelling (Mike-11 ECOlab&AD) for the Yom-Nan river basin was conducted by the 
Department of Water Resources, under the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment. The model represented 
river profiles and modelled water levels under four different scenarios: (i) no water reservoir construction; (ii) no 
dam at the upper Yom river; (iii) reservoir construction; and (iv) dam construction at the upper Yom river, for both 
the year 2010 and future years (2015-2020). A number of models were used to model different aspects of the Yom-
Nan river basin, including MIKE FLOOD for flood, MIKE11 ECOLab&AD for water quality, and MIKE BASIN for water 
consumption. These models are updated every year, especially after flood events when river cross-sections can 
change. However, based on the TAP’s findings from the interview with the AE, hydrological modelling including 
climate change projections has not been carried out. Therefore, it is not possible to ascertain the impact of climate 
change on flooding and on the general river basin regime.

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 93 
 
 
 
selected EbA measures. The EbA Guidebook and Code of Practice are expected to be ready by 
the end of 2021 and will be published by the Thai Office of the National Water Resources 
(ONWR).  
8. 
EbA measures would be designed using modelling techniques to assess the potential 
impact on the hydrological regime, in order to support the prioritization of EbA measures and 
cost-benefit analyses. The AE further explained that EbA measures would include a mixture of 
best practices and lessons learned in past and ongoing projects, which are briefly described in 
the feasibility study. Interventions would be designed through the following process: (1) 
geographical scaling (mapping of hot spots) to define the geographic boundaries of the pilot 
areas; identification of sub-regions within each project area and mapping of major hydro system 
features and economic activities; (2) scoping by assessing environmental and socioeconomic 
impacts and establishing priorities among the major concerns and issues as well as tracing the 
root causative factors behind the selected concerns and issues; (3) data collection; (4) modelling 
for verification and quantification of root-cause relationships with either physically 
deterministic or conceptual models (hydrologic modelling with TalsimNG software and/or 
hydraulic 2D modelling as required; erosion and sedimentation modelling with Modified 
Uniform Soil Loss Equation (MUSLE); water quality modelling with GISMO software; assessment 
to identify risks and uncertainties; identification and ranking of potential EbA measures).6 
9. 
The funding proposal includes a more thorough description of EbA measures. 7 The AE 
stated that “EbA measures will be implemented in and around the two water infrastructure 
interventions of the project area – Klong Mueang and Klong Takae. These areas are mostly 
dominated by the paddy fields, 27,936 rai and 58,964 rai are the cultivated areas, respectively. 
While the EbA measures are not necessarily oriented to agricultural production, they will 
support year-round better water management by contributing to IWRM and provide ecosystem 
services which will benefit cultivated areas.” 8 The independent TAP understands that the 
“27,936 rai and 58,964 rai” do not correspond to the coverage of EbA interventions, but to the 
cultivated areas around the water infrastructure works, that would supposedly be benefited by 
EbA. Without an estimated spatial coverage of the actual area that would be directly modified by 
EbA interventions (including aquatic and adjoining wetland-forest covered areas), it is not 
possible to assess the per hectare cost of EbA interventions or the estimation of target 
beneficiaries for the proposed activity 2.2. 
10. 
The design and implementation of EbA measures would include multiple measures in 
three locations and would cost USD 1.7 M (activity 2.2G in project budget). Potential EbA sites 
have been narrowed down to Pichai Srinakorn, Khonkairas, Sawankha Lok, Promphiram, 
Bangrakham and Muang Phitsahulok. As indicated in paragraph 9 above, the method for 
estimating beneficiaries of this activity is not described in the proposal. 
11. 
Component 3 is focused on enhancing the climate resilience of farmers. The project 
would provide training and technical assistance to farmers and extension officers on the 
application of climate forecasts and knowledge of climate change risks in household agriculture 
planning, including the development of district-level adaptation action plans and 
implementation of climate-smart agricultural practices. 
12. 
The project would support on-farm interventions to improve drought and flood 
resilience through technical assistance for the development of on-farm EbA guidelines, the 
procurement of small scale equipment for farmers (such as water pumps, small cultivators, on-
farm water level measurement, etc.), the construction of 100 ponds as micro-scale water 
 
6 Explanations given in AE’s responses, 22 September 2020. 
7 Feasibility Study, section 4.2.1. Measures would include wetland / floodplain / oxbow lake restoration; living weirs; 
riparian zone rehabilitation / bank stabilization by vetiver grass, buffer zones, sedimentation traps and/or an 
appropriate combination of such measures. 
8 See AE responses to independent TAP comments, dated 29th June and 21st July, 2021.

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 94 
 
 
 
reservoirs, the establishment of community nurseries, the co-design of a financial instrument 
with the Bank of Agriculture and Agriculture Cooperatives (BAAC) to support farmers with 
adaptation investments, and capacity-building for farmers to support market access for their 
products. BAAC has committed USD 16 million for this instrument, as parallel financing. Upon 
request from the independent TAP, the AE provided a commitment letter from BAAC.9 
13. 
Activity 3.1 includes the implementation, at a demonstration scale, of what is called 
precision agriculture or smart farming. This approach to agricultural production involves the 
use of modern observation and communication technology to generate and use geo-referenced 
information for the control of agricultural systems, integrating characteristics of soil, plants and 
climate. Through the use of these systems, algorithms executed by machines and based on 
parameters provided by machines, make an increasing number of decisions. For adequate 
implementation of precision agriculture to address droughts, the evapotranspiration level of the 
specific crops in the targeted area must be well understood. Hourly evapotranspiration data or, 
at least, daily data, as against data on water availability at root zones and water deficit, are 
needed. Although the use of precision agriculture has been applied in extreme water-stressed 
agriculture systems across the world with the aim of saving as much water as possible during 
irrigation applications, the intention to use precision agriculture in water-abundant areas such 
as the Yom-Nan basin appears technologically feasible but not viable in the economic sense.  
14. 
Within activity 3.1, the project would install five Internet of Things (IoT) platforms, 
which would include IoT sensors, drones with multispectral cameras for surveying agricultural 
areas, hardware and software for data processing, storage and communication, and technical 
support and related training. Although it is widely recognized that precision agriculture has the 
potential to increase production and reduce the need for inputs with large-scale and/or high-
cost production, the use of such advanced technology by poor, vulnerable farmers has 
numerous challenges. For example, the platforms include drone kits for spraying liquids (water 
or organic fertilizers), which can carry only 15 litres and would cost USD 20,000 each. 
Recognizing that smallholders in the Yom-Nan basin are among the most vulnerable population 
under climate change, there is no clear reason why agricultural activities including precision 
irrigation should be mechanized in small farms. The selection criteria for this activity stipulate 
that the landowner must have an agricultural area not larger than 1,6 hectares).10  There is no 
analysis in the feasibility study (FS) in relation to the potential annual increment of productivity 
in pilot farms as against annual depreciation of the investment plus the annualized operation 
and maintenance (O&M) costs. Questioned by the TAP, the AE responded that: “A separate 
economic cost-benefit analysis of farm-level precision agriculture platforms – that include IoT 
investments and drone technology – does suggest a benefit-cost ratio greater than one and a 
positive NPV [net present value].  This analysis includes the full costs of investment (upfront 
capital costs) along with annual O&M costs. The primary benefit for farmers that adopt the 
technology platform is increased farming income as the investment allows them to grow higher 
yield varieties and in marginal seasons. This is all under the overhang of a changing climate i.e., 
under the assumption farm incomes will erode as the climate changes.” The economic analysis 
referred to is not included in the proposal. Apart from upfront investment requirements for 
precision agriculture involving modern technologies, there is a significant investment 
requirement for operationalization of precision agricultural practices, which often becomes a 
barrier to adoption of such techniques, especially at smallholder levels. In the absence of 
adequate analytical explanations as well as a roadmap for the extension of such techniques 
among smallholders, there is considerable uncertainty regarding the immediate uptake of the 
proposed intervention within the project implementation period. 
 
9 Annex 13: Co-financing commitment letters, part 2. 
10 Response to TAP comments at B.27, response 5.

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 95 
 
 
 
15. 
Information regarding the time required for complete realization of the capital 
investment from the proceeds of increased productivity has not been provided in the FS. It 
appears difficult to understand whether there is any economic viability at all of precision 
agriculture to address potential water stress in the farms indicated, keeping in view their 
average potential decline in productivity due to claimed climate-change-induced increased 
water stress. Since this type of technology is not developed in Thailand, parts will need to be 
imported, which may pose a threat to the sustainability in the medium and long term.  
16. 
The proposal does not provide an evaluation of the reach these platforms would have in 
terms of direct beneficiaries (people and agricultural area), or of the potential economic 
efficiency of this approach. Questioned about this matter, the AE responded that “Based upon 
survey of existing data of the target area and criterion of beneficiary’s selection, 10 farms in 
each district will be selected for demonstrating as pilot farms. Total pilot farms will be 70 farms 
from 7 districts11; Pichai Srinakorn, Khonkairas, Sawankha Lok, Promphiram, Bangrakham and 
Muang Phitsahulok…” and that an economic evaluation by the BAAC “…confirmed that using 
drone and IoT can increase efficiency of farming by reducing water consumption, cost of soil 
testing, fertilizer mixing, seeding and fertilizing. The intervention will further establish best 
practices which can be replicated and up-scaled (further supported by the credit line to be made 
available through BAAC).” The AE indicated that this activity would serve as a pilot project to 
demonstrate results and accelerate the introduction of precision agriculture.  
17. 
Although the proposal states that IoT equipment would be owned and maintained by 
the district governments,12 the operation and maintenance (O&M) costs were not found in the 
O&M plan (annex 21) of the first submission of this FP (B.27). Questioned by the TAP on this 
matter, the AE responded that “… O&M cost is built into the sale price and warrantee from the 
dealers in the domestic market (Thailand). The dealers include an insurance and drone permit 
as one price. The after-sale service is generally provided by the dealers.” Even with the included 
insurance and warrantee, it is not clear how the dealers would cover the operation costs or the 
maintenance costs after purchase or for how long they would do so. Also, the dealers would 
have a natural incentive to promote the use of precision agriculture and IoT in farms with 
minimum O&M cost, which may generate unfairness in the distribution of assistance and may 
also make the application of this technology less efficient. The AE also added that “the project 
management unit will support resource mobilization for further replication and upscaling, and 
O&M cost (if applicable) from the regular public budget, distributed to government departments 
under the Ministry of Agricultural and Cooperatives (MoAC). Additional resources for IoT/O&M 
can be mobilized through the regular public budget for capacity-building to farmers and 
innovation research…” and that “there is high possibility to mobilize the O&M cost from the CAT 
(Communication Authority of Thailand) that has promoted the IoT for smart farming.” The 
economic analysis in the current submission (B.30) included the O&M costs for the IoT 
platforms, estimated in USD 107,000 per year after year five of project implementation. 
However, the O&M Plan does not include a description of the composition of this cost and the 
method used to estimate it. Asked by the TAP, the AE described the method used to estimate 
O&M costs of IoT platforms.13 
18. 
Each IoT platform would cost USD 270,000, or USD 27,000 for each farm, making it 
unlikely for small farmers (up to 1.6 ha) to adopt it or even operate and maintain it by their own 
means. Following the estimation presented of the O&M costs, for groups of ten farmers sharing 
a platform to use this technology, each farmer would have an annual O&M cost of USD 2,000. In 
this case, being a pilot, the government would cover these costs, but for widespread 
 
11 The original submission included the installation of seven IoT platforms (one for each district), which was reduced 
to five in the present submission. Hence, 50 farms would participate in the pilot programme. 
12 Funding proposal, paragraph 98. 
13 Response to TAP comments, question 8.

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 96 
 
 
 
implementation by small farmers, it is uncertain how these systems would be operated and 
maintained. The use of this technology would not only be unaffordable for small farmers but 
would also require very high technical skills for O&M, thereby relying on external support and 
imported parts.  
19. 
In response to concerns raised by the independent TAP, the present submission reduces 
the installation of IoT platforms from 7 to 5,14 reducing the budget for this activity by 
approximately USD 0.5 million, which was transferred to activity 3.2, which supports farmers 
with low tech/simpler interventions (e.g. on farm ponds, small equipment, etc.).  The total 
budget for component 3 remains unchanged. 
20. 
The independent TAP noted that project performance indicators do not include targets 
for this activity. In response to this comment, the AE suggested adding a performance indicator 
to assess the rate of IoT adoption by gender, age, socioeconomic profile of household, and the 
impact on productivity. The AE further clarified that “The benefit from IoT is captured under 
indicator A1.2, ‘Number of males and females benefiting from the adoption of diversified, 
climate resilient livelihood options (including fisheries, agriculture, tourism, etc.)’. Any further 
upscaling using the BAAC credit would be captured under indicator 3.2, ‘Number of households 
with access to finance for climate resilient farming investment’.”15 
21. 
The Department of Royal Rainmaking and Agricultural Aviation (DRRAA) undertakes an 
annual average of 5,000 rain-seeding flights.16 Such activities may have an effect on 
precipitation patterns. The project does not include a description of reach and impact of the 
cloud-seeding programme being carried out by this governmental agency. Questioned by the 
independent TAP, the AE responded that despite the fact that cloud-seeding activities have not 
been the subject of long-term research, “published research on the effect of rainmaking in 
Thailand did not find a statistically significant relationship between cloud seeding and increases 
in rainfall amount or rainfall area.”17 The AE also added, “the seeding programme is still mostly 
active during drier pre-monsoon periods, before the southwest monsoon. The seeding 
programme is therefore not expected to affect rainfall during flooding events, which occur later 
during the year when the southwest monsoon is more intense.” 
22. 
Direct beneficiaries of project interventions are estimated to be the 62,000 people who 
live in the project site area, with indirect beneficiaries reaching approximately 470,000 people 
that live in project districts, plus 25 million people living in the greater Chao Phraya River Basin. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
         Scale: N/A  
1.2.1. 
Innovation 
23. 
Although most of the project revolves around expanding and improving existing climate 
and water monitoring and management systems, and redesigning and constructing water 
infrastructure (floodgates and canals), the proposal includes some innovative activities in the 
form of EbA measures. Although concrete EbA measures are not yet defined, the present 
submission includes an accurate description of the potential alternatives, of which three would 
be selected for implementation based on a “diagnostic analysis including vulnerability and risk 
assessment, modelling, cause-impact chains and economic evaluation”.18 The implementation of 
 
14 A previous submission of this project included seven pilot platforms. 
15 AE responses to TAP assessments, 21 July 2021. 
16 Royal Rainmaking Project, Wikipedia. 
17 Woodley, W.L., Rosenfeld, D. and Silverman B.A. (2003). On-Top Glaciogenic Cloud Seeding in Thailand. Part I: The 
Demonstration Experiment. Journal of Applied Meteorology, vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 920–938. Parts I and II available at 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26185817>;  <https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26185818 
18 Funding proposal, page 23.

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 97 
 
 
 
EbA measures for climate resilient water management and livelihood development would 
represent an innovative approach for Thailand, for the first time integrating both grey and 
green approaches to water drainage, storage, diversion and irrigation. This paradigm shift to a 
hybrid approach to adaptation has potential to maximize effectiveness and cost-effectiveness.19 
The project is also innovative in integrating climate risk management into IWRM, employing 
solutions which simultaneously tackle drought and flood by diverting floodwaters to replenish 
groundwater for use in dry periods, whilst also mitigating the floods. 
24. 
Precision agriculture is also in its early days globally, and although BAAC launched a soft 
loan for purchasing drones in 2019, the disbursement rate was low.20 This could be because 
precision agriculture is still at the introduction stage in Thailand, or because the idea of using 
such expensive equipment did not make economic sense to Thai small farmers. Perhaps the 
potential returns are too small compared to the capital cost, the incremental loss of opportunity 
costs through depreciation and annualized O&M costs, despite the fact that the BAAC has 
created access to credit. Despite institutional incentives, the current lack of enthusiasm 
involving the advanced precision agriculture technology may be an indication that the 
innovation is mostly theoretical. Overall, the funding proposal fails to provide adequate 
explanation justifying the use of precision agriculture. Although innovative, it is costly (both 
from a CapEx and an OpEx basis), thereby hindering diffusion of this advanced technology to 
low-income small farmers in the region.  
1.2.2. 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
25. 
The project involves capacity-building, technical training and enhancement for inter-
agency coordination as cross-cutting activities in all components. 
26. 
Component 1 is focused on improving the capacity for generating, communicating and 
using climate and hydrological information. These goals would be achieved through several 
actions, including: 
(a) 
The provision of hardware and software for enhanced generation of climate and 
environmental information;  
(b) 
Technical training to 30 staff from the Thai Meteorological Department (TMD), Royal 
Irrigation Department (RID) and relevant agencies on integration of climate change into 
water management and agricultural planning;  
(c) 
Development of tailored climate information products and climate forecast models; 
(d) 
Development of SOPs for sharing of climate information across relevant departments; 
(e) 
Workshops and meetings for sensitization and collaboration in sharing information and 
supporting collaboration;  
(f) 
Development of a communication strategy for dissemination of information; 
(g) 
Development of information briefs and reports released for circulation in local and 
social media;  
(h) 
Development of smartphone and LINE app with climate information to be applied at the 
agriculture household level; and  
(i) 
Development of a complementary website. 
 
19 See, for example, World Bank Group and World Resources Institute (2019) Green and Gray: Creating Next 
Generation Infrastructure. 
20 Responses to TAP comments at B.27, response 5.

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 98 
 
 
 
27. 
The risk of cross-posting or poaching of TMD and RID and other relevant agency 
personnel trained under this project may put at risk the effectiveness of this capacity-building. 
Appropriate safeguards need to be in place, such as a minimum number of years for remaining 
in a post. 
1.2.3. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
28. 
The RID has committed, through a co-financing letter, to provide the necessary funds for 
O&M of activities beyond completion of the project, as estimated in the O&M Plan. 
29. 
Project activities that would promote project sustainability beyond project lifespan 
include the design of a financial instrument with BAAC to support farmers with adaptation 
investments towards climate resilient agriculture, knowledge-sharing and training activities for 
farmers to support market access, and the establishment of an online market platform to 
increase visibility and marketability of farmers’ products. 
1.2.4. 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies 
30. 
The integration of climate risk knowledge into policies and planning across the water 
and agriculture sectors would be sought through the provision of technical training to 30 staff 
from TMD, RID and relevant agencies on integration of climate change knowledge into water 
management and agriculture planning, and through the development of tailored climate 
information products to inform planning. 
1.2.5. 
Scalability and replicability 
31. 
Given that the entire country faces similar challenges regarding floods and droughts, 
and considering that capacity-building would benefit national institutions (RID and TMD), the 
project has good potential for scaling up project activities to other regions of Thailand without 
equally increasing the total costs of implementation. Parallel financing from BAAC in the form of 
credit for farmers practicing climate-informed and sustainable agriculture would also support 
scaling up. However, scaling up of practicing precision agriculture without increasing the total 
cost of implementation appears over-optimistic. 
32. 
The proposal presents a clear theory of change describing the existing barriers and root 
causes that undermine the capacity for mitigating flood and drought risks, and how they relate 
to project activities. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
         Scale: N/A   
1.3.1. 
Environmental co-benefits 
33. 
The most significant environmental co-benefits would come from the implementation of 
EbA measures and conservation agriculture, and include reduced soil erosion, improved surface 
water quality and groundwater recharge, and enhanced biodiversity. 
1.3.2. 
Social co-benefits 
34. 
The main social benefits include increased food and water security, which would 
translate into enhanced food security and better health conditions of farming families. 
1.3.3. 
Economic co-benefits

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 99 
 
 
 
35. 
The project’s support to climate resilient agriculture and to expanding access to markets 
and financing would enhance income generation for the vulnerable farmers targeted by the 
project, and possibly generate jobs for young people. 
36. 
Enhanced climate forecasting and the use of the IRDM tool, together with the 
development of communication tools, would provide people with more time to safeguard their 
assets or harvest the crops to avoid damage from an impending extreme weather event. 
1.3.4. 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
37. 
Existing gender inequality and provisions to ensure equal gender participation and 
mitigation of any negative impact on women and girls are clearly explained in the Gender 
Assessment and Action Plan. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
         Scale: N/A   
1.4.1. 
Vulnerability of the country and climate rationale 
38. 
The proposal argues that wet seasons are becoming more intense, with the target basin 
being increasingly unable to manage slow run-off to the central plains and the greater Bangkok 
area. Further, the proposal states that dry seasons are becoming drier, with the water that the 
infrastructure is able to retain being insufficient to cover the irrigation needs of farmers. The 
increased run-off of more intense precipitation events could also be accelerating soil erosion 
and impacting groundwater resources. 
39. 
The climate rationale presented in a previous submission of this proposal was 
questioned by the independent TAP for using gridded data sets instead of real observed data 
from stations for evaluating historical trends. The present submission states that it “utilized a 
daily rainfall and air temperature dataset from 17 stations within the Chao Phraya basin 
provided by Thai Meteorological Department” complemented by “freely available global gridded 
data products”.21 This observed data complemented with gridded data is used for trend 
analysis, for calculating extreme rainfall, temperature and drought indices, and for validating 
climate models. Model-based outputs are only useful when a model is selected on the basis of its 
performance to reproduce observational data trends. The process is called “validation”, and is 
intended for the country or the region in question. If a model output is used without proper 
validation, the outputs are inadequate for making projections on which to base and design a 
project.  
40. 
The validation of the model ensembles used for climate projections is made against 
computer-assisted reanalysis data sets22 developed by the Climate Research Unit (CRU) and the 
Global Precipitation Climatology Centre (GPCC). The feasibility study presented in the first 
submission was missing a comparison between observed and gridded data. The AE later 
submitted charts for monthly and annual rainfall and monthly and annual mean temperature 
showing a comparison between data from observations, CRU, GPCC and Climate Hazards group 
Infrared Precipitation with Stations (CHIRPS).23 Since the CHIRPS dataset takes into account 
satellite observations of rainfall data, calibrated against point-source based observational 
datasets, the alternative validation of rainfall data involving computer generated gridded 
datasets is acceptable. The proposal deals with seasonal high rainfall and run-off to cause floods 
as well as a dry seasonal lack of rainfall leading to high evapotranspiration and droughts. 
 
21 Annex 26, section 1.3.1. 
22 Annex 26, figures 14a, 14b, 15a, 15b. 
23 AE responses to TAP comments, 29 June 29 2021.

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 100 
 
 
 
Therefore, the use of CHIRPS rainfall datasets for the validation of gridded data and the use of 
the latter for the validation of projection models is also acceptable. 
41. 
The study concludes that while precipitation has become less frequent in most parts of 
Thailand, with a significant reduction in the occurrence of consecutive wet days, and total 
annual precipitation remaining mostly unchanged, precipitation events have become more 
intense.24 Such claims, however, remain questionable in the absence of rainfall intensity analysis 
involving the peak rainfall season. The trends shown in the study are mostly based on a non-
significant relationship involving rainfall-related indices, and their extent of change is not very 
high. For example, the number of rainy days per year and in May to October fell by only one day 
over a full decade, and the simple daily intensity index increased by only 0.17 mm/day/decade. 
Regarding rainfall historical data, annex 26 concludes that: “Trends are weak and inconsistent 
and should not be interpreted as systematic drivers behind historical extreme events (such as 
the 2011 flood), nor as expressions of anthropogenic climate change.” 
42. 
Despite such weaknesses in trend analyses, it is easily recognized that the total rainfall 
is increasing against a reduction in the number of rainy days, which has resulted in 
intensification of rainfall during the rainy season. In such a condition, rainfall run-off will 
increase and tend to generate flow volumes to overtop riverbanks and cause floods.  
43. 
Flood is a phenomenon that occurs when there is more water than available drainage 
capacity. In a river basin, flood generally occurs as a seasonal phenomenon, when the water 
flow at any given point exceeds drainage capacity and water level rises above a locally perceived 
‘danger level’. The normal flood can become an ‘extreme flood’ event if the water level surpasses 
a perceived threshold beyond the known and defined danger level. Flood can also occur due to 
congestion, especially when the river is choked due to siltation or other obstacles. Urban floods 
occur when there is an extreme rainfall event (e.g. equal or more than a rainfall event 
surpassing an upper threshold in several consecutive hours; for example, the accumulation of 
100 mm or more rainfall in about 24 hours) that exceeds the urban drainage capacity. In a river 
basin, unusual and sudden (flash) flood can occur if a large volume of water is drained (for some 
reason, like breaking of a dam, or outburst of a cloud, or breach of a glacier lake to trigger a 
glacial lake outburst flood) beyond a threshold in excess of the drainage capacity of any given 
point in the river basin. In a previous submission, the independent TAP could not find any 
supporting information in the funding proposal defining flood in the target river basin. No 
relationship was made in the proposal between any defined extreme rainfall event and a given 
water flow threshold beyond which floods occur. There was no sense of cause and effect in the 
discussion in the feasibility study. The present submission defines flood as when the flow of the 
Chao Phraya River exceeds 2,800 cubic metres per second (m3/s), which happened during the 
devastating 2011 floods. 
44. 
The feasibility study presents data, showing that the validation of the models used for 
climate projections also show the projections for the MRI-AGCM3.2s atmospheric model. This is 
used for rainfall projections, and discharge projections are obtained from these through 
hydrological modelling. The feasibility study presents the results from a study by Wichakul et al. 
(2014), which estimated that there would be increases in run-off of more than 20 per cent at the 
beginning of the Chao Phraya River due to increases in mid-season rainfall. Available data25 
show the maximum daily discharge corresponding to different return periods for present 
climate, near future climate and future climate for four locations. As per the data presented by 
the AE, at the beginning of the Chao Phraya River, a flow of 2,800 m3/s has a return period of 
five years at present. In the near future a flood with a return period of five years would produce 
 
24 Feasibility study, page 40. 
25 Annex 26, figure 29.

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 101 
 
 
 
a discharge of 3,300 m3/s. This clearly exhibits that under climate change, flood intensity will 
significantly increase due to a significant increase in run-off. 
45. 
Also in annex 26, in section 6.2, which deals with mitigation of flood risks, it is concluded 
that: “Given the results of the modelling above and the uncertainty associated with future 
projections of rainfall it is recommended that interventions to mitigate flood risks be based on 
current flood risks, known areas where flooding risks pose a threat, and to the extent possible 
allow for flexibility to adapt to changes in future rainfall distributions and flooding as they 
evolve.” The AE clarified that project interventions “have been selected as highest priority 
activities, based on in-depth modelling of current flood risks by the Thailand Government…”. 
Since the Yom-Nan river basin is managed by hydraulic structures, hydrological modelling must 
show at which levels of discharge beyond an upper threshold flooding actually occurs beyond 
the operation of the management structures. The AE clarified that the maximum discharge 
levels presented in figure 79 of the feasibility study for each section of the Chao Phraya River 
represent flood thresholds and take into account the current water management 
infrastructure.26 
Figure 19: Changes in maximum water discharge at Phrae (northern Chao Phraya) for different 
future periods under RCP4.5 (left) and RCP8.5 (right) 
 
46. 
The independent TAP acknowledges the fact that, as per the above-mentioned modelling 
results, the possibility of greater flooding in future decades cannot be ruled out and the system 
will only get wetter, despite the two regulators in the Yom-Nan river basin. Under such 
circumstances, even under the RCP4.5 scenario, the investment in water infrastructure (i.e. 
flood regulators) can be considered to be a climate-driven investment, despite having a weak 
evidence base regarding flooding induced by climate change. 
 
26 AE responses to TAP comments, 21 July 2021.

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 102 
 
 
 
47. 
Usually in monsoon-influenced regions across the globe, agricultural drought as a 
phenomenon occurs, if at all, only in non-monsoon months. In the broader climatological 
perspective, Thailand’s climate is influenced by the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). 
Therefore, the potential influence of the El Niño phase of ENSO in contributing to increased 
droughts cannot be ruled out, especially under climate change. Precipitation in non-monsoon 
months was found to be increasing (low confidence) at a rate of 10.8mm/decade.27 Increased 
rainfall during the non-monsoon period would not exacerbate flooding, rather it might 
compensate for evapotranspirative losses from the topsoil, thereby reducing drought impacts. 
This increase in rainfall, as well as the increase in temperature over all the months, have been 
analysed to examine the past and projected drought-related indices such as the standard 
precipitation index (SPI), standardized precipitation and evapotranspiration index (SPEI) and 
potential evapotranspiration (PET). While SPI and SPEI are indices widely used for 
understanding landscape-level drought, PET is widely used for understanding crop-specific 
drought and for calculating crop water deficits – a quantitative index for analysing droughts.   
48. 
Although annex 26 (Climate Change in Chao Phraya Basin) concludes that “Trends in 
extreme rainfall indices are weak, and do not show any consistent sign, nor clear spatial 
pattern,” the PET analyses exhibit an increasing drought intensity in the near future (2021–
2050) for all months. This indicates that the perceived compensation from increased rainfall 
during the wet season would not be adequate to prevent the occurrence of drought, which 
would require irrigation water for dry season paddy cultivation in the target areas. Moreover, 
the 12-month SPEI trends in the four sub-basins including the Yom-Nan basin clearly show that 
the projected values in future years would continue to decline, leading to higher levels of 
persisting droughts. Accordingly, the estimated water deficits would be likely to increase under 
such drought conditions, as presented by model outputs.  
1.4.2. 
Vulnerable groups 
49. 
The project targets farming households and farming communities, which are the groups 
most vulnerable to flooding and drought in Thailand. The design phase of the project included a 
survey that revealed that 96 per cent of households in the Yom-Nan River basin were dependent 
on rice farming as a source of income. Selection criteria prioritized vulnerability and urgency, 
considering the proximity of communities to the river basin and their reliance on water for 
agriculture. 
1.4.3. 
Economic and social development 
50. 
Thailand’s rural population is mostly engaged in agriculture, which generates over 10 
per cent of the gross domestic product, and accounts for 74 per cent of water consumption. 
Almost 6 million households in Thailand depend on agriculture as their source of income. The 
agricultural sector in Thailand employs approximately half of the country’s population and is, 
overall, dominated by smallholder farms which, in the project area, have an average land size 
between 4.00 and 4.64 hectares. 
51. 
In 2015, Thailand became an upper-middle income economy with average per capita 
annual income of USD 5,775. Over the last four decades, Thailand has made remarkable 
progress in social and economic development. Poverty declined from 67 per cent in 1986 to 11 
per cent in 2014. However, income inequality is evident between urban and rural populations. 
Poverty is higher in the northern-central region, where the target area is located. 
1.4.4. 
Absence of alternative sources of financing 
 
27 Feasibility study, page 32.

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 103 
 
 
 
52. 
Given the public good nature of benefits, and that project interventions would not 
generate direct revenues, alternative financing options to address climate change adaptation in 
the agricultural and water sectors are limited. The proposed line of credit of USD 16 million 
from BAAC through financial products with incentives for farmers to practice climate resilience 
may address climate finance availability from financial institutes; however, this does not ensure 
that it will address current issues and challenges of accessibility and affordability of climate 
finance for small farm holdings which neither the feasibility study nor the funding proposal 
have presented clearly. 
1.4.5. 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity 
53. 
The need for strengthening institutions, including technical and management skills and 
inter-agency coordination and collaboration are recognized and widely addressed in the 
proposal through the capacity-building and institutional strengthening activities described. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
         Scale: N/A   
1.5.1. 
Alignment with national climate strategy and policies 
54. 
 As described in the proposal, the project is aligned with the country’s priorities and 
policies including Thailand’s 20-year development plan, as well as the Water Management 
Strategy, the Technology Needs Assessment report formulated in 2012, the 12th National 
Economic and Social Development Plan (2017–2021), the national Climate Change Master Plan 
(2015–2050), the Climate Change National Adaptation Plan and Nationally Determined 
Contribution. 
1.5.2. 
Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver 
55. 
The accredited entity, the UNDP, has worked with RID on a number of projects, 
including the ongoing Climate Change Finance project, related to RID’s capacity to formulate 
climate-informed projects and secure finance for implementation. UNDP is also working with 
the Office of Agriculture Economics of the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, in the 
“Integrating Agriculture in National Adaptation Plans (NAP–Ag)” programme. 
1.5.3. 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
56. 
The inception phase included several rounds of stakeholder discussions over the period 
from 2016 to 2019, on adaptation priorities, including the implementation of EbA measures, 
construction of grey infrastructure and increased climate resiliency for agriculture-based 
livelihoods. Subnational level decision makers, the private sector, farmers and community 
leaders where engaged through field surveys and consultation forums. Academic institutions 
and technical officials within MoAC with expertise in water and agriculture were also consulted 
in order to inform the project design and seek support for the project interventions. The 
Stakeholder Consultation Report describes the parties consulted and the feedback received. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
                     Scale: N/A   
1.6.1. 
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 104 
 
 
 
57. 
Given that the benefits represent a public good, and that the project interventions would 
not generate direct revenues, it is unlikely that GCF financing would crowd out private 
investments. 
58. 
The proposed financial structure seems reasonable to achieve the project objectives. 
1.6.2. 
Amount of co-financing 
59. 
Co-financing is relatively high: GCF would finance 52 per cent of total project cost and 
the rest would be financed by the government of Thailand (almost 48 per cent) and the Krungsri 
Bank (0,3 per cent). 
1.6.3. 
Financial viability 
60. 
The cost-benefit analysis includes four without project scenarios: 5 per cent, 10 per cent, 
15 per cent and 20 per cent reduction in agricultural production by 2042. As economic benefits, 
the analysis considers the avoided damage of floods and the increased agricultural production. 
The resulting net present value and internal rate of return are summarized in the following 
table provided in the Economic Analysis (tables 17 and 20):  
Table 17: Estimated net present value and internal rate of return 
 
1 For purpose of clarity, the scenarios presented are the assumed impacts of climate change by 2045 on agricultural 
productivity in the absence of the project.  
61. 
Even with a simultaneous increase in cost of 20 per cent and a decrease in benefits of 20 
per cent, the economic efficiency of the project remains significant: 
Table 20: Estimated net present value and internal rate of return 
 
62. 
The basis for calculating the future flood damages in the with project scenario, as 
presented in table 15 of the economic analysis, was not clear. Questioned by the TAP on this 
matter, the AE presented a description of the calculation process made to estimate avoided 
flood damage, which was done by relating recorded flood damages for different return periods 
with water level at gauging stations and flow.28 
63. 
As indicated in paragraphs 13 and 23 of this assessment, the benefits of replication of 
IoT, including their O&M, would be extremely difficult for the farmers in view of high initial 
costs and the absence of any information regarding potential cost recovery by them. The classic 
cost-benefit analysis does not take such information into account. Even if bank loans are being 
offered, the penetration of precision agriculture might remain questionable due to cost-related 
uncertainties. These can make part of the project financially untenable for a large segment of the 
target beneficiaries. 
 
28 Responses to TAP comments, question 9.

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 105 
 
 
 
1.6.4. 
Best practices 
64. 
EbA can be considered a best practice for improving climate resilience in a cost-efficient 
manner. GIZ is currently developing an EbA Guidebook to be used as a national standard for the 
systematic identification, prioritization and selection of EbA measures at river basin scale. 
65. 
Potential EbA measures include Monkey Cheek, which is a flood control concept that 
focuses on building reservoirs to retain rainwater and alleviate discharge, vetiver grass to 
prevent soil erosion and landslides, the “living weir” concept to stabilize soils and riverbanks, 
forest restoration using temporary weirs, wastewater treatment using grass filtration, lagoons, 
wetlands and mangroves, and conservation agriculture practices. 
66. 
Monkey Cheek projects should involve intense public consultations and adequate 
compensation to farmers who lose their lands to water reservoirs. The details regarding costs 
and benefits are not provided in the funding proposal and associated documents. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
67. 
The available evidence base suggests that both floods and drought might take place in 
the near future in the targeted basin. Although the extent of increase in intensity of such hazards 
remains highly uncertain, the continuing occurrence of both phenomena is likely in the Yom-
Nan basin.  
68. 
In the baseline period (based on CRU data), the occurrence of drought events (SPEI 
values) was increasing. Thereby, an increase in drought driven by climate change could be 
established in the Chao Phraya River basin. 
69. 
Despite a weak evidence base, the data indicate that flooding will likely be a problem in 
the Chao Phraya basin. The incidence of higher levels of rainfall has been observed (not so much 
in the Chao Phraya basin itself, but in the country, especially in the southern sub-catchments). 
The model outputs indicate that run-off in the Chao Phraya basin will increase by 20–25 per 
cent by the 2040s. The return period of floods at the Chao Phraya headwaters will also become 
shorter, meaning that there will be more flood incidents in the medium future than in the past. 
Since there have been past floods, floods will likely continue to occur at a higher frequency.  
70. 
For these reasons, the independent TAP endorses this funding proposal with one 
condition:  
(a) 
The AE must present, prior to the first disbursement by the GCF under the project, (i) a  
feasibility assessment (based on existing case-studies and platforms in South East Asia) 
on the implementation of the project’s proposed utilization of an Internet of Things 
(IoT) irrigation system for rice cultivation; this should include a costing analysis, review 
of technical requirements, review of equipment suppliers, plan for development of a 
Thai version of  an IoT irrigation software platform; and (ii) a plan for development and 
scaling up such IoT irrigation systems by the Thai government as part of its plans for 
digital transformation and sustainability.  
71. 
The risk of cross posting or poaching of TMD and RID and other relevant agency 
personnel trained under this project may put at risk the effectiveness of this capacity-building. 
The independent TAP recommends that appropriate safeguards need to be in place, such as a 
minimum number of years for remaining in a post.

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 106 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP170) 
Proposal name: 
Enhancing climate resilience in Thailand through effective water 
management and sustainable agriculture 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Country/(ies): 
Thailand 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
Impact potential 
We note iTAP’s assessment that by addressing both the major concerns of floods and 
droughts, the project is expected to facilitate climate resilient crop production. The project 
will, through integration of EbA and infrastructure establish a regime of integrated water 
resource management for year-round water security. 
Below, we address specific comments presented in this assessment, referring also to prior 
responses. 
Paragraph 9 
The comment on the per hectare cost of EbA interventions or the estimation of target 
beneficiaries is well noted. Since the EbA measures will be undertaken in and around the 
cultivated areas, the spatial coverage is indeed estimated based on these areas. The 
estimation will be vetted and refined during the participatory process with the communities 
whereby the final determination of the EbA measures will be made. A comprehensive Annex 
18(b) - Lessons Learned from Baseline Projects has been included in the FP package detailing 
the process by which EbA measures will be identified/selected. In addition, the proposal 
package includes the safeguards measures to be put in place to protect farmers in the area. 
Please refer to Annex 6(b) – Environmental and Social Management Framework. 
Paragraph 14 
We underscore that the government is proposing the establishment of five platforms (each 
covering an aggregate of 10 farms) to pilot precision agriculture technology across project-
targeted farms that will benefit from the investment of capital from GCF funds and O&M by 
the districts. Through a consultative process, the set of farms will be selected to serve as 
pilots whereby the farmers benefit from the higher yields and incomes and the data collected 
from these farms serves the government vision to improve climate resilient agriculture 
planning in the sector and drive future investments. The platform based on an IoT technology, 
has already been tested in other SE Asian countries including Thailand, and will address the 
issue of improved water management in the aggregated irrigation system thereby dealing 
with increased water demands predicted from increased evapotranspiration and increased 
temperature. The smallholder farmers are not expected to invest any funds to facilitate this 
pilot and the O&M, post-project, will continue to be the responsibility of the districts. It is also 
important to note that drones referred to in the ITAP comments serve multiple purposes,

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 107 
 
 
 
particularly through remote sensing, data collection on crop health and herbicide application, 
and are not intended as the source of irrigation for the farms. Irrigated water will be applied 
through communal system of irrigation channels. The below picture is provided to clarify the 
use of precision agriculture involving Internet of Things (Iot) and drones: 
 
IoT is indeed an innovative technology (approx. $1.3M of the total GCF funding request) that 
is being adopted by the government across its many investments (government and donor 
funded) and there is a commitment for O&M and vision for upscaling that will ensure that 
these technologies become cost-effective over time. The precision agriculture interventions 
will be based on a successful research conducted by the Kasetsart University Thailand in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives and international best 
practices, such as International Rice Research Institute application in SE Asia. The research 
indicates the IoT system is especially effectively for multiple purposes: 
•              Assist timing for planting; 
•              Land preparation; 
•              Drone usage for remote sensing (crop health data collection)_and efficient 
herbicide/pesticide application if this is needed; 
•              Enabling farmers to effectively manage water levels through better management of 
soil moisture levels (as monitored by IoT sensors)  
•              Data collection for enabling policy and planning with local government; and 
•              Climate data forecasting for better decision making.

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 108 
 
 
 
On iTAP’s comment related to cost-benefit analysis, as per standard practice for the projects, 
the economic analysis for the overall project has been undertaken. This includes the cost-
benefit analysis of farm-level precision agriculture platforms – that include IoT investments 
and drone technology – and it does result in a benefit-cost ratio greater than one and a 
positive NPV [net present value] for the project in its entirety.  This analysis includes the full 
costs of investment (upfront capital costs) along with estimated annual O&M costs of this 
activity. The primary benefit for farmers that adopt the technology platform is increased 
farming income as the investment allows them to grow higher yield varieties and in marginal 
seasons. This is all under the overhang of a changing climate i.e., under the assumption farm 
incomes will erode as the climate changes. 
As acknowledged in the assessment, the intent is to demonstrate results to support Thai 
Government’s strategy to accelerate smart agriculture. The project will support this through 
testing the application in a new context with the view to working with Universities, private 
sector, financial institutions, communities and district agencies for upscale.  
With regards to replication and upscaling, the expectation is not that the project-targeted 
smallholders will adopt this technology en-masse. Rather, as part of the vision, the results will 
support early adoption and uptake by larger farms or groups of farms in Thailand, including 
through support from the BAAC credit thereby easing the way for a wider market for smart 
agriculture. This paves the way for innovative technologies to take root, leading to overall 
reduction of costs and wider adoption in the medium- to long-term. Please see the transition 
plan below from the National Strategy Thailand 4.0 to shift traditional agriculture into smart 
agriculture, highlighting the need for IoT and precision farming.   
 
Analysis done in the project will help define the appropriate number of rai (farm area) where 
precision agriculture results in benefits.  Results of the pilot will be shared widely to inform 
investments by other districts, small farmer groups or by larger farms.    
Paragraph 15 
We maintain that piloting technology does not necessitate that it is locally sourced. There are 
no pre-selected firms to provide this support, or preference of international vs local 
providers. In addition, there are Thai companies working in this space. For example:

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 109 
 
 
 
https://www.arv.co.th/varuna/.  During project implementation, an open, competitive 
procurement process will ensure cost-effectiveness and value for money, with considerations 
given to training, maintenance and warranties available.   
Paragraph 17 
We recognize that O&M costs related to IoT and drones are not fully clear as it is a new 
industry and the estimations are based on existing case studies. Dealers are not expected to 
cover O&M per se, but protections offered by warrantees would affect actual O&M costs.  It is 
to be noted that in the project, district authorities would be responsible for O&M and related 
resource commitments (e.g., personnel/finance). Further, before any investments are 
commenced, the districts will be expected to provide a letter of support for long term O&M 
(beyond the project and supplier contracts), as the O&M estimates based on final site-
selection and supplier commitments are finalized during implementation.   
Paradigm shift potential 
We note the iTAP’s acknowledgement of the pioneering and innovative approach the project 
is advancing for water management, integrating grey and green approaches. We also note 
that project is promoting an innovative approach in integrating climate risk management into 
IWRM. 
Regarding iTAP concerns on the approximately US1.3M estimated for introduction of 
innovative precision agriculture technology in the project, we address specific concerns 
below. (Also refer to the response in the previous section) 
Paragraph 24 
It is indeed, as iTAP notes, true that precision agriculture is still in the introductory stage in 
Thailand. We would like to posit that new technologies require testing; new innovations do 
not have the network of retailers, repair and service entities as one would find with well 
tested technology. The early adoption and piloting of innovative technology should not be 
evaluated in terms of standalone cost-effectiveness, since it is not at a stage for mass rollout 
(when the technology would not be described as ‘innovative’).  
The Government of Thailand has requested UNDP to help facilitate the testing and piloting of 
technology to support its National Strategy-Thailand 4.0: the government's industrial 
economic model, which aims to shift traditional agriculture into smart agriculture. The 
advancement of technology in agriculture is also in line with Thailand’s 20 year Agricultural 
Development Plan (2017-2036) and “MOAC’s Digital Agriculture Strategic Plan (2017-2021)”. 
The market value of smart farming in Thailand amounted to around 128.7 million U.S. dollars 
in 2018, and was forecasted to reach 269.9 million U.S. dollars in 2022.  There is growing 
literature to suggest precision agriculture can be viable for Thailand, notably: “Small Scale 
Farmers under Thailand’s Smart Farm System” by Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives; 
“Precision Agriculture for Rice Production in Thailand” by Kasetsart University; “A 
comprehensive solution for landscape-scale sustainable water management in rice” by 
International Rice Research Institute. Around the country, there are many examples and 
piloting projects with industry partners on precision agriculture and usage of drone for 
farming: for instance, telecommunications firm DTAC is working with Department of 
Agricultural Extension on new IoT-based precision farming solution. In recognition of

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 110 
 
 
 
Thailand’s interest in precision farming, an international conference is planned for January 
2022, providing political and financial momentum for the country to accelerate these 
innovations. (https://waset.org/advances-in-precision-farming-technologies-conference-in-
january-2022-in-bangkok) 
In light of this, we stress that the project intends to focus on paving the way for the paradigm 
shift envisioned by the Thai Government. The iTAP review comments state that: “Although 
innovative, it is costly (both from a CapEx and an OpEx basis), thereby limiting diffusion of 
this advanced technology to low-income small farmers in the region.” It is not expected that 
smallholder farmers in the project would upscale to full IoT individually or immediately. A 
few aggregate farms benefit from the introduction of the technology, with full support for 
capital and O&M costs (beyond the project), while serving as pilots that allow the government 
to consolidate successes and failures on their path to digitalization of agriculture over time.  
Paragraph 27 
Regarding concern of staff poaching, capacity building in the relevant departments would be 
sustained through the following approaches: (i) Training of Trainers approach for the 
department staff and (ii) Codification of the training materials and dissemination. These 
approaches could help address any staff turnover by institutionalizing the training and, to an 
extent, broadening the reach of the capacity building efforts.  
Sustainable development potential 
We note iTAP’s acknowledgement of the environmental (reduced soil erosion, improved 
surface water quality and groundwater recharge, and enhanced biodiversity), social 
(enhanced food and water security and better health conditions), economic (enhanced 
income generation and safeguarding against loss of assets), and gender (provisions to 
address gender inequality) benefits of the project. 
Needs of the recipient 
Comments from iTAP are well noted on the reach of the project to benefit the most vulnerable 
and its contribution to socio-economic development. 
We appreciate the discussions with iTAP and the opportunity provided to clarify several 
aspects of the climate rationale for the project. As noted above we have used a combination of 
multiple (all globally available) sources of both observed and projected future climate data, 
including Thai weather stations from the basin, CRU, GPCC, CHIRPS and ensembles of CMIP 5 
& 6 and CORDEX climate models, both for RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 (see Annex 2, Feasibility Study, 
sections 1.7.3 & 1.7.4,). We used these multiple data sources, a calibrated hydrological model 
of the Chao Phraya basin and available literature to assess the evidence for increases in 
rainfall intensity, surface runoff and water discharge (to assess the likelihood that flooding 
risk will increase under climate change). All data sources and variables indicate likely 
increases in flooding hazard and risk (see FP paragraphs 11, 12, 16 & 17 and Annex 2, 
Feasibility Study sections 1.7.4 and 1.7.5). The same multiple data sources were used to 
evaluate indicators of agricultural drought, including potential evapotranspiration (PET), 
SPEI, crop and irrigation water requirements (CWR & IWR), all of which indicated increasing 
agricultural drought risk (see FP paragraphs 13 & 17 and Annex 2, Feasibility Study sections

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 111 
 
 
 
1.7.4 and 1.7.5). As recommended within the recently released IPCC AR6 WGI report (chapter 
10), we compared these different sources of data and information to ensure that observed 
trends and projected future changes (from bias corrected GCMs and RCMs) were consistent 
and not contradictory in terms of the expected direction (sign) of change, indicating whether 
climate hazards and hence climate-induced risk will increase. As iTAP acknowledges, these 
indicators and models consistently demonstrate that flooding risk (through increases in 
rainfall intensity) and agricultural drought risk (through increases in PET, CWR and IWR) are 
likely to continue to increase over the Chao Phraya basin in the future, thereby providing the 
necessary rationale for project interventions to address these expected elevated climate risks 
(see FP, paragraph 17 for a summary). 
 
Paragraph 51 
iTAP’s comment on (d) Absence of alternative sources of financing is noted. Challenges of 
accessibility and affordability of climate finance for small farmers is a global development 
challenge. In this project, the credit line provided by BAAC is new and additional, developed 
specifically to complement this project’s interventions, with the GCF investment allowing for 
crowding in of this co-financing. The project will work with BAAC to design the credit to 
ensure that project beneficiaries will have better/enhanced access.  Credit will support 
investments in adaptation (e.g. farm ponds, precision agriculture, etc.) taking into account the 
financial capacity of the farmers. Krungsri bank will also partner with the project to provide 
the financial literacy training to the project beneficiaries. The capacity building and 
investments for climate resilience, financial literacy training from Krungsri bank and credit 
line provided by BAAC will together facilitate a holistic approach to build creditworthiness 
and enable access to finance for the beneficiary farmers. This could also serve as a model for 
BAAC to replicate and scale up their loan programme in other regions. 
 
Country ownership 
Comments from iTAP are well noted.  
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
iTAP’s concern on efficiency of precision agriculture is noted. Refer to previous response in 
Impact Potential section.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
We thank the iTAP for the endorsement of the proposal, noting the condition and the 
recommendation as below:  
iTAP Condition: “The AE must present, prior to the first disbursement by the GCF under the 
project, (i) a  feasibility assessment (based on existing case-studies and platforms in South East 
Asia) on the implementation of the project’s proposed utilization of an Internet of Things (IoT)

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.02 
Page 112 
 
 
 
irrigation system for rice cultivation; this should include a costing analysis, review of technical 
requirements, review of equipment suppliers, plan for development of a Thai version of  an IoT 
irrigation software platform; and (ii) a plan for development and scaling up such IoT irrigation 
systems by the Thai government as part of its plans for digital transformation and 
sustainability.”  
We accept the condition, as per the elements outlined, noting the assessment is intended for 
the entire IOT platform (inclusive of software and hardware requirements). We also note the 
timeline stipulated by ITAP for the fulfilment of the condition prior to first disbursement. 
As per the Government of Thailand’s request to facilitate the introduction of precision 
agriculture technology, the project supports testing and piloting of precision agriculture and 
IOT technologies. The project is fully aligned with the National Strategy-Thailand 4.0: the 
government's industrial economic model, which aims to shift traditional agriculture into 
smart agriculture as well as the government’s 20 year Agricultural Development Plan (2017-
2036) and “MOAC’s Digital Agriculture Strategic Plan (2017-2021)”. In line with these 
strategies and plans, the requested assessment will build on best practices from regional and 
country pilots and case studies, as well as growing research on precision agriculture in 
Thailand (by Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives (MOAC); Kasetsart University; 
International Rice Research Institute, among others). 
 
iTAP Recommendation: “The risk of cross posting or poaching of TMD and RID and other 
relevant agency personnel trained under this project may put at risk the effectiveness of this 
capacity-building. The independent TAP recommends that appropriate safeguards need to be in 
place, such as a minimum number of years for remaining in a post.” 
We note ITAP’s concern and have consulted the government. The project will facilitate 
sustained capacity building in the relevant departments through the following approaches: (i) 
Training of Trainers approach for the department staff and (ii) Codification of the training 
materials and dissemination. These approaches would help address sustainability issues by 
institutionalizing the training and broadening the reach of the capacity building efforts.

=== PAGE 113 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
Gender Assessment, Action Plan and Budget 
Enhancing climate resilience in Thailand through effective 
water management and sustainable agriculture 
I.
Introduction
This gender assessment aims to provide an overview of the gender situation in Thailand, with a specific 
focus on supporting climate resilience and transformational change in water management and sustainable 
agriculture, identifying gender issues that are relevant to the project, and examining potential gender 
mainstreaming opportunities at the policy and project level. The assessment is based on available data 
from studies conducted by the Royal Thai Government (RTG), UN agencies, and multilateral development 
agencies; and includes: 
•
Undertaking a desk review on gender-related studies conducted for Thailand
•
Drawing on earlier stakeholder consultations [and engaging potential female beneficiaries of
the project and incorporating feedback into the design of the proposed project]
•
Incorporating information and lessons learned from past studies and assessments on gender
in Thailand;
•
Documentation on Thailand’s relevant gender and climate commitments under the SDGs,
CEDAW, and the Paris Agreement (including Nationally Determined Contributions)
•
Integrating gender considerations in the project indicators, targets and activities.
II.
Gender and Climate Change Related Risks in Thailand
Thailand is considered one of the sixteen countries in the "extreme risk" category that are most vulnerable 
to the impacts of climate change over the next thirty years (Thailand NDC). Thailand’s agriculture sector 
is particularly at risk with 55% of the nation’s total area under agricultural use. Changes in climatic 
conditions have the potential to destabilize agricultural productivity and impact farmers’ incomes and 
lives.1 2
While the impacts of climate change affect the agricultural sectors and the country, climate change and 
its impacts are not gender neutral. Inequitable access to and control over natural resources, particularly 
land, water, and forests, as well as exclusion from the policy- and decision-making processes that affect 
resource distribution and their livelihood. These disproportionately affect the poor, particularly poor rural 
women, members of indigenous and ethnic minorities, who rely on natural resources for the livelihood.  
1 Talberth, J., Reytar, K., 2014. Climate Change in the Lower Mekong Basin - An Analysis of Economic Values at Risk, USAID 
Mekong Adaptation and Resilience to Climate Change (USAID Mekong ARCC). World Resources Institute, Washington, D.C. 
2 Plan International. 2018. Climate change, young women and girls: Vulnerability, impacts, and adaptation in Northern Thailand. 
Gender documentation for FP170

=== PAGE 114 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
Women as well as men are also both important change agents and critical actors in actions to address 
climate change and in adopting adaptation options to strengthen resilience of communities and 
households. Their potentially different knowledge and skills as well as needs and priorities are important 
to consider in the the design, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of climate change and natural 
resources projects. 
 
 
III. 
Existing Gender Inequality in Thailand 
 
 
The Gender Inequality Index (GII) measures gender inequalities across three important dimensions of 
human development—reproductive health, measured by maternal mortality ratio and adolescent birth 
rates; empowerment, measured by proportion of parliamentary seats occupied by females and proportion 
of adult females and males aged 25 years and older with at least some secondary education; and economic 
status, expressed as labour market participation and measured by labour force participation rate of 
female and male populations aged 15 years and older. The GII exposes differences in the distribution of 
achievements between women and men and measures the human development costs of gender 
inequality. The higher the GII value the greater the disparities between females and males and the greater 
loss to human development. 
The 2017 GII sheds light on the position of women in 160 countries; it yields insights in gender gaps in 
major areas of human development. The component indicators highlight areas in need of critical policy 
intervention and stimulate proactive thinking and public policy to overcome systematic gender-based 
disadvantages. 
Thailand has a GII value of 0.393, ranking it 93 out of 160 countries in the 2017 index (see Table 1). In 
Thailand, 4.8 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women, and 42.4 percent of adult women have 
reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 47.5 percent of their male counterparts. For 
every 100,000 live births, 20 women die from pregnancy related causes; and the adolescent birth rate is 
51.9 births per 1,000 women of ages 15-19. Female participation in the labour market is 60.5 percent 
compared to 77.3 for men.3 In comparison, the Philippines and Viet Nam are ranked at 97 and 67 
respectively on this index. Unemployment rate for youth (2019) is men 3.4%, women 5.3%, while the 
share of youth not in employment, education or training (2019) is men 11.2%, women 18.6%.4 
 
3 UNDP. 2018 Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update. Briefing note for countries on the 2018 
Statistical Update 
4 ILOSTAT, 2019

=== PAGE 115 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
Table 1:Thailand's GII relative to selected countries and groups (2017) Source: UNDP. 2018 Human 
Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update. Briefing note for countries on the 2018 
Statistical Update 
 
GII 
value 
GII 
Rank 
Maternal 
mortality 
ratio 
Adolescent 
birth rate 
Female 
seats in 
parliament 
(%) 
Population 
with at least 
some 
secondary 
education 
 (%) 
Labour force 
participation rate 
(%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F 
M 
F 
M 
Thailand 
0.393 
93 
20 
51.9 
4.8 
42.4 
47.5 
60.5 
77.3 
Philippines 0.427 
97 
114 
60.5 
29.1 
76.6 
72.4 
49.6 
75.1 
Viet Nam 
0.304 
67 
54 
27.3 
26.7 
66.2 
77.7 
73.2 
83.5 
E Asia and 
the Pacific 
0.312 
- 
62 
22.4 
19.8 
67.8 
75.5 
60.1 
70.3 
High HDI 
0.289 
- 
38 
26.6 
22.3 
69.5 
75.7 
55.0 
75.5 
 
Maternal mortality ratio is expressed in number of deaths per 100,000 live births and adolescent birth 
rate is expressed in number of births per 1,000 women ages 15 – 19. 
Based on the sex-disaggregated Human Development Index (HDI), the Gender Development Index (GDI) 
is defined as a ratio of female to male HDI. The GDI measures gender inequalities across three dimensions 
of human development; health (measured by women’s and men’s life expectancy at birth); education 
(measured by expected years of schooling for children and mean years for men and women aged 25 years 
and older); and command over economic resources (measured by estimated Gross National Income GNI) 
per capita for women and men. 
The GDI for 2017 is calculated for 164 countries. The 2017 female HDI is 0.753 in contrast to 0.756 for 
males.  The GDI value for Thailand is 0.996 compared to the Philippines (1.000) and Viet Nam (1.005) (See 
Table 2).  
Table 2: Thailand's GDI for 2017 relative to selected countries and groups   Source: UNDP. 2018 Human 
Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update. Briefing note for countries on the 2018 
Statistical Update 
 
Life 
expectancy 
at birth 
Expected 
years of 
schooling 
Mean years 
of schooling 
GNI per capita 
HDI value 
F-M 
ratio 
 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
GDI 
Value 
Thailand 
79.3 
71.8 
14.8 
14.5 
7.4 
7.8 
13,793 17,327 
0.753 
0.756 
0.996 
Philippines 
72.8 
65.9 
12.9 
12.3 
9.5 
9.2 
7.582 
10,705 
0.699 
0.698 
1.000

=== PAGE 116 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
Viet Nam 
81.0 
71.8 
12.9 
12.5 
7.9 
8.5 
5,345 
6,383 
0.696 
0.692 
1.005 
E Asia and 
the Pacific 
76.7 
72.8 
13.5 
13.2 
7.6 
8.3 
10,689 10,568 
0.717 
0.750 
0.957 
High HDI 
78.2 
74.0 
14.3 
13.9 
8.0 
8.6 
10,945 18,948 
0.740 
0.773 
0.957 
 
The OECD’s Social Institutions and Gender Index (2019) considered 12 key indicators over the life cycle to 
show how Thailand (among other countries) performs across childhood, youth, adulthood, and older age.  
The indicators cover education, labour market and work, political representation, time use and social 
protection. Three indicators are for women only and the rest are given in the form of female-to-male 
ratio. Table 3 below shows how Thailand performs and includes the Philippines and Viet Nam for 
comparison.  Thailand performs better than at least two thirds of countries (i.e., it is among the top third 
performers), better than at least one third but worse than at least one third (i.e., it is among the medium 
third performers), and worse than at least two thirds of countries (i.e., it is among the bottom third 
performers).  
Table 3: Summary of Thailand’s performance on the Life-course gender gap dashboard relative to selected 
countries (Source: OECD. 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index, 2019: Thailand.) 
 
 
Childhood & youth  
(5 indicators) 
 
 
Adulthood  
(6 indicators) 
 
Older age 
 (1 indicator) 
 
Overall  
(12 indicators) 
 
Missing 
indicato
rs 
 
Top 
Thir
d 
Mid 
Thir
d 
Botto
m 
Third 
Top 
Thir
d 
Mid 
Thir
d 
Botto
m 
Third 
Top 
Thir
d 
Mid 
Thir
d 
Botto
m 
Third 
Top 
thir
d 
Mid 
thir
d 
Botto
m 
third 
 
 
 
Number of indicators 
 
 
T
H 
1 
1 
3 
3 
1 
2 
0 
0 
0 
4 
2 
5 
1 
P
H 
2 
2 
1 
1 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
3 
5 
2 
2 
V
N 
2 
1 
1 
2 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
3 
1 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TH = Thailand; PH = the Philippines; VN = Vietnam 
The Gender Social Norms Index (GSNI) attempts to measure the prevalence of gender biases affecting 
gender equality. The index includes four dimensions – political, economic, educational, and physical 
integrity. According to GSNI, 95.47 % show a gender bias in at least one of the dimensions. 74.5 % show 
biases in two or more dimensions. Physical integrity is the dimension that indicate the strongest gender 
bias at 84.53%. This dimension uses proxies to measure attitudes to intimate partner violence and 
reproductive rights. For the political dimension, which measure attitudes to women as political leaders,

=== PAGE 117 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
67.3% indicate that they have a bias. The economic and educational dimensions show 50.86% and 29.02% 
respectively.5  
 
Per UN Women, challenges in realizing gender equality and the empowerment of women in Thailand 
remain in the areas of lack of sex disaggregated data, traditional attitudes and stereotypes which underpin 
domestic violence and violence against women, low participation of women in politics and decision-
making positions, discrimination and vulnerabilities of ethnic and rural women as well as women in the 
informal sector, HIV prevalence, trafficking and exploitation.6  
 
In addition, data drawn from draft national assessment on social dimension of CC impact report7, provides 
the following information: National poverty rate (2017) is 7.21% overall. Urban 5.49%, Rural 8.91%. Men 
7.59%, Women 6.87%. Higher rates for both genders in the rural areas, 9.23% men and 8.61% women. 
Lower poverty rates for women in all regions. (National Statistic Office)  
5.3 million people are in absolute poverty (living below national poverty line), 5.4 million are near poor 
(just above national poverty line). 1.5 million households are landless. 
 
The National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB) in its 2017 report on poverty and 
inequality describes the general characteristics of Thailand’s poor as follows:8 
• 
Individual characteristics: low education, working in agricultural sector, landless, low income 
without job benefits 
• 
Household characteristics: large-sized, skipped-generation, elderly or female-headed households 
most vulnerable to poverty with limited opportunity to engage in income generation 
• 
Concentration: southern, north-eastern and northern regions, more rural than urban. 
 
Agriculture Sector 
Poverty tends to concentrate in farming households. According to the Office of Agricultural Economics 
(OAE), based on 2013/2014 data, farming households in the northeast have the highest rate of poverty 
with a regional average of 37.27 percent, followed by the north 26.09 percent, the central region 13.86 
percent, and the south 9.57 percent.9 One-third of Thai labor force is in agriculture. Nearly 60 million rai 
of farm land is prone to drought or floods, and over 80% of which is outside of irrigated area.  
The 2017 NESDB report also shows the highest incidence of poverty among children and elderly 
populations. Due to low income in agricultural work, young agricultural workforce migrated to cities for 
jobs, so by 2013, 1 in 4 Thai farmers were over the age of 55, leading to rise in “skipped-generation” 
 
5 UNDP (2020). Tackling social norms: A game changer for gender inequalities.   
6 http://asiapacific.unwomen.org/en/countries/thailand  
7 Busakorn Suriyasarn & Pawin Talerngsri, (draft) Social Dimension of Climate Change Impacts in Thailand: Analysis of Risks, Policy, 
Planning and Finance, UNDP (forthcoming). 
8 NESDB, รายงานการวิเคราะห์สถานการณ์ความยากจนและความเหลื่อมล ้าในประเทศไทย ปี 2560, September 2018, p. ช. 
9 2013/2014 figures. Office of Agricultural Economics, ภาวะความยากจนของครัวเรือนเกษตร ปีเพราะปลูก 2556/7, 
http://www.oae.go.th/view/1/ภาวะความยากจนของครัวเรือนเกษตร/TH-TH

=== PAGE 118 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
households (grandparents living with grandchildren).  There are some indications that there are more 
single elderly female-headed skipped-generation households than the male-headed ones.  
In 2013, 1.4 million single-parent households (7.1% of all households); majority single-mother often in 
difficult situation. 400,000 skipped-generation households (2% and growing trend) (NESDB, 12th 
Development Plan).  A growing number of Thai elders (38%, even male-female split) are living in 
vulnerable family situation (living alone, with elderly spouse or with grandchildren). 63% living in rural 
area. However, more elderly female heads in skipped-generation households (meaning more elderly 
women with grandchildren). About 20 percent of elders in skipped-generation households have income 
below the poverty line10 - more than twice the national poverty rate. 
In the OAE analysis, factors contributing to poverty in farming households include geographical region, 
access to irrigation, age and education of head of household, number of family members, dependent 
burden, type of farmland, household net assets, and household debt. In the OAE’s view, farming 
households in the northeast and the north are the most likely to be poor and should be prioritized in 
poverty reduction interventions.11 The National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB) also 
stressed the need to reduce poverty with the priority for the north and northeast in the Twelfth Plan. 
Roughly 40% of expenses of Thai household debts is spent on basic consumption, and 14% (formal) & 
9.9% (informal) for agricultural activities, and 7.9% formal & 32.9% informal for businesses.  
While the agricultural sector produces overall only 10 percent of the GDP, it is important for Thailand’s 
rural economy, representing 31 percent of the GDP for the north, 28 percent for the south, 23 percent for 
the northeast, and 20 percent for the west.12 GDP in 2014 value. NESDB. 2014 figures. Office of Agricultural 
Economics.13  The agricultural census carried out in 2013 showed an increased proportion of female land 
holders. In the Northern Region, women made up 28.7% of the landholders in 2013, compared to 20.7% 
in 2003.14  
Focus group discussions were held in the project sites during project development, including 401 including 
as a sampling group. The number of female and male respondents was 199 and 202 persons, respectively.   
According to perceptions, the farmers in the four districts reported on the incidence of climate change 
related impacts in the long-term shifts over the last 10-20 years and adaptive strategies in coping with the 
shifts. The survey showed that 93% of the farmers feel a increase temperature and that the temperature 
becomes hotter, and 84-91% feel the change in rainfall amount and intensity, with greater concerns about 
drought. In response, a number of autonomous adaptation strategies have been undertaken by farmers. 
The most common were changing crops and/or crop patterns and timing. Some other strategies used 
were swapping to crops that were less water-intensive and stopping cultivating for a while to other career, 
 
10 NESDB, Twelfth National Economic and Social Development Plan (2017-2021). 
11 For ethnic dimension of poverty see: John Draper & Joel Sawat Selway, “A New Dataset on Horizontal Structural Ethnic 
Inequalities in Thailand in order to Address Sustainable Development Goal 10,” Social Indicators Research, Springer, 2019 
12 GDP in 2014 value. NESDB. 
13 http://www.nso.go.th/sites/2014/Documents/info/Infographic59/2.Labor/9.Labor.pdf  
14 National Statistical Office (2013), 2013 Agricultural Census Northern Region, p. 17.

=== PAGE 119 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
while the most extensively used approach by the farmers was an increasing dependence on groundwater 
use as a supplementary water supply.  Success of autonomous adaptation can be improved through 
climate information and support to ensure choices are consistent with changing temperature and rainfall 
patterns. 
    
 
Gender Division of Labour 
Focus group discussions further indicated that women generally do the same activities in agricultural 
cultivation as men do.  This is in addition to the role of caregiver for families and household work.  This is 
consistent with a study in Northern Thailand15 where it was found that women often hold the primary 
responsibility for unpaid household labour (e.g. cleaning, cooking, childcare, and caring for home gardens 
for household food consumption). Another study by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO) into gender roles and use of technology in Thailand found that while women were generally 
involved in all aspects of agricultural production, while men dominate mechanized tasks. Further, women 
have significantly reduced access to resources (e.g. inputs, funds/credit, seeds, breeds and plant varieties, 
and information and knowledge)16 and therefore decision-making power when it comes to agriculture 
activities.  
Water insecurity creates livelihood-related challenges and potential losses of income. A shortage of water 
can add stress to women’s lives through increased workloads (fetching water). Young women and children 
in Northern Thailand often work support their mothers with household labour. They also contribute to 
agricultural labour and subsequently household’s income. Climate change increases water insecurity, 
increasing the burden particularly for women and children as primary household caretakers and 
agricultural labourers.17 18  Focus group discussions in the project sites indicate that for managing water 
usage group , the leaders are usually men. However , roles and responsibilities of women in these groups 
include vice president , financing and accounting as well as administrative positions. 
A recent study indicated that reduced fertility, access to electricity and running water have contributed 
to easing rural women’s lives and labour burdens. Even with these, women in rural Thailand still carry the 
bigger burden of domestic work than men. While it is several years old and the economic and social 
 
15 Plan International. 2018. Climate change, young women and girls: Vulnerability, impacts, and adaptation in Northern 
Thailand. 
16 FAO. 2003. Gender-responsive technology for poverty alleviation in Thailand. 
August 2003 http://www.fao.org/3/ae538e/ae538e00.htm#Contents  
17 Andajani-Sutjahjo, S., Chirawatkul, S., Saito, E., 2015. Gender and Water in Northeast Thailand: Inequalities and Women’s 
Realities. Journal of International Women’s Studies 16, 200–212. 
18 Plan International. 2018. Climate change, young women and girls: Vulnerability, impacts, and adaptation in Northern 
Thailand.

=== PAGE 120 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
contexts have evolved, a 2001 national survey noted that in rural areas, women spent an average 5.4 
hours a day on domestic tasks and childcare, compared to 2.9 hours for men.19 
COVID-19 and the extent to which it could impact Thailand must be mentioned.  As women are the 
primary caretakers, illness in the family would add to the responsibilities of women. One of the measures 
to contain the spread of the virus has been to close schools and care facilities, this is likely to have added 
to the burden of unpaid care work of women. As at 30 June 2020, there have been 3,171 diagnosed cases 
in Thailand, 12 of which were in the project sites.  Restrictions are slowly being lifted and the related socio-
economic impacts will be felt for the longer term. For a population of 65 million, the relatively low number 
of cases can be seen as a success towards containment.  There is however uncertainty going forward as 
restrictions continue to be lifted and international travel re-opens.          
 
Access to Resources 
Thailand’s Constitution (Articles 33 and 41) and the Civil and Commercial Code (Section 1336) state that 
women and men have the same rights to own, use, and make decisions regarding land and non-land 
assets. The law allows for joint land titling and co-ownership of property for married and unmarried 
couples. Women and men’s equal right to inheritance is protected by Thailand’s Civil and Commercial 
Code and traditionally the youngest daughter inherits most of the property. 2021 Customary law still 
influences decision-making in rural areas communities, with communal rules allocating resources, 
decision-making, and conflict resolution in ways that may disadvantage women’s access to land, property 
and inheritance.22 23 The Civil and Commercial Code stipulates that, after divorce, commonly held property 
(Sin Somros) is to be divided equally between man and woman (Thailand, 1925, Sec. 1533). Spouses 
manage his or her own individual property (Sin Suan Tua) (Thailand, 1925, Sec. 1473). In administering 
common marital property, either the spouses are joint managers, or one spouse must obtain consent 
from the other (Thailand, 1925, Sec. 1476).24  
Women and men have the same rights to open bank accounts, obtain credit, and access formal financial 
services.25 Government measures such as the National Village and Urban Community Fund extends loans 
to villages and urban communities and provides vocational training and try to reach women and men.26  
 
19 Fox, L., Wiggins, S., Ludi, E. and Mdee, A. 2018. The lives of rural women and girls What does an inclusive agricultural 
transformation that empowers women look like? Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. 
20 FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations), 2017. Gender and Land Rights Database: Thailand. Available 
at: http://www.fao.org/gender-landrights-database/country-profiles/countries-list/customary-law/en/?country_iso3=THA  
21 OECD. 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index, 2019: Thailand. 
22 FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations), 2017. Gender and Land Rights Database: Thailand. Available 
at: http://www.fao.org/gender-landrights-database/country-profiles/countries-list/customary-law/en/?country_iso3=THA  
23 OECD. 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index, 2019: Thailand. 
24 OECD. 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index, 2019: Thailand. 
25 World Bank, 2016. Women Business and the Law: Getting to Equal. Available at: 
http://wbl.worldbank.org/~/media/WBG/WBL/Documents/Reports/2016/Women-Business-and-the-Law-2016.pdf  
26 OECD. 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index, 2019: Thailand.

=== PAGE 121 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
Social norms, inequitable power dynamics, and the gendered division of labour affect women’s and men’s 
access to resources in Northern Thailand.  This includes water.27 Men typically have greater rights of access 
to, and decision-making power over water. Women in rural areas, particularly poor women of ethnic 
minority, may face disproportionate water insecurity compared to rural men and people in urban areas 
due to overlapping sources of vulnerability and marginalization (Plan International, 2018).  
A recent study demonstrates some of the challenges faced at the community level around land ownership, 
the pattern of which is mixed in Thailand. Forty percent of the participants in focus group discussions 
indicated that, in practice, they have access to, and decision-making power over land but are unsure of 
their formal ownership status. In 30 percent of the FGDs, participants mentioned that new property (land 
as well as house) is commonly registered under the wife’s name because men tend to avoid paperwork 
and prefer to work in the field.28 
 
Education 
Thailand’s 1999 Education Act grants “all children, without discrimination” a right to a quality education 
and the Ministry of Education supports all children a twelve-year education. From a gender perspective, 
Thailand has been very successful at promoting the right to girls’ education. Between the years 2005 to 
2010, the primary school completion rate for girls in school was 89 % while the completion rate for boys 
was 97 percent.  While there are still fewer girls than boys attending primary school, the gender gap has 
decreased considerably from slightly more than 8 % in 1971 to slightly less than two percent in 2009. 29 By 
2012, there was little difference in enrolment between urban and rural areas.30 
In 1998, the Child-Friendly School (CFS) initiative was launched to promote education for all, and many of 
CFS’s activities are ongoing in Thailand today.  Yet, girls continue to face challenges accessing education 
including poverty, language, and mobility/distance to school. Marginalized populations also face 
challenges. 31   
From the perspective of higher education, women have more opportunities than men. However, although 
53 percent of science students in higher education are female, less than 24 percent of women study 
engineering, manufacturing and construction studies.  In recent years, Thailand’s Ministry of Education 
 
27 Plan International. 2018. Climate change, young women, and girls: Vulnerability, impacts and adaptation in Northern 
Thailand. 
28 Aktera, S., Rutsaert, P., Luis, J., Htwe, NM., San, S.S., Raharjo, B., Pustika, A. 2017. Women’s empowerment and gender equity 
in agriculture: A different perspective from Southeast Asia.in Food Policy, Vol. 69, May 2017. pp 270-279. 
29The Borgen Project. 10 Extremely Important Facts about Girls’ Education in Thailand. Blog July 5, 2018. 
https://borgenproject.org/facts-about-girls-education-in-thailand/  
30 Fox, L., Wiggins, S., Ludi, E. and Mdee, A. 2018. The lives of rural women and girls What does an inclusive agricultural 
transformation that empowers women look like? Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. 
31The Borgen Project. 10 Extremely Important Facts about Girls’ Education in Thailand. Blog July 5, 2018. 
https://borgenproject.org/facts-about-girls-education-in-thailand/ accessed 23 May 2018.

=== PAGE 122 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
has worked to promote Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among Thai 
girls. 32 
 
Health 
Thailand has worked to ensure wide access to health services including sexual and reproductive health 
(SRH) services. A primary health care system expanded to sub-districts beginning in the 1980s and access 
to health care became more equitable. From a gender perspective, achievements include the following: 
80% of pregnant women used prenatal care in 1987 and 92% in 2000. With Universal Health Care (UHC), 
use reached 100% in 2012. Birth attendance increased from 90.8% in 1990 to 99.7% in 2012. Further, 
contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR) increased from 14.8% in 1970 to 79.3 % in 2012. The total fertility 
rate also fell from 5.9 children per woman in the 1970s to 1.6 in 2011.33 
Challenges continue however, including the increase in adolescent birth rate from 31 per 1000 women 
aged 15 – 19 year in 2000 to 53 in 2012.  The adolescent birth rate has sharply increased from 31 per 1000 
women aged 15–19 years in 2000 to 53 in 2012. Unmet need for contraception is 6.9% higher among 
women aged 15–19 years (11.6%) than among women aged 45–49 years (8.3%).34  
Women still face challenges accessing safe abortions even though it is permitted by law, when conducted 
by a physician, if the pregnancy threatens a woman's life or health, or is the result of a sexual crime. 
Official reports suggest that about 30,000 abortions occur each year (including induced, spontaneous and 
therapeutic), but other estimates go as high as 200,000–300,000 annually, suggesting that abortion is 
widely practiced.35 
Indigenous peoples in rural Thailand experience health inequities as demonstrated by a recent study In 
Northern Thailand. 36  Healthcare is limited or not available in rural areas and indigenous people are less 
likely to access public health services, leading to negative health consequences. Many women with 
preventable diseases (e.g. cervical cancer and HIV/AIDS) are indigenous and face discrimination for being 
women and being indigenous; this discrimination also affects their access to healthcare.  Further, the 
unequal labour distribution in their households can also lead to unequal opportunities for indigenous 
women to seek healthcare, invest in educational and vocational skills, and participate in paid work.  
 
32The Borgen Project. 10 Extremely Important Facts about Girls’ Education in Thailand. Blog July 5, 2018. 
https://borgenproject.org/facts-about-girls-education-in-thailand/  
33 Tangcharoensathien V, Chaturachinda K, Im-em W. Commentary: Thailand: sexual and reproductive health before and after 
universal health coverage in 2002. Glob Public Health. 2015;10(2):246–248. doi:10.1080/17441692.2014.986166 
34 Tangcharoensathien V, Chaturachinda K, Im-em W. Commentary: Thailand: sexual and reproductive health before and after 
universal health coverage in 2002. Glob Public Health. 2015;10(2):246–248. doi:10.1080/17441692.2014.986166 
35 Tangcharoensathien V, Chaturachinda K, Im-em W. Commentary: Thailand: sexual and reproductive health before and after 
universal health coverage in 2002. Glob Public Health. 2015;10(2):246–248. doi:10.1080/17441692.2014.986166 
36 Onouma Thummapol, Sylvia Barton, Tanya Park. Healthcare Access Experiences Among Indigenous Women in Northern Rural 
Thailand: A Focused Ethnographic Study in Central Asian Journal of Global Health, Vol. 7, No. 1, 2018.

=== PAGE 123 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
The impacts of COVID-19 in Thailand and in the world are not yet fully known. The project beneficiaries 
are expected to be vulnerable agriculture households, many female-headed and including elderly, which 
are in a high risk category.   
 
Political Participation 
Article 65 of the Constitution states that men and women in Thailand have the same rights to hold public 
and political office in the executive, judiciary and legislative branches (Thailand, 2007). There are no legal 
quotas at national or local levels. Further, the government provides incentives to encourage women’s 
political participation, including training for female political candidates, public education campaigns, and 
pushing for quotas within political parties. Even though women have the same rights, they face cultural 
barriers to political participation. For example, patriarchal norms pose challenges to women who run for 
office at the local level – norms that expect them to stay at home. Election rigging, corruption, and patron-
client relationships also complicate women’s advancement in the political arena and their advancement.37  
Women are still underrepresented in public and private sectors, including in the parliament, government, 
judiciary and administration both at national and local levels. Thailand has ranked as one of the lowest 
countries for gender equality in politics in the region of Asia and the Pacific.38 The percentage of women 
in provincial and local governments in Thailand is much lower than that of the national government. There 
is only one female governor from 76 provinces (1.32%).39 Female Chiefs of Provincial Administrative 
Organizations (PAO) and Sub-district Administrative Organizations (SAO) account for 8% and 6.45% 
respectively.40 
In reference to agriculture, a recent study on gender equity in agriculture in Southeast Asia found that 
women in Thailand were active members of village and agricultural organizations and had direct contact 
with extension officers. Women’s involvement in decision making in rice farming was observed to be 
greater in Thailand compared to the Philippines, Indonesia, and Myanmar – other countries in the study.41   
 
Gender-based Violence 
Patriarchal norms and attitudes in Thailand contribute to violence against women in the public and private 
spheres. Thailand does not currently have one overarching law addressing all forms of violence against 
women. The Domestic Violence Victim Protection Act of 2007 criminalizes domestic violence and 
perpetrators are liable to imprisonment of up to six months or a fine (Thailand, 2007b, Art. 4). The law 
extends to current and former partners, and includes physical and psychological violence (Thailand, 
2007b).  While the definition does not specify sexual and economic violence, these can fall under the law, 
as domestic violence is broadly defined as “any act done with the intention or in the manner likely to 
 
37 OECD. 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index, 2019: Thailand. 
38  http://www.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2019/03/women-in-politics-2019-map 
39 Prae Province (appointed October 2019) 
40 Data from King Prajadhipok’s Institute 2017. 
41 Aktera, S., Rutsaert, P., Luis, J., Htwe, NM., San, S.S., Raharjo, B., Pustika, A. 2017. Women’s empowerment and gender equity 
in agriculture: A different perspective from Southeast Asia.in Food Policy, Vol. 69, May 2017. pp 270-279.

=== PAGE 124 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
cause harm to the body, mind or health of a family member” and “to exert coercion or immoral  influence 
over a family member in order to wrongfully cause him to do, not to do or yield to any act” (Thailand, 
2007b, Art. 3).42  
Rape is criminalized by the Penal Code of 1965, and the subsequent Criminal Code Amendment Act of 
2007. The Amendment Act removed the provision allowing a husband to rape his wife. (OECD, 2019, SIGI 
Thailand). The Labour Protection Act of 2008 and the Penal Code foresee legal protection in the workplace 
and the Labour Protection Act extends protection against sexual abuse, harassment or nuisance by 
superiors to cover all workers, both female and male, with penalties up to THB 20 000 baht (Thailand, 
2008).  Sexual harassment continues to be an issue in the workplace, and women may be verbally and 
physically abused in the workplace, pressured to trade sexual favours for career advancement 
opportunities, and face risks of violence when traveling between their home and workplace.43 
 
Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) is perceived as a private or a family matter, and is considered to be 
underreported in Thailand.  Statistics show that the numbers of reported domestic violence cases have 
risen from 25,767 to 31,866 between 2010 and 2013 respectively (Thai Health Promotion Foundation 
2011), (The Women's Affairs and Family Development 2013).  In addition, the report from the OSCC, 
Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) found that, in 2015, there were 23,977 women who used their services.  
Recent region-specific data is lacking, however, a report 2011 report indicates a higher proportion in the 
North and Central regions, and there was a correlation with limited education44.   
 
 
Graph 1: Proportion of married women 15-19 years old who experienced physical violence in the past year, 
2009 (Report on Gender-based Violence Against Women and Girl (VAW/G) Indicators; Office of Women’s 
 
42 OECD. 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index, 2019: Thailand. 
43 OECD. 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index, 2019: Thailand. 
44 Report on Gender-based Violence Against Women and Girl (VAW/G) Indicators; Office of Women’s Affairs and Family 
Development, Ministry of Social Development and Human Security, with support from UNDP Thailand, 2011

=== PAGE 125 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
Affairs and Family Development, Ministry of Social Development and Human Security, with support from 
UNDP Thailand, 2011) 
 
The Domestic Violence Act enables government officials to make available medical, social and 
psychological assistance to survivors of domestic violence. The Thai government had implemented 
preventative measures including the establishment of shelters and half-way homes for children and 
families in crisis, One Stop Crisis Centres to provide physical and psychosocial health services to victims of 
sexual and domestic violence, and a 24-hour hotline. Police officers are said to be trained in gender 
perspectives and the psychological nature of sexual violence victims, and certain courts have integrated 
women-friendly measures such as the provision of counselling services and the separation of victims and 
perpetrators.45 The Department of Women’s Affair and Family Development Learning Centres hears 
complaints of gender discrimination and the Committee on Consideration of Gender Discrimination 
ensures that victims of gender discrimination receive legal remedies and compensation.46 However, 
Thailand has been criticized under CEDAW for the lack of access to justice for survivors of gender-based 
violence. The criticism includes issues such as law enforcement officials’ negative attitudes resulting in 
failure of register and investigate complaints.47  
 
 
 
 
 
45 OECD. 2019. Social Institutions and Gender Index, 2019: Thailand. 
46 Thailand's Voluntary National Review on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,  June 2018 
http://www.mfa.go.th/sep4sdgs/contents/filemanager/images/sep/VNR%202018%20English%2010.07.18.pdf  
47 CEDAW/C/THA/CO/6-7

=== PAGE 126 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
IV. 
Legal and Administrative Framework Protecting Women and Gender Equality 
 
From the perspective of  key international commitments protecting women and gender equality, in 2000, 
Thailand ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women 
(CEDAW) in 1985 and its Optional Protocol and endorsed the Beijing Platform for Action (BPFA), the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and finally the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
  
Thailand has made significant efforts to integrate the international principles and instruments into the 
policy and programming framework, evident in the Constitution B.E. 2550 (2007), which has anti sex 
discrimination and gender equality provisions.   
 
A Working Group for the Implementation of SDG 5 supports the implementation of the Goal. 
Representatives from government   agencies   and   civil   society   such as   the   Thailand   Sustainable   
Development   Foundation, the   Association   to   Empower   the   Potential   of   Women   with   Disabilities 
(AEPWWDs), the Foundation for Women, Homenet Thailand Foundation for Labour and Employment 
Promotion and WeMove are all active in the Working Group.  The Working Group allows government 
agencies and civil society to exchange information, as well as discuss future direction in the 
implementation of SDG 5.48  
 
The Strategy for Women’s Development Plan (2017 – 2021) is Thailand’s main mechanism for promoting 
women’s development; it aligns with SDG 5 (Gender Equality). The Strategy has the vision of “[creating] 
social equality without discrimination, for women to have good quality of life, be safe and secure.” The 
Government also designed an action plan to implement the Strategy. The action plan focuses on 
community development, for example, the Vocational Training Program for Women and Families which 
provides training for the unemployed, educationally disadvantaged, and people at risk of sexual 
exploitation and human trafficking.   
 
The Department of Women’s Affairs and Family Development, of the Ministry of Social Development and 
Human Security, is the national women’s machinery responsible for promoting gender equality and the 
empowerment of women, and social inclusion. It serves as a secretariat of the National Inter-ministerial 
Committee on Policy and Strategy for the Improvement of the Status of Women, chaired by the Prime 
Minister and develops.  The Office implements a five-year cycled National Women’s Development Plans, 
which currently falls under the period of 2012-2016.49 
 
In 2015, Thailand passed its first law to promote gender equality, namely the Gender Equality Act B.E. 
2558, which aims to provide protection to all people from gender discrimination. It was Thailand’s first 
legal instrument to specifically mention transgender people. Further, the Department of Women’s Affairs 
and Family Development recognizes the different challenges faced by people whose gender identity do 
 
48 Thailand's Voluntary National Review on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,  June 2018 
http://www.mfa.go.th/sep4sdgs/contents/filemanager/images/sep/VNR%202018%20English%2010.07.18.pdf  
49 UN Women: Thailand http://asiapacific.unwomen.org/en/countries/thailand

=== PAGE 127 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
not match their sex assigned at birth.50 However, the Act has been criticized by the CEDAW Committee 
for making exceptions on issues related to religious principles and national security.51 
 
Thailand’s 2017 Voluntary National Review on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development reported 
that women’s status in Thailand has drastically improved in Thailand over the past several decades. The 
country has achieved gender parity in basic education with women doing slightly better in higher 
education and the proportion of women in poverty than men overall. While noting that Thailand is 
recognized as having among the most favourable conditions for women entrepreneurship in Asia and the 
Pacific,52 the Review also recognized the low representation of women in the public sector, in particular 
in national politics, in government leadership positions and in local administration. The 2017 Constitution 
calls for gender responsive budgeting, stipulating that the government should take into account the 
different necessities and needs with respect to gender, age, and conditions of persons to ensure fairness.  
The 2017 Voluntary National Review also noted that elements of SDG 5 would be included in the Women 
Development Strategy (2017-2021), which recognizes that Thailand has fallen short on several 
international goals and measures and the country needs to step up efforts in women’s development and 
promote a more equal society. Thailand considers the development of a gender-disaggregated database 
a next step in its effort to achieve gender equality. The Government reaffirmed its commitment in 2017 
to work with all stakeholders at both national and international levels for the successful promotion of 
gender equality and sustainable development.53  
 
The weak gender dimension in Thai policy has been observed by the Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). In CEDAW’s 2017 Concluding Observations on the state of 
gender equality in Thailand, the Committee expressed a particular concern for the situation of rural Thai 
women, including indigenous women and those ethnic and religious minorities, remain disproportionately 
affected by poverty and limited economic opportunities. CEDAW spells out that Thai women, in particular 
rural women, are also excluded from participation in the elaboration and implementation of policies and 
action plans on climate change and disaster risk reduction, despite the fact they are disproportionately 
affected by the effects of climate change and disasters.54  
 
Besides lack of clear policy directives on the integration of gender equality and limited participation of 
women in the formulation and implementation of climate policies and plans, another key challenge in 
gender and social inclusion in on climate change action is lack of disaggregated data.  
 
 
 
 
50 UNDP, MSDHS. May 2018. Legal Gender Recognition in Thailand: A Legal and Policy Review 
51 CEDAW/C/THA/CO/6-7  
52 According to Mastercard Women’s Entrepreneurial Index 2016. 
53 Thailand’s Voluntary National Review on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, June 2017, p. 
21. 
54 CEDAW Concluding Observations on state of gender equality – Thailand 2017, p. 11.

=== PAGE 128 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
V. 
Gender Analysis and Recommendations  
 
This gender analysis acts as an entry point for addressing gender equality and women’s empowerment 
through: i.) strategic approaches, i.e. with interventions targeted specifically at women and girls and  ii.) 
mainstreamed approaches, i.e. ensuring that all areas of the project promote the transformation of 
gender inequalities to strengthen climate resilience and provide greater opportunities for all rural people 
to adopt adaptation options that reduce their vulnerability to the impacts of climate change and 
strengthen the climate resilience of households and communities in the areas directly and indirectly 
targeted by the project. 
 
Over 50% of project beneficiaries are expected to be women, please see table below.  The project should 
ensure that the particular climate challenges and needs faced by women in water management and 
agriculture are fully captured in project implementation.  These include disadvantages related to: 
 
• 
Access to information about climate change and related impacts on water and agriculture, and 
related ability to define information disseminated 
• 
Decision making related water use/management and agriculture 
• 
Access to technology and related training to advance climate resilient agriculture 
• 
Access to finance to invest in climate resilient agriculture

=== PAGE 129 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
Table 4: Project beneficiaries disaggregated by gender 
 
 
The project is aligned with national gender equality and women’s empowerment related policies and 
programmes as well as international commitments under the Paris Agreement, CEDAW, SDGs, etc.  The 
project will aim to support transformational change towards gender equality and women’s empowerment 
and will:  
• 
Seek to understand in greater depth the potentially gender-differentiated knowledge, experience, 
and skills of women and men at sub-district, district and provincial levels  as well as their needs, 
challenges, and vulnerabilities (e.g. around access to resources, decision-making, etc.) in order to 
strengthen project interventions including information sharing between implementers and 
beneficiaries, decision-making around adaptation at community and household levels, 
production, post-harvest, and market development decisions, etc. This can be done through 
introducing/piloting approaches such as gender-responsive participatory Integrated Climate

=== PAGE 130 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
Services for Agriculture (PICSA) and piloting and scaling up household methodologies (HHM). 55 56  
Several organizations have championed these approaches which have been applied in several in 
different regions to strengthen agricultural livelihoods, production, and value chain/market 
development, etc. 
• 
Formulate a working group on gender. The gender focal point of each ministries (national level) 
will be informed about the project implementation. The project management team, led by the 
Royal Irrigation Department will invite a member from a provincial representative of the Women 
Empowerment Fund, Krungsri Bank, BAAC, female head of villages, Tambon Administrative Office, 
water user groups, FFS in the project provinces, Yom-Nan river basin committee, as well as a co-
operatives in the project provinces.  The Ministry of Social Development and Human Security 
(MSDHS) is mandated to promote gender equality and is therefore important to engage on issues 
related to gender. MSDHS has staff working on issues such as gender responsive budgeting and 
planning, which would be useful to engage in the project. Equally important will it be to use and 
try to strengthen the system om gender focal points appointed within each ministry. 
• 
Due to the low level of women in decision-making roles in Thailand, which also applies to water 
management, efforts to promote and support women in these roles will be done throughout the 
project. This might also include ensuring that there are enabling environments, including working 
with men to alter harmful stereotypes. 
• 
Ensure capacity building includes the active participation of women and men and incorporates, 
where relevant, issues around gender and climate information services, market development, 
farmer engagement, irrigation, use of innovative technology, etc.  
• 
Given the lower percentage of land owned by women, the project needs to ensure their equal 
participation by providing an enabling environment for participation. The project also needs to 
have a broader inclusion of households members, not only focusing on the person who the land 
is registered on.  
• 
Mitigate any negative impacts on rural women and girls (e.g. in terms of benefit sharing, labour 
division of labour, access to resources, access to technology and skills development, etc.) Where 
possible, enhance role of new generation, both female and male youth (aged 18-25) to build a 
 
55 For more about PICSA approaches, see, for example  https://ccafs.cgiar.org/participatory-integrated-climate-services-
agriculture-picsa#.XOlq5Y9lDIU  
56 For more about Household Methodologies (HHM), see, for example 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/40198517/Household+methodologie+-
+harnessing+the+family%27s+potential+for+change.pdf/cb0ab278-bfb4-4b4c-a237-e7841bc9e9aa  
For more on Household Methodologies, particularly the Gender Action Learning Systems (GALS) approach, See Mayoux, L. 
2017. Gender Action Learning for Sustainability at Scale:: Pilot in Kyrgyzstan, May – Nov 2016 
https://gamechangenetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/GALS-Process-for-RWEE-Naryn-Pilot_-
ConsolidatedReport_Feb2017_ed.pdf  
For more on adapting GALS in agricultural extension, Value Chain (VC) development and Village Savings and Loans Associations 
(VSLA), see PELUM. 2016. Models of Integrating GALS in Functional Adult Literacy, Agricultural Extension, Advocacy, Village 
Savings and Lending Associations https://uganda.oxfam.org/sites/uganda.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/Adapting-GALS-in-
development-programmes-FINAL.pdf

=== PAGE 131 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
new generation of famers equipped with knowledge and skills to build climate resilience in their 
community. 
• 
Ensure that the Grievance Redress Mechanism is gender- and age inclusive and responsive, 
addressing potential barriers to women and marginalized groups. Raise awareness of the 
grievance mechanism among all impacted by project activities. For the grievance mechanism to 
be able to adequately respond to complaints raised by women or marginalized groups, staff 
members will be trained on gender sensitivity. Furthermore, a protocol on prevention of sexual 
exploitation and abuse will be adopted to ensure that any complaints related to such issues are 
adequately managed.   
• 
Although an increased risk of GBV is not considered to be high for the planned project activities, 
strategies will be put in place to monitor and mitigate GBV. The measures will follow CARE’s 
Guidance for Gender Based Violence (GBV) Monitoring and Mitigation within Non-GBV Focused 
Sectoral Programming.57 This includes activities such as capacity building of project staff and 
implementing partners, development of protocols on GBV, and putting a referral list in place.  
• 
Include a Gender Specialist to ensure that the needs and challenges faced by women are 
appropriately reflected in interventions. The Gender Specialist will support community 
consultations, data collection and mainstreaming of gender issues (and where relevant, strategic 
approaches targeted specifically at women/girls across all areas of the project);  
• 
Link with institutions who can provide training to agricultural extension workers on uptake of 
household methodologies (e.g. Gender Action Learning Systems or GALS) in their work with 
women and men in vulnerable rural households and communities to complement, strengthen, 
and leverage farmer to farmer sharing of climate information, Value Chain (VC) and market access 
opportunities  
• 
Build/strengthen linkages with institutions/networks that can strengthen gender approaches 
throughout the project (e.g. academic institute, agriculture and other relevant research centres, 
etc.).  The project should also consider linking to existing women’s groups, housewife groups, 
credit groups.  
• 
Contributions to disaggregated data should be an integral part of any project for future 
sustainability. Build data collection and management in the process of capacity development at 
all levels. Technical support with integrated gender and social inclusion for each project/program. 
• 
Ensure that good practices and lessons learned from the project around integrating participatory, 
gender transformative approaches in climate adaptation are documented and shared among 
stakeholders including line ministries, policymakers, and government/non-government decision-
makers/planners/implementers at national and sub-national level and beyond (e.g. 
 
57 CARE (2014), Guidance for Gender Based Violence (GBV) Monitoring and Mitigation within Non-GBV Focused Sectoral 
Programming

=== PAGE 132 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
regional/international). This may also contribute to reporting on international commitments such 
as NDCs, etc. 
• 
Women generally carry out the same activities in agricultural cultivation as men do, and perhaps 
even more. For water-usage managing groups, the leaders are usually men. However, women in 
these groups hold roles and responsibilities including vice president, financing and accounting and 
various administrative positions. It is therefore important to ensure that women are encouraged 
and supported in leadership positions, and not exclusively to administrative roles.  
• 
Thailand creates a supportive mechanism to promote female business start-up for agricultural 
business. The mechanism builds on an existing agricultural cooperative and a community 
enterprise that female and LGBT always active in leading the cooperative management in their 
hometown. It also creates job for local resident.   
• 
Ensure complementarity with, and learn from best practices and lessons learned from “Gender 
Bond” - Krungsri Bank has prepared a gender bond. The bank will provide loans for female 
entrepreneurs. Women in the project location can access this loan via Krungsri Branch Offices 
nationwide.  https://www.nationthailand.com/business/30377667 
• 
The project will make a case of women leadership to the existing mechanism such as business 
start-up, social enterprise, community enterprise, co-operative of rice, fruit, flower, etc.  
 
The gender analysis and action plan should be reviewed and updated regularly.  This is particularly 
relevant in the context of COVID-19, as the impacts on health and livelihoods are not yet fully known or 
understood.

=== PAGE 133 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
Proposed Gender Action Plan 
Thailand: Enhancing climate resilience in Thailand through effective water management and sustainable agriculture 
 
Activities 
 Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
 
Impact Statement: Improved adaptive capacity and climate resilience (including food and water security and overall wellbeing) of resource dependent 
agricultural households and communities, including women and girls, in Phitsanulok, Uttaradit, and Sukhothai Provinces. 
Outcome Statement: Improved women’s (consider role of youth of both genders, for future resilience and sustainability) participation and decision-making 
in, and benefit-sharing from, greater access to climate information services, water management infrastructure and practices, and livelihood strategies and 
opportunities. 
 
Output 1:   Enhance climate and risk informed planning in the water and agricultural sectors through improved climate information and cross sectoral 
coordination 
 
Activity 1.1  
Strengthening capacity to generate 
tailored climate information to inform 
water management and agriculture 
planning 
 
Development of climate information 
products informed by gender-sensitive 
community consultations and gender 
analysis 
 
Technical training for staff from TMD, 
RID, and relevant agencies identifies 
and includes active participation of 
women as well as men.   Training 
includes sensitization of the needs of 
women of water management and 
agriculture  
 
Indicator: Climate products 
include information 
highlighted as needed by 
women 
 
Target: Gender-informed 
climate information 
 
Indicator: Number of 
trainees, disaggregated by 
gender, age, 
health/disability, income, 
type of household  
 
Target: at least 30% women 
By 
2023 
and 
regular 
thereafter 
100,000 
 
 
RID  
Activity 1.2  
Indicator: Active 
participation of gender 
By 
2025 
and 
regular 
thereafter 
50,000 
 
RID/MOAC

=== PAGE 134 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
Facilitating inter-ministerial 
coordination for climate-informed and 
integrated planning 
 
Formulate a working group on gender. 
The gender focal point of each 
ministries (national level) will be 
informed about the project 
implementation. The project 
management team, led by the Royal 
Irrigation Department will invite a 
member from a provincial 
representative of the Women 
Empowerment Fund, Krungsri Bank, 
BAAC, female head of villages, Tambon 
Administrative Office, water user 
groups, FFS in the project provinces, 
Yom-Nan river basin committee, as 
well as a co-operatives in the project 
provinces.  
 
Integrate a gender focus in inter-
ministerial coordination for climate-
informed and integrated planning (e.g. 
gender and agriculture/cc 
experts/focal points/researchers from 
relevant government/NGO bodies 
 
 
focal point/expertise in 
inter-ministerial 
stakeholder committees, 
meetings, conferences, NAP 
process, etc. 
   
Target: Key line 
ministries/government 
bodies working on gender 
equality/women’s 
empowerment. 
 
Indicator: Number of inter-
agency reports, briefs, 
submissions including 
integration of gender issues 
(need more specifics, e.g., 
gender-specific, socially-
inclusive activities, gender-
responsive indicators) 
 
Target: 100% of relevant 
documentation produced 
by stakeholder committees, 
etc.. 
Note: Should not be much 
added cost (if any) as means 
including ministries/other 
stakeholders where relevant 
who should participate in any 
case.  Also, documentation 
should not require extra 
funding. Gender advisor to the 
project and government gender 
focal points should ensure 
inclusion of gender. 
 
 
ONEP/MoNRE 
 
 
Activity 1.3 
Expanding access to climate 
information for application at the 
household level 
 
Pilot complementary gender-
responsive Participatory Integrated 
Indicator: Number of 
farmers participating in 
PICSA pilot areas 
disaggregated by gender 
(and age if possible) 
 
By 2025 
100,000 
RID, 
with MOAC and 
ARDA 
 
ONEP/MoNRE

=== PAGE 135 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
58 For more information on PICSA, see CGIAR’s Climate Change, Agriculture, and Food Security website https://ccafs.cgiar.org/participatory-integrated-climate-services-agriculture-
picsa#.XOhst49lDIV  
Climate Services for Agriculture 
(PICSA)58 approach that involves 
extension workers working with rural 
women and men farmers to analyse 
together climate information and use 
participatory tools to develop and 
choose adaptation options best suited 
to women and men’s potentially 
different circumstances and 
challenges.   
(Consider ‘moh-din’ ‘moh-naam’ – ‘soil 
doctor’, ‘water doctor’ extension and 
strengthening of capacity. There 
should be more specific effort to 
enhance active role of women and 
youth in developing knowledge and 
skills, and access to new technology.) 
Target: 50% females (25-
30% youth aged 18-25) 
 
Indicator: Number of 
agricultural extension 
workers (disaggregated by 
sex) in pilot sites who can 
apply PICSA approach with 
farmers. 
 
Target:  50% of agricultural 
extension workers in pilot 
sites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2:   Improve water management through strengthened infrastructure complemented by EbA measures, for greater resilience to climate change 
impacts 
 
Activity 2.1  Climate-informed 
engineering designs for the 13 
schemes of the Yom-Nan river basin 
and upgrade of 2 water infrastructure  
 
Activity 2.2.  Complementing of grey 
infrastructure with EbA measures and 
integration of EbA approaches into 
water management policy and 
planning 
 
Indicator: Vulnerability and 
risk assessment reports 
capture and analyse (where 
relevant), data 
disaggregated by sex (and 
age if possible). Need to 
disaggregate by  gender, 
age, health/disability, 
income, type of household 
from the start.   
 
By 2023 
100,000 
 
Note: This budget is to ensure 
coverage of well-designed 
collection, analysis, and 
documentation of gender-
disaggregated data in planned 
vulnerability and risk 
assessment through inclusion of 
a gender/social inclusion expert 
on team (or linkage to research 
RID/MoAC 
 
GIZ 
 
ONEP/MoNRE

=== PAGE 136 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
                                                    GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
Integrate gender responsiveness into 
vulnerability and risk assessment  
 
Participatory assessment, with training 
of community members, especially 
youth/students to conduct data 
collection (with technical support by 
project/academic/research institution)  
 
Participatory assessment results 
should be shared and validated in the 
community in workshop format. 
 
Promote role of women in water user 
groups 
Target: Number of youth 
volunteers trained in data 
collection (field interviews, 
data collection) 
 
Target: 40% participation of 
women in water user 
groups 
institute/university who can 
provide guidance on gender.  
 
 
 
Output 3:  Reduce volatility of agriculture livelihoods in drought and flood prone areas through strengthened extension support and local planning, 
investment in on-farm adaptation measures and greater access to finance and markets 
 
Activity 3.1  Application of climate 
information in household agriculture 
planning and strengthening of related 
support through extension services 
 
Training of trainers (ToT) for Lead 
Extension Workers and cascaded 
Training of extension workers in CSA-
complementary, gender 
transformative household 
methodologies (HHM) that strengthen 
gender equitable intra-household work 
and decision-making on production, 
value chains, market access, and 
benefit-sharing. 
Indicator: ToT extension 
workers supported by 
project trained on 
methodology  
 
Target: 100%  
 
After start of implementation 
and thereafter  
100,000 
 
Note: This would allow for initial 
training of “Lead Extension 
Workers” in each project 
area/province” who would then 
cascade the training to other 
extension workers in project 
areas for greater coverage. 
These extension workers would 
incorporate learnings into their 
work with 
communities/households 
MoAC

=== PAGE 137 ===
H 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
Activity 3.2   Implementation of on-
farm climate resilient measures to 
improve drought and flood resilience, 
and improved access to finance for 
sustainable agriculture 
Integrate household methodology 
approach (HHM) to complement EbA 
approach and support agricultural 
extension efforts to strengthen 
climate-resilient farm planning 
including agricultural livelihoods, 
market access, VC development, etc. 
Indicator: Extension 
workers applying 
methodology in project 
areas incorporating HHM 
approach in agricultural 
extension for strengthening 
agricultural livelihoods 
Target: 100% 
By 2025 
50,000 
Note: This would support 
gender expertise 
advising/working with district 
level adaptation plan team(s) to 
integrate/institutionalize HHM 
approaches in agricultural 
extension to strengthen 
household/community 
resilience 
MoAC 
Activity 3.3  Capacity building for 
farmers to support market access for 
climate resilient agriculture products 
Promote participation of women in 
training, as agents of change towards 
climate resilience 
Make available through training 
materials that may be of help to 
women in the area (e.g. financial 
incentives targeting women and 
female entrepreneurs, information 
related to available help related to 
domestic violence) 
Indicator: women 
participating in training 
activities; use of mobile 
application for  climate 
change information for crop 
planning; adoption of 
climate resilient practices; 
access to finance for 
investment in climate 
resilient agriculture 
resilience 
Target: 50% of beneficiaries 
are women 
By 2025 
50,000 
MoAC 
__________
