=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 21 for Word
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.1.20155
creationDate: D:20210607174623+09'00'
modDate: D:20210607174733+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
28 June – 1 July 2021 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 11 
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
7 June 2021 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum II 
Funding proposal package for FP166 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Light Rail Transit for the Greater Metropolitan Area 
(GAM)"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
62 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
63 
Secretariat’s assessment 
69 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
85 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
108 
Gender documentation 
110

=== PAGE 3 ===
CONFIDENCIAL EXTERNO 
Project/Programme title: 
Light Rail Transit for the Greater Metropolitan Area 
(GAM) 
Country(ies): 
Costa Rica 
Accredited Entity: 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) 
Date of first submission: 
2020/12/09  
Date of current submission 
2021/05/31 
Version number 
V.15

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE b OF 59 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-CABEI-Costa Rica-2021-05-31”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 3 OF 59 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or private 
sector 
Public 
 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
  
Not applicable  
 
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
 
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation:   
 
☒ 
Low-emission transport:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:  
 
☐ 
Forestry and land use:   
 
 
 
 
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☐ 
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
 
  
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security: 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution:  
 
100% 
 
 
 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  
7,622,805 tCO2e 
A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  
Indicate total number of direct 
and indirect beneficiaries 
Indicate % of population 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  
1,873,300,000 USD  
A.9. Project size 
Large (Over USD 250 
million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
271,300,000 USD 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
 
☒ Grant 
21,300,000 
 
☒ Loan 
250,000,000 
☐ Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐ Equity  
 
Enter number 
☐ Results-based  
 
     payment 
 
Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
6 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
44 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
10/30/2019 
A.14. ESS category  
A  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme? 
 
 
 
 
Yes ☐       No ☒

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 4 OF 59 
 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
 Yes ☐    No ☒ 
 
 
 
 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
The executing entity is the “Instituto Costarricense de Ferrocarriles” (INCOFER) 
created by the law Nº 7001, dated September 19th of 1985 in Costa Rica. Costa Rica's 
state-owned rail authority INCOFER is an independent statutory corporation 
established to operate the country's railway network.  
 
The Ministry of Finance (MOF) is the loan recipient and thus the Government of Costa 
Rica, represented by the MOF is also executing entity.  
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
In 2015 Costa Rica had total GHG emissions of 10.9 MtCO2e of which the transport sector contributed 51%. 
Emissions of the transport sector are projected to increase until 2050 by 44% without mitigation measures. The public 
transport share has declined in the last decade from 64% to 41% whilst private car and ride-hailing services have 
increased. This is also linked to an inefficient public transport system. Consequences are increasing air pollution, 
congestion and accidentality. Alone congestion costs are estimated at 4% of the GDP in 2018. Non-Motorized 
Transport (NMT) only plays a marginal role with the lack of cycling infrastructure and the associated safety concerns 
being cited as main reason. Barriers towards a new transport system are primarily of financial nature plus limited 
experience with NMT and measures to improve last-mile connectivity and accessibility of stations. Costa Rica is in a 
critical situation of public finances and requires support to stem a significant long-term investment to structurally 
change its transportation system. 
The project is a modern, fast, convenient, safe, and environmentally sound electric Light Rail Transit (LRT) along the 
central East-West axle of the larger urban zone of San José with 85 km of double tracks on 5 lines transporting 
annually 63 million passengers and benefitting around 2.7 million inhabitants or 52% of Costa Rica’s population. Bus 
passengers could save 66% of trip time. The LRT will use the existing right-of-way of the old, low capacity single 
track diesel train and replace it with an environmentally friendly, high capacity LRT. Its design incorporates best 
practices for a climate resilient infrastructure. Modern principles of urban development are applied including 
integration with the existing bus-based public transport system, NMT and improved LRT connectivity and 
accessibility. The LRT is integrated with 16 km of new segregated cycle lanes resulting in 36,000 additional cycling 
and micro-mobility trips per day linked together with improved pedestrian walkways. In the vicinity of 6 stations 
components to increase last-mile connectivity and accessibility are included as well as revitalization of urban spaces 
and connection of residents living area with workplaces, commerce and services thereby reducing the dependence 
on passenger cars and providing for a better quality of life and environmentally sustainable neighbourhoods. The 
project is an urban development project transforming urban mobility into an ultra-low emission system. The LRT is the 
backbone that integrates all types of public transport with NMT and functions as a trigger to a paradigm shift in urban 
transportation. Fostering of public transport and electrifying the transport sector are the main strategies to achieve the 
ambitious target of Costa Rica of decarbonization. The LRT also contributes significantly to multiple SDG targets, 
especially “good health and well being”, “sustainable cities and communities” and “climate action” whilst also 
providing for new jobs during construction and operations. 
The total investment cost is 1.8733 billion USD (of which the LRT 1.852 billion, NMT/connectivity interventions 20 
MUSD and capacity building, gender and monitoring 1.3 MUSD) with an EIRR of 26% resultant of time savings, lower 
vehicle operating costs, less accidentality and nearly 700 MUSD worth of emission reductions. The LRT recovers 
40% of its total cost with fare-box revenues whilst the remaining part is based on public funding, which is common for 
urban public transport and which is justified due to the large societal benefits reflected in the EIRR. Implementation 
shall be through a Public Private Partnership (PPP) under a 35-year concession (design, build, operate, maintain and 
transfer contract). The government uses the CABEI and GCF loan of together 550 MUSD as anchor payment for the 
PPP. The Government of Costa Rica is the beneficiary of the grant and the concessional loan of the GCF. The 
private concessionaire receives a one-off payment of 550 MUSD (in 2 tranches) against delivery the LRT lines. The 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) created by the concessionaire does not receive a loan or an equity investment from 
the Government of Costa Rica but a payment for compliance with the concession contract. The GCF finance and its 
concessionality do not influence in any manner the profitability of the private concessionaire as it is a fixed payment

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 59 
 
of 550 MUSD followed by annual payments for services. The GCF contribution and its concessionality fully flow to the 
government and reduce the financial burden only of the Government of Costa Rica and not of the private 
SPV/concessionaire. GCF involvement is 250 MUSD of loans for the LRT, and 21.3 MUSD grants for investments in 
NMT and connectivity components as well as capacity building, monitoring and gender specific action measures. The 
total leverage ratio is 5.9 and the private sector leverage ratio 4.8 i.e. the project successfully pulls-in private capital. 
The project reduces directly through mode shift and more efficient transportation 7.62 million tons of CO2 during its 
lifespan with a GCF cost per ton of CO2 removed of 36 USD. Costa Rica produces more than 98% of electricity by 
renewable sources and has surplus capacity. The carbon grid factor is 0.015 kgCO2e/kWh. The project additionally 
improves significantly urban air quality, reduces accidentality, reduces by 30-60% trip time, reduces gender inequality 
and has positive societal and economic benefits. 
The project allows for a paradigm shift towards a sustainable low carbon urban transport system going beyond a 
stand-alone train by including measures of NMT and connectivity/accessibility measures with long-term behavioural 
change impacts. In absence of the GCF financing these components would not have been included in the project. 
The LRT is a key component to reduce urban transport emissions and is a core element of Costa Rica’s national 
decarbonization plan with the goal of net zero emissions in 2050. It is a core component of the Post-COVID19 Green 
recovery Plan of Costa Rica which focuses on profitable resilient public transport infrastructure with short-term jobs 
and long-term social and economic benefits achieving a transformational change to a greener economy.  
 
Abbreviations 
AE 
Accredited Entity  
AMA 
Accreditation Master Agreement 
BAU 
Business as Usual 
BRT 
Bus Rapid Transit 
BUR 
Biennial Update Report 
CABEI 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration 
CAPEX 
Capital Expenditure 
CDM 
Clean Development Mechanism 
CNC 
National Concessions Council 
EE 
Executing Entity 
EIRR 
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
GAM 
Gran Area Metropolitana (larger urban zone of San Jose) 
GCF 
Green Climate Fund 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gases 
GIZ 
German Cooperation 
IADB 
Inter-American Development Bank 
INCOFER 
Instituto Costarricense de Ferrocarriles 
LRT 
Light Rail Transit 
MINAE 
Ministry of Environment and Energy 
MOF 
Ministry of Finance 
MOPT 
Ministry of Public Works and Transport 
NDC 
Nationally Determined Contributions 
NMT 
Non-Motorized Transport 
OPEX 
Operational Expenditures 
PF 
Public Financing 
PPF 
Project Preparation Facility 
PPP 
Public Private Partnership 
PRI 
Involuntary Resettlement Plan 
SD 
Sustainable Development 
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SETENA 
National Environmental Technical Secretariat 
SPV 
Special Purpose Vehicle 
TOD 
Transit Oriented Development 
USOC 
Credit Operations Supervision Area 
VfM 
Value for Money 
WHO 
World Health Organization

=== PAGE 8 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 59 
 
 
 
1 https://www.unenvironment.org/news-and-stories/press-release/costa-rica-named-un-champion-earth-pioneering-role-
fighting-climate 
2 See annual SEN reports of ICE 
3 GDP per capita (current US$) - Costa Rica | Data (worldbank.org) 
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
 
Context Climate Change 
In 2015 Costa Rica had emissions of 10.9 MtCO2e of which the transport sector contributed 51%. Emissions of the 
transport sector will increase under the BAU scenario by 44% whilst under a mitigation scenario they are projected to 
drop by 65% by 2050, compared to 2015 (MINAE, 2019). Fostering of public transport and electrifying the transport 
sector are the main strategies to achieve this ambitious target. The Light Rail Transit (LRT) is a key component to 
reduce urban transport emissions and is prominently listed in relevant climate change publications of Costa Rica 
including the 2nd BUR (MINAE, 2019) or the National Decarbonization Plan (Government of Costa Rica, 2019).  
Costa Rica has a long tradition in being on the forefront of combating climate change. In its Nationally Determined 
Contribution, Costa Rica reaffirmed its aspiration of becoming a Carbon Neutral economy and aims for a 
decarbonized economy with net-zero emissions in 2050 (Government of Costa Rica, 2019). Costa Rica has received 
from UNEP the 2019 Champions of the Earth award for its commitment to ambitious policies to combat climate 
change1. 
The Costa Rican electricity system is one of the few decarbonized systems in the world: Since 2015, Costa Rica has 
always had >98% of renewable energy production2. Planned energy expansions will diversify renewable energy 
sources even more (ICE, 2019). The train will consume annually less than 1% of energy generation. Electrification of 
the transport sector is a strategy to reduce drastically the carbon footprint of the country. 
Context Urban Transport in San Jose 
Costa Rica is one of the countries with the highest vehicle shares per 1,000 inhabitants in Latin America (PEN-
CONARE, 2018). The larger urban zone of San Jose called GAM (“Gran Area Metropolitana”) has 3% of the national 
territory and 52% of the country’s population - an estimated 2.7 million people live 2020 in this area (INEC, 2011). 
The mode share of motorized trips is 42% cars, 41% buses, 9% taxis, 7% motorcycles and less than 1% by a very 
old and partially rehabilitated diesel train (MINAE, 2017). The public transport share has decreased dramatically from 
64% in 2007 to 41% in 2017 whilst private car usage increased in the same period from 31% to 42% (L.C.R. Logistica 
S.A., 2007). The GDP per capita of Costa Rica nearly doubled in this period (average annual increase of close to 
7%3 The GDP per capita in that period nearly doubled with a CAGR of 7% and the passenger car fleet grew by 
annually 4% (PEN-CONARE, 2018). The bus-based public transport system lacks convenience and attractiveness 
and is thus used as last resort in absence of finance to purchase a private car or use taxi/ride hailing services. Non-
Motorized Transport (NMT) has increased in importance but is still marginal. Lack of cycling infrastructure and safety 
issues have been identified as the main causes for the low NMT share (PEN-CONARE, 2018, p. 238). Congestion in 
the city has increased significantly and vehicle operating speeds have dropped to 14-15 km/h. Congestion costs for 
the GAM in the year 2018 were estimated at 3.8% of GDP (PEN-CONARE, 2018, p. 229). Public transport is 
dominated by a large number of privately-operated bus operators. A bus trip has on average a 70% longer duration 
than a car trip (Government of Costa Rica, 2019), also due to route structuring which requires for over 40% of bus 
users at least one transfer (PEN-CONARE, 2018, p. 238).  
The National University of Costa Rica, engaged in air quality monitoring since more than 2 decades, estimates that 
vehicles are responsible for 65% of air pollution. PM2.5 levels monitored in the GAM surpass widely the air quality 
guideline value of the WHO (PEN-CONARE, 2018, p. 243). PM2.5 and NOx are today the air pollutants which cause 
the most health problems. The GHG emissions of the transport sector of the GAM are estimated at 1.9 million tCO2 
for 2014 (equivalent to 35% of total transport emissions of Costa Rica) and are projected to increase 60% under a 
BAU scenario by 2030 (Grutter Consulting, 2016).

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 59 
 
 
Baseline 
The baseline scenario is a continuation of the current bus-based public transport, a marginal share of rail passengers 
(<1% of trips) and basically private means of transit. The observed trend is towards usage of private means of 
mobility plus ride-hailing services.  This results in higher transport emissions, increased congestion levels, more time 
spent on trips and a reduced quality of life of city dwellers. The bus-based transit network lacks convenience for 
users. Multiple bus re-organization and bus re-structuring projects have been designed in the last decades without 
being implemented. Private bus operators are locked in a competitive position, cannot agree on common approaches 
and resist changes in their modus of operations. Under a BAU Scenario GHG emissions from the transport sector will 
continue to increase strongly in the GAM (Grutter Consulting, 2016) as well as at the national level (MINAE, 2019).  
Mass Public Transport in the GAM 
Costa Rica has made numerous studies over the last 3 decades on new mas public transport systems (see for a 
review e.g. (MINAE, 2017b)).  This sustainable urban transport plan financed by the IDB and the GEF came to the 
conclusion that an integrated transport system with a LRT combined with a bus-based system based on re-organized 
routes and a sectorization of routes is the most effective option. In contrast to other cities the GAM already has a 
train, which is completely outdated whilst still having the right of way and the space (which is not sufficient for a BRT 
or bus based system). This allows that the CAPEX is 50% lower than the average of other comparable LRTs (see 
table 1) and an investment at par with a high-quality BRT (based on ITDP data) whilst being more convenient, faster, 
more sustainable and with far less follow-up investments.  
Related Projects and Proposals 
Related transport projects and initiatives are: 
• 
Modernization of the bus system focusing on route re-structuring, improved access, transfer stations, 
integrated electronic ticketing and the promotion of inter-modality. The IDB supported project forms together 
with the LRT the backbone of an integrated urban public transport system for the GAM.  
• 
National plan for electrification of transport (MINAE, 2019) with financial incentives for the import of electric 
vehicles, focusing on private cars.  
• 
Various municipalities are developing project ideas for Transit Oriented Development (TOD) and for NMT 
supported with technical assistance by the GIZ. The GEF 7 project "Transition to an Urban Green Economy 
and Delivery of Global Environmental Benefits" starting in 2021 and administered by the UNDP is 
complimentary to the GCF project and will work on improvements to the legal framework and on 
infrastructure investments for zero emission mobility. The synergy generated between the two projects will 
enable the investment in the infrastructure proposed under the GCF to be made more expeditiously, as 
legal and institutional barriers will be removed with the GEF project. GCF interventions proposed in this 
project are thus strongly complimentary to existing initiatives in TOD and NMT and complement them with 
investive measures.  
• 
Costa Rica is at the moment involved in the following projects with the GCF: FP097 (Multiple Countries: 
Productive Investment Initiative for Adaptation to Climate Change (CAMBio II)), FP144 (Costa Rica REDD-
plus Results-Based Payments for 2014 and 2015), FP151 (Multiple Countries: Global Subnational Climate 
Fund (SnCF-Global) – Technical Assistance (TA) Facility), FP152 (Multiple Countries: Global Subnational 
Climate Fund (SnCF-Global) – Equity) The present project received PPF support from the GCF.   
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) 
 
Climate Problem 
Costa Rica wants to achieve net-zero emissions in 2050. The transport sector is the largest source of GHG emissions 
in the country. Implementing a low-carbon sustainable urban transport system is a condition for achieving the climate 
targets as expressed in the NDC. The climate problem can be summarized in: (i) A fossil-based public transport 
system based on diesel buses with high emissions (ii) lack of a convenient public transport offer in accordance with 
client’s demands resulting in a mode-shift towards private means of transport and ride-hailing services with high 
emissions.

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 59 
 
 
Paradigm Shift 
The major barrier towards achieving a modern, multi-modal low-carbon public transport system is that this requires a 
comprehensive and systemic change. The traditional public transport system is locked into offering low-cost, low 
quality services which result in decreasing passenger numbers. Singular interventions will not be sufficient to get out 
of this negative spiral. The experience of other countries in Latin America, e.g. Colombia, which had comparable 
problems of public transit in the past, is that new transport systems and comprehensive changes are required to get 
out of this lock-in. A paradigm shift is required towards offering the passenger a more convenient system which is 
fast, safe, reliable, comfortable, of universal access, green, modern and at a reasonable cost. Such a paradigm 
change requires a significant and visible shift towards a new public transport system. Without this no mode shift from 
private means of transport to public transport will occur. Rail-based mass transit is targeted by the project due to 
offering a systemic change, its high-mitigation potential, and a high Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR). NMT 
and connectivity measures are targeted due to their high-mitigation impact and the long-term behavioural change 
potential which allows to shift towards a low-carbon sustainable transportation system.  
The transportation sector is transformed to a  sustainable low-carbon system with a dominance of public 
transportation and NMT. The investment in infrastructure is a core element of the Green Recovery Plan of Costa Rica 
established due to the COVID-19 crisis as a vehicle to transform the society by investing in profitable infrastructure 
which creates economic, environmental and social benefits, short-term jobs and a long-term greening of the 
economy. It allows Costa Rica to achieve its target of decarbonization and net zero emissions by 2050 and 
contributes significantly to multiple SDG targets.  
Goal Statement 
If a low-carbon sustainable transport system is implemented then Costa Rica can aspire to fulfil its target of net-zero 
emissions in 2050 because mobility emissions of the country are reduced significantly.  
The sustainable transport system reduces GHG emissions and contributes towards sustainable development through 
reduced local pollutants, green job creation, reduced accidentality and reduced economic costs created by 
congestion and long trip times, air pollution and accidentality. Direct impacts are a CO2 emission reductions of 7.6 
MtCO2e and a reduction of 295 tPM2.5, 12,000 tNOx and 56 tSO2.  
Project Outcomes 
The project outcomes are (i) increased usage of a sustainable low-emission urban transport system; (ii) an increased 
capacity of stakeholders to replicate successfully NMT and connectivity interventions; (iii) reduced economic costs of 
mobility and air pollution and (iv) reduced dependency on fossil fuel imports.  
Project Results 
Project results are (i) mode shift towards LRT; (ii) mode shift towards cycling; (iii) mode shift towards low-carbon 
transport at intervention stations; (iv) trip time savings; (v)  reduced transport accidentality. Mode shift occurs due to 
the convenience of the LRT and the NMT. The LRT reduces trip times for car and conventional bus users by 30-60% 
and offers safe as well as inter-connected services. The current bus system will be integrated in the rail system and 
allows for seamless connections and avoidance of duplicated routes. Improved pedestrian and cycling facilities 
increase the safety and convenience of using bicycles and other micro-mobility means. This combined with NMT 
promotion activities result in increased usage on NMT. Measures at selected LRT stations improve connectivity, 
accessibility and attractiveness of stations resulting in overall reduced GHG transport emissions of residents living in 
the catchment area. LRT also results in reduced transport accidentality.  
Project Activities 
Project activities are (i) identify and engage the concessionaire; (ii) design, build and operate the LRT; (iii) design, 
build and operate cycling lanes; (iv)  design and build connectivity measures at selected stations; (v) realize NMT 
promotion measures; (vi) monitor project outputs, results, outcomes and impacts; (vii) provide capacity building, 
training and outreach; (viii) implement the gender action plan.  The NMT interventions result in 16km of new cycle 
lanes with nearly  36,000 daily trips and connectivity interventions along 6 LRT stations with a total impacted 
population of 140,000 persons. The investment in the LRT results in 5 new rail lanes, 85 km of tracks and 46 stations 
integrated into the public transport system of the GAM. This forms the base for the targeted mode shift towards the 
LRT and NMT and towards reducing trip times, emissions, and accidentality. The shift to LRT is expected to derive

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 59 
 
 
from convenience of the system to users: (i) the LRT is faster than current public transport and faster than private 
means of transport; (ii) the LRT results in a lower transport trip cost for users (ticket plus time cost) than using private 
means of transport; (iii) the LRT is inter-connected and allows to reach the final destination based on NMT plus public 
transport without large complex connections. The shift to NMT and the resultant behavioural change is expected to 
derive from (i) improved safety with bike lanes thereby removing the current main barrier of cycling mentioned by 
stakeholders; (ii) inter-connection with LRT including facilities to park bikes thus providing ease of use; (iii) integration 
with bike and scooter sharing facilities at main LRT stations; (iv) improved accessibility of LRT stations for 
pedestrians and improved connectivity for entire trips. Capacity Building, training, outreach, gender actions and 
project monitoring are essential to ensure an effective and efficient technology transfer, design and implementation of 
the investment measures and to allow for a replication and outspreading of activities especially in the area of NMT 
and improved public transport connectivity and accessibility. Capacity building and outreach include (i) realize 
publications on project components with a focus on NMT/connectivity; (ii) outreach events including workshops, 
training materials, webinairs, case studies. Gender actions include (i) social communication campaigns to identify 
sexual harassment practices and other types of violence in trains and at waiting stations; (ii) train of INCOFER staff 
on the new sexual harassment law; (iii) implement a rapid reporting system for cases of violence against women; (iv) 
establish a complaint mechanism for cases of violence against women that acts automatically; (v) implement an 
adequate lighting system that protects the safety of users; (vi) conduct a gender-sensitive evaluation at the user level 
to better understand the different needs and perspectives of women and men in terms of access to services and 
infrastructure; (vii) LRT infrastructure designs with a gender focus in which their physical integrity is safeguarded and 
allows an adequate use of the infrastructure; (viii) improving women's accessibility to non-motorized mobility services; 
(ix) attract women to the INCOFER workforce and offer equal conditions to men; (x) promote the hiring and provide 
spaces for women entrepreneurs to be part of the tertiary service providers that the train acquires; (xi) establish 
spaces for women to be promoted to decision-making positions within the activities relevant to the LRT. 
Core Project Barriers 
1. Lack of funds for public transport and NMT investments: Costa Rica is in a critical situation of public finances. 
Public transport and NMT infrastructure, as well as investments in improved connectivity are long-term investments 
with a positive economic rate of return without being financially profitable. Private investments for a Public-Private 
Partnership can however only be attracted if sufficient, low-risk public monies are available which ensure private 
investors of the financial viability of the project.  
2. Funding barriers: Whilst “financing” refers to the capital to deliver the infrastructure the “funding” is the long-term 
revenue stream required to cover payment obligations, including debt service. The LRT, like most public transport 
systems, can only partially cover its funding necessities from farebox and ancillary revenues and requires transfers 
from the government’s budget. Other modes of transport including the current bus system do not pay for the usage of 
infrastructure and do not pay external costs related to accidentality, congestion, and pollution. The visibility of LRT 
funding is high compared with the non-visibility of massive societal subsidies (due to external costs) to the currently 
operating transportation modes including buses creating a political barrier to approve public transport investments.   
3. Limited experience, information and knowledge on successful NMT and last-mile connectivity interventions: Less 
than 20km of non-integrated cycle lanes exist in the GAM. Experience lacks with cycle lanes, their linking with public 
transport and their impact. The same is true concerning connectivity/accessibility interventions. The impact of realized 
interventions is not monitored in a systematic manner. This results in limited knowledge on the interactions between a 
mass transit system and such interventions and the potential economic and environmental benefits of such 
interventions. This lack of experience and information again effectively results in a barrier towards approving new 
investment projects. 
Core Project Risks 
1. COVID-19 has impacted in the short-term public transport demand and might have positive or negative long-term 
impacts on the demand for NMT and PT. The train takes 5 years to construct before being operational. It is not 
deemed as probable that a sustained impact on preference or not for PT will influence the train or NMT.  
2. Ineffective efforts to achieve gender equality is considered a risk which is tackled with the GAP. 
3. Preference for private modes of transport i.e. residents do not change to new modes of transport such as the LRT 
and NMT. The bus system is not convenient and results in very high trip times. People thus basically use the bus

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 59 
 
 
system if they lack financial resources to pay for a taxi or own a car. However, if a modern, convenient, safe and fast 
public transport system is available the people will use it. This has also been the experience in multiple other 
countries when establishing a well linked and fast mass transit system, especially if rail-based with full right-of-way 
and accordingly high travel speeds.  
Assumptions 
1/2. It is assumed that finance is available for the investment part of the project and that funding is available to pay 
the recurrent deficits of the system. The GCF plays a critical role in this assumption. 
3. An important assumption is that the mode-shift primarily from cars and traditional buses to the LRT and NMT 
occurs. The new system offers compelling advantages such as a reduced trip time of 30-60% (resulting in 1-2 hours 
of more free time per day for an average resident), modern, convenient, safe and integrated transport at an affordable 
cost. Private vehicles are not only constantly stuck in congestion with low operating speeds but also suffer from 
driving restrictions based on the licence plate endings (currently during 2 days per week each car cannot circulate).   
4.. Another assumption is that the LRT has lower emissions than the baseline transport system. This can clearly 
shown to be the case due also to the virtually 0-carbon grid factor of Costa Rica and the much higher energy 
efficiency of the LRT compared to buses, cars, taxis or motorcycles. 
5. The project will only materialize if their is sufficient political willingness to finance and fund the project. Again the 
political willingness is linked to the finance conditions which are influenced decisively by the GCF contribution. 
6. CB is effective and leads to successful technology transfer, a good design and implementation of investive 
measures 
7. Monitoring systems are implemented well and are sufficient to identify service issues and facilitate the identification 
of solutions to remedy these. 
8. Materials and construction methods used prove to be effective against climate impacts including high 
temperatures, thermal oscillations and hail damage and ensure protection against flooding.  
Figure 1: Theory of Change 
 
Note: Financing refers to capital availability for investment and funding to long-term availability of revenue streams to cover obligations incl. debt service

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 59 
 
 
 
4 Information for section B3 is based on the feasibility study realized by IDOM. For the overview of feasibility documents see 
(IDOM, 2020) and for a  synopsis see (Incofer, 2020). 
5 The sum of individual line length and number of stations is higher than the total as some tracks and stations are shared by 
different lines. See table 3 summary report (Incofer, 2020) 
6 INCOFER, Informe de estadisticas operativas 2019, p.15 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) 
 
Project Brief 
The project is a modern, fast, convenient, safe, and environmentally sound LRT along the central East-West axle of 
the GAM4 including 15 cantons and 4 provinces of Costa Rica. The LRT will transport annually on average 63 million 
passengers benefitting around 2.7 million inhabitants living in the capture area of the train, representing 52% of the 
total population of Costa Rica. The LRT will use the existing right-of-way of the national rail system between the cities 
of San José, Cartago, Alajuela and Heredia (all of which form part of the GAM). It replaces the old low capacity single 
track diesel train with a modern, environmentally friendly, high capacity LRT. The LRT consists of 5 double-track lines 
built predominantly at grade with exception of some fly-overs. The total length of the system is 84.8 km with 46 
stations and the following lines5: 
1. Line 1: from Paraiso to Atlántico with 16 stations and a length of 27.4 km;  
2. Line 2 from Atlántico to Alajuela with 15 stations and a length of 21.6 km; 
3. Line 3 from Atlántico to Ciruelas with 13 stations and a length of 25.4 km; 
4. Line 4 (Alajuela to Ciruelas, 7.8 km, 5 stations) and 5 (Ciruelas to El Coyol, 2.7 km, 2 stations) are extensions 
of line 2 and 3.  
 
Figure 2: LRT of the GAM 
 
An old train operates partially on the proposed LRT route and the right-of-way exists on the entire tracks. The LRT is 
however an investment in a completely new LRT. It only uses the right of way of the existing rail track. New rail tracks 
are laid (double track instead of the prevailing single track), new bridges and fly overs are built (instead of at-level 
crossings), new trains, signalling systems and train control system are purchased, new stations are built and the LRT 
will be fully electrified whilst the current train runs on 1 track with outdated rails and old diesel engines. The system 
cannot be upgraded anymore besides what has already been done and requires a complete replacement. This 
results in a train with 20x carrying capacity, a higher speed,  lower emissions and more convenience – in short a new 
rail system. The current rail system transported in 2019 i.e. prior COVID 9,800 passengers per day on average6. It 
realizes per track only between 5 and 12 services daily, with a 30 minute frequency between 5 and 9AM and 2 and 
6PM due to infrastructure limitations. The current operating speed is on average below 20km/h. The project LRT will 
transport on average per working day over 200,000 passengers with 70 trains operating during peak hours at a 5-

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 59 
 
 
 
7 GIZ, 2005, Mass Transit Options, p.2 
8 2.1 Defining Rapid Transit Modes (itdp.org) 
9 8 additional trains are a reserve 
minute and during off-peaks at a 15-minute interval between 5AM and 11PM on a continuous base.  The current rail 
is clearly not a mass rapid transit (MRT) system. GIZ defines MRT as “It is designed to move large numbers of 
people at one time”7 and “All forms of MRT operate with relatively high speed and passenger capacities, and the 
basic requirement of MRT in a developing city is that it carries large amounts of passengers, rapidly” (p.4) and ”LRT 
and BRT systems typically operate at average speeds of between 20 and 30 km/h” (p.4.). ITDP defined rapid transit 
modes as ”Rapid transit is a form of public transportation on a fixed route that includes features that dramatically 
improve the speed, capacity, reliability, and quality of the service.“8 The project LRT fully complies with this definition 
whilst the current rail system has low capacity, low speed, only operates during a few hours and has a low quality of 
service (convenience, reliability) and is thus not in line with a mass rapid transit system. 
The LRT plans to transport initially more than 200,000 passengers daily with 70 trains operating during peak hours at 
a 5-minute and during off-peaks at a 15-minute interval9. The operating speed shall be 25 km/h in the urban centre, 
50 km/h in peri-urban and 70 km/h in inter-urban areas. This is significantly higher than current bus and passenger 
car speeds. LRT passengers which in absence of the LRT would have used a bus save 66% of trip time (from 
currently more than 2 hours per average trip to 40 minutes) and baseline passenger car users save 24% of trip time. 
The expected mode shift from passenger cars, taxis including shared mobility (Uber is very large in the GAM), and 
the traditional bus system is basically due to time savings and having a safe and convenient transport system. The 
mode shift was modelled using a 4-stage travel demand modelling (IDOM, 2020). Private passenger car users not 
only face congestion resulting in slow average speeds and high trip times but also restrictions on car usage based on 
the licence plate ending (currently the vehicle cannot be used during 2 days per week). Buses are stuck in traffic just 
as cars so private car users currently have no incentive to switch to public transport – additionally the bus system is 
considered as unsafe, non-convenient and uncomfortable. The LRT with multiple connections offers a modern, 
convenient, safe, attractive and much quicker trip thus offering a very attractive option for car or taxi users to shift. For 
bus users the LRT not only offers a faster trip but also a more-connected trip as the bus lines as operating currently 
are non-connected and require transfers downtown with double or triple fare payment. The project contemplates 
direct integration with other transportation services: the feasibility studies have paid special attention to the 
generation of road-rail intermodal stations with the main intersection points of the rail corridor with the bus routes and 
future trunk lines located in the surroundings, thus promoting inter-modality with buses, cabs or non-motorized means 
such as bicycles, etc. The bus routes are currently being re-structured by the Ministry of Transport taking into account 
the LRT lines. No concessions will be given on routes which compete with LRT lines. The idea is to integrate the 
entire public transport system including the rail. This includes also in the medium-term fare integration. The current 
bus-based public transport system has no bus-only lanes and has for the GAM dozens of individual companies each 
of which operates a given route without fare integration, nor integration of routes or stops. This means that currently 
most passengers have to make 1-2 bus changes to reach their destination, thereby going mostly through central San 
Jose and losing lots of time for changes and for long trip distances due to non-connected routes. Due to the past 
experiences with bus restructuring programs, the project has made a conservative approach, and has modelled the 
demand, the costs and the impacts based on a scenario without integration beyond the current practice, limiting the 
project scope to the extent controllable within the single PPP transaction. Under this scenario modelled, the MOPT 
will, as mentioned, restructure the routes in the catchment area of the LRT to avoid competing services with the same 
origin and destination, thereby also avoiding that bus operators receive concessions which they cannot operate in a 
profitable manner. If a full integration and restructuring of the bus-system can be achieved, the the ridership of the 
LRT will be higher and also the emission reductions will be more than projected. 
The project seeks to follow the principles of improved last-mile connectivity as well as Transit Oriented Development 
(TOD) by revitalization of urban spaces and connection of residents living area with workplaces, commerce and 
services thereby reducing the dependence on passenger cars and providing for a better quality of life and 
environmentally sustainable neighbourhoods. The LRT shall form an urban vertebral line within the GAM. Principles 
followed are (i) to create intermodal centres including NMT around stations, (ii) to densify and promote mixed land 
usage around stations, (iii) to ensure optimal and convenient pedestrian access, (iv) to prioritize NMT and public 
transport, and (v) to regenerate informal and precarious urban areas. The LRT shall attract new residential areas 
around its stations with the goal of doubling the current population density in urban areas and by increasing it by 20-
25% in peripheral areas. NMT interventions include the construction of 16 km of segregated cycle lanes in the vicinity 
of LRT lines resulting in 36,000 additional cycling trips per day. These are used by bicycles as well as micro-mobility

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 59 
 
 
 
10 For a detailed assessment of the current NMT and TOD situation of Costa Rica see (Grutter Consulting, 2020b); For an 
assessment of best practices and international benchmarking in NMT and TOD see (Grutter Consulting, 2020a); The project 
interventions are detailed in (Grutter Consulting, 2020c). 
11 See for details (IDOM, 2020) (Annex 2) 
vehicles such as electric scooters and allow for improved safety cited as a major reason for not using bicycles (see 
figure below for examples of project cycle-lanes). Specific NMT and improved connectivity and accessibility 
infrastructure projects are executed by the project with interventions along 6 rail stations and an impacted population 
living in the vicinity of the intervention areas of 140,00010. Minimum 10 stations are planned to be intermodal stations 
with seamless transfer to buses. The project also contemplates large-scale TOD interventions with private 
developers. Initial planning for such interventions has been realized for various stations11. These investments, made 
primarily by private developers, are not included in the project as they also still need to be detailed and agreed upon 
with the stakeholders. 
Figure 3: Designed Project Cycle Lanes   
  
 
Antes = current situation ; despues = with project situation; Source: (Grutter Consulting, 2020c) 
 
Costa Rica has focused on the institutional and regulatory framework in order to improve the conditions of women, 
with the aim of having accelerated returns at social and economic levels. In the last issue of the Global Gender Gap 
Report, Costa Rica was ranked 13th out of 153 countries. Data on urban mobility in Costa Rica show that nearly 60% 
of public transport users are women. The public transportation system must guarantee safe spaces and participation 
of women. Violence against women is present in public spaces and the train does not escape from this reality. In 
order to avoid costs and economic losses, the project has designed activities that promote the training of the 
personnel that will allow them to identify the violence events and provide tools to facilitate the approach of the women 
to the specific services in case of an attack. The project will also implement communication tools and campaigns 
directed to men and women in order to prevent and attend to violence against women, establish a complaint 
mechanism and rapid reporting system for cases of violence against women, and implement adequate infrastructure 
elements such as good lighting at stations or panic buttons. To improve accessibility of women it is necessary to 
ensure that women can access different types of services, not only when using the train or waiting inside the stations, 
but also the connection with other types of multimodal transport and other public spaces. The infrastructure will 
include the necessary spaces to ensure women's comfort and take into account their mobility patterns (accompanied, 
with shopping carts, or multiple bags or packages, or strollers for children). To improve women participation the LRT 
will serve as a potential employer of women, not only within institutions such as the Incofer or the MOPT, but also by 
connecting women to employment or entrepreneurial opportunities, whether they serve as providers to the institution 
or are independent. On the other hand, it shall be ensured that women are involved in decision making and policy 
dialogue in order to ensure implementation of programs and policies that take into account their perspectives and 
views. Specific targets for women participation in workforce, board members and training programs have been 
designed for this purpose.  
The LRT shall strengthen the resilience of the city’s transport system to impacts of climate change, especially heat 
waves, hailstorms, downpours, floods, and changes in temperature and precipitation.  The effects of climate 
parameters on various project components were considered at the structural, operational and functional level. The 
structural analysis refers to all physical components of the project, the operational analysis corresponds to all

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 59 
 
 
 
12 See report 1 on climate risks and vulnerability (Grutter Consulting, 2020d) and the second report on climate adaptation 
options for the LRT (Grutter Consulting, 2020e). 
processes that allow the generation of service and functional analysis is the ability of the system to provide service 
consistently. In order to achieve a disaggregated risk analysis, the risk analysis was carried out by sections of the 
LRT route.The risk evaluations done in the Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (Grutter Consulting, 2020d) 
and (Grutter Consulting, 2020e) find that many of the risks in the LRT project area fall in low and medium risk 
categories with a few subset of risks that may give rise to potential high vulnerability if the effects of future climate 
change are more significant than anticipated (or modeled). The risks posed by these medium and low risk 
interactions can generally be considered within the design and normal operating conditions of a project.  The risks to 
main LRT project components that warrant adaptation considerations are identified for the following LRT 
infrastructures: (a) drainages, longitudinal and transverse, (b) bridges, (c) slope instabilities and landslides, and (d) 
rail tracks. The Feasibility Study for the LRT project has carried out numerous investigations and notably the following 
reports were valuable for decisions on climate change adaptation measures for LRT infrastructural assets: (a) 
Volume 4 - Geology and Geotechnical, (b) Volume 5 – Hydrology and Drainage, (c) Volume 14 – Structures and (d) 
Volume 13 - Track Superstructures (all part of IDOM, 2020, Technical Feasibility Report). The construction and 
operation of the LRT will integrate adaptation measures for the protection of users and infrastructure such as usage 
of materials resistant to maximum temperatures, thermal oscillations and hail damage, protection against flooding of 
depots and the design of urban storm drainage systems that guarantee a storage and retention capacity of water in 
the rain peaks and its subsequent safe evacuation. As examples sizing of bridge structures will be based on a design 
return period of 500 years instead of the standard 100-200 years decreasing the flood risk from 39% (200-year 
period) to 18% (500-year period),  usage of concrete plate or slab tracks instead of the ballast system improving also 
its useful life or realization of a geo-technical “slope stability” study during the design phase. An independent in-depth 
Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment showed that the LRT design is climate proof and incorporates all best 
practices for a climate resilient infrastructure12. The proposed NMT and connectivity interventions also include an 
increase in green areas and improved resilience of urban infrastructure. 
The implementation planning foresees the issuance of the tender for the concession contract and detailed 
engineering design studies for 2021. The lines shall be constructed simultaneously resulting in a total construction 
time of 4 years. All lines shall be operational by end 2025.  
Implementation shall be through a Public Private Partnership (PPP) with a special purpose vehicle (SPV) created by 
the Concessionaire for this effect. Compared to other LRT systems recently constructed the cost per km of the project 
is 45% lower (see table below), due inter alia to the existing right of way. The project will be able to recover through 
tariffs 65% of operational costs or 40% of total costs (IDOM, 2020). The remaining part is covered by governmental 
subsidies. Most urban rail systems worldwide are unable to cover their operating costs with farebox revenues, let 
alone capital expenditures (see e.g. (EY, 2014), (SYSTRA, 2016) or (World Bank, 2018)).  
Table 1: Cost Comparison LRTs 
LRT 
Cost MUSD per km 
Bursa Light Rail System, Turkey (8.9 km) 
34 
Average 5 LRTs in the USA 
39 
LRT Tunis, Tunisia (19.5 km) 
34 
LRT Sfax, Tunisia (49.8 km) 
21 
LRT Mexico City, Mexico (25 km) 
28 
Ayacucho, Colombia (4.2 km) 
38 
Avenida 80, Bogota, Colombia (13.5 km) 
43 
Cuenca, Ecuador (10.2 km) 
30 
Guatemala City, Guatemala (20.5 km) 
31 
Median value (average value) 
34 (33) 
LRT Costa Rica (84.9 km); excludes financing costs 
18 
Source: Annex 22: GHG and SD Impacts of LRT, sheet “cost LRTs other countries” 
PPP Structure 
The PPP is implemented through a SPV established and fully owned by the concessionaire. The government does 
not participate with equity or loans to the SPV but uses a forfeiting model and pays upon completed construction a 
fixed sum of 550 MUSD and with operations annual availability payments linked to performance criteria. This system

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 59 
 
 
 
13 However, INCOFER will apply the same procedures as used by CNC i.e. contracting external persons for administration, 
monitoring etc.  
is more attractive for investors and makes the system less prone to government interference. There has been a large 
increase in the number of urban rail projects worldwide with private participation since the early 2000s. The 
structuring as a public service concession has various advantages for the project such as: 
• 
It provides security to potential concessionaires and investors as a concession contract has an existing 
legislation in Costa Rica (the legislation also allows concessions of already existing infrastructure), and 
processing the concession is a standard procedure. 
• 
INCOFER realizes the bidding procedure directly without the participation or intervention of the National 
Council on Concessions (CNC).13 
Factors driving countries towards PPP models include project implementing experience of the private partner for this 
type of project, Value for Money and the possibility to mobilize private financing to complement constrained public 
resources (World Bank, 2018). 
The PPP is for a time period of 35 years fixed construction plus operations i.e. if the construction period takes longer 
than previewed the concessionary will have a shorter operational period to recover its investment. After this time 
period INCOFER decides if they want to manage the LRT and the SPV is dissolved or if a new contract is arranged. 
The SPV income is based on a fixed, regular availability payment realized by the government covering all expenses 
and costs with potential adjustments or deductions in case of non-compliance with agreed-upon service quality levels 
(condition criteria) and physical infrastructure availability (effective asset usability). Eventually, income derived from 
other commercial activities such as publicity and real-estate lease will be considered as complementary income. This 
means that the government assumes most of the demand and fare risk, with a final decision to be taken during the 
tender process. To achieve interest of private investors in such projects the government needs to either provide a 
fixed availability payment or guarantee a minimum ridership.  
For the development of the project, two transaction structures or business models were analysed: 
• 
Model PPDi - Payment by Availability and Transfer of Income: In this model the concessionaire's revenues 
are pre-determined in the concession contract as a fixed amount that covers the investment, operation and 
maintenance, and profitability. This value is covered by the tariff system revenues and the payment made by 
the State covering the differential between the defined fixed amount and the tariff revenues received (user 
tariff). In case of a surplus in the fare revenues from the system (user fee) these are for the State. The 
concessionaire's revenues are subject to possible deductions only in the case of service failures or lack of 
availability of infrastructure. One of the main advantages of this model is that, as it has no demand risk and is 
guaranteed by the National Government for the payment of the fixed amount established in the concession 
contract. It is attractive to financiers and concessionaires and is easy to bank and place in the market. 
• 
PPDD Model - Pay per Availability with Demand Transfer: This model transfers part of the demand risk to the 
concessionaire. The concessionaire's revenues are determined by a fixed payment from the State and the 
system revenues (user tariff) that take into account a Minimum Revenue Guarantee (MGR) as defined in the 
concession contract. The payments made by the State as in the PDDi model will be subject to deductions or 
discounts for compliance with availability, quality and service levels. The Minimum Revenue Guarantee 
(MGR) seeks to mitigate the demand risk assumed by the private party and to cover the costs of investment, 
operation, maintenance and a minimum profitability that are considered below the market. One of the main 
advantages of this model is that the State's payments are stable since the demand risk is shared, which 
means a conservative fiscal scenario and less risk for the State in case the demand projections move away 
from the projections of the structuring (base scenario). So by assuming a higher risk the concessionaire has 
a higher rate of return. 
The following table summarizes the main characteristics of the two transaction models.

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 59 
 
 
 
14 5d6555428faa5_209 - MOPT.pdf (hacienda.go.cr) 
Table 2: Summary Transaction Models 
Parameter 
Business model 
PPDi 
PPDD 
Assumed expected IRR from private investor 
10% 
13.5% 
Assigned demand risk 
100% Public 
Shared Public and Private 
Guaranteed Minimum Income (GMI) demand 
No 
Yes 
Surplus system tariff revenues 
100% State 
Shared Public and Private 
Compliance with quality and operational 
performance indices 
Yes 
Yes 
Projected annual payment government 
96 MUSD 
123 MUSD 
Source: (IDOM, 2020) 
In the PPDi model the government takes 100% of the demand risk. If demand falls by more than 37.5% with respect 
to the baseline scenario, the PPDi model is more costly for the government and reverse.Under the PPDi model, the 
payments made by the State are fixed for the concessionaire, regardless of fluctuations in demand. The PPDi model 
is a very attractive alternative for financiers and concessionaires, as it is easy to bank and place in the market, taking 
into account that the demand is not a risk attributed to the private party but 100% to the State and the resources to 
renumerate the concessionaire are fixed and guaranteed.  The bidding process will potentially allow for the 
comparison of proposals under the two models proposed. 
The technical fare is understood as the fare that allows the concessionaire to recover its investment, pay operation 
and maintenance costs and obtain profitability. This fare is calculated on the basis of revenues (CAPEX fare, OPEX 
fare and trip revenues) and passenger demand.  
Under the PPDD model, the concessionaire receives three sources of income over the operation and maintenance 
period:  
• 
Revenue per passenger carried: pay-as-you-go, there is a transfer of demand risk since fewer passengers 
carried means a lower demand payment to the concessionaire; however, a minimum value of demand 
revenue is guaranteed, i.e. the MGR demand. 
• 
OPEX Tariff Revenue: revenue from the provision of the transport service, which is an availability payment 
calculated on the basis of annual OPEX costs. This revenue is affected by the optimal performance of the 
service.   
• 
CAPEX Tariff revenues: revenues associated with the availability of the project covering investment and 
interest.   
Under the PPDi model, the concessionaire receives two sources of revenue throughout the operation and 
maintenance period i) OPEX Fare Revenue and ii) CAPEX Fare Revenue; the demand risk under this model is 
assumed in its entirety by the State. 
Once the total revenue is estimated for each model, during the operation and maintenance period of the project, it is 
divided into the total estimated demand for the base scenario and the Technical Tariff is obtained.  
Which model to choose has not yet been finally decided as this is also discussed with the interested parties for the 
PPP. 
PPP Advantages 
Including the private sector makes the project less risky and reduces investment of the government. It also reduces 
the complexity for the government and puts this into hands of experienced private investors.  Contacts with potentially 
interested investors have already been made e.g. from Korea or PR China and from more than 10 potential investors 
interest in participation has been signalled. Negotiations with possible investors with the tender document will allow to 
adjust the project also to the requirements of the private investor. Whilst the investment of 1.87 billion USD is large 
one also needs to take into account that Costa Rica is investing 4.6 billion USD in roads between 2019 and 2022 
many of which also with PPPs14.

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 59 
 
 
 
15 Examples of non-implemented initiatives include: 1999 the Ministry of Transport made a bus route sectorization program 
which included trunk and feeder routes (Decree MOPT 28337 of 1999); the regional urban development program for the 
GAM (PRUGAM) realized in 2007 included a BRT; The national transport plan of Costa Rica 2011-2035 had a public 
transport restructuring plan with trunk and feeder routes (MOPT, 2011); 2013 a study financed by the IADB (EPYPSA-
SIGMA GP, 2015) for urban public transport structuring again proposed a BRT. 
16 2.2 Costs (itdp.org) 
Alternatives Assessed 
Other mass transit options such as a Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) or exclusive bus lanes have been extensively studied 
for two decades15, without any implementation success basically due to the complex legal and operational structure 
of the existing bus system and resistance to change of the more than 40 private operators. The currently followed 
public transport option is based on the LRT linked with a re-structuring of the bus-system (Grupo de Analisis sobre 
Sistemas de Transporte y Movilidad, 2018). This sustainable urban transport plan financed by the IDB and the GEF 
came to the conclusion that an integrated transport system with a LRT combined with a bus-based system based on 
re-organized routes and a sectorization of routes is the most effective option.  
In contrast to other cities the GAM already has a train. The rails are still used over a large part of the system. The 
right of way and the space are available. This space is not sufficient for a BRT or bus based system. Whilst the 
current system is outdated and needs to be fully replaced it is based on the existing track and rights of way which 
drastically reduces investment costs as (i) land purchases are limited; (ii) earth movement is reduced; (iii) existing 
stations can be partially used and (iv) required services are in the immediate vicinity. It would not be possible to 
establish on the existing track a BRT due to lack of space. 
Costa Rica therefore made various analysis (e.g. (IDB, 2015)) to assess how the existing system could be changed 
to a modern mass Rapid Transit System. The existing right of way and space allows that the CAPEX is 50% lower 
than the average of other comparable systems (see table 1). The average CAPEX of a gold standard BRT in 
developing countries is, based on ITDP16, 18 MUSD per km (USD of 2020; 16.3 MUSD of 2013) equivalent to the 
LRT investment of Costa Rica. BRT investments have however a shorter lifespan: buses 10-12 years and roads 20 
years whilst the LRT lifespan of rolling stock is 35 years and average infrastructure excl. rolling stock is of 50 years 
(IDOM, 2020). Thus with the same CAPEX you get a system with much lower future investments, higher speed, more 
convenience, lower accidentality, lower emissions and more attractive for customers. The decision for a LRT is thus 
clear as you can get with the same initial investment a better system with less follow-up investments.  
Previous to the feasibility study realized by IDOM a study focusing on evaluating various construction options for the 
LRT including a system at grade, elevated and underground was realized (IDOM, 2018). The evaluation came to the 
conclusion that a construction at grade is the most appropriate solution taking into account financial and technical 
criteria.  
For the operational implementation the alternatives of a PPP and of Public Financing (PF) were assessed, performing 
a value for money (VfM) analysis (IDOM, 2020). The VfM examined quantitative (project-level monetary) and 
qualitative (external monetary and non-monetary) factors. The values of the different risks where quantified based on 
the risk consequences (risk probability * risk event). A PPP results in a lower total net present cost than realizing the 
project through PF. The core advantages for Costa Rica in realizing the project as a PPP are more rigorous budget 
management, reduced government capital requirement freeing up resources which can be allocated for other vital 
investments, reduced risks and improved public sector efficiency.  
Project Components 
The project has the following components: 
1. LRT system with a CAPEX of 1,852 MUSD including (IDOM, 2020): 
• 
Infrastructure and systems worth 834 MUSD with the main elements being rail track, rail stations, 
electrification, signalling, train depot and workshops, communication systems and rehabilitation of affected 
services. This sub-component also includes 25 MUSD for urban integration, 13 MUSD for rehabilitation of 
historic patrimony and 4 MUSD for waste management; 
• 
Rolling stock worth 452 MUSD for 78 trains @ 5.8 MUSD per unit; 
• 
Financing charges during implementation estimated at 298 MUSD;

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 59 
 
 
 
17 See for details (Grutter Consulting, 2020c) 
18 See for details of the monitoring approaches and surveys (Grutter Consulting, 2020f) 
19 See (Grutter Consulting, 2020g) 
• 
Other costs of 268 MUSD including acquisition of land and buildings, design and implementation and indirect 
costs (administration, profit, contingency). This sub-component also includes 10 MUSD for environmental 
and social measures. 
 
The GCF involvement in this component is 250 MUSD of loans. 
 
Component 1 has the following activities and sub-activities: 
• 
Identification and engagement of the private concessionaire which will then constitute a Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) (i) tender for PPP launched; (ii) concession award 
• 
LRT design build and ready to operate including as sub-activities (i) detailed engineering design of all LRT 
components; (ii) tendering and construction incl. equipment of LRT tracks, stations, depots and ancillary 
components; (iii) tendering, procurement and reception of rolling stock; (iv) EIA for LRT; (v) negotiation and 
approval of all permits required to build and operate the LRT; (vi) LRT constructed; (vii) stations constructed; 
(viii) depots constructed; (ix) trains purchased; (x) construction approved by INCOFER; (xi) operation permit 
issued by INCOFER 
 
2. Urban integration with NMT and connectivity/accessibility components17: Cycle lanes are integrated in some 
areas to gain experience with such measures. Cycle lanes are based on segregated lanes following best 
international practices. The connectivity/accessibility measures include improvements in the surroundings of stations 
generating better quality of life for users and include pedestrianization, greening of spaces, multi-modal access, 
improved safety etc. GCF grants worth 20 MUSD are used for this component including:  
 
• 
Cycle lanes: 16 km of segregated cycle lanes connecting  LRT stations. At stations parking facilities for 
cyclists are established including mass parking stations for bikes with optimal lighting and safety measures. 
Along critical cycle lanes cameras are installed for improved safety (important e.g. to ensure higher female 
usage); 
• 
Connectivity components at 6 LRT stations including improved walkways, pedestrianization, multi-modal 
integration with other modes of transport, improved accessibility including e.g. the construction of various 
access bridges for pedestrians and bicycles to avoid dangerous crossings or to reduce walking distances, 
and greening of spaces including arborization measures. 
 
Component 2 has the following activities and sub-activities: 
• 
Design, build and ready to operate cycling lanes including (i) detailed engineering design of cycle lanes; (ii) 
tendering of construction of cycle lanes; (iii) cycling lanes constructed and operational 
• 
Integrate, design, and build connectivity interventions at 6 LRT stations including (i) detailed engineering 
design of interventions; (ii) tendering of construction activities (iii) delivery of integrated stations 
• 
NMT promotion activities including (i) detailed design of activities; (ii) identification and contracting of delivery 
institution; (iii) delivery of planned activities 
3. Capacity building and gender measures: Improved data collection to generate sources of information on how to 
improve service quality, inclusive measures for all, safety and how to encourage people to use environmentally 
friendly transport. Monitoring is realized for the LRT, last-mile connectivity and NMT components and also includes 
tracking of mode-shift, the impact of activities on the trip structure of people, the identification of triggers of change in 
transport behaviour and the monitoring of GHG and sustainable development impacts18. Data collection is based on 
surveys and automated systems. The results shall be synthesized in guidelines for NMT and  last-mile connectivity , 
best practice reports and other knowledge products which shall be published and discussed at workshops. The cost 
of this sub-component is 1 MUSD. For gender intervention as detailed in the gender action plan 0.3 MUSD are 
reserved (various gender specific investments are already included in the LRT as well as the NMT components)19. 
The GCF involvement in this component is 1.3 MUSD of grants.

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 59 
 
 
 
20 See loan contract Section 2.03 (CABEI, 2020) 
Component 3 has the following activities and sub-activities: 
• 
Establish monitoring system and monitor impacts of LRT,  last-mile connectivity  and NMT intervention 
including (i) design institutional set-up within INCOFER for monitoring of impact; (ii) sub-contract surveys and 
other components of monitoring; (iii) realize and consolidate annual monitoring reports on impacts of LRT, 
NMT and  last-mile connectivity  components 
• 
Deliver capacity building and outreach including (i) realize publications on project components with a focus 
on NMT/connectivity; (ii) realize outreach events 
• 
Implement gender action plan including (i) establish social communication campaigns to identify sexual 
harassment practices and other types of violence in trains and at waiting stations; (ii) train INCOFER staff on 
the new sexual harassment law; (iii) implement a rapid reporting system for cases of violence against 
women; (iv) establish a complaint mechanism for cases of violence against women that acts automatically; 
(v) implement an adequate lighting system that protects the safety of users; (vi) conduct a gender-sensitive 
evaluation at the user level to better understand the different needs and perspectives of women and men in 
terms of access to services and infrastructure; (vii) LRT infrastructure designs with a gender focus in which 
their physical integrity is safeguarded and allows an adequate use of the infrastructure; (viii) improving 
women's accessibility to non-motorized mobility services; (ix) attract women to the INCOFER workforce and 
offer equal conditions to men; (x) promote the hiring and provide spaces for women entrepreneurs to be part 
of the tertiary service providers that the train acquires; (xi) establish spaces for women to be promoted to 
decision-making positions within the activities relevant to the LRT; (xii) documentation of activities and 
outreach. 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
 
Overview 
CABEI is the Accredited Entity (AE) of this project and is a lending agency. In accordance with the Accreditation 
Master Agreement (dated 06/09/2017), the GCF and the AE will enter into a funded activity agreement whereby the 
AE shall administer the GCF proceeds to be disbursed by the GCF for the implementation of the Project. 
 
The executing entity are the Costa Rican Institute of Railways (INCOFER)20 and the Government of Costa Rica 
acting through the Ministry of Finance (MOF) for the purposes of channelling GCF proceeds.. Costa Rica's state-
owned rail authority INCOFER is an independent statutory corporation established to operate the country's railway 
network. INCOFER has administrative autonomy, legal personality and own assets.  
 
The project implementation will be the responsibility of the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) established by the 
concessionary of the train with supervision by INCOFER.  The concession contract is regulated by the Law No. 7762 
of Public Works with Public Services Concession. The application of this model implies the granting by INCOFER (the 
Grantor) to a Private Developer (the Concessionaire) of a contract which includes the right to design, build, operate, 
maintain and commercially exploit the project and transfer it at the end of the 35-year concession period to INCOFER 
(DBOMT contract). INCOFER identifies and engages the concessionaire and supervises the execution of the contract 
thereafter. The concession contract includes the details of what the concessionaire needs to deliver in terms of the 
LRT (routes, train technology, capacity, construction principles) as well as NMT and integrated connectivity stations. 
INCOFER approves all detailed engineering designs, supervises implementation and issues the construction 
acceptance certificate and operation permit. Thereafter it supervises and controls implementation and defines if all 
concession conditions are met for the annual availability payments. 
 
INCOFER has a preliminary list of interested concessionaires, which exceed 10 companies. Likewise, IDOM 
corroborated with these companies that the amount to be tendered and the size of the works is feasible.

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 59 
 
 
 
21 As of 09/2019: Standard & poor’s AA/Stable/A-1+; Moody’s Aa3/Stable/P-1; see https://www.bcie.org/en/investor-
relations/credit-rating 
22 https://www.bcie.org/fileadmin/bcie/english/files/news-and-
media/publications/institutionales/CABEI_Institutional_PPT_ENG_APR2020.pdf 
23 Loan Agreement 2241 between BCIE and Government of Costa Rica, 2020 
24 Law No. 7762; see 
http://www.pgrweb.go.cr/scij/Busqueda/Normativa/Normas/nrm_texto_completo.aspx?param1=NRTC&nValor1=1&nValor2=
30464&nValor3=75110&strTipM=TC 
CABEI 
 
CABEI is a supranational development bank focused on Central America, founded in 1960. The Bank’s objective is to 
promote the economic integration and the balanced economic and social development of the Central American 
region. Costa Rica is one of the founder members of CABEI. 2010 to 2018 CABEI approved in total projects worth 13 
billion USD of which 3.3 billion USD in Costa Rica. CABEI holds the best credit rating in Latin America21. It has a total 
authorized capital of 7 billion USD, 11.6 billion of assets and a Return on Equity of 6.9% as of end 201922. CABEI 
requires that its operations comply with environmental and social standards, based on the best international 
practices, aligned with CABEI's Environmental and Social Policy. In the transport sector, CABEI has realized 
financing of road infrastructure and has focused recently on improving urban mobility, as well as regional integration 
through support for railroad projects, among others. Within this framework, it is developing a regional plan for 
sustainable urban mobility, along with funding for various public transportation initiatives.  
CABEI has realized various PPPs in Costa Rica including Ruta 27, Windfarm Valle Central, Altos de Magdalena or 
with ICE. CABEI will also have two supervising entities for the loan, one contracted by the government of Costa Rica 
and one directly contracted by CABEI through an international tender to have sufficient external technical know how 
during the entire process of PP structuring and implementation. 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
The Ministry of Finance (MOF) is as the loan recipient on behalf of the Government of Costa Rica an executing entity. 
INCOFER 
 
The executing entity of the CABEI loan is INCOFER (Art. 2.0323). Within INCOFER there is an entity to support and 
assist the institution in all activities related to the concession, the monitoring of the feasibility studies, the bidding 
stage of the concession, compliance with conditions precedent, design stage and the construction stage. INCOFER 
will submit to CABEI quarterly reports on the physical execution of the project, compliance with the environmental 
management plans and in general the compliance with the obligations of the concessionaire contained in the 
respective Contract. CABEI will realize bi-annual supervision missions and will also contract an external supervision 
entity. 
 
INCOFER is an autonomous institution of the Costa Rican State, in charge of managing the national railway system. 
It was created on September 9th, 1985, through Law No. 7001, which has had several reforms, the most important 
being Law No. 9366 of 2016 which gives INCOFER the mandate to build an electric train in the GAM. It also 
authorizes the institution to conduct Public-Private Partnerships. INCOFER has extensive experience in railway 
operations, since it has been in charge of the administration of the railway network in the country since 1985. 
Currently, INCOFER's passenger rail transport system has three lines, 32 stations and a workshop, which in total 
extends over approximately 60 km, and mobilizes more than 3.2 million passengers annually. However, it does not 
have experience in handling concession projects, therefore INCOFER already hired with TA funds of CABEI an 
operating unit with members with extensive experience in the management of concession contracts. This unit shall 
also be expanded to include professionals with a strong background in the financial, legal, and railway sectors. An 
international bidding process to determine the private party entering the PPP will be organized by INCOFER following 
the regulations of the General Law on the Concession of Public Works with Public Services24. 
Most of INCOFER's current employees worked at the National Concessions Council (the government entity in charge 
of PPP management in Costa Rica's Central Government) and practically all of them are involved in the LRT project. 
The staff thus has proven experience in PPPs even of this magnitude, having participated directly in the concession 
process of the Moín Container Terminal, a public works concession project that exceeds US$1,000 million. INCOFER 
has also been carrying out a training process for its officials through technical cooperation with the IDB. 20 officials

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 59 
 
 
 
25 Total around 150 million USD per annum minus income 40 MUSD received from fare box. 
26 10,510 billion CRC @ 550 CRC per USD end 2019 equals 19.1 billion USD 
(https://www1.oanda.com/currency/converter/) based on MOF: 
https://www.hacienda.go.cr/docs/5de7b0492ea2c_Resumen_Egresos_2020_Web.pdf 
received a specialization course in PPP projects. With TA funds from CABEI, INCOFER hired three specialist 
advisors with extensive experience in concession contract management, who are part of the project's Executive Unit. 
This Unit will also be expanded to include professionals with a solid background in the financial, legal and railroad 
sectors. Two additional cooperation agreements with CABEI are in process, aimed at supporting INCOFER during 
the bidding stage. 
A capacity assessment of INCOFER was conducted by CABEI. The assessment concluded that the institution is in 
full capacity to oversee the concession contract for the LRT and NMT. The institution carries out internal audits 
periodically and is subject to audits by the Auditor General and the Ministry of Planning and Economic Policy. Its 
financial management is in accordance with national regulations and audited financial statements have been 
provided. INCOFER complies with all national laws regarding procurement and no inconsistencies over the past 6 
years have been found. Over the past 6-10 years, the institution has carried out several projects to modernize both, 
cargo and passenger train service. For this project, the executing unit was enforced with three external consultants 
with a very high profile. The LRT Executing Unit will support and assist INCOFER in all activities related to the follow-
up of the LRT feasibility studies, from the analysis of the technical and legal studies, as well as  the progress in the 
delivery of partial and final reports. The consultants will provide technical advice to INCOFER in all matters related to 
the structuring of the financing of the LRT and subsequently provide the necessary technical support as required by 
INCOFER. 
Implementation Structure 
It is estimated that the Government of Costa Rica will have to destinate a net sum of around 110 MUSD per annum25 
for payment of services to the concessionary (apart from the 550 MUSD as partial recognition of the investments) 
(IDOM, 2020, pp. 8-9). This represents 0.6% of the total government budget in the year 2020 (0.8% of current 
expenditures)26.  
The concession contract will be signed between the Ministry of Public Works and Transportation, INCOFER, the 
Ministry of Finance, the successful bidder and the concessionaire company (SPV). The MoF, as is the case with all 
sovereign loans, is responsible to handle the national accounts and to transfer the funds to the private 
concessionaire. From the awarding of the concession, by law the government has to budget for the availability 
payment. 
The Government of Costa Rica is the beneficiary of the grant for component 2 and the concessional loan of the GCF. 
The grant for component 3 goes to INCOFER. The private concessionaire receives a one-off payment of 550 MUSD 
(in 2 tranches) against terminated LRT construction and lines ready for operations. This is not a loan nor an 
investment in the SPV but a payment for compliance with the concession contract. The GCF finance and its 
concessionality do not influence in any manner the profitability of the private concessionaire as it is a fixed payment 
of 550 MUSD followed by annual payments for services. The GCF contribution and its concessionality fully flow to the 
government and reduce the financial burden only of the Government of Costa Rica and not of the private 
SPV/concessionaire.  
The following figure shows the project structure. The same structure is used for NMT investments as for LRT ones 
i.e. these investments are included within the tender document and the PPP.

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 59 
 
 
Figure 4: Proposed Implementation Structure 
 
 
The SPV will be responsible for implementing components 1 and 2 based on the concession contract and the 
approval of detailed engineering designs of INCOFER with exception of sub-activity 1.1.which is launching and 
awarding the PPP tender for which INCOFER is responsible. INCOFER will be responsible for implementing 
Component 3.  
The CABEI loan for the project is as of early 2021 under discussion in the Congress of Costa Rica. Only after 
approval can the tender process for the PPP be started. According to the schedule, the bidding process for the PPP 
is expected to begin in 2021. It starts with the publication of the bidding notice, followed by a stage of reception and 
evaluation of the bidder’s proposals, an appeal process, if needed, and a stage of PPP contract negotiations. There is 
no deadline and no congressional approval as INCOFER has these legal attributions. 
Implementation Arrangements 
CABEI issues a sovereign loan to the Government of Costa Rica. As such it does not manage, supervise or audit the 
concession execution. The sovereign loan given by CABEI to the Government of Costa Rica is used as counterpart 
fund of the government for the concession contract. The loan recipient is the Ministry of Finance (MOF). MOF is 
therefore also an executing entity. INCOFER does not administer any funds of component 1 and 2. MOF will 
administer these funds and make payments to the SPV at INCOFER’s instructions. INCOFER is however responsible 
to CABEI as executing entity. INCOFER as implementing agency supervisos and approves all detailed engineering 
designs for components 1 and 2, supervises implementation of the construction activities and issues the construction 
acceptance certificate and operation permit. Thereafter it supervises and controls implementation and defines if all 
concession conditions are met for the annual availability payments. CABEI will have two supervising entities for the 
loan: In the first one, to be contracted by the Government of Costa Rica, CABEI prepares the TORs of the 
supervising company and the minimum activities to be performed, and the second company is contracted directly by 
CABEI with an international bidding process for a company with experience in the transport sector to validate the 
social, environmental, infrastructure and economic commitments assumed by the State for the project. CABEI 
disbursements and MOF payments to the concessionary are made after provisional entry of operations of each line 
(Art. 6.02). GCF funds shall be used in the identical manner. The figure below shows the fund flows for loans.

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 59 
 
 
 
27 Loan Agreement 2241 between BCIE and Government of Costa Rica, 2020 
Figure 5: Fund Flows for Loans and Grants 
 
 
 
The Executing Entities for the GCF are MOF and INCOFER. The executing entity of the CABEI loan is INCOFER 
(Art. 2.0327). The loan agreement stipulates inter alia that the borrower (i) must carry out the project in accordance 
with the plan (Art. 9.01); (ii) must comply with all applicable environmental regulations and the environmental and 
social policies as defined in the Environmental and Social Action Plan of the project (Art. 9.02 and 9.03); (iii) 
establishes an unique traceable account to verify expenses are realized in accordance to the project plan (Art. 9.04); 
(iv) acquires goods and services for which CABEI resources shall be used in accordance with CABEIs policies and 
national procurement laws (Art. 9.09); (v) complies with CABEI’s anti-fraud, anti-corruption and other prohibited 
practices policy (art. 9.11). See for loan supervision and information procedures section G3. 
 
Table 3: Implementation and Procurement Responsibilities per Component and Activity 
Component 
Activity 
Sub Activity 
Responsibilities 
1. LRT System 
1. Identification and 
engagement of 
concessionaire 
1.1.Launch tender for 
concession contract 
INCOFER 
 
1.2. Award concession 
contract 
2. Design, build and ready 
to operate LRT 
2.1. Detailed engineering 
SPV; approval of detailed 
engineering, acceptance 
of construction and 
issuance of operation 
permit by INCOFER 
2.2. Tendering & 
construction LRT tracks, 
stations etc 
2.3. Tendering and 
procurement RS 
2.4. EIA for LRT 
2.5. Negotiation and 
getting approval of all 
permits 
2.6. LRT constructed 
2.7. Stations constructed 
2.8. Depots constructed 
2.9 Trains purchased 
2.10. Construction of LRT 
approved 
2.11 Operation permit 
received

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 59 
 
 
2. Urban integration with 
NMT and 
connectivity/accessibility 
3. Design, build and ready 
to operate cycling lanes 
3.1. Detailed engineering 
of cycling lanes 
SPV; approval of detailed 
engineering  and 
acceptance of construction 
by INCOFER 
3.2. Tendering of 
construction of cycling 
lanes 
3.3. Construction of cycle 
lanes delivered 
4. Integrate, design, and 
build connectivity 
interventions at 6 LRT 
stations 
4.1. Detailed engineering 
design of interventions  
SPV; approval of detailed 
engineering  and 
acceptance of construction 
by INCOFER 
4.2. Tendering of 
construction activities 
4.3. Delivery of stations 
with connectivity 
components 
5. Multiple promotion 
activities to foster cycle 
and micro-mobility usage 
5.1.  Detailed design of 
activities 
SPV; approval of detailed 
promotion plan by 
INCOFER 
5.2.  Identification and 
contracting of delivery 
institution 
5.3. Delivery of planned 
activities 
3. CB and gender 
measures 
6.  Establish monitoring 
system and monitor 
impacts of LRT,  last-mile 
connectivity  and NMT 
interventions 
6.1.Design institutional 
set-up within INCOFER for 
monitoring of impacts 
INCOFER 
6.2. Sub-contract surveys 
and other components of 
monitoring  
6.3. Realize and 
consolidate annual 
monitoring reports on 
impacts of LRT, NMT and  
last-mile connectivity  
components 
7.  Deliver capacity 
building and outreach 
7.1. Realize publications 
on project components 
with a focus on 
NMT/connectivity 
INCOFER 
7.2. Realize outreach 
events 
8. Implement GAP 
8.1.a communication 
campaigns to identify 
sexual harassment 
practices and other types 
of violence in trains and at 
waiting stations  
INCOFER 
8.1b. Train INCOFER staff 
on the new sexual 
harassment law 
8.1c.  Implement a rapid 
reporting system for cases 
of violence against women 
8.1d.  Establish a 
complaint mechanism for 
cases of violence against

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 59 
 
 
women that acts 
automatically 
8.1e.  Implement an 
adequate lighting system 
that protects the safety of 
users 
8.2.a   Design, implement 
and analyse a 
comprehensive multimodal 
transport pilot survey 
8.2.b  Conduct a gender-
sensitive evaluation at the 
user level to better 
understand the different 
needs and perspectives of 
women and men in terms 
of access to services and 
infrastructure 
8.3a LRT infrastructure 
designs with a gender 
focus in which their 
physical integrity is 
safeguarded and allows 
an adequate use of the 
infrastructure 
8.3b.  Improving women's 
accessibility to non-
motorized mobility 
services 
8.4a.  Attract women to 
the INCOFER workforce 
and offer equal conditions 
to men 
8.4b.  Promote the hiring 
and provide spaces for 
women entrepreneurs to 
be part of the tertiary 
service providers that the 
train acquires 
8.5.  Establish spaces for 
women to be promoted to 
decision-making positions 
within the activities 
relevant to the LRT 
 
 
8.6.  Create  knowledge 
product on lessons 
learned and disseminate 
these 
 
  
The grants for NMT and  last-mile connectivity  investment measures will be managed identical to the LRT loan. 
Funds for capacity building, monitoring, gender and NMT promotion shall be managed by INCOFER. 
 
Steps and Timeline 
 
1. The Congress of Costa Rica approves the loan of CABEI. As of March 2021 the credit for financing the state

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 59 
 
 
 
28 https://www.imf.org/en/Countries/CRI 
contribution to the concession, financed by CABEI, is being discussed in Congress. 
2. Prior to the bidding process, INCOFER sends CABEI the tender document. 
3. CABEI reviews that the payment mechanism included in the document is in accordance with what has been 
approved by CABEI's. If CABEI has an objection, it reports it. If it has no comments, it informs and allows the bidding 
to proceed. 
4. INCOFER carries out the bidding process. 
5. INCOFER, together with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Works, awards the concessionaire. The 
concessionaire proceeds to form the SPV. 
6. Prior to signing the concession contract, INCOFER sends CABEI the final version of the concession contract, so 
that CABEI can verify the terms of the award, including that the concessionaire is not part of the list of prohibited 
parties in terms of money laundering. 
7. With CABEI's non-objection, the concession contract between the SPV, the concessionaire, MOF, MOPT and 
INCOFER is signed. 
8. The deadline for the fulfillment of preconditions and financial closing begins. Estimated time: 12 months 
9. During this period, INCOFER must carry out the tender to select the project supervisor, and CABEI must carry out 
the tender to select the supervisor who will represent CABEI in the supervision of the project. 
10. The preconditions for initiating the project construction are fulfilled (approval by INCOFER). 
11. The concessionaire completes the construction of each of the LRT lines. 
12. INCOFER issues the provisional acceptance certificate and operation permit. 
13. The concessionaire requests the payment of 495 MUSD 
14. MOF together with INCOFER requests CABEI to disburse the 495 MUSD to the concessionaire. CABEI disburses 
the funds after verifying that all legal milestones have been met. 
15.The concessionaire makes the adjustments to the pending construction aspects. 
16. The project's final acceptance certificate is issued by INCOFER. 
17. MOF together with INCOFER request CABEI to disburse the remaining 55 MUSD to the concessionaire. CABEI 
disburses the funds after verifying that all legal milestones have been met. 
 
CABEI already approved the project with an Annex that CABEI submits the project to the GCF. The Congress wants 
to discuss and approve the project once the GCF has decided if it will co-finance the LRT or not. 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
 
Climate Vulnerability 
Costa Rica has the 8th highest economic risk exposure to three or more climate change related hazards. 6.8% of its 
total area is exposed to multiple adverse natural events, 78% of the population and 80% of the country’s GDP reside 
in areas at high risk of climate hazards (GFDRR, 2011). The proposed project is a climate resilient urban transport 
infrastructure and reduces the vulnerability to climate change impacts whilst mitigating GHG emissions in the 
transport sector. 
Fiscal Situation 
Two pressing development challenges stand out in Costa Rica: the fiscal situation and persistent inequality. These 
challenges affect the basic pillars of the Costa Rican development model: inclusion, growth, and sustainability.  
Successful implementation of the fiscal reform and the fiscal rule that came into effect with the 2020 budget remain 
key to preserving macroeconomic stability. The central government debt reached 2019 59% of GDP, up from 53% in 
2018, and double its level a decade ago. The large fiscal deficit is the main risk to macroeconomic stability. Costa 
Rica has been hit hard by the COVID-19 pandemic, notwithstanding the government’s proactive response and the 
country’s sound universal healthcare system. The economy is estimated to grow by 2.6% in 2021, following a strong 
contraction in 2020 (IMF, January 2021). The important and immediate medical, social, and economic needs 
prompted by the crisis will require higher fiscal spending and consequently a deterioration in the fiscal position in 
202028. January 2021 the country has reached a technical agreement with the IMF for a program of reforms and 
policies to reduce the fiscal deficit and to promote reforms which allow for lasting and inclusive growth. This serves as

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 59 
 
 
 
29 IMF Reaches Staff-Level Agreement with Costa Rica on a Three-Year Extended Fund Facility and Completes 2021 
Article IV Discussions 
30 July 2020 equivalent to 0.34% + 2.9% = 3.24% 
31 Cycle lanes could theoretically be made to exclude non-payers; in practice this is however from an infrastructure 
viewpoint not feasible. 
policy anchor to support fiscal consolidation and free additional multilateral funding at lower borrowing costs. The 
country has launched as response a Green Recovery Plan with a focus on investing in profitable infrastructure like 
the LRT with social benefits and which create short-term jobs and a long-term greening of the economy. The financial 
structure of the project, executed through a PPP and with the government contribution based on a multilateral loan 
with a 5-year grace period allows to create much-needed short-term jobs without increasing the short and medium-
term fiscal deficit whilst investing resources in long-term sustainable and profitable transport infrastructure. Also the 
IMF acknowledges that Costa Rica’s efforts to decarbonize its economy helps to generate sustainable growth 
opportunities for the country29. Concessional finance is crucial for the country to undertake this transformational 
change. Concessional finance of the GCF reduces the fiscal burden for the country and for reducing the fiscal burden 
whilst enabling to implement the Green Recovery Plan. 
Project Finance  
The project is a PPP. The total investment of 1.852 billion USD for the LRT (including finance costs of 298 MUSD) 
shall be borne with a government contribution of 30% (550 MUSD equivalent to the loan received from CABEI) and 
1,302 MUSD from the private sector (of which 250 MUSD as equity). The SPV receives a one-off payment against 
constructed LRT liens ready for operations of 550 MUSD. This is not a loan or equity, but a payment against having 
complied with the construction of the LRT lines. Thereafter the concessionaire receives annual availability payments. 
The SPV/private concessionaire does not receive a loan directly or indirectly from the GCF. The 550 MUSD paid by 
the Government of Costa Rica are a one-off payment to make the PPP viable. The only beneficiary of the GCF 
finance is the Government of Costa Rica which has lower financial costs and can fund the project better. 
The GCF finance will not have an impact on the equity return for the PPP. The financial structuring of the project is 
based on a profitability assumption (FIRR) required by the potential concessionaire. For the PPDD, where the 
concessionaire takes more risk (part of the demand risk is transferred), a 13.5% FIRR was assumed to be expected 
by a investors, while for the PPDi, where the demand risk remains on the state's side a 10% FIRR was estimated. In 
both structures the government contribution of 550 MUSD to which the GCF contributes is fixed. The impact of GCF 
finance is linked to the balance sheet of Costa Rica and reduces the financial burden for the country. Due to the loan 
concessionality it has an important contribution to the financing part which is very important especially in light of the 
fiscal situation of the country. 
The projected impact of the 550 MUSD loan of CABEI on the central government debt level is by 2026 an increase of 
0.65%. Whilst this is not a huge increase concessional loans from the GCF are critical for the country to implement 
the LRT, due to the fiscal situation of the country aggravated with the coronavirus pandemic. The interest rate of the 
GCF is more concessional than the CABEI rate of 6-month Libor + 2.9%30. CABEI does not charge commitment fee 
and the same is requested from the GCF thereby reducing immediate cash-flow pressure on the government.  
GCF Finance Instruments 
GCF finance is separated in a loan of 250 MUSD and a grant of 21.3 MUSD. The loan is used by the Government of 
Costa Rica as part of the one-off payment to the private concessionary. The GCF grant is 1.3 MUSD for capacity 
building, monitoring and gender measures and 20 MUSD for NMT/connectivity measures.   
Last-mile connectivity  and NMT investments such as cycling lanes do not generate a direct income. Improved 
pedestrianization, accessibility, and NMT facilities such as cycle lanes are to a large extent public goods in having 
non-rivalry in consumption and non-excludability31. Increasing levels of cycling means improving accessibility, 
livability and overall attractiveness of the city for citizen plus improved air quality and reduced congestion. These 
benefits cannot be recovered by the investor of measures thereby calling for government intervention. One of the 
problems associated with investments in NMT and  last-mile connectivity  which results in limited government 
involvement is that benefits are perceived in the short term in increased attractiveness of the city whilst the significant 
and transformational impacts of cycle lanes are clearly in the medium and long-term with more people getting 
accustomed to using this mode of transport, by increasing the number of LRT passengers through improved

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 59 
 
 
 
32 IMF 05.2020.pdf 
33 fitchratings.com 
accessibility and attractiveness of the LRT, and by creating a behavioral change. To quantify ex-ante the economic 
benefits of such interventions is complex.   
Cycling projects are more successful if they are undertaken in combination with high quality public transport projects, 
as a single cycling project often has only a small effect, but in combination it can bring about a bigger change 
(Civitas, 2016). The LRT is thus a big opportunity to promote NMT and  last-mile connectivity  measures. The LRT is 
linked with urban development and can create a paradigm shift towards sustained low-carbon urban transport. These 
elements are critical to take the project beyond a standard LRT and result in an innovative and transformative urban 
development project. Without grants these important activities will not be established, although having a positive 
societal impact, as they do not form part of the core investment program of the LRT, and the government needs to 
focus its limited available resources on areas with a visible and short-term impact such as the train infrastructure. 
The grant finance components have a direct connection to the requested loan. They focus on NMT,  last-mile 
connectivity  and urban development, shifting the metropolitan area towards low carbon urban transport. The grant is 
therefore an important component to ensure the impact of GCF investment and a crucial aspect for the desired 
paradigm shift.  
GCF Added Value 
The GCF involvement reduces the fiscal burden of the government. GCF grant components create added value on (i) 
more inclusive design of the LRT linking the mass transit system with aspects of  last-mile connectivity , NMT and multi-
modal integration; (ii) increased social and environmental impact through  last-mile connectivity  and NMT measures; 
(iii) transformational impact and paradigm shift towards a sustainable low carbon urban transport system; (iv) replication 
potential for low carbon transport – other investments in mass transit systems in the region do not include aspects of  l
ast-mile connectivity  or NMT with Costa Rica having the option of creating a landmark project. 
Concessional finance from the GCF is basically critical and a game-changer due:  
a). Funding availability: The IMF states the Costa Rica is facing severely constrained availability of external financing 
(tourism receipts which represent 19% of exports have collapsed due to COVID-19 in 2020) and tighter global financial 
conditions make market borrowing costs prohibitive for Costa Rica with EMBI spreads 500bp higher compared to 2019. 
Costa Rica is facing lower than expected external loan disbursement and limited borrowing room from a small, satiated 
domestic market (IMF Country report no 20/145 Costa Rica)32 
b). The long tenure of 40 years of GCF finance distributes payments over a longer period and gives Costa Rica an 
important breathing space and more budgetary flexibility for other investments and financing demands. 
c). The GCF concessional interest rate reduces the finance burden for servicing external debt.  Fitch has forecasted 
that interest payments reach 38% of central government revenues in 2020 or 5.4% of GDP being the 3rd highest in 
Latin America33. The effective interest rate of Costa Rica in 2020 is 8.4% ( (IMF Country report no 20/145 Costa Rica , 
Figure AII.1) i.e. Costa Rica can save 621 MUSD in interest payment. This is equivalent to 14% of the annual estimated 
required availability payment for the LRT. 
d). The GCF 10 year grace period cannot be obtained from private finance and is very important in the current tight 
fiscal situation of Costa Rica as it gives urgently required breathing space to fix the fiscal situation and get on a growth 
path whilst implementing fiscal reform.  
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 
34 The concession period remains at 35 years even if construction takes more time 
35 More than 100 cities worldwide have even come to the conclusion that free public transport is economically more 
profitable than charging a transport tariff as additional ridership and costs as well as the subsidy of the full financial costs are 
outweighed by the additional health, environmental and infrastructure benefits as well as increased productivity and city 
livability due to reduced congestion (https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/14/us/free-public-transit.html). Luxembourg is the 
first country in the world to offer countrywide since March 1st 2020 free public transport countrywide on trains, trams or 
buses (https://www.mobiliteit.lu/de/fahrscheine/kostenloser-
transport/#:~:text=Luxemburg%20ist%20stolz%20darauf%2C%20das,oder%20Tram%20und%20los%20geht%27s!) 
 
The concession contract is for 35 years (estimated at 5 years construction and 30 years operations34) after which the 
facilities will be turned over to INCOFER or a new contract is established with the same or another private entity. The 
concession contract is also a period of know-how and technology transfer enabling national institutions to continue 
the project after ending the concession period. During the concession contract the subsidies of the Government are 
defined so as to enable the private party to recover its investment and the operational expenses. Once the 
concession has terminated various parts of the LRT still have a remaining life-span e.g. structural parts of the tracks 
are estimated to have a lifespan of 80 years or structural parts of the electrification system are estimated at 60 years 
(IDOM, 2020, p. 72).  
 
If the public transport system will require in 35 years subsidies or not is an open question. However, a low carbon 
mass transport system as backbone of public transport combined with NMT or 0-emission last-mile connectivity 
vehicles and services is as of today considered to be the transport system which covers mobility demands of the 
people with a low overall environmental impact, low economic costs and a high quality of life. The LRT has a highly 
positive economic internal rate of return justifying also in the future potential financial subsidies (if required or 
desired35) due to the positive externalities or public goods created by the project (less air pollution, less noise, less 
congestion, less accidents and less GHG emissions). Already today from an economic perspective the LRT is not 
subsidized but profitable for the country and society.  
 
The NMT and  last-mile connectivity  investments are expected to result in a transformational change towards shorter 
trips realized increasingly by walking, cycling including electric bicycles and micro-mobility forms such as electric 
scooters. Once citizens feel how this improves the quality of life of the city the pressure will mount to expand these 
investments i.e. not roll them back but expand them.

=== PAGE 32 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
271.3 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
250 
40 years 
10 years 
0.00 % 
(ii) 
Subordinated loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) 
Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity 
return 
 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) 
Grants 
21.3  
 
 
 
(vii) 
Results-based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing 
information36 
Total amount 
Currency 
Enter amount 
Options 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
CABEI 
Senior 
Loans 
300 
million 
USD ($)  
25 years 
5 years 
6-month 
LIBOR + 
2.9%% 
pari passu 
tbd37 
Equity 
250 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
tbd38 
Senior 
Loans 
1,052 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Click here to enter text. 
Options 
Enter amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
1,873.3 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page) 
High concessionality conditions are requested for the loan from the GCF based on 
the high climate risk vulnerability of Costa Rica. 
The private concessionary will be defined through the tender. The private 
concessionary invests an estimated 1,302 MUSD. The total investment amount is 
estimated by the feasibility study but might vary depending on the assessment of 
the concessionaire and the detailed engineering design. Based on the assessment 
realized by the private concessionaire at the tender stage they will require a higher 
or lower annual contribution. The ione-off payment of the government to the SPV 
(550 MUSD) is however fixed. The final financial structure of the SPV is defined 
once the project has been awarded to the private concessionary. The end-use of 
GCF proceeds is for refinancing the bridge loan. CABEI and GCF resources are 
disbursed based on constructed LRT lines of the concessionary. Latter will use 
these funds on his discretion. 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
 
36   Financing instruments as well as amount per each instrument for the private investment are indicative and 
subject to the final financial resources structuration to be mobilized by the concessionaire to be selected at a 
later stage.  
37 Private concessionary 
38 Private concessionary

=== PAGE 33 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
million USD 
($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million USD 
($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
1. LRT system 
Infrastructure 
834.2 
163.0 
Senior 
Loans 
671.2 
Senior and 
subordinated 
loans, equity 
CABEI & 
private 
investor 
Rolling stock 
452.4 
87 
Choose an 
item. 
365.4 
Senior and 
subordinated 
loans, equity 
CABEI and 
private 
investor 
Others 
267.3 
0 
Choose an 
item. 
267.3 
Senior and 
subordinated 
loans, equity 
CABEI and 
private 
investor 
Financing 
Charges 
298.1 
0 
Choose an 
item. 
298.1 
Senior and 
subordinated 
loans, equity 
CABEI and 
private 
investor 
2. Urban 
integration with 
NMT & 
connectivity/acce
ssibility 
components 
Infrastructure 
investments 
20 
20 
Grants 
0 
Choose an 
item. 
Click here to 
enter text. 
3. Capacity 
building and 
gender measures 
CB, training, 
outreach 
1.3 
1.3 
Grants 
0 
Choose an 
item. 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
1,873.3 
271.3 
1,602.0 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☐      No ☒ 
 
Capacity Building 
 
NMT and last-mile connectivity monitoring of activities allows to gain insight and experience on the impacts of 
different measures in the area of last-mile connectivity and NMT and how they interact with ridership and passenger 
satisfaction of the LRT system. This will be based on different monitoring instruments using e.g. surveys. The 
improved data collection generates information on how to improve the quality of service, how to establish inclusive 
measures for all, how to improve safety and how to encourage people to use environmentally friendly transport. This 
includes tracking of mode-shift and the impact of activities on the trip structure of people, the identification of triggers 
of change in transport behaviour and the monitoring of GHG and sustainable development impacts. Improved 
monitoring and knowledge on successful interventions and their impacts are an important element to facilitate future 
funding of expansion of last-mile connectivity and NMT activities and services. The results of the monitoring will be 
made accessible to stakeholders through knowledge products such as guidelines and impact reports on NMT and 
last-mile connectivity interventions, and outreach activities such as webinairs and workshops. The investment of the 
GCF in this area is 1 MUSD. 
 
Technology Transfer 
 
Costa Rica has to the moment no modern, electric LRT. It has experience with rail systems but these are based on 
outdated diesel locomotives. The GCF investment in the LRT enables a technology transfer of environmentally sound 
mass urban transit technology. Technology transfer is made through the concession contract.

=== PAGE 34 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
The project reduces GHG emission through the LRT itself, the NMT and last-mile connectivity activities39. 
 
1. LRT 
 
Emissions are reduced due to mode-switch. The LRT is powered by electricity produced to >98% by renewables. The 
following graph compares the well-to-wheel (WTW) emissions per pkm of different modes of transport. 
Figure 6: GHG Emissions WTW per pkm of Transport Modes in GAM, 2019 (gCO2e/pkm) 
 
Note: WTW = well-to-wheel; pkm = passenger-kilometer 
Source: (Grutter Consulting, 2020h); all emission factors based on localized data 
 
The methodological approach to determine LRT emission reductions is based on an approved Clean Development 
Mechanism methodology.40 The project complies with all applicability conditions of the methodology (see for details 
Annex 22, table 6) including, but not limited to: 
• 
The LRT is a new rail-based infrastructure. The existing right-of-way of the old train is taken. However, the 
complete track is built new: the old system is often 1-way, is extremely old and cannot take trains with a 
higher speed. The investment is in a 100% new rail track, new bridges and overpasses (the current system 
has lots of crossings with cars), new stations, new signalling, new information system and new trains. Nothing 
will be used from the old system. The only part of the old train is the right-of-way which of course reduces 
costs considerably as no land purchase needs to be realized. This is thus clearly a brand-new LRT with new 
infrastructure and completely different passenger capacity (20x higher passenger capacity), speeds and 
convenience. The project is thus fully compliant with this condition as it “builds a new rail line”.  
• 
The LRT replaces existing mixed-traffic bus routes. The Ministry of Transport is currently re-structuring the 
entire bus-transport system of the GAM based on the Decree No 40186-MOPT which gives the Ministry the 
authority to re-structure bus routes and concessions. Bus routes parallel to and in the catchment area of the 
LRT will be closed and re-structured. This within a larger Program of restructuring and modernizing the bus 
system.  Private operators are also not interested in operating routes without or with far less passengers as 
the public bus system in Costa Rica operates without subsidies to the bus operators i.e. if passenger 
numbers drop the private concessionaires either reduce frequencies or give back the concession (this has 
happened) as they cannot operate the route in a profitable manner.  
 
39 For methodological details, calculation procedures as well as full datasets see (Grutter Consulting, 2020h) and excel 
sheet “LRT Project Costa Rica” 
40 The methodology was developed by Grutter Consulting 
https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/DB/FXQBDV16UML49NJN03U1QQTEY9J90E 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Passenger car
Taxi
Motorcycle
Bus
Existing train
LRT
gCO2e/pkm

=== PAGE 35 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
Llifespan emission reductions are estimated at 6,544,000 tCO2e. Upstream leakage emissions due to infrastructure 
and vehicle manufacturing are 818,000 tCO2e higher for the baseline than for the LRT project i.e. their non-inclusion 
is conservative41. 
The GHG reduction is due to mode shift. The expected mode shift from passenger cars, taxis including shared 
mobility (Uber is very large in the GAM), and the traditional bus system is basically due to time savings and having a 
safe and convenient transport system. The mode shift was modelled using a 4-stage travel demand modelling (IDOM, 
2020). Rail systems have shown to have a larger mode shift from private car users than bus-based public transport 
systems such as BRTs due to being more convenient and having shorter trip times. This can be observed for 
example when comparing the results of rail-based CDM mass transit projects registered at the UNFCCC with BRT 
systems. 
2. NMT Component 
The methodological approach to determine the GHG impact is based on a GEF approach (GEF, 2015) based on (i) 
km of cycle-lanes (ii) number of additional cycling trips (iii) trip length (iv) baseline mode (iv) emission factors of 
baseline modes. GEF default values and monitored local data is used. Lifetime reductions of 296,000 tCO2e are 
expected due to this component. The project has lower upstream emissions (road respectively cycling infrastructure 
and vehicle manufacturing emissions) than the baseline i.e. not considering upstream emissions is conservative. 
3. Last-mile Connectivity Component 
Last-mile connectivity and improved accessibility as well as initial TOD measures reduce GHG emissions through 
short-term travel behavioural change and long-term lifestyle change. In the short-term measures including mixed land 
use, urban development along the LRT line, and NMT priority in infrastructure affects GHG emissions through shorter 
trips due to substitution of destinations and trip chaining, mode shift towards public transport and NMT due to 
increased convenience and attractiveness of latter, and increased load factor of public transport. In the long run, 
lifestyle changes – including attitudes toward different modes and slower growth of car ownership (as driving 
becomes relatively less attractive) will influence further travel behaviour and reinforce patterns (Zegras, 2009). 
Measures taken by the project are combined efforts to increase attractiveness and connectivity of involved stations 
e.g. through improved pedestrianization, infrastructure for direct access (e.g. bridge to overpass roads), bus 
connection stations, cycling lanes and cycling park facilities, 0-emission connectivity sharing vehicles (scooters, 
cycles) rest areas, greening of spaces etc. All of these measures contribute to ease access for residents, improve 
connectivity with NMT and bus-based transport and increase attractiveness of the area. The methodological 
approach used was developed by Grutter Consulting and the MIT/USA for the World Bank and was applied in a 
project in Nanchang/China (Zegras, 2009). It is based on a control-group approach comparing transportation GHG 
emissions per resident under BAU and in the project area. Important parameters are the number of residents in the 
influence zone, mode switch, trip distances and emission factors. Lifetime reductions of 783,000 tCO2e are expected 
due to this component. 
4. Summary Mitigation Impact 
The project has a cumulative average annual GHG reduction of 173,246 tCO2e and a lifespan impact of reducing 
7,622,805 tCO2e. This is a conservative calculation as it does not include indirect trip effects of the measures, synergy 
effects of an improved public transport system and improved links creating additional passengers also on bus routes, 
nor upstream emission effects which would increase the emission reductions claimed. 
The program will lock-in long-lived low emission infrastructure including a climate resilient LRT, NMT and last-mile 
connectivity measures. It will benefit directly 2.7 million inhabitants or 52% of the population of Costa Rica living 
within the catchment area of the project. Impacts will be monitored to establish a solid methodological base to 
determine the cause-impact relationship and to estimate better the GHG impact of measures (Grutter Consulting, 
2020f).  
 
 
 
 
41 In the baseline more vehicles utilize road space resulting in additional road construction and vehicle manufacturing 
emissions.

=== PAGE 36 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
The project results in a paradigm shift towards low carbon transport due to following features: 
• 
The project is integrated with plans to decarbonize further transport through usage of electric vehicles as well 
as a re-organization of public transport. The metropolitan area of San Jose has started to construct a network 
of cycle ways and wants to achieve a shift towards public and NMT plus electrified transport. The project is 
therefore not a stand-alone investment but part of a strategy to achieve a low-carbon transport system and 
has with the integrated NMT measures a large potential for scaling up and replication throughout the city 
and in other urban areas of Latin America. 
• 
The project is closely integrated with 0-emission last-mile connectivity activities making the LRT a showcase 
on low carbon urban transport. The integration of LRT with a private sector managed bus-based public 
transport system and with comprehensive last-mile connectivity and NMT interventions can serve as model 
case for a modern approach to public transport interventions, important for the region which lacks such 
models. 
• 
The project is a step towards electrification of transport. This results in a massive decrease of emissions per 
passenger-km due to the nearly fully fossil free electricity generation of Costa Rica. Transport emissions are 
the major source of GHG emissions of the country and reducing transport emissions is the core factor for 
achieving the target of carbon neutrality. The project can reduce transport emissions of the GAM by around 
10%42. The LRT represents a fundamental shift towards reducing the carbon transport footprint of the 
metropolitan area. It has a significant contribution to a climate-resilient development pathway and to 
achieve the national climate change target. 
• 
The project includes the collection and reporting of standardized data on the impact of last-mile connectivity 
and NMT measures and thus serves to improve the planning and the impact assessment of such measures. 
Results will be published, knowledge products are prepared, and outreach activities are included in the 
budget for knowledge sharing and learning. This is important to ensure that replication is based on learning 
from experiences and to justify investments based on the expected impacts. 
• 
The major barrier towards achieving a modern, attractive, multi-modal low-carbon public transport system is 
that this requires a comprehensive and systemic change. A paradigm shift is made towards offering the 
passenger a more convenient system which is fast, safe, reliable, comfortable, modern, green, accessible 
and at a reasonable cost. The transportation sector is transformed to a  sustainable low-carbon system with a 
dominance of public transportation and NMT. The LRT has also been climate proofed.  
• 
The project is line with the post COVID Green Recovery plan of Costa Rica with a focus on resilient 
infrastructure to transform the country into a green economy and allows Costa Rica to achieve its target of 
decarbonization and net zero emissions by 2050. 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)43 
The project contributes significantly to sustainable development goals (SDG) 3 (“good health and well-being”), SDG 
goal 9 (“industry, innovation and infrastructure”), SDG goal 11 (“sustainable cities and communities”), and SDG goal 
13 (“climate action”). 
Environmental Co-Benefits 
Environmental benefits are basically reduced air and noise pollution. For air pollution benefits the same 
methodological approach is used as for GHG benefits (Grutter Consulting, 2020h). The following table shows the 
projected environmental benefits. 
 
 
 
 
42 GAM transport emissions were estimated to be in 2014 1.87 MtCO2e (Grutter Consulting, 2016)  
43 https://sdgs.un.org/goals

=== PAGE 37 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
Table 4: Projected Reduction of Pollutants due to the Project 
Parameter 
Average Annual Reduction 
Cumulative lifetime reduction 
PM2.5 reduction 
7 tons 
295 tons 
NOx reduction  
266 tons 
11,670 tons 
SO2 reduction  
1 ton 
56 tons 
Source: (Grutter Consulting, 2020h) 
Around 90% of the impact is due to the LRT and the rest due to NMT and last-mile connectivity measures. 
Social Co-Benefits 
The project will benefit the GAM with 2.7 million inhabitants through access to safe, reliable, and affordable public 
transport. In accordance with the World Health Organization's guidelines, the air quality in Costa Rica is considered 
moderately unsafe. The most recent data indicates the country's annual mean concentration of PM2.5 is 16 µg/m3 
which exceeds the recommended maximum of 10 µg/m3 44. Improving air quality through zero-combustion emission 
technologies like the electric train and NMT, reduces emissions from the transport sector which is the main source of 
air pollutants in the GAM. The LRT has significant health benefits due to improved air quality, less noise pollution and 
reduced accidentality. NMT and last-mile connectivity components also have a positive impact on these aspects and 
cycling ways improve the safety of cyclists whilst allowing for a healthy lifestyle.  
Economic Co-Benefits 
Following economic benefits have been identified by the project: 
• 
Time savings valued at 3,354 MUSD (IDOM, 2020); 
• 
Vehicle operating cost savings estimated at 520 MUSD (IDOM, 2020); 
• 
Reduced accidentality costs estimated at 53 MUSD (IDOM, 2020); 
• 
Reduced emissions of air pollutants calculated by assigning a monetary value to emissions of PM2.5, NOx, 
and SO2 estimated at 79 MUSD (Grutter Consulting, 2020h); 
• 
Reduced GHG emissions valued based on the social cost of carbon valued at 550 MUSD (Grutter 
Consulting, 2020h); 
• 
Reduced noise emissions valued at 6 MUSD (IDOM, 2020);  
• 
Overall, the project is expected to generate 1,200 temporary jobs during construction and 1,460 direct jobs 
during operations (IDOM, 2020, p. 227/228).   
The project has 3.3x more economic benefits than economic costs or an EIRR of 26% (IDOM, 2020). 
Gender-Sensitive Development Impact 
A gender analysis and a gender action plan have been developed by the project (Grutter Consulting, 2020g). The 
intervention areas include aspects are related to (i) mobility and security to ensure infrastructure takes into account 
mobility patterns of women and minimizes the risk of violence; (ii) accessibility ensuring that new infrastructure is in 
line with requirements of women; (iii) participation of women in the transport sector at all stages and decision levels. 
This refers to LRT as well as NMT infrastructure with the goal of ensuring safe, accessible services catering to the 
demands and needs of women.   
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
As with other Mesoamerican Countries, Costa Rica is considered a primary “hot spot” for climate change in the 
tropics. An analysis of temperature and precipitation reveals many changes in the extreme values of these variables 
during the period between 1961 and 2003. Extreme precipitation has increased significantly and is strongly correlated 
with the temperature of the tropical Atlantic Ocean. The trend over the last 40 years suggests a strengthening of the 
hydrological cycle, with more intense rain occurring during shorter periods of time that produce greater average 
precipitation per episode. This trend is expected to continue in the future due to climate change, possibly resulting in 
 
44 https://www.iamat.org/country/costa-rica/risk/air-pollution

=== PAGE 38 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
a greater frequency or intensity of extreme events such as floods and droughts. It can be stated on the basis of 
numerous studies that the intensification of extreme weather events increases the hydrological vulnerability of the 
country. Estimates indicate that costs due to hydrometeorological events and climatic extremes will absorb by 2025 
under a conservative scenario between 0.68% and 1.05% of GDP and in a scenario of higher risk between 1.64% 
and 2.50% of GDP (MINAE, 2019). Costa Rica has the 8th highest economic risk exposure to three or more climate 
change related hazards. 6.8% of its total area is exposed to multiple adverse natural events, 78% of the population 
and 80% of the country’s GDP reside in areas at high risk of climate hazards (GFDRR, 2011). The proposed project 
is a climate resilient urban transport infrastructure and reduces the vulnerability to climate change impacts whilst 
mitigating GHG emissions in the transport sector. The LRT investment has been extensively checked for climate 
proofing (see Grutter Consulting, 2020, reports d and e). 
2018, after many years of discussion and after increasing debt, the country passed a tax reform giving increasing 
confidence and reassurance to national financial markets and an improved medium- and long-term fiscal outlook. The 
large fiscal deficit is the main risk to macroeconomic stability, with debt projected to exceed 60% of GDP in 2020. The 
containment measures for the coronavirus pandemic, coupled with the global economic downturn, are expected to 
take a major toll on the economy in the short term and cause a temporary deterioration in the country’s fiscal and 
external positions. The country has deployed a post-COVID19 plan based on a Green Recovery of Costa Rica with 
investment in transport infrastructure being a core element. This shall create short-term jobs and a long-term 
greening through investing in profitable and climate-resilient public transport infrastructure. Concessional finance is 
crucial for the country to undertake in this situation long-term investment projects. 
The Government of Costa Rica is the beneficiary of the grant and the concessional loan of the GCF. The private 
concessionaire receives a one-off payment of 550 MUSD (in 2 tranches) against delivery the LRT lines. This is not a 
loan nor an investment in the SPV but a payment for compliance with the concession contract. The GCF finance and 
its concessionality do not influence in any manner the profitability of the private concessionaire as it is a fixed 
payment of 550 MUSD followed by annual payments for services. The GCF contribution and its concessionality fully 
flow to the government and reduce the financial burden only of the Government of Costa Rica and not of the private 
SPV/concessionaire. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Country Ownership 
Costa Rica has a long tradition in being on the forefront of combating climate change. During the nineties, Costa Rica 
contributed to the global awareness on climate change, becoming part of the first joint implementation projects. In 
2007, Costa Rica´s National Climate Change Strategy was launched, supported by the creation of a Climate Change 
Department at the MINAE (Ministry of Environment and Energy). Costa Rica launched in 2019 the National 
Decarbonization Plan 2018-2050 which aims for a decarbonized economy with net-zero emissions in 2050 
(Government of Costa Rica, 2019). The project is linked to the National Development and Investment Plan 2019-
2022 (Mideplan, 2018), the NDC (MINAE, 2015), the National Decarbonization Plan (Government of Costa Rica, 
2019), the National Transport Plan for Costa Rica 2011-2035 (MOPT, 2011), the National Plan for Electric Transport 
(MINAE, 2019), and the National Energy Plan 2015-2030 (MINAE, 2015). The LRT is also a core component of the 
post COVID19 Green Recovery Plan of Costa Rica. 
The transport sector is responsible for 51% of the country’s GHG emissions and 76% of total energy emissions in 
2015 (MINAE, 2019). Fostering of public transport and electrifying the transport sector are key strategies to achieve 
this ambitious target. The LRT is explicitly highlighted in the national decarbonization plan, the 2nd BUR as well as the 
NDC of Costa Rica. The NDC includes the train as a mitigation measure and specifically mentions that its 
construction will require both fiscal resources as well as external financial resources.  
The commitment to decarbonization is also reflected in the Costa Rican electricity system: In In 2019 99.2% of 
produced electricity was from renewable resources (ICE, 2020). Electrification of the transport sector is a strategy 
which will reduce drastically the carbon footprint of the country45. 
 
 
45 See annual SEN reports of ICE and for the grid factor (Grutter Consulting, 2020h)

=== PAGE 39 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
Engagement with Civil Society Organizations and other Relevant Stakeholders 
 
Since the planning stage, the Government of Costa Rica has joined forces with the different municipalities that are 
part of the area of influence of the LRT. December 4th, 2018 the Mayors of the fifteen affected municipalities signed a 
Framework Agreement for Inter-municipal Cooperation with the aim of developing guidelines for territorial planning 
and urban development, and the development of urban equipment and infrastructure complementary to the LRT. 
Numerous consultations where made through this and other instruments46. The planned interventions in the area of 
NMT and last-mile connectivity measures where discussed in multiple roundtables with all stakeholders. 
 
During the construction phase a continuous involvement will be sought. INCOFER as executing entity will have to 
design and deliver to CABEI a citizen participation and consultations plan with quarterly follow-up report of the actions 
carried out with evidence. For operations INCOFER must design and implement a citizen participation plan and 
consultations with bi-annual monitoring reports by INCOFER or the Concessionaire to CABEI. 
  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
The LRT component is co-financed with a GCF loan. 86% is co-finance basically through private sector capital 
(around 70%) and through a loan from CABEI. The GCF loan has a lower interest rate than the CABEI loan which is 
important for the Government of Costa Rica as it reduces fiscal spending. GCF financing ensures the project viability 
and assists in crowding-in of private capital through the PPP. 
 
For the concessionary the LRT is financially profitable – overall, however a subsidy rate of 60% will be required. 
Subsidies of mass transit means are common worldwide (World Bank, 2018). The external benefits of the project due 
to time savings, positive health and environmental impacts, vehicle operating costs savings and reduced accidentality 
result in an Economic Internal Rate of Return of 26%47 (IDOM, 2020). This refers to the LRT only which represents 
99% of the CAPEX and 99% of the economic benefits. The main parameters included for the EIRR calculation are 
the CAPEX of the LRT and the operational costs versus as benefits time savings (91% of benefits), environmental 
benefits (7%) and reduced accidentality plus producer surplus. The results are robust against a sensitivity analysis as 
is shown in the following table. The switching point for passenger demand from where the project is economically not 
feasible anymore is for example a 69% lower passenger demand than projected. 
 
Table 5: Sensitivity of EIRR to Parameter Changes 
Parameter Change 
EIRR 
Basic Model 
26% 
Social discount rate Costa Rica 
8.3% 
30% increase CAPEX 
22% 
50% increase OPEX 
25% 
30% reduction of time savings 
21% 
30% reduction of all benefits (idem to 30% demand reduction) 
20% 
Calculated with IDOM FSR Economic Model, sheet “Flujos Econ”  
 
NMT, last-mile connectivity  and capacity building investments are grant financed by the GCF. This is justified as all 
these investments do not result in financial returns. Benefits of these initiatives are largely public goods. The 
magnitude of the benefits can thereby be far less precisely estimated and is predominantly in the medium and long 
term (due to behavioral long-term changes). Using scarce public resources to finance these activities is extremely 
difficult, especially under the adverse fiscal situation of Costa Rica, where already the core investment in the LRT 
results in long and difficult political negotiations. The EIRR of the NMT and last-mile connectivity measures is 34% 
based on the economic benefits of reduced emissions and reduced vehicle operating costs i.e. for the society these 
are highly profitable investments48. The EIRR is calculated separately for the 2 measures due to the weight of the 
CAPEX LRT relative to the NMT (99% to 1%) and the weight of economic benefits of the LRT (99% of economic 
 
46 For a summary see (Grutter Consulting, 2020i) 
47 The economic benefits are the justification for realizing subsidies as without these the LRT would not be established. 
48 See Annex 22 GHG and SD Impacts of LRT, sheet “CB NMT & TOD”

=== PAGE 40 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
benefits are LRT and 1% NMT). The NMT and connect measures in their own are justified with their stand-alone 
EIRR.  
 
The total capital investment is 1.8733 billion USD with a requested GCF finance of 271.3 MUSD and a GHG 
reduction of 7.62 MtCO2 resulting in an effectiveness of the GCF investment of 36 USD/tCO2. GHG marginal 
abatement costs of transport projects tend to be higher than of other interventions as they are also not realized 
primarily due to the GHG impact but to enable a safe, affordable, efficient, convenient and sustainable public 
transport system.  
The co-financing rate of the GCF is 5.9 i.e. 86% of the total investment is co-financed. This is a very high rate 
compared to other mitigation projects co-financed by the GCF49.  
Technology-wise the project is based on a state-of-the art LRT. The currently used diesel rail system is completely re-
vamped and replaced with a modern electric LRT system. Modern principles of urban development are applied 
including integration with the existing bus-based public transport system, NMT and last-mile connectivity measures. 
In absence of the GCF financing NMT as well as last-mile connectivity components would not have been included in 
the project as can be seen from the investment plans of the feasibility reports. 
 
 
49 See Grutter Consulting, 2020, GCF statistics

=== PAGE 41 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development 
 
 
 
50 On average 60 million passengers per year; direct beneficiaries might have used the LRT for 1 trip or for multiple trips per 
year. There is no control which passengers will use the LRT. The direct beneficiaries are the people living in the catchment 
area of the LRT; the gender distribution is based on the urban share of women (https://www.inec.go.cr/). Direct population 
numbers are based on the projected 2020 population by Inec. 
E.2. Core indicator targets 
E.2.1. Expected tons of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
and cross-cutting only) 
Annual 
173,246 t CO2 eq 
Lifetime 
7,622,805 t CO2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) 
(a) Total project financing 
1,873.3 million  USD    
(b) Requested GCF amount  
271.3 million  USD 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
7,622,805  t CO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
246   USD / t CO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed 
(e = b / c) 
36   USD / t CO2eq 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross-cutting only) 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
1,602 million   USD 
(g) Public source co-financed 
300 million   USD 
(h) Private source finance leveraged  
1,302 million   USD 
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
5.9   
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
1.1  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
4.8  
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)50  
Direct 
 
Indirect 
  
 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
 
Indirect

=== PAGE 42 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
E.3. Fund-level impacts 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-
term  
Final  
M2.0 Reduced emissions 
through increased access 
to low-emission 
transportation 
M2.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided - low emission 
gender-sensitive transport 
Reports 
MINAE 
(DCC)  
based on 
surveys and 
measure-
ments51 
0 
0 tCO2e 
157,012 
tCO2e52 
1. CDM 
Methodology 
ACM0016 applied 
for LRT (86% of 
ERs); GEF 
methodology for 
NMT and MIT 
methodology for 
connectivity. 
2. Lifespan: 44 
years; based on 
average 
commercial 
lifespan of LRT 
3. Total GHG 
reduction lifespan: 
7,622,805 tCO2e 
4. Average annual 
GHG reduction: 
173,246 tCO2e 
5. Construction of 
all lines is in 
parallel with lines 
entering into 
operations within 
one year at the 
end of the 
implementation 
period i.e. there 
will be no mid-
term impact.  
6. The final year 
reflects cumulative 
reductions by end 
implementation 
period 
7. Assumes timely 
construction and 
implementation of 
all lines.  
8. Jobs created 
mid-term are 
temporary 
construction jobs 
and final are 
Social, environmental, 
economic co-benefit 
indicators at the impact 
level 
 
Number of green jobs 
created for construction 
and operations (gender 
disaggregated) 
INCOFER 
annual 
reports 
0 
1,200 
(30% 
women)  
1,460 
(40% 
women) 
 
51 see section E7 for details 
52 source of this figure: Annex 22a- Sheet “total PJ”, Box C2, marked in yellow (rounded value)

=== PAGE 43 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
operational 
permanent jobs 
9. Methodology for 
GHG 
determination 
follows report 
(Annex 22) 
10. LRT has lower 
emissions than 
current transport 
system 
11. Political 
willingness to 
implement the 
project 
Tons of PM2.5 reduced 
 
Reports 
MINAE 
(DCC)  
based on 
surveys and 
measureme
nts 
0 tons 
0 tons 
5.6 tons 
Residents are 
willing to use new 
mobility modes 
Tons of NOx reduced 
0 tons 
0 tons 
226 tons 
Tons of SO2 reduced 
0 tons 
0 tons 
1.1 tons 
 
53 see section E7 for details 
54 Gender report figure 14 (Grutter Consulting, 2020g) 
55 Target based on current female share of population in the GAM  
56 IDOM, 2020, FSR 3rd Report; Memoria 10: Modelo de Demanda (Demand Model) 
E.4. Fund-level outcomes 
Expected Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-
term 
Final  
M8.0 Increased use of low-
carbon transport 
M8.1 Number of additional 
female and male 
passengers using low-
carbon transport as a 
result of Fund support  
Reports 
INCOFER 
based on 
ticketing and 
surveys (for 
gender 
split)53 
0 
43% 
female 
current 
PT54 
0 
45 
million 
50% 
female55 
1. residents are 
willing to use new 
mobility modes 
2. Monitoring 
systems are 
sufficient to 
improve service 
levels 
Passenger 
projections based 
on 4-step 
transport model56. 
The average 
number of users 
stated in the FP 
(64 million) is the 
average number 
of users per 
annum over the 
project lifetime.

=== PAGE 44 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57 See section E7 for details 
58 Construction stage 
59 Cumulative  
60 Currently operating urban train based on (MINAE, 2017) 
61 Lower level as LRT under construction stopping operations of existing train 
62 Source: Excel File 22a - sheet “Impact LRT”  
63 Excel File 22a - sheet “NMT Impact” 
The final figure 
here is the 
cumulative 
number of 
passengers at the 
end of the 
implementation 
period. 
Number of technologies 
and innovative solutions 
transferred or licensed to 
support low-emission 
development as a result of 
GCF support 
Number of technologies 
and innovative solutions 
transferred or licensed to 
support low-emission 
development as a result of 
GCF support 
Reports 
INCOFER 
0 
1 new 
techno-
logy: 
LRT 
1 new 
techno-
logy: 
LRT 
1.Funding is 
available 
2. Finance is 
available 
3. CB leads to 
effective 
technology 
transfer 
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)57 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term58 
Final59 
1. Inhabitants shift 
from baseline 
modes of 
transport to LRT 
1.1. LRT passengers 
baseline mode share 
Reports 
INCOFER based 
on gender 
disaggregated 
surveys with trip 
distance per 
mode baseline 
and project 
0 (no 
mode-
shift) 
0 
49% car 
9% taxi 
33% bus 
9% old train 
Residents are 
willing to use new 
mobility modes  
 
The final figure is 
the cumulative 
number at the end 
of the 
implementation 
period 
1.2. LRT passenger trip 
distance 
0 km (no 
LRT) 
0 
16km 
1.3. Rail based mode 
share in % of all trips 
Reports by 
MOPT, MINAE, 
3rd parties 
0.0% in 
201760 
0.0%61 
0.9%62 
2. Inhabitants shift 
from baseline 
modes of 
transport to 
cycling due to 
increased 
convenience and 
safety 
2.1. passenger-km of 
cycle way users 
Reports 
INCOFER based 
on gender-
disaggregated 
surveys 
0 
0 
156 million 
pkm 
2.2. cycle way user 
baseline mode share 
0 (no 
mode-
shift) 
0 
90% bus 
10% car 
2.3. Cycling mode share 
in % of all trips 
Reports by 
MOPT, MINAE, 
3rd parties 
1.0% in 
2017 
(MINAE, 
2017) 
1.0% 
1.3%63 
3. Mode-shift 
towards low-
carbon transport 
at intervention 
3.1. number of residents 
in catchment area of 
intervened stations 
Reports 
INCOFER based 
on updated inec 
statistics 
0 
0 
139,000 
residents

=== PAGE 45 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 
64 No LRT in baseline 
65 LRT under construction 
stations due to 
increased 
connectivity, 
accessibility, 
attractiveness and 
convenience of 
stations and 
improved 
pedestrian and 
cycling facilities 
3.2. GHG emissions per 
resident per year 
intervened area for 
transport 
Report INCOFER 
based on control-
group survey 
0.74 tCO2e 
0.74 tCO2e 
0.61 tCO2e 
4. Reduced trip 
times of 
passengers using 
LRT 
Average trip time of LRT 
passengers compared to 
trip time prior LRT 
relative to mode used in 
absence of the LRT 
Report INCOFER 
based on 
passenger 
survey and 
comparison with 
baseline 
Bus users: 
2.1 hours 
Car/train 
users: 0.9 
hours; 
LRT 
users64: 0 
hours  
LRT users: 
065 
LRT users: 
0.7 hours 
LRT has lower 
emissions than 
current transport 
system 
5. Reduced 
accidentality rates 
 
5.1. Reduced number of 
accidents  
 
Report INCOFER 
based on 
passenger 
survey and 
comparison with 
BAU 
accidentality 
0 
0 
5.1. 74 
accidents 
less 
 
 
Residents are 
willing to use new 
mobility modes 
 
Average annual 
figures are higher 
than the figure for 
end of 
implementation 
period due to 
increasing 
passenger 
numbers 
5.2. Reduced number of 
injured persons  
 
0 
0 
5.2. 13 less 
injured 
persons 
5.3. Reduced number of 
deaths  
0 
0 
5.3. 1 less 
deaths 
E.6. Activities  
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
1. Component 1 LRT System: 
Identify and engage 
concessionaire  
The private concessionare is 
identified and engaged 
through a tender by INCOFER  
1.1. Tender for PPP launched  
 
1.2. Concession contract 
awarded 
1.1. Tender launching 
 
1.2. Concession award 
2. Component 1 LRT System: 
Design, build and ready to 
operate LRT  
LRT is fully operational after 
this activity 
2.1. Detailed engineering 
design of all LRT components 
 
2.2. Tendering and 
construction incl. equipment of 
LRT tracks, stations, depots 
and ancillary components  
 
2.3. Tendering, procurement 
and reception of rolling stock 
 
2.4. Environmental Impact 
Assessment for LRT 
 
2.5. Negotiation and approval 
of all permits required to build 
and operate the LRT   
 
2.6. LRT constructed 
 
2.1. Detailed engineering 
design report approved by 
INCOFER 
 
2.2.a Procurement document 
construction LRT 
2.2.b LRT fully constructed 
and turned-over to SPV 
 
2.3.a Procurement document 
rolling stock 
2.3.b Rolling stock delivered 
to SPV 
 
2.4. EIA approved by 
SETENA  
 
2.5.a Documentation of all 
construction permits

=== PAGE 46 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
2.7. Stations constructed 
 
2.8. Depots constructed 
 
2.9. Trains purchased 
 
2.10. Approval of construction 
 
2.11. Operation permit 
2.5.b Documentation of all 
operational permits 
 
2.6. 85km of LRT tracks 
operational 
 
2.7. 46 stations operational 
 
2.8. 4 depots operational 
 
2.9. 78 trains operational 
 
2.10. INCOFER  issues the 
construction acceptance 
certificate 
 
2.11. INCOFER issues the 
operation permit 
3. Component 2 Urban 
integration with NMT and 
connectivity/accessibility 
component: Design, build and 
ready to operate cycling lanes 
(combined with activity 4) 
Cycling lanes fully operational 
3.1. Detailed engineering 
design of cycle lanes 
 
3.2. Tendering of construction 
of cycle lanes 
 
3.3. Delivery of cycling lanes 
 
3.1. Detailed engineering 
design report approved by 
INCOFER 
 
3.2.Tender document 
construction cycle lanes 
 
 
3.3. INCOFER  issues the 
construction acceptance 
certificate 
 
4.  Component 2 Urban 
integration with NMT and 
connectivity/accessibility 
component: Integrate, design, 
and build connectivity 
interventions at 6 LRT stations 
(combined with activity 3) 
6 stations with connectivity 
completed 
4.1. Detailed engineering 
design of interventions 
 
4.2. Tendering of construction 
activities  
 
4.3. Delivery of stations with 
connectivity components 
4.1. Detailed engineering 
design report for interventions 
 
4.2 Tender document for 
construction activities 
 
4.3 INCOFER  issues the 
construction acceptance 
certificate 
5.  Component 2 Urban 
integration with NMT and 
connectivity/accessibility 
component: NMT promotion 
activities 
Multiple promotion activities to 
foster cycle and micro-mobility 
usage  
5.1. Detailed design of 
activities 
 
5.2. Identification and 
contracting of delivery 
institution 
 
5.3. Delivery of planned 
activities 
5.1. Detailed implementation 
plan 
 
5.2. Implementation contract 
 
5.3.Report on activities 
implemented 
6. Component 3 capacity 
building and gender 
measures: Establish 
monitoring system and 
monitor impacts of LRT,  last-
mile connectivity  and NMT 
interventions  
Fully operational monitoring 
and reporting system on LRT, 
NMT and  last-mile 
connectivity components incl. 
institutional structure 
6.1. Design institutional set-up 
within INCOFER for 
monitoring of impacts 
 
6.2. Sub-contract surveys and 
other components of 
monitoring  
 
6.3. Realize and consolidate 
annual monitoring reports on 
impacts of LRT, NMT and  
last-mile connectivity  
components 
 
6.1. Institutional set-up of 
monitoring system within 
INCOFER defined incl. 
department / staff 
responsibilities and tasks 
 
6.2.a TORs for and 
procurement of sub-
contracting services 
6.2.b Contracts for sub-
contracting services signed 
 
6.3. Annual consolidated 
monitoring report on LRT,

=== PAGE 47 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
connectivity, NMT impact 
based on established 
monitoring methodology (see 
Section E7) 
7.  Component 3 capacity 
building and gender 
measures: Deliver capacity 
building and outreach 
Knowledge products are 
developed and results 
disseminated 
7.1. Realize publications on 
project components with a 
focus on NMT/connectivity 
 
7.2. Realize outreach events 
7.1.a. Publication of 
LRT/NMT/connectivity initial 
impact and consolidated 
impacts and lessons learnt 
year 2 and year 5 after full 
implementation 
7.1.b. Publication of 
guidelines for 
NMT/connectivity and their 
integration with mass transit 
systems 
 
7.2.a. Realize at least 1 
webinair for each publication 
7.2.b. Realize 5 workshops on 
results and lessons learnt 
8.  Component 3 capacity 
building and gender 
measures: Implement gender 
action plan 
The activities of the gender 
action plan are implemented  
8.1a. Establish social 
communication campaigns to 
identify sexual harassment 
practices and other types of 
violence in trains and at 
waiting stations  
8.1b. Train INCOFER staff on 
the new sexual harassment 
law 
8.1c.  Implement a rapid 
reporting system for cases of 
violence against women 
8.1d.  Establish a complaint 
mechanism for cases of 
violence against women that 
acts automatically 
8.1e.  Implement an adequate 
lighting system that protects 
the safety of users 
 
8.2.a.  Design, implement and 
analyse a comprehensive 
multimodal transport pilot 
survey 
 
8.2.b  Conduct a gender-
sensitive evaluation at the 
user level to better understand 
the different needs and 
perspectives of women and 
men in terms of access to 
services and infrastructure 
 
8.3a LRT infrastructure 
designs with a gender focus in 
which their physical integrity is 
safeguarded and allows an 
adequate use of the 
infrastructure 
8.3b.  Improving women's 
accessibility to non-motorized 
mobility services 
8.1a. 4 campaigns realized 
8.1b. 80% of staff trained 
8.1c. System implemented 
with 80% of staff trained for 
attending cases and with 75% 
of cases being attended 
8.1d. In all LRT stations with 
interventions a panic button is 
implemented 
8.1e. 100% of LRT stations 
and surrounding facilities have 
adequate illumination 
 
8.2.a 1 survey conducted 
with results presented at 2 
workshops 
8.2.b 2 surveys or evaluations 
realized with results presented 
at an 2 workshops 
 
8.3a. At least 90% of LRT 
stations have been designed 
with a gender focus and 80% 
of services offered by the LRT 
include actions to improve 
access of women 
8.3b1. At least 1 program to 
foster the usage of cycling for 
mothers and kids 
8.3b2. At least 50% of cycling 
parking spaces have areas 
dedicated exclusively for 
women 
 
8.4a1. Women participation in 
technical workforce of 
INCOFER in year 2 15%, in 
year 4 25% and in year 10 
40% (minimum rates) 
8.4a2. At least 1 women 
mentoring program

=== PAGE 48 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 
8.4a.  Attract women to the 
INCOFER workforce and offer 
equal conditions to men 
8.4b.  Promote the hiring and 
provide spaces for women 
entrepreneurs to be part of the 
tertiary service providers that 
the train acquires 
 
8.5.  Establish spaces for 
women to be promoted to 
decision-making positions 
within the activities relevant to 
the LRT 
 
8.6.  Create  knowledge 
product on lessons learned 
and disseminate 
 
 
 
8.4a3. Women participation as 
LRT drivers in year 2 10%, in 
year 4 20% and in year 10 
40% (minimum rates) 
8.4b1. 1 program to facilitate 
women entrepreneurship for 
services to the LRT 
8.4b2. 1 protocol designed to 
prevent sexual harassment at 
work 
8.4b3. At least 1 training to 
prevent sexual harassment for 
INCOFER staff 
8.4b4. 80% of staff exposed to 
courses on sexual 
harassment in INCOFER 
8.4b5. At least 45% of 
services provided by 3rd 
parties to INCOFER are 
managed by women 
 
8.5a. 1 program for the 
promotion of women to 
management positions 
8.5b. 50% of INCOFER 
directors are women 
 
8.6. Report on lessons learnt 
published online 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
In accordance with the AMA the AE will realize an Inception Report, a Mid-Term Evaluation and a Terminal 
Evaluation plus annual performance reports. INCOFER will provide CABEI project reporting prior to the scheduling of 
reports to be delivered to the GCF, which as AE CABEI will aggregate and report to the GCF through Annual 
Progress Reports (APRs). After the loan is declared effective, CABEI will field an inception mission to discuss the 
project implementation in detail, orient INCOFER on its roles and responsibilities, discuss implementation 
arrangements, procurement processes, disbursement arrangements, audit, and reporting requirements for the 
project. CABEI will field review missions during the duration of project implementation to review the project progress 
and address issues, if needed, to ensure that the project is completed as planned. An independent midterm 
evaluation will be conducted by CABEI between the second and third year of implementation to assess whether 
attainment of the project’s objectives are still likely to be achieved and if changes in the project may be needed. An 
independent final evaluation will be conducted by CABEI within 6 months of physical completion of the project. 
INCOFER will submit the draft completion report to CABEI and CABEI will finalize the GCF project completion report. 
 
INCOFER will provide CABEI project reporting prior to the scheduling of reports to be delivered to the GCF, which 
CABEI will aggregate and report to the GCF through Annual Progress Reports. After the loan is declared effective, 
CABEI will field an inception mission to orient the SPV and INCOFER on its roles and responsibilities, discuss 
implementation arrangements, procurement processes, disbursement arrangements, audit, and reporting 
requirements for the project. CABEI will field review missions during the duration of project implementation to review 
the project progress and address issues, if needed, to ensure that the project is completed as planned. All 
performance indicator as listed in the project agreement will be monitored annually. For impact monitoring and 
reporting INCOFER will be supported by specialized international support to monitor and report results. GHG 
monitoring and reporting of impacts is only possible once the LRT is constructed and operational i.e. year 5 onwards. 
GHG impact monitoring will then be performed on an annual base with year 2 and year 5 of operations including 
major surveys to assess the impact of the different components. The impact monitoring and reporting includes: 
 
a). Performance of the LRT system including GHG reduction, impact on air pollutants, and mode shift. The monitoring 
approach will follow basically the CDM approved methodology for Mass Transit Systems ACM0016 which requires as 
main monitoring parameters passenger numbers, energy consumption of the LRT and passenger surveys to determine 
the passenger origin-trip mode structure and distances and the baseline mode structure used in absence of the LRT.

=== PAGE 49 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 
b). Impact of the NMT component. The methodological approach to determine the impacts and the monitoring is based 
on a GEF methodology for cycling ways.  
 
c). Impact of the  last-mile connectivity  component on GHG and local air pollutants. The monitoring methodology is 
based on control-group approach monitoring the trip emissions per resident of the project area and a control-group 
area. The monitoring methodological and statistical approach are based on a methodology developed by Grutter 
Consulting the MIT/USA for the World Bank for a project in Nanchang/China.  
 
Reports on the impacts of the LRT, NMT and  last-mile connectivity  activities will be produced and will be accessible 
to interested parties online. The monitoring is an important component to improve design of future NMT and connectivity 
measures for an efficient and effective replication of these components. The monitoring methodologies including details 
on surveys to be used and statistical analysis have been complied in a report (Grutter Consulting, 2020f). 
 
The cost of the impact monitoring including the specialized surveys and statistical analysis as well as international 
assistance in this process has been included in the capacity building and monitoring budget financed under a GCF 
grant. The monitoring not only allows retrospectively to determine the GHG and sustainable development impact of the 
different project components but also allows to determine better the impact of different intervention measures and to 
plan and design with a better-quality intervention in the NMT and connectivity areas. 
 
3 evaluations are carried out in accordance with Annex 11: 
1. Mid-term summative evaluation. This is realized with funds provided under Component 3 by the company contracted 
for this purpose. It summarizes the development of the different components of the GCF project as of year 3. In year 3 
no infrastructure is yet operational. As such this will represent a progress report and will assess the implementation 
accomplishment in line with the timeline as well as highlighting any potential issues. 
2. Impact evaluation:  This is realized with funds provided under Component 3 by the company contracted for this 
purpose. It is realized after one full year of operations and is based on the different surveys realized to assess the 
impact of the project relative to all defined indicators. The impact monitoring approach is detailed in Annex 11. 
3. Self-assessment: this evaluation refers to the implementation of the GCF project in terms of financing, 
disbursements, and implementation status, not however to the impact of the project.

=== PAGE 50 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Selected Risk Factor 1: Right of Way  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Impossibility of completely regularizing the right of way of all lines. This risk concerns mainly the lines 4 and 5, since 
for the lines 1-3 the line is currently operational with the old train. The impact of this risk would be a delay in project 
implementation and in the worst-case scenario the respective line could not be realized. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Study and, where appropriate, regularization of the rights that make up the right of way. The right of way is based on 
the Decree 22483-MOPT (MOPT, 1993). This mitigation measure eliminates the risk. Expropriations will be carried 
out under the national expropriation regulations (law 7495) and considering the mitigation measures established in 
the environmental and social action plan66. 
Selected Risk Factor 2: Design Failures 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Risk that the design fails to achieve the required output specifications, with the result that the project has more or less 
capacity than necessary to meet the needs of the demand. The impact would be that the infrastructure would be built 
suboptimal resulting potentially in cost overruns for rectifications and potential delays. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The SPV will realize the detailed engineering design. The selection of the private company for the PPP is thus critical. 
A selection of a high-quality private company with sufficient experience in the design of LRTs will mitigate this risk 
and make its occurrence highly improbable. There are sufficient private companies with experience in designing 
comparable LRTs worldwide. The LRT proposed for the GAM is not a complex project and similar LRTs have been 
designed and implemented successfully in multiple countries worldwide in recent years.  
Selected Risk Factor 3: Construction Sur-Cost / Construction Delays 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
High 
Low 
Description 
Risk that during the design and construction phase the actual project cost exceeds the budgeted costs, due e.g. to an 
increase in the cost of inputs or construction complexity. In the PPP contract this risk is fully with the private investor 
as he agrees to build the LRT infrastructure at an agreed upon CAPEX i.e. any cost overruns not provoked through 
changes of the design requested by the government need to be borne by the private investor. Also construction 
delays and resultant costs are fully born by the private investor. In traditional government financed projects in Costa 
Rica cost-overruns have been in the order of 20% i.e. the potential impact is estimated at low.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The PPP contract transfers this risk to the private investor. The contract establishes the procedures and penalties in 
case of implementation delays. This results in PPP contracts in general delivering the product on-time. 
Selected Risk Factor 4: Late Delivery of Rolling Stock  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
 
66 See Annex 6.5 (CABEI, 2019)

=== PAGE 51 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Risk that the rolling stock selected is not available upon time due to the manufacturer of the rolling stock. This results 
in an implementation delay of the project with the resultant costs. The risk is born within a PPP by the private investor 
as he is responsible for timely delivery of the project and its implementation. The probability of the risk is estimated as 
low as multiple manufacturers are available worldwide and therefore delivery time of rolling stock can be negotiated. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Careful time-planning and early procurement contracts of rolling stock. The PPP shifts this risk to the private investor 
as the concession period is fixed 35 years and annual availability payments are only made in accordance with rolling 
stock and total service availability. The construction time of the project also provides for sufficient leeway to plan and 
procure the rolling stock in a timely manner. 
Selected Risk Factor 5: Lower than Expected Demand 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Risk that the passenger demand is lower than estimated. This may be due to factors external to the private partner if 
actions are taken by the Government or the Municipality which affect demand, may be due to actions or failing 
actions of the private partner e.g. non-adequate service conditions or might be due to factors external to all parties 
such as the a pandemic. The risk is with the government as farebox revenues come to the government whilst the 
private concessionary has a fixed availability payment. The magnitude of the risk impact on the government and the 
SPV depend on the transaction structure model chosen and are higher in the PPDi than in the PPDD model. The 
impact on government finance is relatively low as the financial and economic profitability is related largely to CAPEX 
expenditures and not that sensitive to changes in the number of passengers (IDOM, 2020, p. 57). This risk also has 
an impact on emission reductions and potentially on traffic impacts (the impact of reduced demand is not 1 to 1 on 
emission reductions as latter is relative to passenger*trip distance*mode used in absence i.e. as example less 
passengers coming from short-trip bus users affect marginally calculations and less passengers with long trip 
distance affect more; the same holds true for traffic conditions as it depends if latter is due to less trips than expected 
in the GAM as total (e.g. due to decreasing trip intensity or less residents than projected for the future), and from 
which baseline mode we have less passengers). The influence of 1 parameter alone on emission reductions and on 
traffic mitigation is thus limited. As example the CDM project of Delhi Metro had in its last monitoring period 2016-
2018 35% less passengers than projected but still 14% higher emission reductions than projected as the emission 
reductions per transported passenger where higher than projected due to longer than expected trip distance and 
higher than expected mode share from high emitting modes.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Measures to increase demand are being planned and include: (i) adequate tariff structure which makes the usage of 
the LRT attractive (ii) Integration measures with the bus-based public transport system including tariff integration and 
electronic ticketing which result in increased attractiveness and convenience of the public transport system. (iii) 
Attractive NMT systems including cycling ways and shared mobility services which allow for safe, convenient and 
seamless trips from origin to destination thus attracting additional passenger demand. 
Selected Risk Factor 6: Lower than Expected Quality of Service 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Risk that the service provider does not reach the quality specifications for the service as demanded. This can result in 
penalties and/or lower than expected demand of passengers and therefore lower revenues. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Selection of private partner with experience and good quality track record. The PPP contract establishes penalties 
and guarantees for quality service deliveries to ensure that service targets are met. 
Selected Risk Factor 7: Higher than Expected Operational Costs

=== PAGE 52 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Higher than expected operational costs resulting in lower than expected profitability and less capacity to repay debts. 
The higher costs can be a result of cost increases (e.g. salaries), underperformance of technologies (e.g. higher 
electricity usage than expected of trains) or disputes (e.g. labor disputes) resulting in lower than expected quality of 
services and/or higher than expected OPEX. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The risk is born by the private investor under a PPP contract. Selection of a high-quality private partner is thus key to 
reducing this risk. Insurance or contractual guarantees can also be realized for some of the operational cost risks 
(e.g. technology performance risks). 
Selected Risk Factor 8: Exchange Rate Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Forex 
High 
Low 
Description 
This can be related to the payments of the government to the concessionary, in the CAPEX or OPEX of the 
concessionary or to the revenues related with the tariff. Exchange rate risks affect the potential revenue in foreign 
exchange of the concessionary, the OPEX, the CAPEX and also the transfers from government. Dependent on the 
type of PPP contract the risks are either with the private party, with the government or with both. Results are always a 
lower profitability of operations. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Currency swap contract, as long as the terms and conditions of such contracts are approved by the contracting 
institution, so that aggressive positions that go beyond a hedge are not taken and that imply an additional risk to the 
development of the Project. The currency risk is partly mitigated by the combination of income and expenditure in 
local currency and USD. 
Selected Risk Factor 9: Insufficient Experience Executing Entity 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
INCOFER is in charge of realizing the concession agreement but lacks experience in that. INCOFER is also 
responsible for supervision of the concessionary during the construction and operational phase. While INCOFER has 
experience in running its rail system, the experience in constructing a new electric LRT is limited. This can lead to an 
imbalance of know-how between the private concessionary and the supervising institution which could result in non-
fulfilment of contractual obligations, non-adequate construction, and construction delays. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
INCOFER receives technical support from CABEI to carry out its tasks. For the concession phase INCOFER will work 
with the same procedures and approach as used by the National Concessions Council (CNC) and will also 
strengthen the SPV during the implementation of the concession, with the resources established for this purpose. For 
the construction and delivery phase CABEI will contract directly a 3rd party verification company paid with resources 
of the borrower (0.4% of the loan amount), with field presence. The verifier will be present during the project 
execution and verify the design products, the global budget, monthly estimates of work, will carry out evaluations of 
the variations between the real and the programmed physical and financial execution, and the respective analysis of 
the effect on the time of contractual completion, technical constructive audits, opportune monitoring of change orders, 
extensions of contracts, and follow-up of possible claims or controversies; likewise it will issue monthly reports to 
CABEI. 
Selected Risk Factor 10: Money laundering, terrorist financing and prohibited practices risks 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Prohibited practices 
Low 
Low 
Description

=== PAGE 53 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
Risk of the concessionary being involved in illicit practices. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
CABEI has its internal system of control. The tender process is an open process with results presented to the public. 
CABEI realizes a first level due diligence of the concessionary to ensure that this risk is mitigated.  
Selected Risk Factor 11: Construction Permits 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Risk of not obtaining by the concessionary on time all required permits for construction and operation. The basic risk 
impact is a delay in construction and operations. With long delays the impacts can be high. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project is a national priority and its construction and environmental impacts are very limited as it is basically 
realized on an existing rail track. The experience of INCOFER is useful for the concessionary to identify on time 
potential problem areas for construction areas and permits  
Selected Risk Factor 12: Identification of High Quality Concessionaire 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
High 
Decsription 
Lack of offers / offers with a very high cost for acting as concessionaire. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
INCOFER has a preliminary list of interested concessionaires, which exceed 10 companies. Likewise, IDOM 
corroborated with these companies that the amount to be tendered and the size of the works is feasible, therefore the 
risk of bankability is low and lack of offers is considered to be very low. 
Mitigation measures to reduce this risk are: 
(i) Increase of capacity of contracting parties:  
• 
CABEI will have two supervising entities for the loan: (i) the first company, to be contracted by the Gov. of 
Costa Rica, for which CABEI is preparing the TORs for this project´s supervision company activities, and the 
minimum activities to be performed by it, and (ii) the second company will be contracted directly by CABEI, 
through an international bidding process, calling for a company with experience in the transport sector with 
the objective to validate the social, environmental, infrastructure and economic commitments assumed by the 
State for the project. 
• 
With TA funds from CABEI, INCOFER hired three specialists as advisors, with extensive experience in 
concession contract management, who are part of the project's PIU. This Unit will also be expanded to 
include professionals with a solid background in the financial, legal and railroad sectors. 
• 
Two additional TA cooperation agreements with CABEI are in process, aimed at supporting INCOFER during 
the international public bidding process of this LRT Project 
 
(ii) Supervision with 3rd party: CABEI will contract directly, on behalf of INCOFER, a specialized 3rd party company, 
to be paid with resources of the borrower, which will assist in the PPP project design and in structuring the PPP 
transaction.  
 
(iii) Clearly defined parameters in the draft concession tender and contract which ensure high quality and 
experienced bidders: There are already a series of technical and financial parameters and requirements that will be 
requested from potential concessionaires, which mitigate this risk. All potential offerer’s must prove significant 
experience with comparable LRTs and financial strength (see Annex 19 Summary of Tender and Concession 
Contract Document” especially Chapter 2 Technical Minimum Requirements and chapter 3 Financial 
Requirements). 
 
Also the contracting parties have a broad experience in structuring large-scale PPPs: The Government of Costa 
Rica as well as CABEI all have structured and managed large-scale PPPs. Staff involved in these transaction is now 
at INCOFER.  This experience will be used for the LRT.

=== PAGE 54 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 13: Funding gap (availability payment) due to the tight fiscal situation of Costa Rica 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
High 
Description 
The risk is that the government is not capable to finance the availability gap payment to the Cocenssionaire. 
Mitigation measure(s) 
The risk is related to the current fiscal situation of Costa Rica. The risk is mitigated by: 
• 
The availability payment of around US$100 million needs to be paid annually once the LRT is operational i.e. 
6 years from now. The measures to reduce the fiscal deficit have already been taken since December 2018 
with the approval of the fiscal reform (but have been temporarily suspended due to COVID-19; however, they 
have again been taken up end 2020) and will have an impact in a much shorter period. Therefore the future 
risk is considered to be significantly lower than the current risk. 
• 
With the closure of the Concession contract the Costa Rican government assumes the legal obligation of the 
availability payment i.e. this then forms part automatically of the annual budget. For the year 2020 the 
availability payment would have meant 0.6% of the Costa Rican budget i.e. whilst significant this is not a 
huge part of the budget. 
• 
Investing in profitable infrastructure will alleviate future fiscal problems. The reduced health costs due to 
reduced accidentality and reduced air pollution are worth on average annually US$54 million (FSR Annex 2 
economic spreadsheet). A large part of these health costs are paid directly by the government through the 
public health care system i.e. the LRT results in direct reduced fiscal health costs. Time savings result in 
increased productivity of the economy which again results in increased tax revenues. Overall the fiscal effect 
is thus considered either positive or close to nil.  
The GCF financing enables to reduce this risk strongly by having a long loan tenure allowing to spread out payments 
and by having a long grace period i.e. both allow that the fiscal situation is not aggravated of Costa Rica whilst 
enabling the investment in green infrastructure.

=== PAGE 55 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
 
Environmental Impacts 
 
A separation of potential environmental impacts during the construction and the operational phase is made. Major 
anticipated negative environmental impacts of the project during construction are related to traffic disruptions and 
access to properties, relocation of utilities, cutting trees, noise and air quality impacts, as well as community health 
and safety. During operation, it is anticipated that the project will have mostly positive environmental impacts—
specifically, on urban air quality and acoustic environment. Adequate mitigation measures are incorporated into 
project design and will be implemented through an environmental management plan. Public consultations with 
various stakeholders were conducted67. The preliminary EIA was disclosed on INCOFERs website June 2020 (IDOM, 
2020) and on the website of CABEI for 120 days starting July 25th 2019 and ending October 24th 2019, with approval 
of the loan through the Board of CABEI on October 30th 201968. 
 
The final EIA will be realized by the concessionary. The train requires an environmental permit and authorization 
granted by the National Environmental Technical Secretariat (SETENA), which involves compliance with all relevant 
regulations and the corresponding permits e.g. concerning water, air, noise pollution, social aspects etc. (IDOM, 
2020, p. 191 to 216). For construction the concessionary will require permits from the Ministry of Public Works and 
Transport (MOPT) and the corresponding municipalities. The operational permit is given by MOPT. 
 
Social Impacts 
 
The project will affect and potentially displace around 215 persons which have invaded the right of way of the train 
system in the last years (IDOM, 2020, p. 143). The negotiation mechanisms for the process of expropriation and 
relocation of owners are based on the Law 7495 (Expropriation Law), which clearly indicates the administrative 
processes to be followed to compensate the persons or companies that own property where some new sections of 
the current route of the LRT will have to be traced, as well as the relocation of the persons who will be affected. The 
total expropriation area is estimated at 420,000m2 of land and 26,000m2 of buildings (IDOM, 2020). INCOFER must 
deliver to CABEI prior to the 1st loan disbursement a copy of the Involuntary Resettlement Plan (PRI), including land 
acquisition and expropriations, and corresponding protocols. At least five months after the last resettlement 
INCOFER must deliver to CABEI a final report on the scope and achievements of the PRI considering the 
reestablishment or improvement of socioeconomic indicators and conditions of affected families. 
 
The project is located in the urban area of San Jose, where no indigenous peoples reside. The project will not affect 
any indigenous communities and, accordingly, no indigenous peoples planning documents are required (IDOM, 2020, 
p. 149)69. 
 
The project will benefit GAMs estimated population of 2.7 million through increased access to safe, reliable, and 
affordable public transport. Overall, the project is expected to generate 1,200 temporary jobs during construction and 
1,460 direct jobs during operations (700 in operations, 700 in maintenance and 60 in administration) (IDOM, 2020, p. 
227/228).  The affordability of the services is analysed closely. The new fare schedule will largely follow the existing 
levels (IDOM, 2020).  The project during its operations also improves the health of people and reduces mortality and 
morbidity rates through improved air quality, reduced noise emissions and reduced accidentality.  
 
 
 
 
67 See for details (Grutter Consulting, 2020i) 
68 https://www.bcie.org/fileadmin/bcie/projects/Estudio%20Ambiental%20Preliminar%20TRP%2015%20julio.pdf  
69 The definition of indigenous communities is based on Art 1 of the Indigenous Law 6172: 
http://www.dinadeco.go.cr/sitio/ms/3%20Tem%C3%A1tica/3.1%20Asuntos%20ind%C3%ADgenas/3.1.3%20Normativa/3.1.
3.1%20Ley%20Ind%C3%ADgena%20N%C2%B0%206172/Ley%206172%20LEY%20INDIGENA%20Y%20SU%20REGLA
MENTO.pdf

=== PAGE 56 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
Gender Assessment70 
 
Costa Rica has been committed to closing gender gaps for almost half a century. Sectors that are less traditional for 
women, such as transportation, still present significant gender gaps. In Costa Rica, nearly 60% of public transport 
users are women, yet there are very few women in decision-making positions or as employees in the sector, and only 
10% of bus drivers are women. Women have less access to driver's licenses (only 30% of licenses have been issued 
to women). This shows a greater dependence on the public transportation system 
 
The 2004 specialized survey on violence against women shows that 58% of the women surveyed reported having 
been the victim of at least one incident of physical or sexual violence at some point in their lives since the age of 16. 
The public transportation sector also concentrates high levels of violence. The presence of acts of violence against 
women inhibits them from accessing public transport services and other services provided by the use of buses, trains 
or cabs. Costa Rican women constantly experience sexual harassment, sexual violence and other types of violence 
while they are users. 
 
Based on the analysis of available information, the transport sector in Costa Rica continues to be dominated by men 
in all spheres of decision-making and the provision of transport services, including the train network. Currently, 
INCOFER has a woman as its executive president. Within the institution's board of directors, 42% (3 of 7 positions, 
including the executive president) of the positions were awarded to women and 58% to men (4 of 7 positions).  
 
Gender Action Plan 
 
The gender action plan seeks to incorporate activities that will improve women's participation as users and providers 
of train transportation services. Dimensions included in the gender action plan are (i) mobility and safety; (ii) 
accessibility and (iii) participation. Within mobility and safety it is proposed to design activities that promote the 
training of staff to prevent violent events or the implementation of communication tools and campaigns directed to 
men and women in order to prevent and attend to violence against women. Also, information shall be generated on 
women's mobility patterns, as well as their specific needs when using the train's transportation system and the 
different intermodal connections to optimize the LRT for the specific needs of women. In terms of accessibility it is 
necessary to ensure that women can access different types of services, not only when using the train or waiting 
inside the stations, but also the connection with other types of multimodal transport and other public spaces. The 
improved infrastructure should include the necessary spaces to ensure women's comfort and take into account their 
mobility patterns (accompanied, with shopping carts, or multiple bags or packages, or strollers for children). In terms 
of participations an increased participation of women in technical, managerial and at decision taking level shall be 
achieved through capacity building, mentoring and gender targets. 
  
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
CABEI can realize monitoring supervision of the works and can request the administrative, technical, legal, financial 
and accounting documentation related to the project for its eventual evaluation (Art. 9.05) 71. CABEI will receive 
periodic reports of the project status from the project executing unit. CABEI plans to realize a medium term and ex-
post evaluation in the terms set forth in Annex E of the Loan Contract72. 
 
INCOFER will submit to CABEI quarterly reports on the physical execution of the project, compliance with the 
environmental management plans and in general the compliance with the obligations of the concessionaire contained 
in the respective Contract. INCOFER will realize an external supervision of the concession contract including final 
design and supervision of works (includes environmental aspects). 
 
 
70 See for more details on this section (Grutter Consulting, 2020g) 
71 See for details (CABEI, 2019), section 2.2.4 
72 The medium term evaluation is planned for maximum 3 months after 50% of disbursement of the loan and the final ex-
post evaluation minimum 1 year and maximum 2 years after the last disbursement of CABEI.

=== PAGE 57 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
CABEI will contract directly a 3rd party verification company paid with resources of the borrower (0.4% of the loan 
amount), with field presence. The verifier will be present during the project execution and verifies inter alia the design 
products, the global budget, and will carry out evaluations of the variations between the real and the programmed 
physical and financial execution, and the respective analysis of the effect on the time of contractual completion, 
technical constructive audits, etc.; likewise it will issue monthly reports to CABEI. 
 
CABEI's supervision function will be carried out by the Credit Operations Supervision Area (USOC). The follow-up will 
be carried out through the reports issued by the verifying firm, and through review and field visits, according to the 
annual plan of supervision visits. CABEI will make at least two supervision visits per year. The follow-up of 
environmental and social aspects will be carried out by the Bank's Office of Environmental and Social Sustainability 
(OFAS), who will accompany the USOC, according to the frequency established in the annual supervision plan. 
 
Table 5: Disbursement per Line (USD)  
Line 
Loan disbursement 
Line 1:  Paraiso to Atlántico (27.4 km) 
159 MUSD 
Line 2:  Atlántico to Alajuela (21.6 km) 
127 MUSD 
Line 3:  Atlántico to Ciruelas (25.4 km) 
148 MUSD 
Line 4 Alajuela to Ciruelas (7.8 km) & Line 5 Ciruelas to El Coyol (2.7 km) 
61 MUSD 
Definitive reception of all lines and operational start 
55 MUSD 
Total 
550 MUSD 
Source: (CABEI, 2019), Table II-5 
 
Procurement 
A tender for a concession agreement is made. All procurements are the sole responsibility of the concessionary and 
not realized by CABEI or INCOFER. CABEI has to review the PPP bidding poster before the bidding starts and grant 
it’s no objection, and subsequently, CABEI must review the award to the winning concessionaire and grant it’s no 
objection as well. Project contracts and procurement for construction of the LRT are the sole responsibility of the 
concessionaire given that the design, construction, operation and maintenance risk is transferred to the private 
concessionaire. CABEI and the Government of Costa Rica have no interference in this process. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
  
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information. Annexures 12 to 15 are confidential information.

=== PAGE 58 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s)  
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable (CONFIDENTIAL) 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format (CONFIDENTIAL) 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☒  Others (please specify) – Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan Component 3 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (CONFIDENTIAL) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule 
(CONFIDENTIAL)     
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
CRVA Reports (CONFIDENTIAL) 
☒ 
Annex 18 
NMT and TOD Reports (CONFIDENTIAL) 
☒ 
Annex 19 
Summary Tender Document (CONFIDENTIAL) 
☐ 
Annex 22 
GHG emission reduction (22a) and spreadsheet (22) and Monitoring Manual (22b) 
(CONFIDENTIAL)

=== PAGE 59 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
References 
 
 References 
CABEI. (2019). Analisis de la Solicitud para el Financiamiento del: "Tren Rapid de Pasajeros (TRP) de la 
Gran Area Metropolitana (GAM)" (TRP).  
CABEI. (2019). Anexos Analsis de la Solicitud para el Financiamiento del: "Tren Rapido de Pasajeros (TRP) 
de la Gran Area Metropolitan (GAM)".  
CABEI. (2020). Contrato de Prestamo No. 2241.  
Civitas. (2016). Policy Note: Cycling in the City.  
Consejo Nacional de Planificacion. (2013). Plan GAM 2013.  
EPYPSA-SIGMA GP. (2015). Apoyo al modelo general de sectorizacion de transporte publico de San Jose, 
Costa Rica.  
EY. (2014). Mejoras practicas internacionales y lecciones aprendidas.  
GEF. (2015). Manual for Calculating Greenhouse Gas Benefits of Golobal Environment Facility 
Transportation Projects.  
GFDRR. (2011). Vulnerability, Risk Reduction, and Adpatation to Climate Change: Costa Rica.  
Government of Costa Rica. (2019). National Decarbonization Plan 2018-2050.  
Grupo de Analisis sobre Sistemas de Transporte y Movilidad. (2018). Costa Rica: Una propuesta para 
superar la crisis de movilidad actual (2018-2022).  
Grutter Consulting. (2016). Linea Base de Gases Efecto Invernadero para el Sector de Transporte de la GAM 
de San Jose, Costa Rica.  
Grutter Consulting. (2020a). NMT and TOD Report 1: Best Practices and International Experience NMT and 
TOD.  
Grutter Consulting. (2020b). NMT and TOD Report 2: Assessment of NMT and TOD Proposals and Designs in 
Costa Rica.  
Grutter Consulting. (2020c). NMT and TOD Report 3: Intervention Proposals NMT and TOD for LRT (Annex 
18c).  
Grutter Consulting. (2020d). CRVA Report 1: Risk and Vulnerability Assessment of the LRT (Annex 17a).  
Grutter Consulting. (2020e). CRVA Report 2: Adaptation Options for the LRT (Annex 17b).  
Grutter Consulting. (2020f). Impact Monitoring LRT Costa Rica (Annex 11).  
Grutter Consulting. (2020g). Gender Report and Action Plan (Annex 8).  
Grutter Consulting. (2020h). Emission Impact LRT Costa Rica (Annex 19).  
Grutter Consulting. (2020i). Summary Stakeholder Engagement (Annex 7). 
 Grutter Consulting. (2020j). GCF Statistics. 
ICE. (2019). Plan de Expansion de la Generacion Electrica 2018-2034.  
ICE. (2020). SEN 2019.

=== PAGE 60 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
IDOM. (2018). Estudio de Ingenieria de Valor del Proyecto del Tren Rapido de Pasajeros (TRP) en la Gran 
Area Metropolitana (GAM).  
IDOM. (2020). Feasibility Report; Report 3: Technical Feasibility; Memoria 17: Electrificacion y Catenaria.  
IDOM. (2020). Feasibility Study: Report 3: Technical Feasibility; Memoria 16: Integracion Urbana.  
IDOM. (2020). Feasibility Study; 2nd Report: Estudio Ambiental Preliminar.  
IDOM. (2020). Feasibility Study; 3rd Report: Memoria 24 - Expropriaciones.  
IDOM. (2020). Feasibility Study; 4th Report: Estudio Economico y Financiero; Documento 1: Analisis 
economico-financiero.  
IDOM. (2020). Feasibility Study; 4th Report: Estudio Economico y Financiero; Documento 2: Analisis Costo-
Beneficio.  
IDOM. (2020). Feasibility study; 4th Report: Estudio Economico y Financiero; Documento 3: Analisis del 
riesgos y Valor por Dinero.  
IDOM. (2020). Feasibility Study; 4th Report: Estudio Economico y Financiero; Documento 4: Tarifa tecnica y 
analisis de integracion del sistema.  
IDOM. (2020). Feasibility Study; Informe Final Rev. 2.  
Incofer. (2020). Estudios de Factibilidad Tecnica, Economico-Financiera, Ambiental, Social y de 
vulnerabilidad para la Construccion, Equipamiento, Puesta en marcha, Operacion y Mantenimiento, 
bajo la modalidad de Concesion de Obra con Servicio Publico, del TRP de la GAM .  
Incofer. (2020). Summary Train.  
INEC. (2011). Estadisticas Demograficas. 2011-2025. Proyecciones Nacionales. Población total proyectada 
al 30 de junio por grupos de edades, según provincia y cantón.  
L.C.R. Logistica S.A. (2007). Estudio de Oferta y Demanda de Transportes de la GAM: Informe Final, Tomo I.  
Mideplan. (2018). Plan Nacional de Desarrollo y de Inversion Publica 2019-2022.  
MINAE. (2015). Costa Rica's Intended Nationally Determined Contribution .  
MINAE. (2015). Plan Nacional de Energia 2015-2030.  
MINAE. (2017). PIMUS, Informe 3.  
MINAE. (2019). Costa Rica II Informe Bienal de Actualizacion ante la Convencion Marco de las Naciones 
Unidas sobre el Cambio Climatico.  
MINAE. (2019). Plan Nacional de Transporte Electrico 2018-2030.  
MOPT. (1993). Decreto 22483: reglamento sobre ls dimensiones de los derechos de via en los ferrocarriles 
nacionales disposiciones preliminares.  
MOPT. (2011). Plan Nacional de Transportes de Costa Rica 2011-2035; Transporte Publico: El transporte 
publico de pasajeros y el Proyecto de Sectorizacion.  
PEN-CONARE. (2018). Estado de la Nacion en Desarrollo Humano Sostenible.  
SYSTRA. (2016). Experiencia internacional sobre metros elevados y recomendaciones para el caso Bogota.  
World Bank. (2018). The Urban Rail Development Handbook.

=== PAGE 61 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
Zegras, P. (2009). ehavior-Based Transportation Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Under the Clean 
Development Mechanism: Transport-Efficient Development in Nanchang, China. . Transportation 
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No 2114, 38046.

=== PAGE 62 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 63 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Light Rail Transit for the Metropolitan Area of San José 
(GAM)  
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category A 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Greater Metropolitan Area of San José, Capital City of Costa 
Rica  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, February 17, 2021 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish  
Explanation on language 
Spanish is the local language in Costa Rica, and the 
documents are also disclosed in English to comply with 
GCF Information Disclosure Policy (IDP).  
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.bcie.org/en/operations/in-process-
operations/detail-in-process-operations/5741 
 
Spanish: 
https://www.bcie.org/operaciones-y-
adquisiciones/operaciones-en-proceso/detalle-
operaciones-en-proceso/5741 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
A Preliminary Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) consistent with the requirements for a 
Category A project is contained in the “Environment Effect 
investigation (EIA)” file in the online disclosure.  
Confirmation that the EIA is consistent with the 
requirement for a Category A project is subject to further 
due diligence on the Funding Proposal.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, February 17, 2021 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish  
Explanation on language 
Spanish is the local language in Costa Rica, and the 
documents are also disclosed in English to comply with 
GCF Information Disclosure Policy (IDP).

=== PAGE 64 ===
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.bcie.org/en/operations/in-process-
operations/detail-in-process-operations/5741 
 
Spanish: 
https://www.bcie.org/operaciones-y-
adquisiciones/operaciones-en-proceso/detalle-
operaciones-en-proceso/5741 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESMP, or an Environmental and Social Action Plan 
(ESAP) according to CABEI’s policies and procedures on 
Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS), consistent with 
the requirements for a Category A project is contained in 
the “Report SIEMAS” file in the online disclosure. 
Confirmation that the Report SIEMAS is consistent with the 
requirement for a Category A project is subject to further 
due diligence on the Funding Proposal. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
There is a condition in the financing approved by CABEI, for 
the private concessionaire that will be awarded for the 
implementation of the project, in which it is requested that 
a Resettlement Plan be developed and implemented if the 
project requires it. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Tuesday, June 14, 2016 
Place 
National TV1, local press and Social Media announcements 
regarding the project were made by the Presidency of the 
Republic of Costa Rica and INCOFER. Once the project is 
awarded by the government to a private concessionaire, the 
final ESIA will be developed and thereafter disclosed in 
physical locations such as INCOFER and the awarded private 
concessionaire offices.  
 
1https://www.bing.com/videos/search?q=tren+electrico+gam+incofer+2018&docid=608045379818357098&mid=0
57C8CB498D3CAD10FB9057C8CB498D3CAD10FB9&view=detail&FORM=VIRE

=== PAGE 65 ===
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
Wednesday, October 30, 2019 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, June 28, 2021 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 66 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Light Rail Transit for the Greater Metropolitan Area (GAM)* 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category A 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Greater Metropolitan Area of San José, Capital City of Costa 
Rica  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, February 17, 2021 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish 
Explanation on language 
Spanish is the local language in Costa Rica, and the 
documents are also disclosed in English to comply with 
GCF Information Disclosure Policy (IDP).  
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.bcie.org/en/operations/in-process-
operations/detail-in-process-operations/5741 
Spanish: 
https://www.bcie.org/operaciones-y-
adquisiciones/operaciones-en-proceso/detalle-
operaciones-en-proceso/5741 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a 
Category A project is contained in the “Environment 
Effect investigation (EIA)”.* 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, February 17, 2021 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish 
Explanation on language 
Spanish is the local language in Costa Rica, and the 
documents are also disclosed in English to comply with 
GCF Information Disclosure Policy (IDP).  
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.bcie.org/en/operations/in-process-
operations/detail-in-process-operations/5741 
Spanish: 
https://www.bcie.org/operaciones-y-
adquisiciones/operaciones-en-proceso/detalle-
operaciones-en-proceso/5741 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
(revised)

=== PAGE 67 ===
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category A 
project is contained in the “Report SIEMAS”.* 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Sunday, May 31, 2021 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if 
applicable)* 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Monday, May 31, 2021 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish 
Explanation on language 
Spanish is the national language of all participating 
countries. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.bcie.org/en/operations/in-process-
operations/detail-in-process-operations/5741 
Spanish: 
https://www.bcie.org/operaciones-y-
adquisiciones/operaciones-en-proceso/detalle-
operaciones-en-proceso/5741 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements of a Category A 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework” developed according to CABEI’s 
policies and procedures on Environmental and Social 
Safeguards (ESS). 
There is a condition in the financing approved by CABEI, for 
the private concessionaire that will be awarded for the 
implementation of the project, in which it is requested that 
a Resettlement Plan be developed and implemented if the 
project requires it. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Tuesday, June 14, 2016 
Place 
National TV1, local press and Social Media announcements 
regarding the project were made by the Presidency of the 
Republic of Costa Rica and INCOFER. Once the project is 
awarded by the government to a private concessionaire, the 
final ESIA will be developed and thereafter disclosed in 
physical locations such as INCOFER and the awarded private 
concessionaire offices.  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
1https://www.bing.com/videos/search?q=tren+electrico+gam+incofer+2018&docid=608045379818357
098&mid=057C8CB498D3CAD10FB9057C8CB498D3CAD10FB9&view=detail&FORM=VIRE

=== PAGE 68 ===
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
Wednesday, October 30, 2019 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Tuesday, June 29, 2021 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
*Subsequent to the disclosure of this form to the Board and active observers on 26 February
2021, the following updates have been made: The project name has been slightly modified. The
Secretariat requested the accredited entity to produce and disclose the “Environmental and
Social Management Framework”. After further due diligence on the funding proposal, the
Secretariat has confirmed that the “Environment Effect investigation (EIA)”, “Report SIEMAS”,
and the Environmental and Social Management Framework are consistent with the
requirements for a Category A project.

=== PAGE 69 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 69 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP166 
Proposal name: 
Light Rail Transit for the Greater Metropolitan Area (GAM) 
Accredited entity: 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) 
Country/(ies): 
Costa Rica 
Project/programme size:  
Large 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
This project has a relatively high greenhouse 
gas (GHG) impact thanks to electrification 
powered by > 98 per cent renewable sources.   
A continuous fiscal burden is expected by the 
government for its annual subsidy payment 
to the project during the operation of the LRT 
system. 
The project expects to play a key role in 
effecting systematic change in public 
transport, being integrated with other 
transport modes including buses, routes of 
which will be reorganized around the light 
rail transit (LRT) system.  
A selection of the concessionaire that meets 
both technical and financial requirement is 
critical given the high upfront capital 
investment required from the private sector.  
The components on non-motorized transport 
and transit-oriented components expect to 
bring behavioural change and complement 
modal shift towards public transport.  
 
The project promotes high financing leverage 
from the concessionaire and the private 
sector. The government capital contribution 
will start only after each LRT line begins 
operation, shifting the construction risk to 
the private sector. 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum VI, titled “List of proposed conditions and 
recommendations”, respectively.  
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background  
3. 
The project aims to establish a modern, fast, safe and environmentally sound electric 
light rail transit (LRT) system with 85 kilometres (km) of double tracks on five lines, which will 
be integrated with non-motorized transport (NMT) and transit-oriented development measures

=== PAGE 70 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 70 
 
 
in the metropolitan area of San José (Greater Metropolitan Area of Costa Rica (GAM)) in Costa 
Rica. The LRT system, once established, expects to transport 63 million passengers annually, 
benefitting around 2.7 million people and contributing to greenhouse gas (GHG) emission 
reductions of 7.62 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) during the 44-year 
lifetime of the project. Total project financing amounts to USD 1.8 billion, and GCF is requested 
to provide USD 250 million in loans and USD 21.3 million in grants. 
4. 
The transport sector contributed 51 per cent of Costa Rica’s GHG emissions of 10 million 
tCO2eq according to Costa Rica’s 2015 intended nationally determined contribution. The 
proposal further states that the main mode of transport in Costa Rica is via private car or car-
sharing services, accounting for more than 40 per cent of the mode share of the motorised trips, 
which increases congestion in GAM. Trends show that more passengers are shifting towards 
private means of transport or ride-sharing services due to the inadequate public transport 
service, coupled with the economic growth of the country over the past decades. Bus is the main 
form of public transport available in the region and fails to offer a network of integrated routes 
and a fare system. This means passengers often experience long travel times, for instance 
around 70 per cent longer than a trip by car, while paying costly fares for short distance trips. 
5. 
The country has established an ambitious Decarbonisation Plan to achieve a carbon-
neutral economy by 2050. Under the business-as-usual scenario, the country expects an 
increase in GHG emissions of 44 per cent by 2050 compared to 2015. However, this systemic 
change in transport sector, especially with this project at the centre of it, aims to reduce 
emissions in the country by 65 per cent.  
6. 
Costa Rica has one of the most decarbonized electrification systems, with more than 98 
per cent of its electricity generated from renewable sources. By replacing the old single-track 
rail system with a double-track light rail system powered by more than 98 per cent renewables, 
the project expects to contribute to the achievement of the 2050 net-zero emission goal of the 
country. 
7. 
The borrower of the GCF loan and recipient of the GCF grant is the Government of Costa 
Rica, represented by the Ministry of Finance (MOF). The Instituto Costarricense de Ferrocarriles 
(Incofer), the national rail authority, will also act as an executing entity (EE) of the project as a 
grantor of the concession. The project will be implemented under a public–private partnership 
(PPP) structure in which a special purpose vehicle (SPV) is 100 per cent owned by the private 
sector and is responsible for the initial capital expenditures of the project (USD 1.3 billion) with 
its own equity investment and loans from other financiers. The government contribution to this 
project will be capped at a total amount of USD 550 million, which consists of loans from GCF 
and the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI). 
8. 
The project has been assigned Category A due to the scale of the construction to be 
involved, the likely involuntary land acquisition, and the possible displacement of dwellings, 
structures and business establishments. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Component 1: LRT system (total cost: USD 1.852 billion; GCF cost: USD 250 million) 
9. 
This component seeks to finance the infrastructure for the LRT, including: 
(a) 
Infrastructure and systems worth USD 834 million with the main elements being rail 
track, rail stations, electrification, signalling, train depots and workshops, 
communication systems and the rehabilitation of affected services. This subcomponent 
also includes USD 25 million for urban integration, USD 13 million for rehabilitation of 
historic patrimony and USD 4 million for waste management; 
(b) 
Rolling stock worth USD 452 million for 78 trains at USD 5.8 million per unit;

=== PAGE 71 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 71 
 
 
(c) 
Financing charges during implementation estimated at USD 298 million; 
(d) 
Other costs of USD 268 million including acquisition of land and buildings, design and 
implementation, and indirect costs (administration, profit, contingency). This 
subcomponent also includes USD 10 million or environmental and social measures. 
10. 
The country has been exploring different options to transform the public transport 
system for decades, including restructuring the existing bus system, which is dominated by 
more than 40 private bus operators. The integrated sustainable mobility plan for GAM in Costa 
Rica, financed by the Global Environment Facility and the Inter-American Development Bank, 
concludes that an integrated transport system with an LRT combined with a bus system based 
on a re-organization and sectorization of routes is the most effective option. The government 
expects that once the LRT system is established, the competing bus routes will be redirected to 
serve as connecting lines to the areas far from the LRT lines and will ultimately introduce an 
integrated fare system.  
11. 
While the LRT is deemed as an efficient solution in terms of both (i) performance in 
speed, reliability and capacity; and (ii) its GHG emission reduction impact, it often entails high 
capital expenditures not only for civil works and rolling stocks but also for land acquisitions. 
The project will use the existing right-of-way, which is currently operated as a single track for a 
diesel train. This will reduce the investment cost of the project by 50 per cent compared to 
similar LRT project costs, making the project cost on par with high quality bus transit systems, 
while providing more reliable, convenient and sustainable transport service to the community 
with a longer lifespan of the asset. 
12. 
PPP. The project is structured as a PPP transaction and requires a concessionaire to 
cover the initial capital investment up to the operation of each of the five lines to be built. The 
structure follows a common PPP model applied to other transport projects in the region with an 
SPV that is 100 per cent owned by the private sector and takes into consideration project 
attractiveness to private sector investors, country context and risk allocation among different 
parties. The government contribution of USD 550 million to the project will be made after the 
LRT system commences operation, and the proceeds will go into the project cashflow and 
ultimately be used to repay the bridge loan that the SPV takes out during the construction 
phase. The proposed implementation structure is provided in Figure 1.  
13. 
The payment scheme is not yet defined but is subject to negotiation between the 
government and selected bidder. Two options will be proposed: (1) availability payment (Pago 
por Disponibilidad y transferencia de ingresos (PPDi)) with no demand risk; and (2) availability 
payment with a minimum income guarantee (Pago por Disponibilidad con transferencia de 
Demanda (PPDD)). The government expects to pay around USD 96–123 million for the 
respective options in the form of an annual subsidy to fill in the spread between the technical 
tariff (agreed under the concession contract) and the passenger tariff (which is set at a level 
similar to the current single bus trip rate so that the SPV meets the expected equity internal rate 
of return (IRR). Under the PPDD scenario, a higher equity IRR of 13 per cent is expected 
compared that of the PPDi model, as the SPV would bear the demand risk to a certain extent.  
14. 
The project expects to achieve an emission reduction of 6.5 million tCO2eq through the 
modal shift from passenger cars, taxis including ride-sharing services and existing bus systems 
to LRT-based public transport.

=== PAGE 72 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 72 
 
 
  Figure 1. Public–private partnership implementation structure  
 
Component 2: Urban integration with NMT and connectivity/accessibility (total cost: USD 20 
million; GCF cost: USD 20 million) 
15. 
This component is to finance:  
(a) 
Sixteen km of segregated cycle lanes connecting the LRT stations and parking stations 
with optimal lighting and safety measures; and 
(b) 
Infrastructure required to improve the connectivity/accessibility of the LRT system at 
six stations including walkways, pedestrianization, multi-modal integration with other 
modes of transport such as bus systems, and various access bridges for pedestrians and 
bicycles to avoid dangerous crossings and/or reduce walking distances and promote the 
greening of spaces. 
16. 
The GAM currently has less than 20 km of non-integrated cycle lanes. The country has 
limited experience in both NMT and transit-oriented development (TOD)/connectivity 
measures and its linkage with the mass transit system while not taking advantage of the 
potential economic and environmental benefits from them. Through the support from different 
donor agencies and funding from the GCF Project Preparation Facility, the country and 
accredited entity (AE) explored the potential impact and design of the NMT and TOD measures 
and introduced such interventions to this project. 
17. 
The improved safety and interconnection with the LRT system, including bike parking 
spaces, will promote non-motorized travel by bike. Improved accessibility of LRT stations for 
pedestrians and improved connectivity for entire trips without complex transfers to other 
means of transport (e.g. bus) will allows for a more comprehensive transformation of the public 
transport landscape of the project area. 
18. 
Through behavioural change and a contribution to the modal shift towards public 
transport, this component seeks a cumulative emission reduction of 1.08 million tCO2eq by the 
end of the project lifetime. 
Component 3: Capacity-building and gender measures (total cost: USD 1.3 million; GCF cost: USD 
1.3 million)

=== PAGE 73 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 73 
 
 
19. 
This component consists of the following activities: 
(a) 
Establish a monitoring system and monitor the impacts of LRT, last-mile connectivity 
and an NMT intervention;  
(b) 
Promote knowledge-sharing and outreach, including: (1) publications on lessons 
learned from the project with a focus on NMT/connectivity; and (2) organizing outreach 
events; and 
(c) 
Implement the gender action plan.  
20. 
Monitoring activities under component 2 is critical and will provide valuable insight on 
how the NMT and TOD measures interact with ridership and passenger satisfaction on the LRT 
system. This is to be captured using different monitoring instruments including surveys. This 
particular subcomponent will track modal shift and the impact of activities on people’s trip 
structures; identify the triggers of change in transport behaviour; and monitor the GHG and 
sustainable development impact. The data and lessons learned collected from this component 
will be used to ensure the service quality of the integrated LRT system and further pave the way 
for future expansion of NMT/TOD interventions in the project area and also for future projects 
in other countries and/or regions that are considering mass transit/public transport projects 
integrated with NMT/TOD measures. 
21. 
With only 30 per cent of driving license holders being women, dependence on public 
transport is higher among female passengers, who make up nearly 60 per cent of the total 
number of users in Costa Rica while noting the increase in use of ride-hailing services by 
women. The project has considered gender aspects in its infrastructure design to provide a safe 
and convenient transport service for female passengers such as good lighting at stations, panic 
buttons, spaces to ensure women’s comfort that take into account their mobility patterns (e.g. 
accompanied by shopping carts, multiple bags or packages, or strollers).  
22. 
Through this component, the project will utilize communication tools and campaigns 
directed at men and women in order to prevent and address violence against women and also 
will establish a rapid reporting system and complaint mechanism for reporting violence against 
women. Furthermore, the project will provide necessary trainings and other measures to 
promote women’s participation in the workforce and decision-making processes in the 
transport sector.  
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
23. 
In total, 7.62 million tCO2eq are expected to be mitigated over the lifespan of the project. 
An estimated 86 per cent of the emission reductions are due to the LRT given that the LRT runs 
on electricity, which is produced using over 98 per cent renewables in Costa Rica. Four per cent 
of the GHG reductions from the project are attributed to the fostering of cycling and micro-
mobility, and 10 per cent is due to TOD interventions. While the figure appears smaller 
compared to projects funded by GCF in other mitigation result areas such as renewables and 
forestry, the impact potential is on the high end for typical transport projects thanks to the low 
emission factor of electricity in Costa Rica. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
24. 
GCF funding is critical for the country to overcome financial barriers and limited 
experience with NMT that hinder the development of a modern, multi-modal low-carbon public

=== PAGE 74 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 74 
transport system. The LRT is the backbone that integrates all types of public transport with 
NMT and functions as a trigger of a paradigm shift in urban transportation. The LRT combined 
with NMT and connectivity measures are expected to drive a long-term behavioural shift to 
relying on public transport systems instead of private means of transport that produce high 
levels of GHG emissions and pollution. 
25.
The focus on last-mile connectivity and NMT measures also involves the collection and
reporting of standardized data monitoring, which will feed into knowledge products for future
sharing and learning. It has the potential to be scaled up and replicated in other cities in Costa
Rica and other countries in the same region.
3.3 
Sustainable development potential 
    Scale: High 
26.
The LRT is a core component of the post-COVID-19 Green Recovery Plan of Costa Rica.
27.
The project is expected to contribute significantly to Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) 3 (good health and well-being), 9 (industry, innovation and infrastructure), 11
(sustainable cities and communities) and 13 (climate action).
28.
From the environmental perspective, the operation of LRT combined with the NMT will
result in reduced air and noise pollution. In terms of economic co-benefits, the project is
expected to generate 1,200 temporary jobs during construction and 1,460 direct jobs during
operations. Reduced air pollution, reduced accidentality costs and time savings can also be
monetized to a total amount of USD 4,562 million. While all of these factors would be important,
only good health and well-being through less pollution and climate action are included in the
economic analysis. The project has an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 26 per cent.
3.4 
Needs of the recipient 
   Scale: Medium to high 
29.
Costa Rica’s net-zero goal would require a decarbonized transport sector that currently
stands as the top GHG emitter of the country. The needs of the population to access a cleaner
and more efficient form of transport and use fewer private vehicles are well-established. The
concessionality of the GCF loan is necessary to ease the fiscal burden on the Government of
Costa Rica, whose commitment to subsize the technical tariff at a rate of 60 per cent is required
to make the PPP financially viable during the concession period.
3.5 
Country ownership 
    Scale: High 
30.
The country ownership potential of this project is assessed as high. Costa Rica has been
ambitious in its climate goal. It is aiming for a decarbonized economy with net-zero emissions in
2050. The transport sector is the largest GHG emitter in Costa Rica; it contributed 51 per cent of
the country’s GHG emissions in 2015. The need to decarbonize the transport sector is reflected
in various national development plans and strategies, including its nationally determined
contribution, National Decarbonization Plan 2018–2050, and the National Transport Plan for
Costa Rica 2011–2035. The country ownership is also evidenced by the government’s
commitment to subsidize at a rate of 60 per cent to make the LRT financially profitable despite
its fiscal difficulties in recent years.
31.
The proposal has been developed in consultation with relevant stakeholders, including
government agencies, development partners, academia and civil society. In addition, the project
has a strategy and mechanism to continuously involve relevant stakeholders during the
construction phase.

=== PAGE 75 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 75 
 
 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
32. 
The efficiency and effectiveness potential of this proposal is considered high.  
33. 
The cost per tCO2eq reduced in terms of GCF funding is estimated to be USD 36 over the 
USD 271.3 million in total GCF financing and USD 2.79 over the USD 20 million in GCF grant 
financing for the NMT/TOD component. The economic analysis calculates EIRR and net present 
value over a 30-year period, which appears to be appropriate for projects of this nature. The 
economic analysis shows a cost-benefit ratio of 3.25 and an EIRR of 26.1 per cent.  
34. 
The LRT component is co-financed with a concessional loan from GCF (USD 250 million) 
and CABEI (USD 300 million), and the remaining 70 per cent of its costs will be covered through 
the leveraged private sector capital. This translates to a total leverage ratio of 5.9 and a private 
sector leverage ratio of 4.8 if the project successfully pulls in private capital.  
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
35. 
Project background. The project involves upgrading the existing single-track, diesel 
passenger train system into a state-of-the-art, mostly dual-track, electric passenger train 
system. The project consists of three components, namely: (1) an LRT system; (2) urban 
integration with NMT and connectivity/accessibility components; and (3) capacity-building and 
gender measures. The LRT component will be carried out on the existing right of way of the 
national railway network, which currently connects the cities of San José, Alajuela, Cartago and 
Heredia, in a corridor which extends approximately 84.85 km. The works involve (i) 
rehabilitation and expansion of bridges over more than 50 water channels; (ii) the 
construction/remodeling of 47 stations, including 10 intermodal stations; (iii) construction of 
ancillary facilities such as a central workshop, 4 courtyards/garages, an administrative building, 
24 substations and catenary and power supply; (iv) relocation of public services; and (v) 
drainage and road connectivity works. Component 2 will involve improvements to the 
connectivity and accessibility of areas around the stations, including the construction of 16 km 
of cycle lanes, parking facilities for cyclists, improved walkways, pedestrian access bridges, 
installation of security cameras, and greening of spaces. The environmental and social co-
benefits of the project include reduced air pollution as a result of reduced particulate matter 
emissions in the operation of the electric trains. The inclusion of the NMT and last-mile 
connectivity components are expected to improve safety and security to pedestrians and 
cyclists that will use the system. The project is also expected to reduce noise pollution and 
enhance public access to a safe, reliable and affordable transportation system. 
36. 
Environmental and social risk category. The project has been assigned Category A 
since it entails activities with potential significant adverse environmental and/or social risks 
and impacts that, individually or cumulatively, are diverse, irreversible, or unprecedented. 
These are mainly due to the scale of the construction to be involved, the likely involuntary land 
acquisition and the possible displacement of dwellings, structures and business establishments. 
Most of the adverse impacts will be experienced during the construction stage and are related to 
traffic disturbances and temporary access restrictions to properties, potential relocation of 
utilities, cutting of trees in the rights-of way, increased generation of noise and air pollution, as 
well as occupational hazards to workers and community health and safety. The Secretariat 
confirms the environmental and social risk categorization and that the project is within the risk 
accreditation level of the AE. 
37. 
Safeguards instruments. A PES was submitted by the AE, which provided an initial 
assessment of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts of the project. A more

=== PAGE 76 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 76 
 
 
formal environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) will have to be prepared by the 
future concessionaire when the detailed engineering design has been specified. The ESIA will be 
the basis for the issuance of the environmental license by the National Environmental Technical 
Secretariat. The AE evaluated the project based on its System for the Identification, Evaluation 
and Mitigation of Environmental and Social Risks, its tool for identifying potential 
environmental and social risks. The due diligence of the AE found gaps in the PES, for which an 
environmental and social action plan (ESAP) was developed and submitted. Since the detailed 
ESIA cannot be undertaken yet (pending the engagement of the concessionaire, which will 
undertake the detailed engineering design of the project along with the ESIA study), an 
environmental and social management framework (ESMF) that provides guidance on 
undertaking the assessment and development of mitigation measures was also prepared. 
38. 
Status of compliance with the GCF environmental and social safeguards (ESS) 
standards. The following discussion presents the status of the project’s compliance with GCF 
ESS standards. 
(a) 
ESS 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social impacts and 
risks. A preliminary environmental and social assessment through the PES, an ESAP and 
an ESMF were prepared. The ESMF has specified the scope and outlined the processes 
and steps for the conduct of the detailed ESIA simultaneously with the detailed 
engineering design preparation. The scope of the ESIA will cover the requirements of 
the country, the AE and the GCF. The ESIA will include, among other things, the baseline 
conditions, assessment of project alternatives, identification of potential direct, indirect, 
induced, long-term and cumulative impacts including from associated facilities, and the 
measures to avoid, minimize and mitigate the identified risks and impacts and 
compensate for residual impacts. Frameworks for stakeholder engagement and the 
establishment of grievance redress mechanisms have also been included. 
(b) 
ESS 2: Labour and working conditions. Based on the ESMF, the country’s legal 
framework on labour and working conditions is fully at par with the International 
Labour Organization standards. Nevertheless, there is a small risk of possible non-
compliance from contractors and subcontractors as regards health and safety of 
workers during construction activities. Nevertheless, the ESMF recommends the 
following measures: (i) incorporation of clauses in contractors’ contracts about the strict 
observance of labour standards; (ii) provision of labour management guidelines to 
contractors that highlight critical compliance areas/aspects; and (iii) periodic audits of 
labour and working conditions by project management. The risk of non-compliance and 
the adequacy of these measures will be further validated and refined in the ESIA. 
(c) 
ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution control and prevention. There are 
sufficient laws in the country on the abstraction and industrial use of water. The use of 
water in the project will be covered by permits, hence the risk of non-compliance with 
the regulation is low. In terms of pollution, the project will likely involve the generation 
of noise and dust, including fine particulate matter during excavation works and 
demolition of existing concrete structures. The ESMF provides a list of measures to 
minimize and mitigate impacts of these on the air quality. These will also be validated 
and further refined in the ESIA. 
(d) 
ESS 4: Community health, safety and security. The risks involved under this standard 
include exposure of residents along the railway to physical hazards during construction 
as well as the risks associated with the influx of labour and economic migrants into their 
communities (e.g. pressure on living space, spread of diseases and potential increase in 
criminality and gender-based violence, including sexual exploitation, abuse and 
harassment risks and cultural conflicts). The ESMF suggests requiring contractors to 
provide accommodation for their workers in the worker camps; always secure 
construction areas; install barriers and proper signage; and provide safe and well-

=== PAGE 77 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 77 
 
 
lighted passageways and road crossings for the public. These risks and measures will 
also be further assessed and refined in the ESIA. 
Earthquake hazard is also particularly significant in Costa Rica for large public 
infrastructure due to its tectonic profile. Fire hazards have also been historically 
significant. These resulted in the adoption of stricter codes in the country. The ESMF 
suggests strict compliance with the National Fire Protection Association codes in the 
design and operations of public places and systems and with Costa Rica’s seismic code 
and good international industry practice in the structural design of buildings, bridges 
and elevated railway tracks. 
(e) 
ESS 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. The project will involve right-
of-way recovery and additional land acquisition for the expansion of tracks, stations and 
the construction of other facilities, including accessibility and connectivity 
infrastructure around the stations. Initial estimates show that the project will affect and 
potentially displace around 215 persons who are in the right-of-way of the train system. 
To address the potential involuntary resettlement impacts of these land acquisitions, the 
ESMF includes a resettlement policy framework that requires and will guide the 
preparation of resettlement plans. The requirement for resettlement plans including 
land acquisition and expropriation, economic restoration and land donations (as 
applicable) is also included in the ESAP.  
(f) 
ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources. There are no officially declared protected wilderness areas within the 
influence area of the project. The nearest protected area is the Cerros de la Carpintera 
Protection Zone. However, the existing railroad passes through patches or sometimes 
long stretches of vegetated areas which are habitat to some wild species. These places 
may also be part of a network of thickets where some birds and small mammals roam. 
The project will comply with the country’s permit requirements for vegetation clearings. 
The ESMF suggests to further study the biodiversity significance of these areas and 
explore options of conserving and maintaining these areas as part of the connected 
network of green spaces/parks. It also suggests developing wildlife crossings. The ESAP 
also provides for the preparation and implementation of the forestry resource 
management plan. It also requires the EE to ensure the contractor develops and 
implements a protection, rescue and resettlement plan for the fauna when construction 
works are underway. These measures will be validated and firmed up in the ESIA. 
(g) 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous peoples. In its ESMF, the AE 
states that the project will not affect any indigenous peoples’ territories or reserve 
areas. There may, however, be a possibility that small communities of migrant 
indigenous people may be present in the informal settlements along the railway. This 
will be validated in the development of the ESIA; if communities of indigenous peoples 
are present and project impacts on their socioeconomic situations are significant, the AE 
will include a separate development plan in the environment and social management 
plan (ESMP) to address those impacts. 
(h) 
ESS 8: Cultural heritage. The project will include enhancements of cultural heritage 
structures along the railway line. Cultural heritage buildings and sites will be identified 
and inventoried during the conduct of the ESIA. The project will consult the National 
Museum of Costa Rica as to the significance of these sites and structures, if any, as well 
as the conservation plan to be undertaken. A chance finds procedure including a cultural 
heritage plan will be developed if structures of cultural or religious significance will be 
affected. A cultural heritage policy framework is included in the ESMF. 
39. 
Implementation arrangements. The AE shall administer the proceeds to be disbursed 
by the GCF for the implementation of the project. The EE – Incofer (Costa Rica’s state-owned rail

=== PAGE 78 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 78 
 
 
authority) – will have the legal personality, own the assets and have the project supervisory 
role. Project implementation will be the responsibility of the SPV that will be established by the 
concessionaire. Incofer will ensure compliance with the obligations of the concessionaire, 
including compliance with the ESMPs. On the other hand, the AE will conduct biannual 
supervision missions in addition to an external supervision entity that will be engaged to 
validate the overall commitments for the project, including environmental and social aspects. 
40. 
Stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanism. Several meetings were 
held with various stakeholders, as indicated in Annex 7 (Summary stakeholder engagement). 
The PES also included a preliminary awareness-raising strategy and awareness-raising 
mechanism for stakeholders that will be updated and detailed in the ESIA according to the 
environmental regulations The ESIA shall further document the disclosure and reporting 
process with stakeholders. The EE is also required to design and implement a citizen 
participation plan, relevant consultation plan and a complaints mechanism to be approved by 
the AE as part of the ESAP. The ESMF also provides an initial draft of the stakeholder 
engagement plan (SEP) at the inception of the ESIA study and can use such draft to guide the 
consultations. The ESIA will include a detailed SEP in accordance with national environmental 
regulations, the ESAP and the ESMF (which also includes an information disclosure policy 
framework, stakeholder engagement policy framework and grievance redress policy 
framework). 
41. 
The AE has an existing grievance redress mechanism at the institutional level. The ESAP 
and the ESMF also provide for a grievance redress mechanism that will be set up at the 
commencement of the construction activities. Furthermore, in line with the GCF Indigenous 
Peoples Policy, the GCF indigenous peoples’ focal point will also be available to local 
communities for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made. 
4.2 
Gender policy  
42. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the Gender Policy of the GCF. 
43. 
The gender assessment was conducted using desk reviews as well as through 
consultations with various stakeholders including government institutions at national, regional, 
and local levels, women’s organizations and groups, as well as private sector institutions and 
civil society organizations (CSOs). The assessment demonstrates the existence of an enabling 
environment to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment in Costa Rica. Costa Rica 
has regulatory frameworks and a national policy for effective equality between women and 
men, which focuses on coordination among the various institutions to ensure (i) progress in 
employment, health and education; (ii) strategic action on equal rights and time, wealth and 
power distribution; as well as (iii) expansion of access to opportunities for women in various 
sectors including public transport and climate change. Despite the existence of an enabling 
environment, positive developments and gender equality achievements, women are still 
underrepresented in decision-making processes and positions at all levels; women do not enjoy 
significant roles in the transport sector and other less traditional sectors. A case in point is that 
around 60 per cent of women are users of public transport yet there are only a few women in 
decision-making positions and as employees in the sector. Ten per cent of bus driver positions 
are held by women, and the percentage is much lower for cab drivers (and even lower in the 
metropolitan area (one assistant to the driver)). In terms of transport facilities, as women tend 
to use public transport more than men and are responsible for taking children to school and 
caregiving tasks, trips are usually short in terms of time and distance. Few women have driver’s 
licenses so they do not drive their own cars. They also use the train less often than men, but the 
reasons for this are not understood yet. Inferences from other contexts indicate that women 
choose to use certain modes of transport based on the level of convenience between stations,

=== PAGE 79 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 79 
 
 
frequency of travel and safety inside trains and stations. Given such considerations, women use 
cabs, buses, Uber and bicycles much more than men. The assessment indicates that overall, 
there is insufficient information to understand the differentiated preferences and needs of 
women and men in the sector. 
44. 
The assessment further notes that (i) the unequal access and position of women is 
perpetuated by norms and practices that dictate that women should work only if their partner’s 
salary is not sufficient; and (ii) poverty, particularly among female-headed households, also 
contributes to inequality in access to opportunities and decision-making. Women in Costa Rica 
spend more than twice as much time as men on unpaid domestic work, with food and care work 
demanding the greatest investment of women’s time. This results in women having less time to 
find and keep a job. It is also noted that COVID-19 has resulted in women (i) not working as a 
result of scarcity of job opportunities, and if they are working, it seems to be in low productivity 
sectors; and (ii) having to leave their jobs to take on more household-related responsibilities 
than men. In addition, the wage gap between women and men for the same jobs is prevalent in 
all sectors and for all types of jobs in both the public and private sectors. While employment, 
wage gaps, and access to transport and similar sectors constitute significant barriers, at the 
same time the public transport sector is where women face significant levels of violence as 
users of the service. Furthermore, there are limitations in the generation of data to demonstrate 
and substantiate the magnitude of the problem and not enough information about women’s 
safety and experiences on public transport. This is despite the fact that efforts are underway to 
raise awareness about the implications of sexual harassment prevalent in such services. 
45. 
The AE has provided a gender action plan and therefore complies with the requirement 
of the Gender Policy of the GCF. The gender action plan provides activities that address the 
challenges faced by women in the transport sector and includes indicators and timelines for the 
implementation of each activity. Each indicator will be measured against its baseline, and 
targets are presented in a sex-disaggregated manner. All activities have timelines set as year 5 
with corresponding budgets. The National Institute for Women (INAMU), as the expert 
institution on gender issues at both the local and national levels, has a crucial role to play in the 
implementation of planned activities outlined in the gender action plan in close collaboration 
with other government institutions, ministries and CSOs. 
46. 
Based on the gender assessment and challenges identified particularly in the transport 
sector, the project has developed the gender action plan with components and activities that 
aim to address the gender-related gaps in the transport sector. These activities target women as 
both transport service users and providers. The activities included in the gender action plan 
speak to ensuring mobility and safety by gaining an understanding of gender-differentiated 
mobility patterns and preferences through surveys and evaluations; providing non-motorized 
mobility services; preventing violence against women in public spaces and train services 
through the development of applications for rapid reporting systems and smartphones that 
allow for reporting violence against women; and ensuring women’s access to services through 
gender-responsive infrastructure design. The project will also create direct and indirect jobs for 
women in the public sector, especially in trains, while at the same time creating an enabling 
environment for women to engage in all decision-making levels.  
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall proposal assessment (medium to high risk) 
47. 
The GCF is requested to provide USD 271.3 million for financing electric LRT and 
investing in the promotion of NMT. The project cost estimated by the AE is USD 1,852 million. 
The AE and GCF are providing USD 571million combined; however, financing sources (equity 
and debt) for USD 1,302 million are yet to be determined. This will be arranged by a private

=== PAGE 80 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 80 
 
 
concessionaire to be chosen through a bidding process. The final financial structure will be 
defined once the project has been awarded.  
48. 
The AE has indicated that the project construction will be financed by a private 
concessionaire through bridge loans. The GCF loan of USD 250 million to the Government of 
Costa Rica will be used to repay the bridge loan. The GCF grant of USD 20 million is for 
NMT/connectivity measures, and additional grant of USD 1.3 million is for capacity-building. 
The AE proposal to use GCF financing to repay the bridge loan after the construction of the 
project is reflected in the funding proposal. Alternatively, GCF may consider financing the 
project during the construction stage with a pre-disbursement condition of achieving financial 
close (fund tie-up for the entire project cost).  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute (medium risk)  
49. 
The AE, CABEI, is the regional development entity and has experience investing in the 
region over five decades. From 2010 to 2018, CABEI approved projects totalling USD 13 billion, 
of which USD 3.3 billion was used in Costa Rica. CABEI has realized various PPPs in Costa Rica 
and in the region; these investments, although of relatively smaller size, have given CABEI 
experience in financing long-term projects.  
50. 
The EE is Incofer, which is a state-owned rail authority that operates the country’s 
railway network. A capacity assessment of Incofer conducted by CABEI concluded that the 
institution is in full capacity to oversee the concession contract of the project. While Incofer has 
experience in running its rail system, its experience in constructing a new electric LRT is 
limited. The EE will receive the technical support from AE to carry out its tasks.   
4.3.3. 
Project-specific risks (high risk) 
51. 
Fund tie-up: The project is large with an expected cost of USD 1,873 million, of which the 
sources for 70 per cent financing are not yet identified and will be finalized only after the award 
of the project to the private concessionaire. It may not be possible to award the concession 
before the execution of funded activity agreement (FAA) stage. 
52. 
Bankability of the concession: Currently, the terms of the concession agreement are not 
available. With regard to demand risk, the proportion of risk to be assumed between the 
concessionaire and the government is yet to be determined. In addition, potential changes in the 
tariff and its influence on the PPP contract have not yet been decided. The electricity supply and 
pricing will also be negotiated later. These aspects will affect the annual availability payment of 
the concessionaire. The AE has indicated that it will not manage, supervise or audit the 
concession execution. Instead, it will contract a specialized third-party company on behalf of the 
EE to assist in the PPP project design and in structuring the PPP transaction. An adequate tariff 
which makes LRT attractive, a long-term agreement between the electricity supplier and 
concessionaire at stable prices, currency risk management and sound structuring are necessary 
to improve the bankability of the project. 
53. 
Impact risk: The AE has estimated the project’s mitigation impact at 7.6 million tonnes 
of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2eq) over the project lifetime of 44 years. However, as per 
the logical framework in the funding proposal, the AE has a final impact target of only 0.1 
MtCO2eq (1.4 per cent of the total presented impact) as the AE will monitor and report to GCF 
the project impact during the six-year implementation period only. Hence, the GCF will not 
receive reporting on the complete ex-post impact of the project.   
54. 
Effective use of GCF funds in case of delay: Approx. 92 per cent of the GCF disbursement 
is projected occur in year 4 of implementation period; the project requires an approval by the 
Congress of Costa Rica to start the tender process for the PPP. The credit for financing the state 
contribution to the concession (financed through CABEI) is being discussed in Congress, and the

=== PAGE 81 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 81 
 
 
funding proposal has not provided any target date. General elections are scheduled to be held in 
February 2022, which may affect the approval and/or implementation of the project. In case of 
(i) delays in approval at the government level; (ii) the tie-up of funds; and (iii) implementation 
by the concessionaire, GCF-approved funds will remain committed but unutilized. Therefore, 
the term sheet includes a covenant that the concessionaire to be selected by the government 
shall achieve financial close for the project cost within 2 and a half years of the effectiveness of 
the subsidiary agreement. The concessionaire’s failure to achieve financial close will constitute a 
Major change.  
55. 
Financial viability of the project: The ratio for sharing demand risk is still to be 
determined. For the model where the concessionaire takes part in the demand risk, an FIRR of 
13.5 per cent is assumed by investors, while for the model where the demand risk is assumed by 
the government, an FIRR of 10 per cent is estimated. The AE expects that the project will be able 
to recover 65 per cent of operational costs or 40 per cent of total costs through tariffs. The 
remaining part is covered by governmental subsidies (USD110 million annually) during the 
concession contract of 35 years. Therefore, the government’s continued ability to subsidize the 
project is important for the viability of the project.  
56. 
Credit risk: GCF is providing a sovereign loan to the Government of Costa Rica (Moody’s 
B2). The credit profile of the country remains weak due to increased funding risks as a result of 
pandemic-related economic and fiscal shocks. However, a highly concessional GCF loan with a 
long-term repayment profile is linked to the balance sheet of Costa Rica and reduces the 
financial burden for the country.  
57. 
Concessionality: GCF is requested to provide a highly concessional loan to the 
Government of Costa Rica. This concessionality is expected to result in a lower tariff to the end 
users. However, the concessionality benefits to the end user will also be affected by the project 
cost and the cost of other financing. The project cost includes a financing cost of USD 298 
million, which is 16 per cent of the total cost. It is recommended that the AE perform a prudent 
check on the project cost and co-financing pricing as part of its due diligence in the 
implementation of the project. 
4.3.4. 
Compliance risk (medium risk)  
58. 
 The recipient country, Costa Rica, is not subject to United Nations Security Council 
restrictive measures.  
59. 
The AE will implement the project jointly with the Government of Costa Rica, acting 
through Incofer and MOF (acting as EEs).  
60. 
The AE has performed the capacity assessment and determined that the EEs pose a low 
risk when it comes to their ability to manage money laundering (ML), terrorist financing (TF) 
and prohibited practices (PP). Office of Risk Management and Compliance (ORMC)/Compliance 
notes that the Executive President, Vice President and all Board Members of INCOFER are 
politically exposed persons acting in their official capacity. 
61. 
The AE has performed the risk assessment for the project and determined it is at low 
risk for ML, TF and PP. As a risk mitigation measure, the AE ensures that loan agreements with 
EEs contain provisions where borrowers are required to comply with the CABEI anti-fraud, 
anti-corruption and other PP policies.  
62. 
ORMC/Compliance has conducted a review of the project in accordance with the 
relevant GCF Board approved policies and does not find any material issue or deviation with 
respect to compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding proposal, the 
ORMC/Compliance Team has determined a risk rating of ‘medium’ and has no objection to this 
request proceeding to the next steps for processing.

=== PAGE 82 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 82 
 
 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
63. 
In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal limits is not material.  
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
64. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment 
Rationale 
Overall programme 
Medium-
high 
The GCF loan of USD250million to the 
Government of Costa Rica will be used for 
repaying the bridge loan of the concessionaire. 
Approx. 70 per cent (USD1.3billion) of the total 
financing and the final financial structure have 
not been confirmed. The GCF will receive 
reporting on only 1.4 per cent of the total impact 
envisaged during the implementation period.  
The AE has a limited role in the concession 
execution process. The government capacity to 
execute the concession and finance approx. 
USD110million per annum for 35 years will be 
critical for the successful and sustainable 
implementation of the project. 
Accredited entity/executing 
entity capability 
medium 
Project-specific execution 
high 
GCF portfolio concentration  
low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary  
65. 
CABEI is the AE of this project. The AE shall administer the GCF proceeds to be 
disbursed by the GCF for the implementation of the project. CABEI will make at least two 
supervision visits per year. 
66. 
The EE is Incofer. A capacity assessment of Incofer was conducted by CABEI. The 
assessment concluded that the institution is in full capacity to oversee the concession contract 
for the LRT and NMT. The MOF is the loan recipient, and the Government of Costa Rica, 
represented by the MOF, is thus also an EE.  
67. 
Incofer will manage component 3 and does not administer any funds of component 1 
and 2. MOF will administer these funds and make payments to the SPV at the instruction of 
Incofer. However, Incofer is responsible to CABEI as an EE. As an implementing agency, Incofer 
supervises and approves all detailed engineering designs for components 1 and 2, supervises 
the implementation of the construction activities and issues the construction acceptance 
certificate and operation permit. 
68. 
Project implementation will be the responsibility of the SPV, which is established by the 
concessionaire of the train under the supervision of Incofer. The private concessionaire will be 
defined through the tender. The final financial structure of the SPV will be defined once the 
project has been awarded to the private concessionaire. 
69. 
The use of GCF proceeds is for refinancing the bridge loan. CABEI and GCF resources are 
disbursed based on the constructed LRT lines of the concessionaire. The sovereign loan given by 
GCF and CABEI to the Government of Costa Rica is used as a counterpart fund of the government 
for the concession contract. As such CABEI does not manage, supervise or audit the concession 
execution.

=== PAGE 83 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 83 
 
 
70. 
Incofer will submit quarterly reports to CABEI on the physical execution of the project, 
compliance with the environmental management plans and, in general, compliance with the 
obligations of the concessionaire contained in the respective contract.  
71. 
All procurements are the sole responsibility of the concessionaire and not realized by 
CABEI or Incofer. Project contracts and procurement for construction of the LRT are the sole 
responsibility of the concessionaire given that the design, construction, operation and 
maintenance risk is transferred to the private concessionaire. CABEI and the Government of 
Costa Rica have no interference in this process. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting  
72. 
As a mitigation project, the intervention is foreseen to result in an overall GHG emission 
reduction amounting to 7,622,805 tCO2eq over a lifetime period of 44 years. The estimated GCF 
cost per tCO2eq removed is USD 36. Moreover, by the end of the project implementation period, 
emissions of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and nitrogen oxides (NOx) are expected to be 
reduced by 5.64 and 226 tonnes, respectively, while an additional 1,460 green jobs will be 
created in the target area. 
73. 
The Theory of Change adequately explains how change is understood to come about. 
The ‘if, then, because’ logic is appropriately formulated in the diagram as provided in the 
funding proposal, and the stated results, outcomes and interlinkages are defined in a manner 
that is adequately supportive of meeting the ultimate project goal.  
74. 
Overall, the logical framework has been found to meet the requirements in the results 
management framework and performance measurement framework. The final version of the 
logical framework has been designed with the relevant details, including reporting on the 
appropriate impact and outcome indicators for mitigation as well as the social, environmental 
and economic co-benefit indicator. The project-level results are sufficiently aligned with the 
fund-level impact and outcomes. That is expected to provide a sufficient basis for measuring the 
desired results. 
75. 
The arrangements for monitoring, evaluation and reporting in section E.7 and Annex 11 
of the funding proposal are adequate. The implementation timetable has been provided in a 
format that would enable progress assessment during the implementation period, with 
deliverables properly integrated to determine implementation performance in concrete terms.  
4.6 
Legal assessment  
76. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) was signed with the AE on 6 September 
2017 and it became effective on 16 November 2017. 
77. 
The AE has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and that it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. It is 
recommended that, prior to the submission of the funding proposal to the Board: (a) the AE 
obtains all its internal approvals; and (b) GCF receives a certificate or legal opinion from the AE 
in form and substance satisfactory to GCF confirming that all final internal approvals by the AE 
have been obtained and that it has the authority and capacity to implement the project.  
78. 
The proposed project will be implemented in Costa Rica, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, the risks of which need to be 
further assessed. The GCF Secretariat sent a response to the observations by the Government of 
Costa Rica on the draft of the agreement on privileges and immunities and background on 28 
February 2019.

=== PAGE 84 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add. 02 
Page 84 
 
 
79. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant privileges 
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after 
GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country, or 
has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
80. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Submission by the AE to GCF of a certificate or legal opinion, in a form and substance 
satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval, confirming 
that the AE has obtained all final internal approvals needed by it and has the capacity 
and authority to implement the proposed project; 
(b) 
Signature of the FAA in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 
180 days from the date of Board approval or the date the AE has provided a certificate 
or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all final internal approvals, whichever is 
later; and 
(c) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 85 
 
 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP166 
Proposal name: 
Light Rail Transit for the Greater Metropolitan Area (GAM) 
Accredited entity: 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) 
Country/(ies): 
Costa Rica 
Project/programme size:  
Large 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1. 
This is a transport infrastructure project, which will be implemented along the central 
east–west axle of the larger urban zone of San José, Costa Rica, known as Gran Area 
Metropolitana (GAM). The transport infrastructure will be developed as a light rail transit (LRT) 
system along the existing right of way of an old, slow, single-track, diesel-fueled rail system. The 
LRT, with 85 km of double tracks on five trainlines is expected to transport annually about 63 
million passengers and benefit around 2.7 million inhabitants or 52 per cent of Costa Rica’s 
population in the metropolitan area of San José. The energy used to power the LRT will come 
from Costa Rica’s low-carbon electricity grid; Costa Rica produces more than 98 per cent of its 
electricity by renewable energy sources and has surplus capacity and a grid emission factor (EF) 
of 0.015 kg carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2eq)/kWh. A key characteristic of the LRT system is 
that it is designed to be the backbone of an integrated public transport system, with proper 
implementation of modern principles of urban development, including the integration of the 
existing bus-based public transport system, non-motorized transportation (NMT), with 
segregated bicycle lanes and improved pedestrian walkways. The basic caveat of the 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction that will be delivered by this project will be based on 
not only the replacement of the baseline rail system with the low carbon powered LRT, but also 
the shift of passengers from baseline modes (public and private) to the LRT. The modal shift 
measures as set out in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change baseline 
and monitoring methodology for LRT and bus rapid transit (BRT) projects have been adopted 
for the estimation of the reduction in GHG emissions that will be delivered by this project.  
2. 
In the absence of this project, the baseline transport modes within the boundary of the 
proposed LRT project, as listed in 2017, are composed of private cars (42 per cent); public 
buses (41 per cent); taxis (9 per cent); motorcycles (7 per cent); and the old single-track diesel 
rail (<1 per cent). Over the period 2007–2017, use of public buses declined from 64 to 41 per 
cent while private car and ride-hailing services mode share increased during the same period. 
These changes in mode share have continued in the same direction to the present. The decrease 
in the share of public transportation (especially public buses) has been attributed to the very 
inefficient and poorly maintained public buses, operated by small-scale holders, who have been 
allocated corridor contracts and who do not have the financial wherewithal to properly 
maintain and add new and modern capacity to the old fleet as frequently as needed. Moreover, 
roads are very frequently congested, which results in higher than usual travel times and cost of 
travel. It is important to point out that, during the historical period (2007–2020), NMT has 
played only a marginal role in the transport mode share in the project area, with the lack of 
cycling infrastructure and the associated safety concerns being the main reasons.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 86 
 
 
 
 
3. 
When the LRT is built and commissioned, it is expected that some of the passengers who 
use the baseline modes listed above will shift to the use of the modern, fast and convenient LRT 
as the single-line rail will be decommissioned and replaced with the LRT. It is also stated that all 
the public bus concessions on routes that are parallel to the proposed LRT will be cancelled 
immediately the LRT is operational. Passengers using the baseline modes along routes parallel 
to the LRT will also shift to the use of the LRT when the project becomes operational. There are 
indications that at the start of the LRT operation, modal shift from the public bus system to the 
LRT may not be as comprehensive as it might be. This is because bus lines are currently not very 
well interconnected. Each operator has a concession for their line and all buses drive to the city 
Centre, where passengers can change to another bus line to get closer to their destination. Bus 
lines are connected with the current rail system, allowing the user to change from the bus to the 
train and vice-versa only at some specific stops. 
4. 
The restructuring of the existing (baseline) public bus routes, aimed at engendering 
seamless travel between the new LRT and public buses, is currently being carried out. The 
output of the ongoing route restructuring exercise is expected to be available fairly soon after 
the commissioning and start of operation of the LRT. The implementation of such a plan will 
enhance bus–bus and bus–LRT connections. Since the bus routes are owned by private 
operators, the cancellation of the public bus routes, which are parallel to the LRT routes, and the 
restructuring of the remaining bus routes must be carried out in such a way that will avoid 
public protest or social disruption, which may be generated if care is not taken; private bus 
operators in Costa Rica are usually locked in a competitive position, disagree on common 
approaches and resist changes in their modus operandi. Although no official information on 
how the restructuring will be implemented was available in the materials reviewed by the 
independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP), it is understood that owners of the routes that 
will be cancelled are being engaged by government and that there is ongoing work on an 
integrated electronic fare system that would allow the use of the same ticket when switching 
modes. These developments, which will be carried out by Costa Rica’s Ministry of Public Works 
and Transport, are outside the scope of the proposed project. Therefore, some of the modal 
shifts that will be engendered by the restructuring of the public bus routes may not be captured 
by the ex-post survey as some of the linkages (bus–bus and bus–LRT) will not exist before the 
LRT is built and hence not be considered in the responses of the users of the LRT. Thus, the 
fractional shares of the modal shifts may appear to be lower than they will be in real terms, 
leading to an underestimation of the implication of modal shift. Since this will deliver baseline 
GHG emission estimates, it can be concluded that the calculation of GHG emission reduction will 
be conservative.  
5. 
The project reduces GHG emissions through the LRT itself, the NMT and last-mile 
connectivity activities. A brief description of each of the emission reduction pathways is 
described in Box A below:  
BOX A: GHG EMISSION REDUCTION PATHWAYS FOR THE LRT PROJECT 
a. 
LRT emission reduction 
GHG emissions are reduced by the LRT through modal shift.  A key GHG emission reduction 
estimation methodology/approach in this submission is the determination of the transport modes 
that travelers using the LRT would have used if the project activities were not implemented (i.e., 
in the absence of the LRT transport mode). The modal shifts that will occur in each operational 
year of the LRT will be determined by sample surveys, where travelers on the LRT will be 
questioned on the way they would have made their present journey (from start to finish) before 
the LRT mode was available. Information on baseline modes that would have been utilized by LRT 
passengers (including the type, fuel utilized in the baseline, average travel times on each mode in 
the baseline, modal average EF using Costa Rican data) will be established from the survey with 
up-to-date local data being used for the baseline calculation. In addition, using in-country data 
through a Well-to-Wheel (WTW) analysis, emissions per km (pkm) for each of the modes present

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 87 
 
 
 
 
in the project boundary are established. GHG emissions Wheel to Well (WTW) per passenger km 
(pkm) for the modes present in the baseline in GAM in 2019 is presented in Figure 1. 
Figure 1: GHG emissions WTW per pkm of transport modes in GAM, 2019 (gCO2eq/pkm) 
Abbreviations: WTW = Well-to-Wheel; pkm = passenger-kilometer.  
Source: (Grutter Consulting, 2020h)1; all emission factors based on localized data. 
Essential elements of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change clean 
development mechanism methodology ACM0016 “Mass Rapid Transit Projects”2 were utilized in 
developing the GHG emission reduction that will be delivered by this LRT project. The key 
elements of the GHG emissions calculation include baseline emissions – determination of the 
mode share of travel that would have been used by passengers using the LRT in a particular year; 
the GHG emissions WTW per pkm for each mode available in the base year and the total number 
of passengers transported by the LRT in that year; project emissions – electricity consumed by 
the LRT in that year; and the Costa Rican grid EF; leakage emissions are assumed to be zero. 
(i) Baseline GHG emissions 
Baseline emissions are then calculated based on the number of passengers, the mode share, the 
EF per pkm per mode and the average trip distance.  
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵= 𝑃𝑃× ∑𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖× 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖× 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖
                                                                                                             (1) 
Where: 
BE 
Baseline emissions (tCO2eq) 
P 
Million LRT passengers (passengers) 
MSBi 
Share of LRT passengers which in the absence of the LRT would have used mode i (%) 
TDi 
Trip distance on mode i of LRT passengers (km) 
EFi 
EF of mode i (gCO2eq/pkm) 
To determine baseline emissions of PM2.5, nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxide the same equation 
is used but with the EF for the respective pollutant. 
(ii) Project GHG emissions 
Only direct project emissions are taken for ex ante calculations. The same is applied for the 
baseline, where the trip distance of the project is taken and not the entire trip distance from origin 
to destination. Project emissions are based on electricity consumption of the LRT and the carbon 
factor of the electricity grid of Costa Rica. 
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃= 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸× 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒                                                                                                                                         (2) 
Where: 
PE 
 
Project emissions (tCO2eq) 
EC 
 
Electricity consumption of the LRT (MWh) 
EFelec 
 
Carbon factor of the electricity grid of Costa Rica 
 
1 Grutter Consulting. (2020h). Emission Impact LRT Costa Rica (Annex 19). 
2 https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/DB/FXQBDV16UML49NJN03U1QQTEY9J90E 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Passenger car
Taxi
Motorcycle
Bus
Existing train
LRT
gCO2e/pkm

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 88 
 
 
 
 
Emission reductions are baseline emissions minus project emissions. 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸= 𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵−𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃                                                                                                                                              (3) 
Where: 
ER 
 
Emission reductions (tCO2eq) 
BE 
 
Baseline emissions (tCO2eq) 
PE 
 
Project emissions (tCO2eq) 
The same approach used for GHG emissions is used for the estimation of the emissions of local 
pollutants with the exception that the LRT has no direct local pollutants, that is, project emissions 
of local pollutants is zero. 
b. 
NMT component emissions 
The methodological approach to determine the GHG impact is based on a Global Environment 
Facility approach (GEF, 2015)3 based on (i) km of cycle lanes; (ii) number of additional cycling 
trips; (iii) trip length; (iv) baseline mode; and (v) EFs of baseline modes. Global Environment 
Facility default values and monitored local data are used. 
c. 
Last-mile connectivity component emissions 
The methodological approach utilized for this class was developed by Grutter Consulting and the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology for the World Bank and was applied in a project in 
Nanchang, China (Zegras, 2009) 4 . It is based on a control group approach comparing 
transportation GHG emissions per resident under a business-as-usual scenario and in the project 
area. Important parameters are the number of residents in the influence zone, mode switch, trip 
distances and EFs. 
6. 
According to the information provided in the funding proposal and related annexes, the 
project has been developed around three components, summarized as follows: 
Component 1: The LRT 
(a) 
Activity 1: Identify and engage concessionaire. 
(i) 
Sub-activity 1.1: Launch tender for concession contract 
(ii) 
Sub-activity 1.2: Award concession  
(b) 
Activity 2: Design, build and prepare to operate 
(i) 
Sub-activity 2.1: Detailed engineering 
(ii) 
Sub-activity 2.2: Tendering and construction of LRT tracks, stations, etc. 
(iii) 
Sub-activity 2.3: Tendering and procurement of rolling stock 
(iv) 
Sub-activity 2.4: Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for LRT 
(v) 
Sub-activity 2.5: Negotiation and obtaining approval for all permits 
(vi) 
Sub-activity 2.6: Construction of LRT 
(vii) 
Sub-activity 2.7: Construction of stations 
(viii) 
Sub-activity 2.8: Construction of depots 
(ix) 
Sub-activity 2.9: Purchase of trains 
(x) 
Sub-activity 2.10: Approval of the construction of the LRT 
(xi) 
Sub-activity 2.11: Operation permit received 
 
3 GEF. (2015). Manual for Calculating Greenhouse Gas Benefits of Global Environment Facility Transportation Projects. 
4 Zegras, P. (2009). Behavior-Based Transportation Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Under the Clean Development 
Mechanism: Transport-Efficient Development in Nanchang, China. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the 
Transportation Research Board, No 2114, 38046.

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 89 
 
 
 
 
Component 2: Urban integration with NMT 
(c) 
Activity 1: Design, build and prepare to operate cycle lanes 
(i) 
Sub-activity 1.1: Detailed engineering of cycle lanes 
(ii) 
Sub-activity 1.2: Tendering and construction of cycle lanes 
(iii) 
Sub-activity 1.3: Construction of cycle lanes delivered 
(d) 
Activity 2: Integrate, design and build connectivity interventions at six LRT stations 
(i) 
Sub-activity 2.1: Detailed engineering of interventions 
(ii) 
Sub-activity 2.2: Tendering of construction activities 
(iii) 
Sub-activity 2.3: Stations constructed 
(e) 
Activity 3: Multiple promotion of activities to foster cycle and micro-mobility usage 
(i) 
Sub-activity 3.1: Detailed design of activities 
(ii) 
Sub-activity 3.2: Identification and contracting of delivery institutions 
(iii) 
Sub-activity 3.3: Delivery of planned activities 
Component 3: Community-building and gender measures 
(f) 
Activity 1: Establish monitoring system and monitor impacts of LRT, last-mile 
connectivity and NMT interventions 
(i) 
Sub-activity 1.1: Design institutional set-up within the Costa Rican Institute of 
Railways (INCOFER) for monitoring of impacts 
(ii) 
Sub-activity 1.2: Sub-contract surveys and other components of monitoring 
(iii) 
Sub-activity 1.3: Realize and consolidate annual monitoring reports on impacts 
of LRT, NMT and last-mile connectivity components 
(g) 
Activity 2: Deliver capacity-building and outreach 
(i) 
Sub-activity 2.1: Realize publications on project components with a focus on 
NMT/connectivity 
(ii) 
Sub-activity 2.2: Realize outreach events 
(h) 
Activity 3: Implement gender action plan 
(i) 
Sub-activity 3.1: Communication campaigns to identify sexual harassment 
practices and other types of violence in trains and at rail stations 
(ii) 
Sub-activity 3.2: Train INCOFER staff on the new sexual harassment law 
(iii) 
Sub-activity 3.3: Implement a rapid reporting system for cases of violence 
against women 
(iv) 
Sub-activity 3.4: Establish a complaints mechanism for cases of violence against 
women that acts automatically 
(v) 
Sub-activity 3.5: Implement an adequate lighting system that protects the safety 
of users 
(vi) 
Sub-activity 3.6: Design, implement and analyze a comprehensive multimodal 
transport pilot survey 
(vii) 
Sub-activity 3.7: Conduct a gender-sensitive evaluation at the user level to better 
understand the different needs and perspectives of women and men in terms of 
access to services and infrastructure

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 90 
 
 
 
 
(viii) 
Sub-activity 3.8: LRT infrastructure designs with a gender focus in which 
women’s physical integrity is safeguarded and allows adequate use of the 
infrastructure 
(ix) 
Sub-activity 3.9: Improving women's access to non-motorized mobility services 
(x) 
Sub-activity 3.10: Attract women to the INCOFER workforce and offer equal 
conditions to men and women 
(xi) 
Sub-activity 3.11: Promote the hiring of and provide spaces for women 
entrepreneurs to be part of the tertiary service providers that the LRT acquires 
(xii) 
Sub-activity 3.12: Establish spaces for women to be promoted to decision-
making positions within the activities relevant to the LRT 
(xiii) 
Sub-activity 3.13: Create and disseminate knowledge products on lessons 
learned  
7. 
Financing for the three components described above, and sources of the funding (GCF 
and co-financing) for the activities, are summarized in Table 1. 
Table 1: Project components and activities with indicative financing 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
million 
USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
instrument 
Name of 
institutions 
1. LRT 
system 
Infrastructure 
834.2 
163.0 
Senior 
Loans 
671.2 
Senior and 
subordinate
d loans, 
equity 
CABEI and 
private 
investor 
Rolling stock 
452.4 
87 
Choose an 
item. 
365.4 
Senior and 
subordinate
d loans, 
equity 
CABEI and 
private 
investor 
Others 
267.3 
0 
Choose an 
item. 
267.3 
Senior and 
subordinate
d loans, 
equity 
CABEI and 
private 
investor 
Financing 
charges 
298.1 
0 
Choose an 
item. 
298.1 
Senior and 
subordinate
d loans, 
equity 
CABEI and 
private 
investor 
2. Urban 
integration 
with NMT & 
connectivity
/accessibilit
y 
components 
Infrastructure 
investments 
20 
20 
Grants 
0 
Choose an 
item. 
Click here to 
enter text. 
I 3. 
Capacity-
building and 
gender 
measures 
Capacity-
building, 
training, 
outreach 
1.3 
1.3 
Grants 
0 
Choose an 
item. 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Indicative total cost 
1,873.3 
271.3 
1,602.0 
Source: From section C.2. – Financing by Components on page 28 of the funding proposal,

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 91 
 
 
 
 
Note: All the financing amounts are estimates based on the current scope of the projects. These are indicative and 
subject to approval by the World Bank Board and agreements with the executing entities. 
Abbreviations: CABEI = Central American Bank for Economic Integration; LRT = light rail transit; NMT = non-
motorized transportation USD: United States Dollars 
8. 
The total financing needed (GCF financing plus co-financing) for this project is USD 
1,873.3 million. This is expected to be contributed as follows: 
(a) 
GCF: USD 271.3 million made up of: 
(i) 
Senior loan: USD 250 million with a 40-year tenor, 10-year grace period and 0.00 
per cent annual interest rate; and 
(ii) 
Grant: USD 21.3 million; and 
(b) 
Co-financing: USD 1,602 million sourced as follows: 
(i) 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) – senior loan: USD 300 
million with a 25-year tenor, 5-year grace period and 6-month London Inter-
bank Offered Rate + 2.9 per cent; 
(ii) 
Private concessionaire (to be decided through project activity 1.1) – equity: USD 
250 million; and 
(c) 
Private concessionaire (to be decided through project activity 1.1) – senior loan: USD 
1,052 million, Terms yet to be finalized. 
9. 
The private concessionary will be defined through the tender. The private 
concessionaire invests an estimated USD 1,302 million. The total investment amount stated 
here has been estimated by the feasibility study carried out during the planning of the project 
and might vary depending on the assessment of the concessionaire and the detailed engineering 
design. Based on the assessment realized by the private concessionaire at the tender stage they 
may require a higher or lower annual contribution. The Government of Costa Rica is expected to 
provide a one-off payment of USD 550 million to the special purpose vehicle (SPV) to cushion 
the cost of the capital expenditure (CAPEX) of the facility that they must raise to implement this 
project. The USD 550 million will be provided to the Government of Costa Rica as a very 
concessional loan of USD 250 million from GCF and a senior loan of USD 300 million from 
CABEI. The payment of the USD 550 million from the Government of Costa Rica to the SPV will 
be disbursed based on the constructed LRT lines of the concessionary. The one-off payment of 
the government to the SPV (USD 550 million) is fixed even when the project CAPEX is different 
from the one estimated by the feasibility study. The final financial structure of the SPV is defined 
once the project has been awarded to the private concessionary.   
10. 
The expected potential outcomes that will be delivered by this project as estimated and 
presented in the funding proposal and in the annexes submitted for this review have been 
evaluated by the independent TAP as conservative estimates. These are summarized as follows: 
(a) 
Replacement of the existing old technology, diesel-fuelled, slow, single-track rail system 
with a fast, comfortable, six-lane, low-carbon electric-powered LRT system; 
(b) 
Not only will the LRT displace the use of fossil diesel fuel used by the baseline rail 
system, with its emissions of GHGs, noxious gases and particulates, but it will also 
deliver additional climate mitigation benefits from its utilization of low-carbon power 
from the Costa Rican grid; 
(c) 
The inclusion of NMT facilities (bicycles and cycle lanes) and last-mile connectivity at 
LRT stations (safe crossings and pedestrian walkways) will engender modal shift 
towards LRT, cycling and low-carbon transport at passenger connection and transfer 
stations;

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 92 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
The entire LRT system will also catalyse modal shifts from other existing transport 
modes, including public buses, passenger cars (private cars, taxis), motorcycles, etc., 
with passengers who utilize these pre-project modes shifting to the LRT because of its 
convenience and journey time savings, as passengers move from the congested baseline 
modes. These modal shifts are the key sources of the GHG emission reductions that will 
be delivered by this project; 
(e) 
Modal shift will be brought about by the convenience of the LRT and the NMT. The LRT 
reduces journey times for car and conventional bus users by 30–60 per cent and will 
offer safe as well as interconnected services. The current public bus system routes, it is 
planned, will be restructured to promote integration with the LRT and promote 
seamless connections and avoidance of duplicated routes. Thus, the modal shift that will 
be estimated using the result of the survey of project passengers (what baseline mode 
would you have used to undertake your current travel in the LRT in the absence of the 
LRT) will underestimate the modal shift, and hence the baseline emissions, thus 
ensuring that the emission reduction estimated by the modal shift methodology 
produces a conservative result; and        
(f) 
The independent TAP reviewed the methodologies used in the calculation of the GHG 
emission reductions expected to be delivered by the interventions of this proposed 
project. The methodological approach in all the calculations presented in the funding 
proposal were judged to be sound and the tools used are expected to deliver reliable and 
conservative estimates of GHG emission reductions. The mitigation benefits that will be 
delivered by the project will be a cumulative average annual reduction in GHG emissions 
of 173,246 tCO2eq and a lifespan impact of a reduction of 7,622,805 tCO2eq; 
11. 
 The independent TAP concludes that this project will deliver a high climate impact 
potential.  
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
                    Scale: High 
1.2.1. 
Comprehensiveness 
12. 
In the absence of this LRT project, the following baseline conditions will continue to hold 
in the transport sector of Costa Rica and especially in the catchment area of the GAM:  
(a) 
The Costa Rican transport sector will continue to lead the GHG emissions pathway of the 
country. The sector contributed 51 per cent of national emissions of about 10.9 
MtCO2eq in 2015. Without the proposed mitigation interventions of this project, it is 
expected that under the business-as-usual scenario, the GHG emissions of the transport 
sector will continue to grow by 44 per cent, while under a mitigation scenario they are 
projected to fall by 65 per cent by 2050, compared with the 2015 level (MINAE, 2019);  
(b) 
The public transport system of Costa Rica (public buses and trains) decreased from a 
mode share of 64 per cent in 2007 to 41 per cent in 2017. During the same period, the 
use of private cars increased from 31 to 42 per cent (L.C.R. Logistica S.A., 2007).  In the 
absence of this project, which will deliver a good template for low-carbon 
transportation, this trend is likely to be maintained. This will continue to exacerbate 
GHG emissions and congestion on the roads of the country’s metropolis and cities and 
hence increase the carbon footprint of the country’s transport sector. 
(c) 
In the absence of LRT investments such as that proposed in this project, public funding 
will not be available and consequently investments in low-carbon transport modes that 
will utilize the low-carbon electricity available from Costa Rica’s grid will not occur; and

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 93 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
Without the concessional loan from GCF, it is unlikely that the LRT project as currently 
conceptualized, especially the public–private partnership (PPP) model currently 
proposed, can be achieved. It is unlikely that Costa Rica will be able to attract private 
concessionaires who will bring such a level of investment for infrastructure 
development into the country. The result would be the continuation of the baseline 
scenario, characterized by growing numbers of private cars, low investment in the 
improvement of the stocks of public buses and continuing congestion on the roads of the 
metropolis, all leading to an unsustainable transport sector.    
13. 
Since the availability of funds to carry out this investment will change much of the 
storyline set out above, a comprehensive low-carbon result will be delivered by this project 
intervention. 
14. 
The key barriers identified in the reports reviewed that will also be removed by the 
proposed project intervention include the following: 
(a) 
Lack of funds to prosecute this kind of investment due to the current poor fiscal 
situation of Costa Rica’s economy. It can be argued that in the absence of the 
concessionary funding from GCF, which will be expected, together with funds from 
CABEI, to catalyse the flow of private sector funds (from the concessionaire), this low-
carbon project would not occur;  
(b) 
Lack of public investment in public transport modes, including in infrastructures such as 
roads and bridges. This impedes the ability of operators to improve the condition of the 
vehicles or rolling stock in public sector modes, giving rise to a funding barrier from the 
non-availability of the long-term revenue streams required to cover payment 
obligations, including debt service. Therefore, most public transport systems can only 
partially cover their funding necessities from farebox and ancillary revenues and 
require transfers from the government’s budget. The proposed project funding structure 
is a very effective way to address this barrier. It can therefore be said that the success of 
the scheme will deliver comprehensive paradigm shift; and 
(c) 
 Lack of the experience, information and knowledge regarding successful NMT and last-
mile connectivity interventions necessary to an effective LRT system. Less than 20 km of 
non-integrated cycle lanes exist in the GAM in the pre-project situation. There is 
therefore a lack of experience in the planning and implementation of cycle lanes, their 
linking with public transport and their impact, and connectivity/accessibility 
interventions, which effectively results in a barrier to approving such new investment 
projects. The success of this LRT intervention will help to eliminate this barrier and 
allow for such projects to be replicated, hence delivering comprehensive paradigm shift.  
15. 
The independent TAP believes that the structure of this proposed LRT project, as 
described in the funding proposal and annexes, is sufficiently comprehensive to deliver the 
necessary infrastructure and the expected level of modal shift when the infrastructure is in 
place. This will be facilitated by the availability of concessional loans that will provide public 
investment to enable the private sector concessionaire to bring investment into this project, 
compared with the status quo. This will also remove some of the existing barriers to private 
sector investment in low-carbon transport sector development in Costa Rica. The flow of 
concessional funding from GCF will be to the Government of Costa Rica and not to the private 
sector, thus enhancing the argument that the benefit truly flows to the people of Costa Rica. The 
independent TAP concludes that this intervention should deliver comprehensive paradigm shift.  
1.2.2. 
Innovation 
16. 
Innovation is partially delivered through changes to the status quo that result in value 
creation, reforms and renovation of failing systems (impossible to change the baseline narrative 
of inability to introduce a low-carbon transport mode) and ensuring sustainability of the

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 94 
 
 
 
 
process. The Costa Rica LRT investment can deliver such results. The development of the 
proposed LRT with NMT and last-minute access infrastructure in the metropolis is hampered by 
some of the barriers discussed above and in the funding proposal and some of its annexes. The 
proposed LRT intervention is expected to mitigate these barriers and set the pace for a low-
carbon transport sector in Costa Rica. The strategy to achieve this was presented convincingly 
in the funding proposal and annexes. Although the technologies and means (LRT, NMT and last-
minute access infrastructure) that are likely to be used by the proposed intervention may not be 
a global innovation, they could well be innovative in the context of the country and perhaps the 
region; this is important as the development of the LRT system will increase the penetration of 
low-carbon transport systems in Costa Rica. This becomes even more important if the 
development of this fast and comfortable electric-powered train incentivizes the 
implementation of electric vehicles in the country as believed.   
1.2.3. 
Creation of an enabling environment/sustainability of outcomes 
17. 
Among the pieces of the puzzle of this intervention, the search for a private sector 
investor to raise the funds needed to design and construct the LRT infrastructure seems to be 
the issue that still portends some level of risk. The project cannot go forward if a concessionaire 
is not found. The independent TAP believes that the investment will eventually and in a timely 
manner succeed in selecting a concessionaire for the following reasons:  
(a) 
INCOFER, Costa Rica’s leading agency for this project (the grantor), has already 
identified about 10 international companies, each of which has shown interest in the 
concessionaire role. According to the information available to the independent TAP, 
each of these potential concessionaires have evaluated as acceptable the CAPEX figures 
from the feasibility study (and perhaps the front-end engineering) prepared for project 
planning. The concessionaire eventually selected will, however, carry out its own 
detailed engineering and detailed cost of the project – which may be higher or lower 
than the earlier estimate. According to information in the funding proposal, changes in 
the concessionaire’s CAPEX estimate will not affect the quantum of the bridging fund 
(USD 550 million) that will be paid to the concessionaire; and    
(b) 
A PPP model that will be used in engaging the concessionaire is a very attractive 
mechanism to bring private funds to this project. The PPP will be implemented through 
an SPV established and fully owned by the concessionaire. The government does not 
participate with equity or loans to the SPV but uses a forfeiting model and pays upon 
completed construction a fixed sum of USD 550 million and annual operations 
availability payments linked to performance criteria. This system is more attractive for 
investors and makes the system less prone to government interference and hence likely 
to enhance the success of selection of a strong concessionaire.        
18. 
The two points discussed above will provide adequate support for the belief that the 
selection of concessionaire and hence the successful incorporation of an SPV that will play a 
crucial role in the implementation of this project should not be an insurmountable barrier. 
Therefore, the project plan as presented in the funding proposal and some of the annexes 
should deliver sustainable outcomes as well as also create an enabling environment that will 
successfully deliver this project. 
1.2.4. 
Potential for scaling up and replication 
19. 
Scaling up and replication of this proposed intervention in Costa Rica will involve the 
expansion of the project in GAM in the near future and the implementation of the LRT in other 
major cities in Costa Rica and other countries of the region. Since this is an electrically powered 
transportation project, it will be expected that lessons learned from the success of the LRT will 
incentivize the introduction of non-train electric vehicles in the country. What then are the

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 95 
 
 
 
 
elements and characteristics of the current LRT project implementation that will provide for 
robustness of the potential for the scaling-up and replication of the intervention? These 
elements and characteristics can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The participation of the private sector in this project, especially the structuring of the 
financial arrangement available to the concessionaire, will make the project less risky 
and reduce the investment of the government. These are positive impacts that will 
provide an enabling environment for replication and scaling; 
(b) 
Although the restructuring of the route of the private sector operated public bus system 
is not part of this project’s scope of work, it is understood that this will be done with the 
restructured route integrated with the LRT. The LRT by design will also be integrated 
with the NMT as well as the last-mile connectivity interventions, which will provide a 
model for a modern approach to public transport interventions that is not available in 
Costa Rica or in other countries of the region. This is an element and a characteristic of 
this intervention that will deliver good potential for future scaling-up and replication of 
the project ideas; and 
(c) 
A key paradigm shift in the transport sector of Costa Rica is the use of low-carbon 
electricity as a source of transport energy. Given that Costa Rica’s transport sector is the 
leading source of GHG emissions in the country, successfully utilizing the low-carbon 
electricity from the national grid in this project will provide a solid platform for 
replicating the use of electricity as power for other modes (e.g. electric vehicles). 
20. 
Given the three elements discussed above, the independent TAP concludes that the 
successful implementation of the LRT project should deliver tangible potential for the scaling-
up and replication of many of the aspects of the current project idea.    
1.2.5. 
Potential for knowledge-sharing and learning 
21. 
The design and implementation plan of the LRT system includes some strategies for 
knowledge-sharing, project data acquisition and learning, which are essential for knowledge-
sharing and learning. Some are described below to illustrate the potential for knowledge-
sharing and learning built into the LRT project design: 
(a) 
One of the key activities that will be funded using grant funding from GCF is the creation 
of knowledge products on lessons learned and the dissemination of the information in 
such reports. These reports will be published and presented at outreach activities. Such 
activities are included in the budget for knowledge-sharing and learning;  
(b) 
Important data and information will be collected in a focused survey covering the entire 
project segments. These will include a sample survey of passengers in the LRT when 
operational to determine the transport modes that the passengers would have used in 
the absence of the LRT. Information so developed will help to set the modal shift and 
behaviour characteristics of LRT passengers. The information captured by such a survey 
will not only be useful for determining the baseline of this project but also provide 
useful information that will enhance the knowledge base for future planning of such 
systems; and 
(c) 
The project also includes the collection and reporting of standardized data on the impact 
of last-mile connectivity and NMT measures and thus serves to improve the planning 
and the impact assessment of such measures. This will be useful to determine the 
performance and impact of these project components and provide a datum for 
knowledge sharing and learning.  
22. 
The proposed project will deliver comprehensive and innovative attributes that the 
independent TAP believes will contribute strongly to a high paradigm shift potential. It will 
deliver an enabling environment that will make the tangible outcomes of the intervention

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 96 
 
 
 
 
sustainable, while also enhancing replicability of the project concept. The knowledge-sharing 
platform, which is a sub-component of the project delivery, will enhance robust knowledge-
sharing and learning attributes that are essential for the scalability and replication of the 
project. In the light of these observations, the independent TAP concludes that the paradigm 
shift potential is high.   
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
        Scale: High  
1.3.1. 
Alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals  
23. 
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that the project intervention are expected to 
align with are summarized as follows: 
(a) 
SDG 3 (good health and well-being): the fossil fuels (diesel) used as transport fuel in the 
old diesel train will be completely replaced, (while some of the diesel and gasoline used 
in the baseline public buses may be curtailed by modal shift) leading to a saving in the 
emissions from the journeys of passengers who would have used the fossil fuel modes in 
the absence of the LRT. These fossil fuels are sources of emissions of noxious gases and 
particulates. PM2.5, a particulate matter that would be emitted in the baseline and 
reduced because of the project, is of particular importance to the health and well-being 
of the people of Costa Rica; 
(b) 
SDG 9 (industry, innovation, and infrastructure): the sustainable development benefits 
that the project will deliver under SDG 9 include strengthening the performance of the 
transport sector, making it more effective in delivering its value addition, which will in 
turn have a positive value addition to all sectors of Costa Rica’s economy, including 
industry. In addition, it is expected that infrastructure (rail lines and link roads) will be 
developed, and the use of low-carbon electricity will penetrate the transport sector;  
(c) 
SDG 11 (sustainable cities and communities): the baseline public transport situation in 
the city of San José and the larger GAM area is characterized by the domination of 
private cars, followed by public transport (mostly by the uncomfortable public buses); 
very serious traffic congestion, adding more time to typical travel times; very slow trains 
on old gauge single-track rail lines burning diesel; and uncoordinated public bus routes. 
The combustion of fossil fuels in these baseline modes not only emits GHGs, but also 
noxious gases and particulates, with a significant impact on the health of residents of the 
GAM. The proposed project will replace the old gauge rail with the LRT, which will use 
electricity from the low-carbon grid of the country as its source of operational energy. 
As a result of the availability of the LRT, which will carry more passengers than all the 
baseline modes combined, GHG emissions will be greatly reduced, fossil fuel that would 
have been used for the baseline travels of LRT passengers will be curtailed because of 
modal shift – with a significant reduction in the emissions responsible for public health 
deterioration in the city – and better living conditions (better air quality over time) for 
city dwellers. Hence it can be correctly concluded that the LRT project will deliver on 
SDG 11; and                                                             
(d) 
SDG 13 (climate action): A primary goal of this project is to alter the GHG emission 
pathway from the historical upward scenario that has been forecasted for Costa Rica’s 
transport sector. The LRT project will deliver over 10 per cent of the emission 
reductions that have been estimated to alter the historical GHG emissions pathway. The 
project will also enable the expansion of this mitigation intervention in San José and the 
replication of similar mitigation interventions in the transport sector of other cities in 
the country and replication of the success of the present intervention in other countries 
in the region. Therefore, this LRT project will deliver on SDG 13.

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 97 
 
 
 
 
1.3.2. 
Economic co-benefits  
24. 
The success of the financial structure of this LRT project and the implementation model 
put together for this PPP intervention will enhance the planning of more low-carbon 
intervention in the transport sector of Costa Rica. The success of this first fast electric train will 
catalyse the implementation of other electric transportation projects in the country as it will 
facilitate a reduction in the perceived risks of such projects. This project will mobilize into Costa 
Rica’s infrastructure investment fund to the tune of about USD 2 billion with positive economic 
benefits for the country. The enabling environment that will be created by the success of the 
pioneer project will add more value to this initial economic benefit through the possibility of 
many other such projects within the project boundary and in other cities in the country. This 
will reduce the need for fossil fuel imports (mostly for the needs of the transport sector) as 
many of the modes will be substituted by electricity use once the LRT is operational. This will 
deliver beyond marginal economic co-benefits to Costa Rica. Over time, because of the 
diversification of the energy mix for the transport sector (away from fossil fuel), the country’s 
economy will be protected from the negative impacts of fossil fuel price fluctuations.  
25. 
Other economic co-benefits that have been identified in the project write-up that the 
independent TAP reviewed can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
Time savings from using the LRT valued at USD 3,354 million (IDOM, 2020);5 
(b) 
Operating cost savings estimated as USD 520 million (IDOM, 2020);6 
(c) 
Reduced accident rates with cost savings of about USD 53 million (IDOM, 2020);7 
(d) 
Reduced emissions of air pollutants calculated by assigning a monetary value to 
emissions of PM2.5, nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxide estimated at USD 79 million 
(Grutter Consulting, 2020);8 
(e) 
Reduced GHG emissions valued on the basis of the social cost of carbon at USD 550 
million (Grutter Consulting, 2020);9 
(f) 
Noise emissions valued at USD 6 million (IDOM, 2020);10 
(g) 
Overall, generation of 1,200 temporary jobs during construction and 1,460 direct jobs 
during operations (IDOM, 2020);11 and 
(h) 
Delivery of 3.3 times more economic benefits than economic cost or an economic 
internal rate of return of 26 per cent (IDOM, 2020);12 
26. 
 Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has resulted in the diversion of a sizeable 
proportion of public funds available in most countries, including Costa Rica. With available 
public finance targeted at critical COVID-19 challenges, the implementation of this project will 
reduce the economic losses that will arise from non-implementation of the nationally 
determined contribution (NDC) targets.  
27. 
By leveraging private investments at scale, the successful implementation of this project 
will spare Costa Rica’s limited public sector finance, which could then be directed to, for 
example, healthcare and post-COVID-19 strategies for other needy sectors such as education, 
 
5  IDOM, 2020, FSR 3rd Report; Memoria 10: Modelo de Demanda (Demand Model). 
6  As footnote 6 above. 
7  As footnote 6 above. 
8  Grutter Consulting, (2020), NMT and TOD Report 3, Intervention Proposal (See FSR of this project – Annex 22). 
9  As footnote 9. 
10 As footnote 6 
11 As footnote 6 
12 As footnote 6

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 98 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure and welfare. These are co-benefits that will be delivered by a successful 
implementation of this LRT project. 
1.3.3. 
Social and health co-benefits  
28. 
The project will deliver better air quality in the GAM area and progressively in Costa 
Rica, where the air quality has been described by the World Health Organization guidelines as 
moderately unsafe. The most recent data indicate that the country's annual mean concentration 
of PM2.5 is 16 µg/m3, which exceeds the recommended maximum of 10 µg/m3. 13 The LRT, 
because of its non-combustion technology to power this transport mode and displace some of 
the baseline fossil fuel use, will deliver lower PM2.5 emissions with attendant health co-
benefits. The other project components – the NMT and the last-mile connectivity – will also 
contribute more value to the health co-benefits discussed above.    
1.3.4. 
Environmental co-benefits 
29. 
The air quality co-benefits of this project will result from reduced environmental 
pollution that will be engendered by the no-combustion powering of the LRT compared with the 
modes that would have been used in the baseline. The estimates of each of the non-GHG 
emissions associated with the implementation of the proposed LRT are presented in Table 2. 
Table 2: Projected reduction of pollutants due to the project (tonnes) 
Parameter 
Average annual reduction 
Cumulative lifetime reduction 
PM 2.5 reduction 
7 
295 
NOx reduction 
266 
11,670 
SO2 reduction 
1 
56 
Source: Grutter Consulting (2020) Emission Impact LRT Costa Rica (Annex 19). 
30. 
These environmental co-benefits, as well as a reduction in noise pollution, will be 
delivered by the LRT and its other components. 
1.3.5. 
Gender-related co-benefits 
31. 
The gender co-benefits of the proposed LRT project in the GAM area were well 
articulated in the funding proposal and in its annex 8 (Gender analysis and action plan). The 
following three dimensions were included in the gender action plan and built into the project 
implementation plan. The three dimensions include:  
(a) 
Mobility and safety – apart from ensuring that the LRT is fast and able to carry 
passengers with a goal of ensuring optimum use of time in journeys and safety for all 
passengers, special attention has been placed on the special needs of women. This will 
include: building schemes into the project implementation and operations to facilitate 
optimum mobility of all passengers and, for women, proper security to ensure that the 
infrastructure includes measures that will enhance the mobility patterns of women and 
minimize the risk of violence against them within and around all the LRT facilities. This 
is achieved through the inclusion of gender-differentiated mobility patterns and 
measures, including intermodality of different media; 
(b) 
Accessibility – ensuring that the new infrastructure, when implemented and operational, 
takes the requirements of women into consideration. The design, implementation and 
operation of the LRT and all its associated infrastructure take into consideration 
accessibility for women through: 
 
13 See https://www.iamat.org/country/costa-rica/risk/air-pollution.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 99 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Acknowledging the flaws in the pre-project system that brought about a barrier 
for women to economic activities. For example, many of the stations or bus 
stops, where passengers are picked up are not well lit and secure, especially in 
the early hours of the morning (peak commuting period), late evening and night, 
posing risks to women and their ability to travel for economic activities; 
(ii) 
Ensuring that the new LRT facilities are designed to take into account the needs 
of women and to safeguard their physical autonomy, such as through the 
provision of well-lit female toilets, etc.; and 
(iii) 
Monitoring gender issues: the monitoring and project evaluation monitoring 
protocol includes monitoring and evaluating gender-related issues, focusing on 
results and outcomes at the project level; and 
(c) 
Participation of women – this very important dimension is built into the project to 
ensure gender mainstreaming. Being part of the gender action plan of this project, it will 
ensure that women are engaged in the transport sector at all stages and decision levels. 
The gender action plan has been designed to provide women with the opportunity to 
play tangible roles at all levels of activity of this project, including decision-making, 
working on the trains, and participating in all services that will be offered by contract 
model at stations and other parts of the integrated system. The project monitoring and 
evaluation is also expected to provide reports on progress in reaching the gender action 
plan goals. 
32. 
In view of the above-mentioned contributions to various elements of sustainable 
development, the independent TAP concludes that the project will generate significant 
sustainable development potential and can deliver all the benefits discussed in section 1.3 
above. Therefore, the independent TAP concludes that the sustainable development potential of 
this proposed project is high. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.4.1. 
Needs of the country  
33. 
It is argued in the funding proposal that, because Costa Rica is considered a primary “hot 
spot” for climate change in the tropics, this proposed project fits the needs of the country in 
responding to the various climate change impacts; however, the independent TAP has taken a 
very different approach to the needs of Costa Rica in this context. The climate change impacts 
listed in the funding proposal include extreme precipitation, which has increased significantly, 
being strongly correlated with the temperature of the tropical Atlantic Ocean, and is expected to 
continue in the future as a result of climate change and to result in a greater frequency or 
intensity of extreme events such as floods and droughts. Such current and future impacts have 
been put forward as the key reasons why this project is needed in Costa Rica. To substantiate 
this claim a very articulate climate rationale argument will be required and since this project 
has been designed as a GHG mitigation project, the independent TAP decided to focus on other 
reasons that can strongly support the argument that this intervention is greatly needed. 
34. 
The key reasons why this project is needed by Costa Rica (in addition to the climate 
change reasons described in the funding proposal and summarized in para. 33 above) can be 
summarized as follows: 
(a) 
GHG emissions in Costa Rica in 2015 were estimated at about 10.9 MtCO2eq, with the 
transport sector contributing about 51 per cent of these emissions. The sector is the 
leading emitter of GHGs because it is entirely dependent on fossil fuel use. This makes 
the proposed project, which will change a major mode of transportation to electric fast 
rail (the LRT), a logical trigger for a paradigm shift in the transport sector. Therefore,

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 100 
 
 
 
 
fostering of public transport and electrifying the transport sector (given the low-carbon 
nature of Costa Rica’s grid with 98 per cent renewable energy sources) are the main 
strategies to achieve Costa Rica’s ambitious target of decarbonization. That the LRT 
stands out in the strategy for decarbonization of the transport sector of Costa Rica is 
confirmed by the country’s various climate change strategy documents (Costa Rica’s 
second biennial update report (MINAE, 2019)14 and the National Decarbonization Plan 
(Government of Costa Rica, 2019)15);  
(b) 
In its NDC, Costa Rica reaffirmed its aspiration to become a carbon-neutral economy, 
aiming for a decarbonized economy with net-zero emissions by 2050 (Government of 
Costa Rica, 2019). Costa Rica received from the United Nations Environment Programme 
the 2019 Champions of the Earth award for its commitment to ambitious policies to 
combat climate change.16 This proposed project is aligned to the country’s 
decarbonization aspiration; 
(c) 
The Costa Rican electricity system, with over 98 per cent of renewable energy 
production since 2015, is one of the few decarbonized systems in the world. Planned 
energy expansions will diversify renewable energy sources even more (ICE, 2019)17. 
The development of a modern, fast and comfortable electric train can therefore be 
considered a logical follow-up to the achievement of a low-carbon electricity grid in 
Costa Rica. The LRT is a key component in reducing urban transport emissions in that it 
will consume annually less than 1 per cent of energy generation; Electrification of other 
modes of the transport sector, (private cars and buses) is a logical follow-up to a 
successful LRT project; 
(d) 
The mode share of motorized trips has historically been changing towards an increase in 
the use of private cars and a significant decrease in the use of the public bus system. The 
implication is more congestion on the roads, especially in the GAM, and worsening air 
pollution. The LRT, which will be a fast and comfortable mode of transportation, will 
promote modal shift, thus reducing travels in the buses and, it is to be hoped, if properly 
integrated, also engender some shift from private cars. This will indirectly reduce 
congestion on the roads, reduce air pollution and establish the know-how to utilize low-
carbon electricity for the transport sector, making the LRT project a necessary 
intervention in the transport sector of Costa Rica.   
35. 
The LRT project presented to the independent TAP for review has been designed to 
address the issues discussed above. The technical design and the financial plan are expected to 
provide adequate funds through the PPP model to meet the CAPEX requirements for the project 
and provide the Government of Costa Rica with highly concessional debt, which will enable the 
public sector part of the PPP to provide the concessionaire with bridging funds. This will make 
the project funding attractive to the private entity; provide the concessionaire (its SPV) with the 
necessary funds to operate and maintain the infrastructure and the rail system over the 
concession period; and have in place what can become a workable exit strategy for the private 
sector partner. These actions will assist the LRT to deliver the primary goals of reducing the 
GHG emissions of Costa Rica’s transport sector and set the stage for use of low-carbon power as 
a transportation energy, starting with the LRT and, it is to be hoped, extended in future to other 
modes such as road vehicle electrification. 
1.4.2. 
Economic and financial needs of the country 
 
14 MINAE. (2019). Plan Nacional de Transporte Electrico 2018-2030  
15 Government of Costa Rica. (2019). National Decarbonization Plan 2018-2050 
16 See https://www.unenvironment.org/news-and-stories/press-release/costa-rica-named-un-champion-earth-
pioneering-role-fighting-climate. 
17 ICE. (2019). Plan de Expansion de la Generacion Electrica 2018-2034.

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 101 
 
 
 
 
36. 
It can be concluded that the financial structuring of the project has been designed in a 
way that meets the country’s economic and financial needs. The economy of Costa Rica in recent 
years has been suffering from fiscal weakness due to high fiscal deficit. The deficit has lately 
been the main risk to the macroeconomic stability of the country, with debt projected to exceed 
60 per cent of gross domestic product in 2020. The negative effect of the COVID-19 pandemic 
has further worsened the financial strength of public budgeting to the extent that in the absence 
of the planned PPP funding model the present project would not have been possible. As argued 
in the funding proposal, the important and immediate medical, social and economic needs 
prompted by COVID-19 will require higher fiscal spending, which will lead to a deterioration in 
the fiscal position in 2020.18 In recognition of this fiscal weakness, the country reached a 
technical agreement with the International Monetary Fund in January 2021 on a programme of 
reforms and policies to reduce the fiscal deficit and to promote reforms which allow for lasting 
and inclusive growth. This has provided a strong fiscal base to release multilateral funding at 
lower borrowing costs for infrastructure planning and implementation of the country’s green 
recovery plan with a focus on investing in profitable infrastructure. The financial structure of 
the LRT project, executed through a PPP and with the government contribution based on a 
multilateral loan with a five-year grace period, allows the creation of much-needed short-term 
jobs without increasing the short- and medium-term fiscal deficit while investing resources in 
long-term sustainable and profitable transport infrastructure. Thus, the design of the LRT 
project (technical and financial) fits into this narrative and is very much needed in the country.  
37. 
The concessional loan of USD 250 million from GCF is expected to crowd in financing 
from CABEI and a yet to be selected concessionaire (~USD 1,602 million). In addition, grant 
funding from GCF (~USD 21.3 million) will fund various components of the LRT, including 
urban integration with NMT and connectivity/accessibility components, as well as capacity-
building, training and outreach. This will further strengthen the “can-do” ability of country 
stakeholders and further strengthen the country’s economic and fiscal environment over a long 
period.   
38. 
Given the analysis of the project information made available for the review of this 
project submission, and the discussion of the issues presented in this section, the independent 
TAP concludes that the LRT project will deliver the estimated decarbonization of Costa Rica’s 
transport sector, while incentivizing the shift of more modes to the use of the low-carbon grid 
electricity in the sector and deliver a robust economic and financial atmosphere that can make 
this project concept successful. Therefore, the independent TAP has scored the needs of the 
recipient as high. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.5.1. 
Evidence of country ownership through participation of relevant stakeholders 
39. 
Country ownership is strongly related to national stakeholder engagement. The funding 
proposal provides the following information on the level of stakeholder engagement adopted by 
the accredited entity (AE) and the Government of Costa Rica in the development of the LRT 
project: 
(a) 
The LRT project has been planned within the context of the Government of Costa Rica’s 
historical commitment to the international climate change agreements. The country has 
a long tradition of being at the forefront of combating climate change. During the 1990s, 
Costa Rica contributed to the global awareness on climate change, becoming part of the 
first joint implementation projects. The country has created within its institutional 
space public policy and strong institutional arrangements, which have delivered various 
 
18 See https://www.imf.org/en/Countries/CRI.

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 102 
 
 
 
 
strategies that can be said to be precursors of the proposed LRT project. These relevant 
strategies include:  
(i) 
Costa Rica´s National Climate Change Strategy, which was launched in 2007 and 
supported by the creation of a Climate Change Department at the Ministry of 
Environment and Energy (MINAE); 
(ii) 
The launching in 2019 of the National Decarbonization Plan 2018–2050, which 
aims for a decarbonized economy with net-zero emissions by 2050 (Government 
of Costa Rica, 2019)19; and 
(iii) 
These strategies and others, such as the National Development and Investment 
Plan 2019–2022 (Mideplan, 2018)20, the Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDC) (MINAE, 2015)21, the National Transport Plan 2011–2035 (MOPT, 
2011)22, the National Plan for Electric Transport (MINAE, 2019)23, the National 
Energy Plan 2015–2030 (MINAE, 2015)24 and the post-COVID-19 green recovery 
plan, all have the concept of the LRT as either a part or a core component of 
these strategies and plans. Therefore, it is conceivable to argue that the planning 
and development of the LRT were discussed with relevant stakeholders who 
housed each of the plans discussed above; and 
(b) 
Pertinent information presented in the funding proposal and its annexes concerns the 
responsibility of Costa Rica’s transport sector for 51 per cent of the country’s GHG 
emissions and 76 per cent of total energy emissions in 2015 (MINAE, 2019)25. The need 
to improve and restructure the transport sector and make it more sustainable is well 
articulated in many country strategies. Given the leading role that the transport sector is 
playing in the country’s carbon footprint, and the fact that the electricity sector is very 
low carbon, the electrification of many modes in the transport sector can deliver 
substantial GHG emission reductions. This strategy is articulated in many of the 
country’s strategy documents such as in the Costa Rica’s second biennial update report 
and its NDC. Electric rail as a mitigation measure and specifically the LRT concept are 
highlighted in many of these strategy documents and formed the foundation for the way 
the current LRT project was conceptualized and planned. This provides strong evidence 
of country ownership, as the above-mentioned facts must have been considered in the 
analysis, design and planned roll-out of the LRT project. It must also have been 
discussed widely with the relevant stakeholders mentioned in paragraph 39(a) above. 
Since no evidence of formal stakeholder interaction from the bottom up was included in 
the submission, it is very difficult to evaluate the extent of stakeholder interaction in the 
development of the LRT. 
1.5.2. 
Alignment of the project with relevant national strategies  
40. 
The proposed LRT project is well aligned to the national strategies referred to in 
paragraph 39(a) above. It is the opinion of the independent TAP that the LRT project as 
proposed is in alignment with the pertinent climate change mitigation, transport sector and 
energy sector objectives of Costa Rica, given that GHG emissions are targeted for reduction and 
 
19 Government of Costa Rica. (2019). National Decarbonization Plan 2018-2050. 
20 Mideplan. (2018). Plan Nacional de Desarrollo y de Inversion Publica 2019-2022. 
21 MINAE. (2015). Costa Rica's Intended Nationally Determined Contribution. 
22 MOPT. (2011). Plan Nacional de Transportes de Costa Rica 2011-2035; Transporte Publico: El transporte publico de 
pasajeros y el Proyecto de Sectorizacion. 
23 MINAE. (2019). Costa Rica II Informe Bienal de Actualizacion ante la Convencion Marco de las Naciones Unidas sobre 
el Cambio Climático. 
24 MINAE. (2015). Plan Nacional de Energia 2015-2030. 
25 As footnote 23 above.

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 103 
 
 
 
 
the leading contribution to national GHG emission inventories in the country’s energy and 
transport sectors is from the transport sector. 
1.5.3. 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
41. 
Information in the funding proposal showed that as from the inception of the plan to 
develop the LRT, especially once the draft of the plan was available, the Government of Costa 
Rica engaged all the municipal governments within the area of influence of the LRT. On 4 
December 2018, as an example of the result of the many interactions with stakeholders, the 
mayors of the 15 affected municipalities signed a framework agreement for intermunicipal 
cooperation with the aim of developing guidelines for territorial planning and urban 
development, and the development of urban equipment and infrastructure complementary to 
the LRT. The planned interventions in the area of NMT and last-mile connectivity measures 
were discussed in multiple round tables with all stakeholders. It is not clear from the funding 
proposal whether INCOFER as the executing entity for this project presented to CABEI, the AE, 
evidence of relevant stakeholder (citizen) engagement during the planning and design of the 
LRT. This is the design that formed the basis of the concessionaire interest in this project. 
Information in the funding proposal, however, showed that for the construction period (the 
engineering design that will form the basis of the construction will be prepared by the 
successful concessionaire), continuous involvement of relevant stakeholders must be 
engendered. INCOFER, according to the information available, must design and deliver to CABEI 
a citizen participation and consultations plan with a quarterly follow-up report of actions 
carried out, complete with evidence. During the operation of the project, INCOFER is also 
expected to design and deliver to CABEI a citizen participation and consultations plan with 
biannual monitoring reports by INCOFER or the concessionaire to CABEI. 
42. 
As part of the project plan, given that better and faster alternatives will be provided to 
users of buses on bus routes parallel to the LRT routes, the operational contracts of private 
sector operators of those bus routes will be cancelled as soon as the LRT is operational. In 
response to queries on whether this cancellation will lead to social disorder from protests by 
these private operators, whose livelihood will be terminated, the AE informed the independent 
TAP that robust engagement of these important stakeholders has been carried out. Discussions 
were held with these private operators while this project was on the drawing board and they 
were made to realize that their operations cannot compete effectively with the LRT along that 
route because that mode is more comfortable, is faster and will avoid traffic congestion on the 
roads within GAM. The independent TAP understands that they are willing to go along with the 
route cancellation plan as they will be offered alternative operations routes in the public bus 
route restructuring activities. These stakeholders are also aware that public bus route 
restructuring will be carried out by a different agency and that the eventual outcome of their 
being offered alternative routes is outside the control and scope of INCOFER. 
43. 
The independent TAP is of the opinion that stakeholder engagement of this project is 
robust and has covered all the different types of stakeholders’ whose views should be 
considered in the development of this kind of transport infrastructure. 
1.5.4. 
Executing capacity of the executing entity 
44. 
As stated in the funding proposal, the executing entity for this project INCOFER26 and 
the Government of Costa Rica acting through the Ministry of Finance for the purposes of 
channeling GCF proceeds. INCOFER is an independent statutory corporation established to 
operate the country's railway network. It has administrative autonomy, legal personality and 
own assets. Within INCOFER, an entity has been put in place to support and assist the institution 
in all activities related to the concession, the monitoring of the feasibility studies, the bidding 
 
26 See loan contract – [CABEI. (2020). Contrato de Prestamo No. 2241.

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 104 
 
 
 
 
stage of the concession, compliance with conditions precedent, the design stage and the 
construction stage. INCOFER will submit to CABEI quarterly reports on the physical execution of 
the project, compliance with the environmental management plans and in general the 
compliance with the obligations of the concessionaire contained in the respective contract. 
CABEI will realize biannual supervision missions and will also contract an external supervision 
entity. Using this in-house entity, INCOFER has completed the first engineering design and 
feasibility study of the LRT as part of preparing this funding proposal and delivered the same 
for initial review of some of the concessionaire companies, one of which will be selected to 
implement the project. 
45. 
A capacity assessment of INCOFER was conducted by CABEI. The assessment concluded 
that the institution has full capacity to oversee the concession contract for the LRT and NMT. 
The institution carries out internal audits periodically and is subject to audits by the Auditor 
General and the Ministry of Planning and Economic Policy. Its financial management is in 
accordance with national regulations and audited financial statements have been provided. 
INCOFER complies with all national laws regarding procurement and no inconsistencies over 
the past six years have been found. An LRT executing unit, with a team of dedicated experienced 
consultants, will support and assist INCOFER in all activities related to the follow-up of the LRT 
feasibility studies, from the analysis of the technical and legal studies to progress in the delivery 
of partial and final reports. The consultants will provide technical advice to INCOFER in all 
matters related to the structuring of the financing of the LRT and subsequently provide the 
necessary technical support as required by INCOFER. 
46. 
The Government of Costa Rica is the beneficiary of the grant for component 2 and the 
concessional loan of GCF. The grant for component 3 goes to INCOFER. The private 
concessionaire receives a one-off payment of USD 550 million (in 2 tranches) – from the 
concessional senior loan from GCF (USD 250 million) and from the senior loan from CABEI (USD 
300 million), against terminated LRT construction and lines ready for operations. This one-off 
payment is not a loan or an investment in the SPV but a payment for compliance with the 
concession contract. The GCF contribution and its concessionality fully flow to the Government 
of Costa Rica and reduce its financial burden. In addition, it has been estimated that the 
Government of Costa Rica will have to designate a net sum of around USD 110 million per 
annum27 for payment of services to the concessionary (apart from the USD 550 million as 
partial recognition of the investments) (IDOM, 2020, pp. 8-9). This must be provided as part of 
the government annual budget each operational year of the LRT. Given the weak fiscal situation 
of Costa Rica, the ability to raise this fund from budgetary provision remains a hanging risk that 
may negatively affect project success each operating year. 
1.5.5. 
The capability of the accredited entity 
47. 
The AE for this project will be CABEI, a supranational development bank focused on 
Central America, which was founded in 1960. The bank’s objective is to promote the economic 
integration and the balanced economic and social development of the Central American region. 
Costa Rica is one of the founder members of CABEI. During the period 2010–2018 CABEI 
approved total projects worth USD 13 billion, of which USD 3.3 billion USD was in Costa Rica. 
CABEI holds the best credit rating in Latin America.28 It had a total authorized capital of USD 7 
billion, USD 11.6 billion of assets and a return on equity of 6.9 per cent as at the end 2019.29 
CABEI requires that its operations comply with environmental and social standards, based on 
international best practices, aligned with its Environmental and Social Policy. In the transport 
 
27 Total of around USD 150 million per annum minus income USD 40 million received from farebox. 
28 As at September 2019: Standard & Poor’s AA/Stable/A-1+; Moody’s Aa3/Stable/P-1; see 
https://www.bcie.org/en/investor-relations/credit-rating. 
29 https://www.bcie.org/fileadmin/bcie/english/files/news-and-
media/publications/institutionales/CABEI_Institutional_PPT_ENG_APR2020.pdf.

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 105 
 
 
 
 
sector, CABEI has realized financing of road infrastructure and has focused recently on 
improving urban mobility, as well as regional integration through support for railway projects, 
among others. Within this framework, it is developing a regional plan for sustainable urban 
mobility, along with funding for various public transportation initiatives.  
48. 
CABEI has realized various PPPs in Costa Rica, including Ruta 27, Windfarm Valle 
Central, Altos de Magdalena. CABEI will also have two supervising entities for the loan, one 
contracted by the Government of Costa Rica and one directly contracted by CABEI through an 
international tender, in order to have sufficient external technical know-how during the entire 
process of PPP structuring and implementation. 
49. 
Based on the analysis presented in sections 1.5.1–1.5.4 above, the independent TAP 
considers that the country ownership of this LRT project submission can be ranked as high. 
1.6 
The Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
           Scale: Medium to high  
1.6.1. 
Financial structure 
50. 
The proposed project is requesting grant and debt financing from GCF and other co-
financing from sources to the amount of USD 1,873.3 million. The GCF contribution amounts to 
USD 271.3 million made up of a grant of USD 21.3 million and a concessional senior loan of USD 
250 million. The complementary co-financing will come from the following sources: USD 300 
million from CABEI sourced as a senior loan; and USD 1,302 million from a concessionaire (to be 
selected after the GCF approval of its fund through a competitive bidding process), which will be 
sourced as concessionaire equity of USD 250 million and a senior loan of USD 1,052 million 
(with terms known after the bidding). The appropriation and terms of these funds were 
discussed in an earlier section of this report (see table 1 and para. 8 above).  
51. 
The breakdown of the funding contribution from these sources, the types of fund and 
the total that will be provided for the project, is presented in Table 3. 
Table 3: Breakdown of project funding 
Number 
Source 
Type of fund 
Amount (USD million) 
1. 
GCF financing 
 
 
a. 
GCF 
Grant 
     21.3 
b.  
GCF 
Senior loan 
   250.0 
Subtotal GCF      
  271.3 
2. 
Co-financing 
 
 
a. 
CABEI 
Senior loan 
     300.0 
b. 
Concessionaire 
Equity 
     250.0  
c. 
Concessionaire 
Senior loan 
    1,052.0 
Subtotal co-financing 
1,602.0 
Project total funding 
1,873.3 
52. 
The total fund requested from GCF is about 14.48 per cent of the total fund required for 
implementation of the programme. As a percentage of total LRT project funding, GCF requested 
contributions can be summarized as follows:  
(a) 
Grant funding: is 1.14 per cent; and 
(b) 
The senior loan: is 13.34 per cent. 
53. 
The grant funding from GCF has been earmarked as follows:

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 106 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
About 93.9 per cent of the GCF grant funding will be spent or on the activities of 
Component component 2, covering that will cover: Urban urban Integration integration 
with NMT and Connectivityconnectivity/Accessibility accessibility activities; and. 
(b) 
The balance of 6.1 per cent, which is the GCF grant has been earmarked for Capacity 
capacity-Building building and Gender gender Measuresmeasures. 
1.6.2. 
Co-financing, leveraging and mobilizing long-term investment 
54. 
The USD 271.3 million requested from GCF will be complemented by USD 1,602 million 
from CABEI and the selected concessionaire. The senior loan from GCF as well as the sum from 
CABEI are expected to flow to the Government of Costa Rica, which will enable it to pay the 
CAPEX bridging fund to the concessionaire, which should in turn leverage private investment of 
USD 1,302.0 from the private sector concessionaire as a member of the PPP investment. This 
will yield an indicative leveraging ratio between public investments (CABEI and GCF financing) 
and private investments of about 1:2.4. This can be considered an effective and efficient use of 
funds for the LRT project. 
55. 
Other key performance indices of the financing scheme of this project can be 
summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The approximately 86 per cent co-financing funds will be co-financed basically through 
private sector capital (around 70 per cent) and through a loan from CABEI (around 16 
per cent); 
(b) 
The GCF loan has a lower interest rate than the CABEI loan, which is important for the 
Government of Costa Rica as it reduces fiscal spending; 
(c) 
GCF financing ensures the project viability and assists in the crowding in of private 
capital through the PPP; 
(d) 
The concessionaire will receive a subsidy of slightly less than 60 per cent through funds 
provided through senior loans from CABEI and GCF to the Government of Costa Rica as a 
CAPEX bridging fund (neither equity nor debt) to make the project financially feasible 
for the concessionaire; 
(e) 
Using only the CAPEX of the LRT, a financial analysis showed that the project can deliver 
an economic internal rate of return of about 26 per cent.30          
56. 
The independent TAP is of the opinion that these financial performances discussed in 
paragraphs 53–54 above are an indication of the sound cost-effectiveness of the project when 
compared with benchmarks of similar projects recently funded by GCF.  
1.6.3. 
Cost-efficiency 
57. 
The project is expected to deliver about 7.62 MtCO2eq of GHG emission reductions over 
the lifetime of the project. The efficiency metrics that will be delivered by this project 
intervention were estimated as follows: 
(a) 
Total project financing = USD 1,873.3 million; 
(b) 
Requested GCF amount = USD 271.3 million; 
(c) 
Expected lifetime GHG emissions = 7,622,805 tCO2eq; 
(d) 
Estimated cost per tCO2eq ((a)/(c)) = USD 246/tCO2eq; and 
 
30 The economic benefits are the justification for realizing subsidies as without these the LRT would not be 
established.

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 107 
 
 
 
 
(e) 
Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq ((b)/(c)) = USD 36/tCO2eq. 
58. 
The independent TAP concludes that the GCF mitigation cost of USD 36/tCO2eq, as 
presented above, when compared with other mitigation projects funded by GCF is high. 
However, when the external benefits of the project due to time savings, positive health and 
environmental impacts, vehicle operating costs savings and reduced accidentality are added to 
the project’s benefits, this may represent excellent value for money. The possibility that a 
concessionaire may not be identified and selected in time after the GCF funding approval has 
been given by the Board remains a tangible risk to the cost-effectiveness of this project. 
However, given the number of international private sector transportation infrastructure 
developers who have registered their interest in this project, the independent TAP is of the 
opinion that this remaining risk may turn out to have only a marginal impact on the success of 
the PPP investment.  
59. 
The independent TAP therefore concludes that the efficiency and effectiveness of 
implementation of this proposed project will be moderately high. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
60. 
The independent TAP recommends that the Board approve this LRT project proposed 
for implementation in the GAM area of San Josée, Costa Rica.

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 108 
 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP166) 
Proposal name: 
Light Rail Transit for the Greater Metropolitan Area (GAM) 
Accredited entity: 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) 
Country/(ies): 
Costa Rica 
Project/programme size:  
Large 
 
Impact potential 
Thanks for the review. We have no further comment to add. 
 
 
Paradigm shift potential 
Thanks for the review. We have no further comment to add. 
 
 
Sustainable development potential 
Thanks for the review. We have no further comment to add. 
 
 
Needs of the recipient 
Thanks for the review. We have no further comment to add. 
 
 
Country ownership 
Thanks for the review. We have no further comment to add. 
 
 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.29/02/Add.02 
Page 109 
 
 
 
 
Thanks for the review.  
We are aware that the mitigation cost compared to other GCF mitigation projects are relatively 
high. As also mentioned by the iTAP the project has however significant positive sustainable 
development benefits improving air quality, health, social well-being, accessibility to 
affordable mobility for the poor and liveability of the city. Transport mitigation projects tend 
to be more complex and have higher GHG mitigation costs than interventions in the energy or 
industrial area.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
Thanks for the review. 
Transport contributes almost one-quarter of the current global energy-related GHG emissions 
and is growing faster than any other energy end-use sector. GHG emissions from transport are 
anticipated to rise from today’s levels by nearly 20% by 2030 and close to 50% by year 2050 
unless major action is undertaken. Limiting the global temperature increase to below 2 degrees 
Celsius requires changing this transport emissions trajectory and GCF interventions in the 
transport sector. The project goes beyond establishing solely an urban mass transit system but 
builds a comprehensive new mobility system integrating public transport with non-motorized 
transport and with components of transit oriented development. Long-term structural changes 
are thus possible towards ultra-low carbon emission mobility in the larger urban zone of the 
metropolitan area.

=== PAGE 110 ===
Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
Funding proposal for the Green Climate Fund for the passenger 
express train in the Greater Metropolitan Area of Costa Rica 
Customer 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration 
Version 
07 
Date 
29/04/2021 
Responsible 
Nathyeli Acuña 
Review 
Jürg Grütter and Verena Arauz 
Contact 
Rte. des Esserts 92, 1854 Leysin, Switzerland 
jgruetter@transport-ghg.com, www.transport-ghg.com 
Gender documentation for FP166

=== PAGE 111 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
2 
Acronyms and Abbreviations  
 
CGR 
General Comptroller of the Republic 
COSEVI 
Road Safety Council 
COVID-19 
Coronavirus Disease 
ECLAC 
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 
ENSSR 
National Survey on Sexual and Reproductive Health 
GDI 
G Development Indicators 
GIZ 
German Society for International Cooperation 
HDI 
Human Development Index 
ILO 
International Labor Organization 
INAMU 
National Women's Institute 
INEC 
National Institute of Statistics and Census 
OECD 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
PIEG 
National Policy for Effective Equality between Women and Men 
WEF 
World Economic Forum

=== PAGE 112 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
3 
 
Content 
 
Acronyms and Abbreviations ...................................................................................................... 2 
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 4 
2. Background ............................................................................................................................ 7 
3. Economic Participation of Women in Costa Rica .................................................................... 9 
4. Advances in Women's Sexual and Reproductive Health .......................................................18 
5. Violence Against Women in Costa Rica ................................................................................19 
6. Barriers for Women in the Transport Sector ..........................................................................24 
7. Gender Action Plan ...............................................................................................................36 
Bibliography and References ....................................................................................................48

=== PAGE 113 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
4 
1. Introduction  
 
Costa Rica has made great advances in gender issues over the last few decades. This has responded to 
some extent to the granting of rights and other social and economic advances in the country. The country 
has registered a sustained increase in per capita income and human development levels, which allows for 
better access to services, opportunities and a higher level of quality of life.  
For example, from 1990 to 2019, the country has increased the per capita income of its inhabitants almost 
7 times, as shown in Figure 1 (World Bank, 2020). Also, the Human Development Index (HDI) ( (United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 2020) presents an upward trend since 1990, where the country 
went from having a medium to high level of development, surpassing the average level at the global level, 
as shown in Figure 2.  
Figure 1: Per capita income behavior in Costa Rica (1990-2019, USD) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from (World Bank, 2020) 
 
Figure 2: Human Development Index Costa Rica and the world (1990-2018) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from HDI 2020 
$1,831.00 
$8,141.91 
$12,238.37 
 $-
 $7,000.00
 $14,000.00
1990
2000
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Per capita income (USD$, actual value)
Year
0.655
0.794
0.598
0.731
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Human Development Index ranking
Year
 Costa Rica
World

=== PAGE 114 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
5 
In addition to social progress, Costa Rica enjoys political stability, given the uninterrupted nature of its 
democracy since 1948, the longest in Latin America. In the last 15 years, economic growth has averaged 
4%, a trend that is higher than the 3.8% of the region and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD) countries. The country has changed its trade matrix from being an agro-exporting 
country to diversifying its production and offering skilled labor (OECD, 2017). This has led to an 
improvement in the quality of jobs in the country, where both men and women have benefited.  
Poverty has a female face. Although the country has good economic and social performance, poverty 
levels are concentrated in female-headed households with a higher proportion of members, including 
children and the elderly. According to the OECD there is an increase in income inequality because skilled 
worker wages and contributory pensions grew more  (OECD, 2017). 
Costa Rica has focused on the institutional and regulatory framework in order to improve the conditions 
of women, with the aim of having accelerated returns at social and economic levels, however, gender 
gaps are persistent. According to data from the World Economic Forum (WEF) (FEM, 2019)In the last issue 
of the Global Gender Gap Report, Costa Rica was ranked 13th out of 153 countries. The country occupies 
the second best position in the Latin American and Caribbean region, only surpassed by Nicaragua (which 
is in one of the top 5 positions worldwide). When comparing the country's results in 2006 with those of 
2020, there were improvements in all sub- indexes except the health and survival dimensions. In addition, 
the country made great progress when women nearly doubled their political participation and 
empowerment, reflecting parity in central government ministerial bodies and achieving a score of 0.84. 
In addition, there is no gender gap in access to education, but as will be seen below, there stare great 
differences between the type of training and skills women acquire when compared to men. Finally, a 
better gender equality situation in the national territory responds mainly to improvements in access to 
economic opportunities that are reflected in an increase in the participation of women as part of the labor 
force. 
Although Costa Rican women are working at a higher rate than almost two decades ago, there are still 
barriers to access when compared to men. Only about half of the women who are able to work are 
included in the active labor force (according to recent data from the National Institute of Statistics and 
Census (INEC) (INEC, 2020)The net labor participation rate of women at the end of 2019 was 54.1, and 
this situation worsened with the arrival of the COVID-19 health emergency. By the second half of 2020, 
23.3% less women were in the labor market than in the same period in 2019. Men achieved a number 10 
percentage points higher (13.8%). The above situation denotes an exacerbated vulnerability on the part 
of women regarding the quality, stability and productivity of their jobs.  
For the pre-COVID-19 scenario, a research study by the State of the Nation Program (2019) concludes that 
Costa Rican women are not working due to lack of job opportunities. Seventy-six percent of women who 
work do so in low-productivity sectors. In addition, the 2015 Latinobarómetro report (Latinobarómetro, 
2015) shows that gender norms about women's roles in the workplace are far from egalitarian. In Costa 
Rica, 43% of the population believes that women should work outside the home only if their partner does 
not earn enough, a much higher percentage when compared to countries such as Chile (20%) or Uruguay 
(27%).

=== PAGE 115 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
6 
All of the above means that the closing of the educational gap has not translated into the productive and 
economic participation of women. According to data from the Economic Commission for Latin America 
and the Caribbean (ECLAC) (ECLAC, 2013) In Costa Rica, 32.7% of women do not have their own income, 
three times more than men (10.5%), a percentage slightly higher than the rest of the women in the region 
(29%). Not having their own income restricts women's autonomy, and therefore limits their decision-
making and results in a deterioration or slowdown in the human development indices. Women's economic 
participation, their sexual and reproductive health, and a life free of violence are women's human rights, 
which in turn play a key role in the development of countries, contributing significantly to the reduction 
of poverty and inequality and to the increase of the GDP1. 
The following report will detail the main challenges facing women in Costa Rica. It is mainly an analysis of 
gender issues in gaps associated with access to the labor market, access to opportunities and services, 
physical autonomy and decision-making. This diagnosis will make it possible to inform adjacent and direct 
activities of the investment in the intercity electric passenger train in order to increase gender equality, a 
necessary condition for achieving higher levels of development in the country.  
The following document was created assessing information from:  
• 
Desk review of different sources of information available online. These sources range from 
national statistics, data and reports (such as INEC, UCR, INAMU, Ministry of Health, Ministry of 
Culture, Ministry of Public Works and Transport, Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry of 
Justice, General Comptroller of the Republic, State of the Nation, among others) and international 
organizations initiatives carried out from or for Costa Rica (Inter-American Development Bank, 
World Economic Forum, World Bank, United Nations Organization, GIZ, AFD, Latinobarometer, 
etc.)  
• 
Consultation with stakeholders: to ensure synergies and alignment with initiatives that are being 
designed or implemented in the current area of the project. The following are the organization 
that were consulted: 
o GEF/UNDP 
o Incofer 
o INAMU 
o Multilevel Technical Table (Office of the First Lady, the National Institute of Housing and 
Urban Development (INVU), the Institute of Municipal Development and Advisory 
Services (IFAM) and the National Union of Local Governments (UNGL), the Ministry of 
Planning, the Ministry of Environment and Energy (MINAE), the Ministry of Finance, the 
National Registry, the Costa Rican Railway Institute (INCOFER) and the Ministry of Public 
Works and Transport (MOPT). On the private sector side, the Chamber of Commerce, the 
Chamber of Construction and the Council for Real Estate Development (CODI) participate, 
as well as international cooperation actors such as the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP), the German Cooperation Agency (GIZ) and the Global Environment 
 
1 World Bank studies (2012) indicate that in the first decade of the 21st century, female labor market income reduced extreme 
poverty by 30% and inequality by 28% in the region. On the other hand, Cuberes and Teignier (2016) conclude that if female labor 
participation in Latin America and the Caribbean were to reach the level of male labor participation, per capita GDP would be 
16% higher.

=== PAGE 116 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
7 
Facility (GEF), and representatives of the academic sector and civil society (urban 
collectives, development associations, impacted population). 
The reader can also find a list of civil society organizations that work in the country. This list does not 
pretend to be exhaustive, but it includes relevant information about the leverage and scope of each 
institution.  
2. Background  
 
Costa Rica has been committed to closing gender gaps for almost half a century. For more than 45 years, 
the Costa Rican government has generated institutional actions that promote gender equality. For 
example: (i) in 1974 the Office of Programs for Women and the Family was created within the Ministry of 
Culture, (ii) since 1990 the country has had the Law for the Promotion of Real Equality for Women, (iii) in 
1998 the National Women's Institute (INAMU) was created as an autonomous and decentralized 
institution led by the Minister for the Status of Women.  
Costa Rica has a consolidated regulatory framework to empower women and close gender gaps. One of 
the most recent advances is the creation and implementation of the National Policy for Effective Equality 
between Women and Men (PIEG) and its 2018-2030 action plan, as a follow-up to the PIEG 2007-2017. 
The implementation of the PIEG seeks to generate inter-institutional coordination at both the public and 
private levels, focusing on areas such as employment, health and education. The PIEG focuses on four 
strategic areas: (i) mainstreaming of equal rights, (ii) time distribution, (iii) wealth distribution and (iv) 
power distribution; and it also seeks to expand access to opportunities for women in multiple sectors, 
including public transportation and climate change.  
INAMU acts as the coordinator of the PIEG and due to its role as the Ministry of Women, it is responsible 
to engage with other ministries and institutions to work towards gender equality. The PIEG 2018-2030 
stablished 4 strategic area to ensure efficiency during the implementation of the Policy.  
• 
Coordination: INAMU is the responsible of the coordination of the PIEG. The execution of the PIEG 
is responsibility of the central Government, public institutions and Municipalities.  
• 
Policy level: A High Commission is formed, it includes the participation of authorities of the 
Executive Power (Ministry of Public Education, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Health and Rectory 
of the Social Sector, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of National Planning), Legislative Assembly, the 
Judicial Power, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal and the Municipalities. These institutions need to 
appoint their representatives as advisers or consultants to participate of the comission. Its main 
function is to provide follow-up, support and political incidence for the advancement in 
compliance with the results of the PIEG and its action plans. 
• 
Technical level: INAMU leads this structure, and it has representatives from institutions ans 
sectors that are linked to the implementation of the PIEG. INAMU and the representatives hold 
periodic meetings every 2 months.  
• 
Local level: Local governments throughout the Development Regional Councils will be in 
responsible to implement the PIEG.

=== PAGE 117 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
8 
 
At the local level, the INAMU coordinate with the Municipal Governments to ensure the application of 
the PIEG, created the Oficinas Municipales de la Mujer (Women’s Municipal Officies, OFIM). In 1996, the 
National Government created the OFIMs. Across the entire territory, there are 67 OFIMs out of a total of 
81 municipalities. They act as local affirmative mechanisms for advancing women's rights and are part of 
the municipal structure. They carry out actions in different thematic areas, such as attention to domestic 
violence, promoting women's rights, entrepreneurship, economic rights, citizen participation and political 
rights, health, and recreation. Also, they carry out actions to promote a gender mainstreaming approach 
across the municipal work. The authorities develop gender equality policies and discuss them to create 
programs and incorporate the gender perspective within the municipality's budgetary structure. INAMU 
provides support and technical advice to these instances and has promoted municipal policies as a 
strategy for gender mainstreaming. (INAMU, 2021). OFIMs have limited resources and most of their work 
is focusing in addressing cases of domestic violence.  
Despite these efforts, women are still underrepresented within policy and decision making. The National 
Government has made an effort to ensure gender parity within the cabinet, (Rivera, 2018) however, that 
does not translate to other policy making structures. For instance, a third of the total decision-making 
position with the national government, public institutions management and the Parliament are held by 
women (as opposed to the 66 percent held by men). (FEM, 2019) There is not recent data on how the 
public institutions promote and retain women for leadership positions. Also, women leaders in the private 
sector and underrepresented: only 15 percent of top management positions belong to women, while 85 
percent belong to men. (FEM, 2019) 
Also, data from the ECLAC  (ECLAC, 2020) indicates that only a third of the judges are women (33.3% in 
2018), less than 1 in 5 mayors are women (14.8% in 2018) and less than half of city councilors (45.6%) are 
represented by women. This represents a constraint for women to be involved in decision making at all 
levels, including decisions at a local level (e.g.: women are underrepresented as mayors) where a lot of 
programs and policies are designed and implemented. Without a full representation, women’s needs are 
not being able to be addresses as they are unable to fully enjoy access to opportunities and participate as 
agents of change.  
Less traditional sectors for women, such as transport, still have significant gender gaps. In Costa Rica, 
nearly 60% of public transport users are women, yet there are very few women in decision-making 
positions or as employees in the sector, and only 10% of bus driver positions are held by women. This 
figure is lower when it comes to cab drivers, where women represent less than 10% of the drivers in this 
service2 . In the case of the passenger train in the Metropolitan Area, there is only one woman on the staff 
who operates this means of transport3, who serves as an assistant to the train driver. In order to promote 
gender equality and address persistent gaps in the transportation sector, it is important that projects that 
support initiatives such as the Greater Metropolitan Area LRT include actions that include the gender 
perspective and propose indicators that measure concrete results. To achieve the above, it is necessary 
that these operations have a gender perspective from their design (at the level of diagnostics, proposed 
 
 2 Cosevi (2020). Open data. 
 3 
Journalistic note. Amelia Rueda (2019).

=== PAGE 118 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
9 
activities and measurement of results), in order to improve the inclusion of women in all spheres: decision-
making, service providers and users of the proposed services, and that their implementation be through 
an action plan. 
There are sensitive gaps in the production of information that make it impossible to quantify more 
precisely the gaps and challenges women face. There are mainly deficiencies in recognizing the geographic 
characteristics of the population and there is only the possibility of using the 2011 Census (INEC, 2011) to 
understand the differences at the cantonal level of the various indicators. For its part, there is a wide lack 
of statistics related to physical, psychological and sexual violence that impacts the lives of women in both 
public and private spaces. In the absence of sources of information that systematically collect data and 
gaps, it is not possible to implement solutions that address specific problems, or to deal with them in the 
most efficient manner with tailored solutions that prevent or address their incidence. 
3. Economic Participation of Women in Costa Rica  
 
32.7% of women in Costa Rica have no income of their own4, compared to 10.5% of men. Women also 
face greater complications in rural areas, where 42.8% (11.3% of men) of women have no income, a higher 
number than in urban areas (29.4%; and 10.2% of men) (Figure 1) (CEPALSTAT, 2020). Although the gender 
gap is wide, the country has achieved a progressive reduction since the beginning of 2000, where nearly 
half of the women did not have their own income.  
Figure 1: Percentage of men and women without own income (Costa Rica, 2000-2018) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from CEPALSTAT 2020 
 
 
4 
  Proportion of the female (male) population aged 15 years and over not receiving individual monetary income and not 
studying (according to their activity status) in relation to the total female (male) population aged 15 years and over not 
studying The result is expressed as a percentage. 
10.3
10.5
49.3
32.7
0.0
30.0
60.0
         2000
         2001
         2002
         2003
         2004
         2005
         2006
         2007
         2008
         2009
         2010
         2011
         2012
         2013
         2014
         2015
         2016
         2017
         2018
Percentage no income
Year
Men
Women

=== PAGE 119 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
10 
Without income, women are at a disadvantage due to the loss of their autonomy to access goods and 
services, limiting their living conditions and therefore being more affected by poverty than men. According 
to ECLAC data (CEPALSTAT, 2020) in Costa Rica, 47.8% of women in couples do not have their own income, 
five times more than men in couples (Figure 2). This also responds to cultural patterns and gender norms 
revealed by the Latinobarometer (2015): 43% of the Costa Rican population considers that women should 
only work if their partner's salary is not sufficient. 
Figure 2: Percentage of men and women without own income by household type (Costa Rica, 2013) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from CEPALSTAT 2020 
 
The proportion of women without income in the country is slightly higher than the average recorded for 
the region. For example, according to data from 2014, for every 100 men aged 20 to 59 living in poor 
households, there were 125 women of the same age group in a similar situation. The female poverty index 
in Costa Rica is higher than the average for Latin America (118.2) and for countries such as Honduras 
(100.7); Guatemala (101.9); El Salvador (103.8) and Nicaragua (104.3), although it is exceeded by the 
Dominican Republic (132.3), Chile (136.7) and Uruguay (142.5) (Benavente M.C., 2014). 
Poverty also tends to belong to female-headed households. According to INEC data for 2019 (INEC, 2020), 
poverty is concentrated in about 20% of the population, and about 6% of the population lives in extreme 
poverty. The area with the highest proportion of poor households is the Brunca Region, where 1 out of 
every 3 households is in poverty and 9.2% live in extreme poverty. In the case of the Central Region, 17% 
of households are in poverty and 4.32% in extreme poverty. Between 2018 and 2019, there was a slight 
increase in the number of households led by women, from 39.94% to 41.01%. By 2019, 48% of all poor 
households are headed by women, and 49.38% of all households in extreme poverty. In other words, 
there is a higher proportion of poor households that are led by women than by men. There are more 
women heads of household in urban areas (44.42% of total households) than in rural areas (32.02%), yet 
more than half of poor households in urban areas are headed by women (51%) and 54% of households in 
extreme poverty. In the case of the Central Region, the pattern is repeated: more than half of poor 
households are headed by women (50.3%) and extreme poverty hits these families hardest (53.43%).  
There are territorial differences associated with the multidimensionality of poverty and female head of 
household. For some of the cantons in the area affected by the Passenger Train (identified with * in Figure 
3.7
9.0
16.9
1.6
47.8
17.1
4.3
12.4
19.5
4.7
35.4
19.5
0.0
30.0
60.0
Single person/no
links
Households with a
primary partner
Homes without a
primary partner
Single person/no
links
Households with a
primary partner
Homes without a
primary partner
No own income
No own income
Men
Women
Porcenje no income
Costa Rica
Latin America

=== PAGE 120 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
11 
3), compared with other neighboring cantons, the percentage of households headed by a woman 
(whether or not she has a spouse) varies. Among the cantons with the highest percentage of women 
heads of household are Tibás, Montes de Oca and San José, which are in the area affected by the 
passenger train, and among those with the lowest percentage, cantons such as El Guarco, Barva or San 
Isidro (cantons not affected by the means of transportation). By superimposing these data on household 
headship with other data on inequality (Gini index, see Figure 3), or even poverty (poverty gap or severity), 
it can be seen that, although there is not a strong correlation, the cantons with a higher percentage of 
female headship are usually associated with a lower Gini index. However, the relationship between 
households with at least one deficiency and female labor occupation at the canton level is unequivocal 
and negative. Specifically, the correlation between these two variables is -0.63. In other words, as female 
labor occupation increases, there will be a lower degree of shortages in households. This is a simple 
explanation that describes that the higher the employment rate, the higher the hypothetical employment 
rate, which could mean adding an extra income to the household that would serve to mitigate basic 
deficiencies. As an approximation, this exercise makes it possible to analyze how different types of 
indicators vary with respect to the effect on the train; however, it should be noted that the difference 
may not necessarily be due to the neighboring railway infrastructure, but rather to the proximity of the 
city centers.  
Figure 3: Female leadership by canton (over total households) and inequality (Costa Rica, 2011) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from Census 2011, INEC (2020) 
 
There are diverse characteristics that, when correlated, can explain territorial characteristics with respect 
to the head of household. This explanation becomes even stronger when it is verified that the correlation 
between variables of the same branch is also high, as can be seen in the following table that summarizes 
various correlations.

=== PAGE 121 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
12 
Table 1: Correlation coefficient between variables 
  
Poverty Gap 
Severity of poverty 
Average members per 
household 
of households with at least one 
deficiency 
0,90 
0,90 
0,78 
Difference Occupation (Male - 
Female) 
0,90 
0,90 
0,76 
Female Occupation by canton 
-0,84 
-0,83 
-0,74 
Source: Own elaboration with data from Census 2011, INEC (2020) 
 
Those cantons with the greatest difference between male and female employment tend to be poorer and 
have more severe poverty. Conversely, cantons with higher female employment tend to have a smaller 
poverty gap and severity of poverty. There is also a significant negative relationship between female 
employment and occupants per household, which indicates, taking into account existing data, that more 
female employment leads to fewer household members, characteristics associated with the fertility rate 
per woman and entry into the labor market. By calculating some of these characteristics, this trend is 
confirmed (Graphs 4, 5 and 6). 
 
Figure 4: Average members per household and occupation by canton (Costa Rica, 2011) 5: 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from Census 2011 (INEC, 2020) 
 
 
5 List of cantons: 
1 = El Guarco  
2 = Alajuela*3  
= Alajuelita 
4 = Homeless5  
= Barva  
6 = San Rafael 
7 = Goicoechea*8  
= Santo Domingo*9  
= San Isidro 
10 = Tibás*11  
= San José*12  
= Belén* 
13 = The 
Union*14 =  
Moravia15  
= Heredia 
16 = Curridabat*17 =  
Escazú18  
= Santa Ana 
19 = Montes de Oca 
 
1
2
3
45
6
7 8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
15
20
25
30
35
40
Average occupants per household
Difference between Male and Female Occupation by Canton

=== PAGE 122 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
13 
Figure 5: Households with at least one deficiency and female occupation (Costa Rica, 2011)  
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from Census 2011 (INEC, 2020) 
 
Figure 6: Ratio of households with shortages, average number of inhabitants per household and 
female labor force (Costa Rica, 2011) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from Census 2011 (INEC, 2020) 
 
On the other hand, there are cultural patterns and gender norms that extend into time-use behaviors and 
the sexual division of labor. The use of time in unpaid work is one of the main barriers for women to enter 
the labor market under equal conditions and obtain their own income. According to data from the 
National Survey on the Use of Time (2017) 6(INEC, 2017) on average, women in Costa Rica spend more 
than twice as much time as men on unpaid domestic work (33 hours and 38 minutes per week vs. 13 hours 
and 26 minutes per week, respectively). The tasks that demand the greatest investment of women's time 
 
6 
 The Time Use Surveys (TUS) allow us to know how women and men distribute their time in their daily activities, in addition 
to investigating topics such as unpaid domestic work, free time, personal needs, among others. 
1
2
3
4
5 6
7
8 9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
1718
19
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
of households with at least one 
deficiency
Female occupation by canton
Correl = -0.63

=== PAGE 123 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
14 
are related to food and care. Only 46% of children between the ages of 3 and 5 in Costa Rica attend 
daycare centers or pre-school education; while in OECD countries the average is 84%. (OECD, 2017). In 
addition, the gender gap is exacerbated for the 20-35 age group, where women perform this type of work 
up to three times more than men (39 hours compared to 13 hours and 40 minutes). Also, the age group 
where they spend the most hours in unpaid work is women between 36 and 54 (about 41 hours a week). 
Women, then, have less time to get and keep a job. The net participation rate of women in 2020 is 44% 
(6 percentage points lower than that registered during the period of 2019), while the male rate is 71% (4 
percentage points lower than the previous period). During the emergency of COVID-19, this situation 
aggravated unemployment for men, but especially for women. While the unemployment rate for women 
was around 15% during 2019, for the same period in 2020, women's unemployment reached 30%, both 
figures higher than men's (10% during 2019 and 20%) after the situation of confinement and economic 
slowdown caused by the effects of the global pandemic (INEC, 2020).  
In working age, there are more women out of the workforce than men. In the country, the number of 
women of working age (1,988,531) is very similar to the number of men (2,001,318). However, the 
number of women in the labor force (885,967) is almost half that of men (1,410,663). On the other hand, 
the number of unemployed men (281,939) is only slightly higher than the number of women (269,434). 
This means that in relative terms, although the sizes of the male and female populations are similar, 
women have a greater chance of facing barriers to access the labor market (willingness, ability, etc.) and 
also of being unemployed (INEC, 2020). 
Women have less access to social security than men. Of the total number of women in the workforce, 
27.9% do not have social security, a percentage slightly higher than the 25.2% registered for men. During 
the COVID-19 emergency, nearly 46% of women ceased to have access to the right to social security, a 
proportion greater than the 21% fewer men who did so. Without access to social security, women tend 
to enter conditions of poverty and extreme poverty during the elderly stage in greater proportion than 
men. 
During the COVID-19 emergency, women with lower levels of education have been the most affected by 
unemployment. According to INEC data  (INEC, 2020) when looking at the educational levels of those who 
lost their jobs during the global pandemic, 54% of women with incomplete primary or lower levels of 
education lost their jobs compared to the previous period, a much higher figure than 24% for men. For 
their part, 10.3% of women with university degrees were also affected by unemployment, but men in the 
same situation were less affected by the phenomenon (9.9%). 
In addition to the economic slowdown and the increase in unemployment as a result of the emergence of 
COVID-19, there are other reasons why women are unable to access the labor market. For example, 
women report that they have to take on a greater proportion of household tasks than men.  
Access to opportunities to reach the most productive jobs is limited for women and responds to patterns 
that are present throughout women's life cycle. According to WEF data (WEF, 2019) as a result, the gender 
education gap is closed in the country. In general terms, almost 100 percent of the population is literate 
(97.9 percent of women and 97.8 percent of men), and for the primary, secondary and tertiary education 
cycles, women attend with the same incidence or more than men (96.3 vs. 96.4; 84.3 vs. 80.7; and 60.7

=== PAGE 124 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
15 
percent vs. 50 percent). However, when an analysis is made of access to different fields and, in particular, 
those careers or professions that are more productive, women have less opportunities than men.  
When women pursue professional careers, they focus on lower productivity sectors or fields of care. 
According to WEF data (FEM, 2019)In the country, the majority of women enrolled in tertiary education 
do so primarily in the health sciences or in the field of education, both of which are related to care and 
gender roles. The gap between men and women in more productive fields such as those associated with 
science, technology, mathematics and engineering has reduced spaces for women: only 8% of women 
decide to opt for this type of career (Graph 7).  
Figure 7: Percentage of men and women according to university enrollment (Costa Rica, n.d.) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with WEF data (2020) 
 
There are barriers to entry to the STEM sectors from early stages of the life cycle and this is reflected in 
the jobs that are occupied by women. In Costa Rica, only 44% of science and technology researchers are 
women, a lower proportion than in countries such as Trinidad and Tobago (55%), Argentina (51%) and 
Uruguay (48%) (Science and Technology Indicators Network, 2017). Data from the National Learning 
Institute (INA) show that women are very little integrated into specialties such as vehicle mechanics (7% 
of students are women), telecommunications and telematics (20%), electricity and electronics (6%). In 
addition, women make up 32% of the total number of students enrolled in engineering careers and 36% 
of the graduates (State of the Nation Program, 2019).  
The lower quality of women's jobs, coupled with problems of discrimination, makes it difficult to close the 
gender wage gap. In relation to labor income, women earn on average about 90% of what men earn (INEC, 
2020). There are important differences in the types of jobs men and women hold. For example, the income 
received by self-employed women is 45% lower than that received by men in the same condition. Also, in 
both public and private sector jobs, women earn less than men (7% less and 15% less, respectively). 
Women in lower-skilled positions receive an average of 15% less than men in the same position. It is 
important to note that, in addition, salaried women earn an average of 4% more than men. (Chart 8) 
8%
1%
34%
26%
4%
18%
2%
2%
3%
7%
8%
3%
27%
2%
3%
16%
13%
9%
12%
3%
5%
7%
0%
20%
40%
STEM Careers
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing
and Veterinary
Arts and Humanities
Administration and Law
Education
Engineering, Manufacturing
and Construction
Health
Communication
Technologies
Natural Sciences,
Mathematics and Statistics
Services
Social sciences, journalism
and information
Vocational training
PhD graduates
Percentage of registration
Women
Men

=== PAGE 125 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
16 
Figure 8: Average income difference between men and women (Costa Rica, 2020) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from INEC (2020) 
 
For almost all occupational sectors, women receive lower income than men. According to INEC data, there 
are sectors where women receive less than half of what men do (Figure 9). This is a situation that expels 
women from considering these types of niches or categories of employment.  
Figure 9: Average income difference between men and women by occupational sector (Costa Rica, 2020) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from INEC (2020) 
 
Women's ventures tend to be less productive and less profitable than those of men. Women 
entrepreneurs are mainly concentrated in micro and small enterprises in commerce, services, and 
manufacturing (there is little representation in high-productivity sectors or STEMs), and have lower 
profitability than those owned by men. In the case of Costa Rica, according to data from the Enterprise 
Survey (World Bank, 2020)In Costa Rica in 2010, the percentage of firms with female owners is 43.5%, 
which is very similar to the regional average (43%). However, only 15.4% of firms have women in senior 
management positions, a lower percentage than that recorded for peers in the region (21.8%). 
In Costa Rica, the transport sector, one of the most productive sectors, employs very few women directly 
or indirectly, and presents barriers at all levels for them. According to the Inter-American Development 
Bank (IDB) (IDB, 2016) in the country, less than one-fifth (17%) of the human resources employed in the 
-50%
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
Highly skilled
occupation
Average
Qualified
Occupation
Unskilled
Occupation
Public
Private
Wage earner Own account
Employer
Occupational group
Institutional Sector
Position in Main Employment
Percentage of difference
-18%
-4%
-1%
-63%
-104%
-100%
12%
-15%
-110%
-60%
-10%
40%
Professionals,
scientists and
intellectuals
Technicians
and mid-level
professionals
Administrative
support staff
Service
workers and
store and
market
vendors
Farmers and
skilled workers
in agriculture,
forestry and
fisheries
Officers,
workers and
craftsmen of
mechanical
and other
trades
Plant and
machine
operators and
assemblers
Elementary
occupations
Percentage of the difference

=== PAGE 126 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
17 
transport sector are women, slightly more than the 15% recorded for the Latin American and Caribbean 
region. In addition, according to data from the Costa Rican Road Safety Council (COSEVI), 100% of drivers 
in Costa Rica (COSEVI, 2020)Only 30% are women. In recent years, men have received a leave of absence 
almost twice as often as women. This gap is greater when analyzed by the type of license drivers have for 
productive work. Only 10% of licensed bus drivers are women, and between 7% and 12% of airport and 
regular cab concessions are owned by women (although this does not mean that they are the drivers of 
the vehicle). Currently, there are no female drivers in the railroad sector and only one woman is in a 
technical position within INCOFER.  
Other sources of information denote the same problems and gaps in women's access to the labor market. 
According to Valeria Lentini (Lentini, Valeria, 2020) as a result, sectoral job segregation is present in all 
sectors globally. Sectors such as construction, transportation, logistics and communications networks are 
predominantly represented by men, while third-party care sectors such as education, health and other 
social services are dominated by women. This situation is further exacerbated when the consequences of 
the health emergency caused by COVID-19 are analyzed, in which 33% of Costa Ricans will see high 
negative impacts on their jobs (ILO, 2020), but particularly for some of the sectors where women are more 
prominent. Table 2 shows the population at risk and the projections on the impact of job losses and female 
participation by sector.  
Table 2: Workers at risk from a sectoral perspective 
Economy Sector 
Current impact of the crisis on 
economic production 
Female participation in sectoral 
employment 
Public Administration 
Low 
39,1% 
Teaching and health 
Low 
61.4% 
Agriculture, livestock and fishing 
Medium-Low 
13.1% 
Construction 
Medium 
1,9% 
Others 1/ 
Medium 
18,4% 
Financial and insurance brokerage 
Medium 
52,7% 
Professional and administrative 
support activities 
Mediu, 
33,3% 
Transport and storage 
Medium-High 
12% 
Communication and others 2/ 
Medium-High 
38,4% 
Households as employers 
High 
89,2% 
Manufacturing Industry 
High 
28,1% 
Trade and repair 
High 
39,9% 
Hotels and restaurants 
High 
63,3% 
1/ Includes mining and quarrying, electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supplies, water supplies, sewage disposal and waste and pollution 
management.  
2/ Includes information and communications, real estate, arts, entertainment and recreation, activities of extraterritorial organisations and 
bodies, and other service activities. 
Source: ILO (2020) 
 
The consequences of the COVID-19 emergency exacerbate women's vulnerability. According to the ILO 
(ILO, 2020) as a result, women experience a dual vulnerability as they work in sectors most affected by 
the economic slowdown brought about by the pandemic (services) and as they perform front-line jobs in 
response to the pandemic (e.g., nurses). Eighty-seven percent of women who do work are in the tertiary 
sector, up from 59 percent for men. On the other hand, women have less access to social protection

=== PAGE 127 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
18 
services and carry a disproportionate workload in the care economy (particularly the closure of study or 
care facilities). 
4. Advances in Women's Sexual and Reproductive Health  
  
Costa Rica's historical investments in the health sector have succeeded in offering its women a better 
quality of life thanks to the contributions made in the area of sexual and reproductive health. In particular, 
the country has reduced the maternal mortality rate, the fertility rate, the incidence of adolescent 
pregnancy and births to undeclared parents. This is due to a multidisciplinary social security system that 
is also coordinated with other relevant actors in health, education and social assistance.  
The fertility rate has been systematically reduced for decades. While in 1960 women averaged 6.7 
children, by the 1980s this figure had dropped to 3.58 children per woman. By 1995, women had an 
average of 2.58 children, and by 2010 this number was 1.88. Currently, women have an average of 1.77 
children (World Bank, 2020). 
The maternal mortality rate is one of the lowest in the region, yet inequalities persist within the country. 
While the maternal mortality rate in Latin America and the Caribbean is estimated at 74 deaths per 
100,000 births, in the country this figure is estimated at 27 maternal deaths per 100,000 births. This figure 
has been on a downward trend since 2000, when there were 40 deaths for every 100,000 births. The 
provinces of Limón and Alajuela have a higher proportion of deaths of this type than other provinces 
(INEC, 2020). 
Costa Rica has committed to a comprehensive agenda in order to contribute to the reduction of the 
number of adolescents who become mothers and has managed to reduce its incidence in recent years. 
According to data from the INEC (INEC, 2020)In 2010, 18.7% of births in the country were to women under 
19, but by 2019 this figure had fallen to 12.5%. In the provinces of Puntarenas and Limón, the data is 
higher than the national average (15% for each, respectively). 
The presence of a pregnancy during adolescence and teenage motherhood are associated with the 
initiation of sexual relations. Despite the existence of a law that prevents this, inappropriate relationships 
(adolescent - adult) are recorded that limit the autonomy of young women. According to the National 
Survey of Sexual and Reproductive Health (ENSSR) of the Ministry of Health and Central American 
Population (Ministry of Health and CCP, 2016) by the year 2015 (SSRS-15), the average age of sexual debut 
for women over 15 is 17, and for men it was 16.  
Women who had their first sexual relationship between the ages of 10 and 14 reported that their partner 
was at least 5 years older than them by 59.6%, and men older than 20 reported that their partner was 5 
to 10 years younger than them by 8.5%. This means that in many of these cases these girls and adolescents 
had sexual relations with older men, a fact that constitutes a crime in Costa Rica7 . Additionally, according 
to data from the X Population Census and VI Housing Census of 2011-INEC (INEC, 2011)In the case of girls, 
 
7 
 The Costa Rican Criminal Code provides an express prohibition on sexual relations with persons under the age of 15, even 
when there is alleged consent by the victim, and considers sexual relations with girls under the age of 13 to be rape (Articles 
156, 157 and 159 of the Criminal Code).

=== PAGE 128 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
19 
8.6% of girls and adolescents between 12 and 19 years of age and 2.6% of their male peers have ever lived 
in a marital relationship of some kind, which has a negative impact on their chances of development: 
74.5% of girls and adolescents who declare that they are or have ever been in a union do not attend the 
educational system, compared to those who are not or have ever been in a union (17%). In addition, 
among those who are or have been in a union, 88.3% declare that they do not work, and of these 57.3% 
only do unpaid domestic work (United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA, 2018)). 
A key element in assessing the possibility of women in Costa Rica to decide about their own bodies is the 
study of contraceptive prevalence. The three most widely used contraceptive methods in Costa Rica place 
the responsibility for contraception exclusively on women, and none of them protect them from sexually 
transmitted infections. The only method that does provide such protection, the male condom, has 
registered a sustained decrease in its use, reaching only 10% among men and 9.2% among women in 
union (ENSSR-15). 
In 2015, 77.8% of women aged 15-49 in  Cost Rica use some form of contraception, a slight decrease from 
the figure for 2010 (82.2%). The most used method is female sterilization (25.5%), followed by oral 
contraceptives (22.7%) and injectable contraceptives (9.2%) (ENSSR-15). The incidence of the use of 
contraceptive methods varies according to age group, educational level and geographical area. The vast 
majority of unmarried adolescents do not use any contraceptive method (only 24.6% report using some 
method); 76.2% of unmarried women who do not live in the central region say they use a contraceptive 
method and only 37.9% of unmarried women whose educational level is up to secondary school. 
5. Violence Against Women in Costa Rica  
 
The specific data on violence against women is outdated and has not been followed up. The last specific 
survey on this topic - the National Survey on Violence against Women (ENVCM) - is from 20048. 
Information has been collected in other instances, however, this impedes temporal and regional 
comparability. Efforts to replicate the 2004 survey are still scarce, although institutions at different levels 
such as INAMU, INEC and the Research Center for Women's Studies of the University of Costa Rica have 
become involved in promoting the agenda for generating data and information on this issue.  
The 2004 specialized survey on violence against women shows that 57.7% of the women surveyed 
reported having been the victim of at least one incident of physical or sexual violence at some point in 
their lives since the age of 16; 24.2% reported having suffered 4 or more such incidents. For women 
between the ages of 25 and 49, this percentage was higher (62%), although the situation during women's 
childhood and early adolescence is not much different: 48% of the women surveyed reported having 
suffered some type of abuse before the age of 15. 
The couple and the family are the areas where women have historically been most exposed to violence. 
45.5% of women report having experienced physical violence in these areas, 38.2% sexual violence and 
49.6% psychological violence from their partner (ENVCM 2004). According to ENSSR 15, in public spaces, 
close to 80% of the women surveyed state that they have suffered a situation of violence at some time. 
 
8 
 ENSSR collects information on physical and sexual violence and harassment.

=== PAGE 129 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
20 
In the student or work environment, close to 70% of the female population reports having suffered some 
type of sexual violence (almost always or always), in the case of men, the percentage is 60%9 . 
The public transport sector also concentrates high levels of violence. The presence of acts of violence 
against women inhibits them from accessing public transport and other services provided by the use of 
buses, trains or cabs. According to data from INAMU (2019), Costa Rican women constantly experience 
sexual harassment, sexual violence and other types of violence while they are users. The perpetrators are 
usually men who use violence against women. The effects of this type of behavior result in economic 
losses for families and societies by not being able to safely access their jobs or other services outside the 
home. There are limitations with respect to the generation of data and statistics that show the magnitude 
of the problem of violence against women in the facilities and services offered by INCOFER.  There is 
evidence for other countries that most acts of sexual harassment of violence against women in public 
transportation occur inside buses and trains, yet there is very little disaggregated information on the 
incidence of acts of violence or sexual harassment against women for different modes of public 
transportation. 
As in other areas, there is a lack of and limited information about women's safety and experience on public 
transport. In a survey conducted by the School of Statistics of the University of Costa Rica in the 
“Actualidades Survey” (University of Costa Rica, 2015) it is concluded that about 62% of women in the 
country face some form of violence in public spaces (a figure almost double that of men at 33%), this also 
includes situations that occur while using public transportation services. National authorities have made 
progress in creating new norms and protocols that seek to prevent and address this type of violence. 
INAMU and other relevant government institutions, such as the Ministry of Public Security, the Ministry 
of Public Works and Transport, and other organizations are acting to implement a protocol for the 
prevention of sexual harassment applicable to all public spaces, including public transport.  
In 2017, in a joint effort, INAMU and Incofer 10signed an agreement to address and prevent violence 
against women using the country's train service. The agreement consisted of a campaign to raise 
awareness about the implications of sexual harassment during train travel and the events of violence 
experienced in stations. During this initiative, 110 Incofer officials and other officials from companies that 
provide services to Incofer were trained.  
The implementation of the protocol responds to an environment of widespread violence experienced by 
women. For example, the German Society for International Cooperation (GIZ, 2018) conducted a survey 
to analyze the state of security in urban public transport. Not only do women feel less safe while using 
the services (47% of women say they do not feel safe, compared to 42% of men), but they are also more 
often victims of crime (73% of women were victims of theft compared to 63% of men) and sexual 
harassment (a result consistent with the information provided by INAMU, about 55% of women compared 
 
 9 In the ENSRR 2016 the question was asked about the frequency (always, almost always, sometimes, almost never or never) 
of having been exposed to situations that could make the workplace or study uncomfortable. The questions asked about: 
suggestive looks, approaches to your body, comments about your body or ways of dressing, macho or feminist jokes, caresses, 
expressions or compliments. 
10  http://www.planovicr.org/noticias/inamu-refuerza-acciones-para-prevenir-el-acoso-callejero-en-el-tren

=== PAGE 130 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
21 
to 33% of men). In addition, about 35% of women (compared to 23% of men) have been touched without 
their consent while using public transportation (GIZ, 2018). 
Data from the judicial system indicate that complaints of violations of the Law on the Criminalization of 
Violence against Women (LPVCM) have increased systematically each year, and are among the 20 most 
recorded crimes in the country11. While in 2014 19,284 complaints were registered about this type of 
infraction, by 2019 the complaints had increased to 22,122. The most important crimes are: mistreatment, 
failure to comply with a protection measure, offense to dignity, and threats against a woman.  
On the other hand, the judicial system has seen an increase in cases with sentences handed down for 
LPVCM violations since 2014 (Judicial Branch, 2020). This means that in general there is a tendency to 
report more frequently this type of crime, and an estimate from the authorities to safeguard security and 
justice for women. (Figure 10). 
Graph 10: Number of sentences handed down in adult criminal courts for crimes committed against the LPVCM 
(Costa Rica, 2014-2019)  
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from the Gender Observatory of the Judiciary (2020) 
 
Drug use and machismo are causes linked to violence against women. ENVCM 2004 reports that in 50% 
of the cases of physical or sexual violence the aggressor had consumed alcohol or some other narcotic 
substance. In the case of violence perpetrated by men who did not have a relationship, 34.6% of the 
incidents report some type of substance. On the other hand, in the survey of Perceptions of the Costa 
Rican Population on Violence Against Women (National University of Costa Rica, 2013)The study, which 
was conducted by the National Institute of Statistics and Censuses, reveals that 40% of the population 
associates MCV with machismo, patriarchal society and unequal power relations between men and 
women. In addition, 16% of the population mentions cultural patterns associated with upbringing among 
the causes of MCV. 
The effort to improve the collection and systematization of WVC data by improving the administrative 
records of the institutions that provide services to women victims, conducting specific research, and 
including specific questions or short modules in more general surveys is noteworthy, however, it does not 
have continuity. For example, the Third National Youth Survey 12(Council of the Young Person - Ministry 
of Culture, Youth and Sports, 2018)The results of the survey, which were released in 2019, show that 94% 
 
11  Statistical Yearbook of the Judiciary 2016.  
12 The third delivery started in November 2017 
500
517
654
632
730
989
363
342
321
385
452
795
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Number of Cases
Year
Condemnation
Absolutory

=== PAGE 131 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
22 
of the total number of people who claim to have been victims of rape (1.7% of the total sample, 2.5% for 
the third survey), 96% of the total number of people who claim to have been victims of sexual abuse (2.7% 
of the sample), and 95% of the total number of people who admit to having suffered sexual harassment 
(4.4% of the sample) are women. Also, women report the highest prevalence of psychological and physical 
violence by their partners: 65.8% of those who report that their partner has ever yelled at them, insulted 
them, and humiliated them are women (8.2% of the sample), in addition to 62.1% of those who report 
that their partner has ever pushed them, hit them, or done them any physical harm (2.9% of the sample) 
(Council of the Young Person - Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports, 2018). 
Regarding sexual violence, women report very high percentages of experiencing different expressions of 
violence, both in the workplace or study, and in other public spaces. The ENVCM 2004, concludes that 
38.2% of the interviewed women have experienced some form of sexual aggression after the age of 16, 
that 27.9% have been touched sexually against their will, and 26% have tried to force them to have sexual 
relations or have been raped. Rural women report more exposure to sexual violence (50.4%) than urban 
women (44.6%). 
According to the data on the entry of sexual crimes in the adult criminal prosecutor's offices, the five most 
prevalent sexual crimes are: sexual abuse against minors and incapable persons, rape, sexual relations 
with minors, sexual abuse against minors and incapable persons (attempt to), and sexual abuse against 
adults. 
The Judicial Branch and INAMU have made an additional effort to keep a detailed count of the femicides 
that have occurred in the country under both categories. For example, in the year 2019, 9 femicides were 
committed according to the LPVCM and 7 additional ones according to the Convention of Belem do Pará 
13addition, there has been a reduction in this type of violence since 2015 (Figure 11) (Judicial Branch, 
2020). 
 
13  The deaths of women at the hands of their spouses or current partners are classified as femicide by Article 21 of the Law on 
the Criminalization of Violence against Women (LPVCM). The expanded definition of femicide also includes violent deaths of 
women due to their gender, where there was no marriage or union relationship. For example, these are deaths during 
courtship, after a divorce or after the termination of a de facto union. Also, those that occur in the public sphere, as a result 
of sexual assault.

=== PAGE 132 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
23 
Figure 11: Registered Femicides by Type (Costa Rica, 2007-2020)  
 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from the Gender Observatory of the Judiciary (2020) 
 
During 2020 (and up to August), there have been 9 deaths of women classified within what has been called 
extended femicide. In general, femicides in the country are perpetrated by acquaintances of the victims, 
and in a minority of cases the relationship of the victim is not known. By 2018, the Judicial Branch will  
(Judicial Power, 2020) reported on the profile of the 26 victims of femicide: the average age of the victims 
is close to 31, they were living together in de facto union, Costa Ricans; in 65% of the cases the perpetrator 
was living with the victim, in almost 30% of the cases there was already a history of aggression. In addition, 
40% of the homicides against women correspond to femicides. In the vast majority of cases, the femicide 
weapon corresponds to a firearm or a knife.  
Within the group of women most affected by violence, girls and adolescents under 19 years of age should 
be considered a high-risk population, since the legislation does not protect them, or does so only partially. 
This is particularly worrying when we analyze the figures related to the establishment of inappropriate 
relationships, that is, the coexistence of girls and adolescents with adult men and much older than them. 
Many girls and adolescents who suffer acts of violence are detected in their medical care during their 
regular visits. Data from the Health Surveillance Directorate of the Ministry of Health for the year 2018 
show that the group of adolescents between 15 and 19 years of age is the one with the highest number 
of reported victims.  
Unfortunately, there is no detailed quantitative or qualitative information on the incidence of violence 
against women or gender-based violence or its characteristics among women belonging to groups that 
have traditionally been discriminated against, such as indigenous women, women of African descent, 
women with disabilities, or women of diverse sexual orientation and gender identity and/or expression, 
all of whom are groups affected by the intersection of various types of inequalities.  
 
6
18
15
10
12
5
7
7
9
11
14
18
9
6
15
15
24
21
30
21
11
17
18
15
12
8
7
3
0
10
20
30
40
50
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Number of Femicides
LPVCM Femicide
Extended Femicide

=== PAGE 133 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
24 
6. Barriers for Women in the Transport Sector  
 
In Costa Rica, the public transportation system has improved access to goods and services, and above all, 
it has improved access to jobs, which has a great impact on women. Data on urban mobility in Costa Rica 
show that nearly 60% of public transport users are women. When analyzing differences by sex in the use 
of public transportation, gender roles must be taken into account. For example, women are generally 
more likely to make more trips on public transport than men because they are responsible for taking 
children and older adults to schools or care facilities, doing household shopping, and other activities 
associated with caregiving (IDB, 2016). Worldwide, women are more likely to make shorter but more 
frequent trips than men. Women's travel patterns are more complex and heterogeneous than those of 
men. The strong persistence of the care economy in low- and middle-income countries leads many women 
to make shorter trips both in time and distance. Women are more willing to combine travel, make more 
domestic trips, and travel with children and more packages than men.  
Information about women's patterns, preferences and needs is very limited in Costa Rica. At both the user 
and service provider levels, there is very little sex-disaggregated information or information showing 
gender-specific gaps in the country for the transport sector. For example, when analyzing how women 
behave regarding the use of alternative means of transport, secondary sources of information should be 
used, not the transport governing bodies. Specifically, according to the State of the Nation Report 2018 ( 
(State of the Nation Program, 2018)In recent years, non-motorized transport has been gaining ground in 
the country. Only in the capital province there are more than 17 kilometers dedicated to bicycle paths, 
where approximately 125,500 daily trips are made, which represent 2% of the total number of trips, and 
only 20% of these trips are made by women.  
Women who use transportation in Costa Rica behave similarly to women in other cities around the world. 
Comparing the scarce data available for the country with international information, based on the IDB 
reading (IDB, 2016)In Latin America, as in almost every country in the world, public transportation systems 
have not been designed with women's needs and safety in mind. Gaps also exist in both developed and 
developing countries. The IDB's 2016 data collection shows that there are data for the case of London in 
England, where only 57% of women capable of driving have a license, compared to 80% of men. While 
18% of men choose to use the bicycle as their most frequent means of transportation, only 12% of women 
do so. In the same collection, data for cities in South America such as Santiago, Montevideo, Buenos Aires 
and Bogotá show that women have less access to cars and motorcycles than men (Santiago: 3.7% women 
vs. 13% men; Montevideo: 25% women vs. 38% men; and Bogotá: 10% vs. 17%). However, women use 
public transportation more than men (for women and men, Santiago 68% vs. 45%, in Buenos Aires 52% 
vs. 48%, and in Montevideo 31% vs. 23%). Women also make more trips on foot than men (55% vs. 40% 
in Santiago and 51% vs. 39% in Bogotá for women and men respectively). And as in Costa Rica, women 
use the bicycle much less to get around (3% vs. 10% in Santiago and 1% vs. 5% in Bogotá for women and 
men). 
When these data are contrasted with the reality of Costa Rican women (GIZ, 2018)The results are not 
much different:

=== PAGE 134 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
25 
• 
Women generate on average more trips than men (51.4% vs. 48.6%).  
• 
They tend to use the bus a third more than men (36% vs. 27%). 
• 
Only 20% of car trips are generated by women.  
• 
Women have less access to driver's licenses. According to COSEVI's historical data (2020) only 30% 
of licenses have been issued to women. This shows a greater dependence on the public 
transportation system.  
• 
Women are also less likely to have access to a private vehicle: 28% of them indicate that they 
cannot use a private car, this figure is more than 3 times higher than what men indicate (about 
8%).  
• 
About 70% of women and 75% of men spend more than one hour a day on public transportation 
systems, generating economic and efficiency losses.  
Women are underrepresented in the transport sector. As mentioned, less than one-fifth (17%) of the 
human resources employed in the transport sector in the country are women; this figure is slightly higher 
than the 15% recorded for the Latin American and Caribbean region  (IDB, 2016). However, information 
on the type or quality of jobs is not available. In the last 10 years, men received a leave of absence almost 
twice as often as women. This gap is greater when analyzed by the type of license drivers have. Only 10% 
of licensed bus drivers are women and between 7% and 12% of airport cabs and regular cab permits are 
owned by women. In addition, only 6.2% of traffic police positions are occupied by women  
Gender gaps do not only affect women, men die more on the roads. According to information from the 
Judicial Branch (Judicial Branch, 2019)By 2018, historically, the number of male victims of traffic accidents 
is almost 6 times higher than the number of women. Most of these cases correspond to collisions, which 
represent 66% of the victims, followed by outrages (21%). The proportion of these accidents remains 
relatively constant over the years. There is evidence for other countries that 90% of traffic accidents are 
associated with human behavior14, such as cell phone use, alcohol abuse, drowsiness, aggressive behavior 
and speeding. These are characteristics associated with hegemonic masculinities and therefore it is men 
who suffer most from the consequences of these.  
Figure 12: Proportion of traffic accident victims by sex (Costa Rica 2018) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from the Judicial Power, 2018 
 
14 http://www.dgt.es/revista/archivo/pdf/num150-2001P.18-20.pdf 
85%
87%
84%
85%
87%
15%
13%
16%
15%
13%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Male
Female

=== PAGE 135 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
26 
 
To show efficiency, the public transportation system must guarantee safe spaces and participation of 
women. As discussed in section IV, women tend to feel more insecure about using the service than men, 
inhibiting their free use and therefore imposing a barrier to access to different types of markets. The 
violent practices that women suffer on a daily basis can be perpetuated in new forms of mobility, both 
unimodal and multimodal, and there is a need to provide tools, infrastructure and protocols for the 
prevention and care of this type of violence.  
The survey conducted by the Comptroller General of the Republic (CGR) (CGR, 2019)reports that women 
perceive transportation as one of the top priorities in their lives. Figure 12 shows the perceptions of 
personal priorities in public services, in addition to the main basic services (not included in figure 12). 
Women placed citizen safety, health and public transportation as their top options. Although men 
represent less than the total number of users, they placed transportation as the number one priority, this 
sector is also highly dominated by men, reflecting the need to design and implement actions to attract 
more women to the challenging and changing sector as users and service providers. 
Figure 13: Perceptions of personal priorities for public services (Costa Rica 2018) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from CGR, 2019 
 
Women, although in greater need given the lack of driver's licenses, use the train less than men. According 
to data from the CGR (2019), women are not the ones who use the train most in the country, 57% of users 
are men and 43% are women. There is no information for the country on why this behavior occurs, but 
there is information for other contexts: sometimes women desist from using certain types of 
transportation because of their inconvenience between stations, frequency of travel and safety inside 
trains and stations. Nevertheless, they may benefit from train connections if the train functions as a 
substitute for bus routes or reduces travel times on routes that are primarily taken by private vehicles, 
cabs, or other similar services. Graph 14 shows the distribution of means of transport according to gender. 
Women use the means of cab, bus, Uber and bicycle much more than men. With regard to the bicycle, 
the information provided is different from that which the State of the Nation had captured, and this 
discrepancy can be attributed to the different methodological approaches used.  
 
 
17.0%
13.7%
18.1%
9.6%
20.7%
17.1%
15.0%
9.5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
Security
Health
Public transportation
Employment
% of the population that identifies 
priority
Service
Men
Women

=== PAGE 136 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
27 
Figure 14: Most used means of transport by sex (Costa Rica 2018) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from GCR, 2019 
 
Women depend on the public transport sector for their mobility and, when analyzing the ownership of 
private vehicles, important differences are found at the territorial level in the cantons served by the train. 
Ownership of cars and motorcycles varies among cantons. For example, in the direct cantons of Belén, 
Santo Domingo and Montes de Oca, car ownership per home is over 50% (all cantons where the railway 
infrastructure is located), while in San José and Alajuela it is over ten percentage points lower (both 
cantons have direct access to the train but are at the head of the province). These differences are, if 
possible, more pressing in the indirect cantons: while just over 30% of households in Alajuelita have a car, 
this percentage is twice as high in Escazú. Motorcycle ownership per household also varies between 
cantons, although to a lesser extent, and in addition, car and motorcycle ownership per canton does not 
seem to be correlated (0.09 between -1 and 1) (Figure 15). 
 
Figure 15: Motorcycle and car ownership by canton (direct and indirect) (Costa Rica, 2011) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from Census 2011 (INEC, 2020) 
57%
38%
57%
30%
17%
47%
88%
43%
62%
43%
70%
83%
53%
12%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Vehicle
Bus
Train
Cab
Uber
Bicycle
Other
Percentage of use
Men
Women
10C0A]0.0
10C0A]2.0
10C0A]4.0
10C0A]6.0
10C0A]8.0
10C1A]0.0
10C1A]2.0
10C1A]4.0
10C2A]5.0
10C3A]0.0
10C3A]5.0
10C4A]0.0
10C4A]5.0
10C5A]0.0
10C5A]5.0
10C6A]0.0
10C6A]5.0
San Jose
Alajuela
Tibas
The Union
Heredia
Curridabat
Oca Mountains
Santo Domingo
Bethlehem
Alajuelita
Homeless
Goicoechea
The Guarco
San Rafael
San Isidro
Barva
Moravia
Santa Ana
Escazú
%
%
Direct Cantons (San José - Belén ) Indirect Cantons (Alajuelita - Escazú)
With carriage (left axle)
With motorcycle (right axis)

=== PAGE 137 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
28 
 
Poverty is a determining factor in access to personal transportation vehicles. A key factor in explaining 
this variation among cantons is the gap or severity of poverty in the households of each canton. As can be 
seen in Figure 16 and Figure 17, the cantons with the largest poverty gap tend to have fewer cars, and it 
is argued that multidimensional poverty measurements can also encompass both aspects of mobility and 
added factors of poverty. In particular, the case of Alajuelita is an example of the above, since it has the 
worst poverty gaps, and also the lowest car ownership in the entire series. Other disadvantaged cantons 
according to the graph are Desamparados, San José and Goicoechea. At first glance, the results do not 
seem to indicate that there are significant differences between direct and indirect cantons in terms of 
poverty and car ownership. 
 
Figure 16: Poverty gap and tenure of individual means of transport (Costa Rica, 2011) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from Census 2011 (INEC, 2020) 
 
 
 
San Jose*
Alajuela*
Tibas*
The Union*
Heredia*
Curridabat*
Oca Mountains*
Santo Domingo*
Bethlehem*
Alajuelita
Homeless
Goicoechea*
The Guarco 
San RafaelSan Isidro
Barva
Moravia Santa Ana
Escazú
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
10C3A]0.0
10C3A]5.0
10C4A]0.0
10C4A]5.0
10C5A]0.0
10C5A]5.0
10C6A]0.0
10C6A]5.0
Poverty gap (1=min, 7=max)
Owning a car at home

=== PAGE 138 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
29 
Figure 17: List of households with a car and female occupation (Costa Rica, 2011) 
 
Source: Own elaboration with data from Census 2011 (INEC, 2020) 
 
Head of household and mobility factors at the cantonal level: In addition to these descriptive statistics 
and the visual inputs associated with them, an analytical regression model, which takes into account head 
of household and household size, can be useful for understanding the mobility of household members 
through car or motorcycle ownership.  
The estimated models of household headship and mobility are as follows15 :  
ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜
෣
 = 𝛽𝛽0
෢+ 𝛽𝛽1
෢. 𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗+ 𝛽𝛽2
෢𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 (1) 
ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜
෣
 = 𝛽𝛽0
෢+ 𝛽𝛽1
෢. 𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗+ 𝛽𝛽2
෢𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 (2) 
ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜
෣
= 𝛽𝛽0
෢+ 𝛽𝛽1
෢. 𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗+ 𝛽𝛽2
෢𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 (3) 
ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜
෣
= 𝛽𝛽0
෢+ 𝛽𝛽1
෢. 𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗+ 𝛽𝛽2
෢𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 (4) 
ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜= 𝛽𝛽0
෢+ 𝛽𝛽1
෢. 𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗+ 𝛽𝛽2
෢𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 (5) 
ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜
෣
= 𝛽𝛽0
෢+ 𝛽𝛽1
෢. 𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗+ 𝛽𝛽2
෢𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 (6) 
Results: While female or male leadership does not clearly explain motorcycle ownership by household, it 
does explain car ownership in the household, which in turn can influence household mobility.  
 
15 With the following variables:  
 
 
• 
Jeffem = percentage of households led by a woman  
• 
Jeffemsc = percentage of households headed by a woman without a spouse 
• 
Jefmascfemdif = difference in the percentage of households headed by a woman and a man  
• 
Hogarconcarro = % of households with a car 
• 
Hogarconmoto = % of households with a motorcycle 
• 
Occupy = average number of occupants per household 
Oca Mountains
Moravia
Bethlehem
Heredia
San Rafael
Barva
Santo Domingo
Tibas
San Isidro
Escazú
Curridabat
Santa Ana
Goicoechea
The Union
Homeless
San Jose
Alajuela
The Guarco 
Alajuelita
10C3A]0.0
10C3A]5.0
10C4A]0.0
10C4A]5.0
10C5A]0.0
10C5A]5.0
10C6A]0.0
10C6A]5.0
32.0
34.0
36.0
38.0
40.0
42.0
44.0
46.0
48.0
50.0
% of households with a car
Female occupation with canton

=== PAGE 139 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
30 
Taking an average canton, for each percentage point more households with a woman in the lead, it can 
be estimated that the percentage of cars will decrease on average by -1.34 percentage points, and by -
1.78 in the case of households with women without a spouse. In other words, taking into account these 
data16, it is expected that a canton with 27% of women heading households will have an average of 9 
percentage points more cars than one with 20% of women heading households. The difference between 
households headed by women and men also serves to explain car ownership in the home: for every 
percentage point more difference between households with a man and households headed by a woman, 
the number of cars will increase by 0.73 percentage points in a given canton. 
A correlation matrix can help to explore preliminarily which pairs of variables are most related to each 
other. That is, which individual variables have the most influence on other individual variables.  
After making the general correlation matrix, all those values that indicate a correlation higher than 0.8 
over 1 or lower than -0.8 over -1 have been selected.  
In terms of gender, the difference between male and female employment has a high correlation with the 
poverty gap, average schooling and also the difference in the percentage of male and female heads of 
household. The latter variable also correlates, but somewhat less strictly, with the poverty gap and 
average schooling. 
 
  
ocupmascfemdif 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
average schooling 
homecare 
Poverty 
Reduction 
Strategy 
Paper 
0,8793 
1 
average 
schooling 
-0,9136 
-0,9116 
1 
homecare 
0,7359 
0,9285 
-0,8529 
1 
homecar 
-0,6872 
-0,8635 
0,8002 
-0,8481 
gini 
0,4464 
0,5163 
-0,5158 
0,6151 
jefmascfemdif 
0,846 
0,6159 
-0,6854 
0,4427 
 
In other words, what underlies these preliminary calculations is: 
 
• 
That the greater the difference between male and female employment, the greater the poverty 
gap and vice versa. 
• 
That the higher the average schooling, the smaller the difference between male and female 
employment, and the poverty gap, and vice versa. 
 
16 The series analyzed is small in statistical terms, although the results obtained are solid enough to take into account the 
relationships obtained. These conclusions should be supported in subsequent studies with larger and more granular series.

=== PAGE 140 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
31 
• 
That households with deprivation are highly correlated positively with high levels of poverty and 
negatively with schooling Therefore, the greater the level of schooling, the less poverty is 
assumed, and vice versa. 
• 
That, individually, there is no variable that correlates strongly with the Gini Index, although 
households with deficiencies do have a correlation greater than 0.5. 
This exercise does not explain or pretend to explain the origin or direction of causality, but merely 
emphasizes that there are significant correlations between some variables.  
The relationships between these variables give an indication of which variables to prioritize when 
performing more complex analyses, both when carrying out graphs and when computing regressions of 
various types with sets of variables. In addition, some variables may not be individually related but are 
collectively related, for which more complex explorations are necessary.  
Two variables that are interesting to visualize graphically are the difference between male and female 
occupation at the canton level, as well as the poverty gap. As can be seen in the following graph, the shape 
of the poverty gap growth line (orange dotted line), coincides with that of the difference between male 
and female occupations in a canton. In other words, where the difference between employed men and 
women is higher, the poverty gap will also be higher, in this case, in Oreamuno, Paraíso and Alvarado. A 
sensu contrario, Montes de Oca, Escazú and Curridabat are the three cantons with the least difference 
between male and female employment rates, and also have some of the lowest poverty gaps in the 
country.  
Figure 18: Occupation Difference (Male/Female) and Poverty Gap 
 
Source: own elaboration 
 
Something similar occurs with the difference between female-headed households and differences in male 
and female occupation. In those cantons where the difference between male and female heads is less 
(i.e., where women are more likely to be heads) such as Montes de Oca, Tibás and San José, the difference 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Montes de Oca
Escazú
Curridabat
San Pablo
Tibas
Heredia
San José
Santa Ana
Moravia
Goicoechea
Santo Domingo
Vázquez de Cor.
Flores
Belén
San Rafael
La Unión
San Isidro
Desamparados
Barva
Alajuela
Alajuelita
Mora
Cartago
Santa Bárbara
Aserrí
Atenas
El Guarco
Poás
Oreamuno
Paraíso
Alvarado
Brecha de Pobreza (1 = mejor, 10 = peor)
Diferencia Ocupación Masc - Fem (%)
Dif Ocupación (Masc - Fem) (Eje izdo)
Brecha de pobreza (Eje dcho)
Linear (Brecha de pobreza (Eje dcho))

=== PAGE 141 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
32 
between male and female occupations is also less. At the other end of the distribution are El Guarco, 
Atenas and Alvarado. 
  
Figure 19: Difference: Male Female Headship vs. Female Occupation (histogram) 
 
Source: own elaboration 
 
There is a negative relationship between average schooling and the difference between male and female 
employment. In cantons with higher average education, women are more likely to be employed. The 
negative correlation between these variables is very high (-0.91), although this does not necessarily 
indicate that there is a direction on the causal mechanism that determines this correlation. 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
Montes de Oca
Tibas
San José
Goicoechea
Alajuelita
Heredia
Curridabat
Moravia
Desamparados
San Pablo
Escazú
La Unión
Vázquez de Cor.
Santo Domingo
San Rafael
Santa Ana
San Isidro
Flores
Belén
Aserrí
Mora
Alajuela
Barva
Cartago
Oreamuno
Paraíso
Santa Bárbara
Poás
El Guarco
Atenas
Alvarado
%
Diferencia Jefatura (masculina - femenina)
Diferencia Ocupación (Masculina - Femenina)

=== PAGE 142 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
33 
Figure 20: Average schooling vs. difference in male/female occupation 
 
Source: own elaboration 
 
Finally, selecting the three cantons with the largest and smallest poverty gaps, and studying other 
individually related variables, can help to see what differences exist between these cantons, regardless of 
the socioeconomic gap. As can be seen in the graph below, which includes five variables, the cantons of 
Poás, Paraíso and Oreamuno, where there are high poverty gaps, also tend to have households with more 
deficiencies, more probabilities of having male-headed households, and less probabilities of women being 
inserted in the labor market than the three cantons with the lowest poverty gap in the sample (Montes 
de Oca, Belén and San Pablo). In addition, the poorest cantons also have fewer cars, with a difference of 
almost 20 percentage points with respect to the richest ones.  
 
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
14.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Montes de Oca
San Pablo
Moravia
Curridabat
Escazú
Flores
Santa Ana
Barva
Belén
Tibas
Heredia
Vázquez de Cor.
San José
San Rafael
Goicoechea
San Isidro
La Unión
Mora
Cartago
Desamparados
Santa Bárbara
Santo Domingo
Alajuela
Atenas
El Guarco
Oreamuno
Alajuelita
Aserrí
Paraíso
Poás
Alvarado
Diferencia Ocupación Masculina - Femenina (Eje izdo)
Escolaridad promedio (Eje dcho)

=== PAGE 143 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
34 
Figure 21: Cantons with the largest and smallest poverty gaps: profile of critical variables 
 
Source: own elaboration 
 
Without access to private vehicles, women use public transport services more, yet are often excluded for 
reasons associated with their safety. Sometimes this is a result of high rates of sexual harassment in mass 
transit systems, a phenomenon that is present worldwide (Osmond and Woodcock 2015; Simicevic, 
Milosavljevic and Djoric 2016). Affordability of transport is a challenge, as travel expenses consume 30 
percent or more of the income of the poor in the region, adding to the already high costs of travel time 
(Kaltheier 2002; Vasconcellos 2001). As noted in the previous section, nearly 70 percent of women report 
being assaulted in public transportation systems and on average earn less than men.  
The government and other non-governmental actors are implementing actions that contribute to the 
inclusion of the gender perspective through specific actions that seek to create spaces for women in the 
sector. Based on a review of GIZ (2018), the following are some of the most relevant initiatives that 
contribute to closing gender gaps or contribute to the empowerment of women within the sector (table 
3). 
Table 3: Relevant gender equity initiatives for the transport sector 
Project name 
Name of the 
institution leading 
the process 
Type of 
institution 
Gender-Specific Action or Gender 
Mainstreaming 
Women on the move 
NGO, MOPT 
Government 
Working on increasing women's leadership 
within the sector. Prevention and care of 
violence against women in public 
transportation. 
Costa Rica's 
Decarbonization Plan 
MINAE 
Government 
Incorporation of the gender perspective in 
activities to mitigate and address climate 
change. 
0
20
40
60
80
Diferencia Jefatura Masc -
Fem
% de hogares 1+ carencia
Brecha de pobreza (x10)
Con carro
Dif Ocup Masc - Fem
Montes de Oca
Belén
San Pablo
Poás
Paraíso
Oreamuno

=== PAGE 144 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
35 
Project name 
Name of the 
institution leading 
the process 
Type of 
institution 
Gender-Specific Action or Gender 
Mainstreaming 
Participation in the 
Interministerial 
Technical Committee 
on Climate Change 
MINAE in 
collaboration with 
INAMU 
Government 
Through multisectoral dialogue, incorporation 
of the gender perspective in different actions 
that promote attention to climate change 
Ecovillas 
UN Development 
Programme 
International 
Organization 
Prevention and care of violence against women 
through the promotion of safe public spaces for 
women. 
Police officers 
addressing sexual 
harassment on public 
transportation 
INAMU in 
collaboration with 
the Ministry of 
Public Security and 
other institutions. 
Government 
Training and education of police officers to 
prevent, address and reduce violence against 
women on public transportation.  
Preventing and 
addressing violence 
against women on 
bus/train routes 
CANTRANS, Incofer 
Private 
Sector 
Through communication campaigns and training 
of employees and working on prevention and 
care of violence against women. 
Women in Engineering 
UCR 
Academy 
Providing participatory spaces to attract more 
women to study STEM careers in order to 
provide economic opportunities for women 
Toolkit for transport 
practitioners   
GIZ 
Civil Society 
Workshops on gender and mobility, addressing 
violence against women.  
 
The country still needs more data on women's participation in the sector, including information on how 
many women are in decision-making positions, what percentage women represent as service providers 
or users of public transportation such as cabs and trains, and what are the perceptions and cases of 
violence. 
Based on the analysis of available information, the transport sector in Costa Rica is still dominated by men 
in all spheres of decision-making and the provision of transport services, including the train network. 
Initiatives that consider the gender perspective are dispersed and not institutionalized in the context of 
Costa Rican transport, and projects such as the one proposed could generate positive impacts on women. 
Based on the analysis of available information, the transport sector in Costa Rica is still dominated by men 
in all spheres of decision-making and the provision of transport services, including the train network. 
Initiatives that consider the gender perspective are dispersed and not institutionalized in the context of 
Costa Rican transport, and projects such as the one proposed could generate positive impacts on women. 
Currently, INCOFER has a woman as its executive president. Within the institution's board of directors, 
42% (3 of 7 positions, including the executive president) of the positions were awarded to women and 
58% to men (4 of 7 positions). There is no public information on the constitution of human resources 
within INCOFER, which limits the analysis of women's participation within the institute itself. However,

=== PAGE 145 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
36 
there is a need to open up spaces for women at all technical and decision-making levels of the institution, 
in order to ensure that the gender perspective is integrated.  
7. Gender Action Plan  
 
The following are the considerations that will be taken into account for the development of the gender 
action plan. This action plan seeks to incorporate activities that will improve women's participation as 
users and providers of train transportation services. These activities must be led in an inter institutional 
manner and at different levels of public administration.  
Given the proximity of changes of the political cycle to ensure sustainability, and continuity of the project, 
it is recommended that the new authorities are informed about the project. The implementors of the 
initiative should consider, if necessary, new approaches that align the proposed activities with the 
incoming representatives’ new priorities. Also, it is recommended to identify technical focal points across 
institutions that serve as linkages between the new teams and the executors of this initiative. The work 
with local governments should be leverage as they recently started their new cycle and relevant activities, 
and plan should be presented and discuss. Periodic meetings, webinars, workshops and monitoring 
update meetings are also suggested to coordinate, adapt, scale and sustain activities.  
In case, an institution is dissolved, the activities should be delegated to another relevant organization that 
have similar capacities.  
Activities related to violence against women are not presented/ pretend to be implemented in insolation. 
The umbrella project incorporates activities and plan to support the construction of infrastructure that 
aim to prevent and address violence against women in transport.  
After the identification of relevant institutions and initiatives, actions and indicators will be proposed for 
the following dimensions.  
Dimension 1 -Mobility and Safety: 
• 
Consideration of gender-differentiated mobility patterns, including intermodality of different 
media.  
• 
Prevention of violence against women in public spaces and in train service  
Dimension 2 - Accessibility 
• 
Gaps in access to transport systems and means of transport represent a major barrier to women's 
access to the economic, political and social spheres 
• 
The new or rehabilitated infrastructure should be designed to take into account the needs of 
women and to safeguard their physical autonomy.

=== PAGE 146 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
37 
Dimension 3 - Participation 
• 
The possibility of generating direct and indirect jobs for women in the public transport sector, in 
particular on the train.  
• 
Creating spaces for women to participate at all levels of decision-making.  
The CABEI  gender specialist will play an important role during the project implementation of the project. 
The Specialist will make sure the commitments towards gender equality (and aligned across institutions) 
are being met within the role of CABEI of supervising INCOFER as implementer of Component 3.

=== PAGE 147 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
38 
Gender Action Plan 17 
Activities 
Goals and indicators 
Responsibility 
Timeline 
Approximate 
budget (US$) 
 
1. DIMENSION: MOBILITY AND SAFETY 
 
Violence against women is present in public spaces and the train does not escape from this reality. In order to avoid costs and economic losses, it is 
necessary to prevent and address the problem in the most expeditious manner. It is proposed to design activities that promote the training of the personnel 
that will allow them to identify the violence events and provide tools to facilitate the approach of the women to the specific services in case of an attack. On 
the other hand, it is necessary to have the implementation of communication tools and campaigns directed to men and women in order to prevent and 
attend to violence against women.  
For its part, it is necessary to generate information on women's mobility patterns, as well as their specific needs when using the train's transport system and 
the various intermodal connections.  
 
1.1 Prevention of violence against women on trains and in other public spaces 
1.1.1 Establish social 
communication campaigns aimed 
at men and women to identify 
sexual harassment practices and 
other types of violence in trains 
and waiting stations (these 
activities will also address risky 
behaviors that threaten women 
such as consumption of substances 
by men as stated in the National 
Violence Against Women Survey. 
This activity should be informed 
with the results of 1.2.2) 
Number of communication campaigns generated 
(Baseline (LB): 0, Target: 4) 
Number of users who warned about violent 
practices (Monitor – 53% men, 47% women)18 
Number of graphic pieces (Monitor: (i.e.: this will 
depend on the spaces they will be placed) 
Main responsible: Incofer 
and Inamu 
Coordination with: 
Relevant municipalities, 
COSEVI 
year 4 and 5 
US$ 20,000 
1.1.2 Training Incofer personnel 
with the new sexual harassment 
law  
Number of trained staff members (LB: 0, target: 
80%; this indicator will be sex-disaggregated)19 
Main responsible: Incofer 
and Inamu 
year 5 
--- 
 
17 See Annex B for a more detail budget allocations.  
18 The targets are calculated based in the GCR information showed in figure 14 
19 Incofer indicates in 2019 that the total number of staff is 53. This excludes contractual and temporary staff. However in 2017, a sexual harrasment training was delivered for 
110 employees.

=== PAGE 148 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
39 
Activities 
Goals and indicators 
Responsibility 
Timeline 
Approximate 
budget (US$) 
Number of evaluations (implementation and 
report) for trainees on knowledge acquired during 
training (BL: 0, target: 1) 
Coordination with: 
Ministry of Security, 
Public Force, COSEVI 
1.1.3 Implementing a rapid 
reporting system for cases of 
violence against women 
Number of systems designed and implemented 
(LB: 0, Target: 1) 
Percentage of staff trained to handle complaints 
(WP: 0, Target: 80%, this indicator will be sex-
disaggregated and aligned with 1.1.2 ) 
Number of qualitative evaluations (implementation 
and report) for trainees on knowledge acquired 
during training (BL: 0, target: 1) 
Percentage of cases handled through the system 
(WP: 0, target: 75%) 
Bi-annual reports of the evolution of received 
reports (BL: 0, T: 6) 
Main responsible: Incofer 
and Ministry of Security 
Coordination with: Inamu, 
Municipal Offices for 
Women, Ministry of 
Security, Ministry of 
Justice 
year 4 
US$ 20,000 
1.1.4 Establish a complaint 
mechanism for cases of violence 
against women that acts 
automatically 
Number of panic buttons implemented in the 
enhanced spaces (LB:0, Target: 5 - 1 per enhanced 
space) 
Number of applications developed for 
smartphones that allow reporting violence against 
women (WP: 0, Target: 1)20 
Number of communication campaigns for users to 
learn about the complaint mechanism (LB: 0, 
Target: 1) 
 
Main responsible party: 
Incofer and relevant 
municipalities 
Coordination with: Inamu, 
Ministry of Security 
year 4 
US$ 120,000 
1.1.5 Implement an adequate 
lighting system that safeguards the 
safety of users, mainly women 
Percentage of improved facilities within stations 
with adequate lighting (LB:0, Target: 100%) 
Percentage of areas surrounding the train 
infrastructure that have improved facilities with 
adequate lighting (WP: 0, target: 100%) 
Main responsible party: 
Incofer, relevant 
municipalities 
year 5 
--- 21 
 
20 There is not a lot of evidence on the effectiveness on mobile apps to prevent violence against women (VAW) or to change social norms, however the app mentioned will aim 
to capture information in situ of VAW, as an action to act fast when women are in danger. The app will provide guidelines to file a complaint and seek for help with the relevant 
institutions. in coordination with the Justice System. The application needs to be developed after a consultation with possible victims of violence in public transport. It could be 
either a free app developed for Android and iPhone or a SMS system. In coordination with the Ministry of Security, the app or message will send an alert to police 
officers/special task force that will be located are around the area of the event. The officers will arrive where the victim is at the moment and they can file the complaint and 
give assistance to her/him/the. The program is aiming to implement a pilot project at first and then expand, and adapt based on an evaluation 
21 Part of the budget for the construction of the train

=== PAGE 149 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
40 
Activities 
Goals and indicators 
Responsibility 
Timeline 
Approximate 
budget (US$) 
Coordination with: Costa 
Rican Institute of 
Electricity 
 
1.2 Generation of information on mobility and accessibility patterns with a gender perspective 
 
1.2.1 Design, implement and 
analyse a comprehensive 
multimodal transport pilot survey 
that gathers information about 
users, destinations, waiting time, 
means of transportation, 
affordability, private transportation 
use, etc. All information should be 
disaggregated by sex and 
presented to show differences 
between men and women and 
intersectionality of different 
population groups  A report will be 
developed and published.  
Number of pilot surveys conducted (BL: 0, Target: 
1) 
Number of pilot survey reports (BL: 0, Target: 1) 
Number of dissemination workshops to relevant 
stakeholders (BL: 0, Target: 2) 
Number of published reports (BL:0, Target: 1) 
Main responsible party: 
incofer, MOPT, INEC 
year 4 
$30,000 
1.2.2 Conduct a gender-sensitive 
evaluation or survey (and its 
recommendations) at the user level 
to better understand the different 
needs and perspectives of women 
and men in terms of access to 
services and infrastructure. It will 
include a violence against violence 
module. A report will be developed 
and published. 
Number of evaluations/surveys conducted (LB:0, 
Target:2) 
Percentage of users surveyed (differentiated by 
men and women – 47% women, 53% men) (WP: 0, 
target: 10%)  
Number of presentations/workshops held 
(webinars, face-to-face events) in which results and 
recommendations were presented (WP: 0, Target: 
2) 
Number of published studies with respective 
recommendations based on the implemented 
survey (LB:0, Target: 1) 
Number of qualitative evaluations (implementation 
and report) for attendants on knowledge acquired 
during workshop (BL: 0, target: 1) 
Main responsible: Incofer 
together with INEC 
In coordination with: 
Inamu, UCR, CGR. 
year 5 
US$ 50,000 22 
 
22 First year

=== PAGE 150 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
41 
Activities 
Goals and indicators 
Responsibility 
Timeline 
Approximate 
budget (US$) 
 
2. DIMENSION 2: ACCESSIBILITY 
 
It is necessary to ensure that women can access different types of services, not only when using the train or waiting inside the stations, but also the 
connection with other types of multimodal transport and other public spaces, where they are protected by their physical autonomy. The improved 
infrastructure should include the necessary spaces to ensure women's comfort and take into account their mobility patterns (accompanied, with shopping 
carts, or multiple bags or packages, or strollers for children) 
 
 
2.1 Improving women's accessibility to other public spaces and other forms of transportation 
2.1.1 To have new infrastructure 
that ensures designs with a gender 
perspective in which their physical 
integrity is protected and allows for 
adequate use of the infrastructure.  
Number of stations with gender-sensitive 
infrastructure (Target: at least 90% of stations) 
Number of other services offered by the train 
service included in the plan that are implementing 
actions to improve and ensure accessibility for 
women23 (WP:0, target: at least 80%)24 
Number of monitoring mechanisms to ensure the 
gender sensitive infrastructure is being 
implemented (BL: 0, target: 1) 
The project has a holistic approach to new 
infrastructure and has thus not put specific targets 
and indicators for the infrastructure itself. 
Examples are: The program will make sure that 
stops are adequate for women’s height, pregnant 
women or women traveling with kids. Manhole 
covers and/or rainwater inlets should consider 
having holes that are not a threaten for women 
wearing heels or sandals. Also, they will dedicate 
spaces for pregnant women, and include separated 
bathroom for men and women (where planned).  
Main responsible party: 
Incofer 
 
year 5 
--- 25 
 
23 Improvement of ramps, steps, waiting seats in order to have spaces that consider the height and behavior of women (women carrying bags, cars, children, etc.), reservation of 
spaces for people traveling with children, cars or elderly, improvement of compliance in the granting of spaces reserved for pregnant women, lighting, etc.  
24. 
25 Part of the budget for the construction of the train

=== PAGE 151 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
42 
Activities 
Goals and indicators 
Responsibility 
Timeline 
Approximate 
budget (US$) 
2.1.2 Improving women's 
accessibility to non-motorized 
mobility services 
Number of mother and child programs promoting 
bicycle use (LB: 0, target: 1) 
Number of bicycle and road safety education 
programs targeting women (LB:0, target: 1) 
Percentages of bicycle parking with dedicated 
spaces exclusively for women (LB:0, target: at least 
50%) 
Number of mothers that are part of the project (BL: 
0, target: 500) 
Number of qualitative evaluations (implementation 
and report) for women and children on knowledge 
acquired during training (BL: 0, target: 1) 
Main responsible:  
Inamu and Cosevi 
 
In coordination with: 
Incofer, MOPT, bicycle 
organization.  
year 4 
US$ 30,000 
 
3. DIMENSION 3: PARTICIPATION 
 
The public transportation system, and in particular the train, must serve as a potential employer of women, not only within institutions such as the Incofer 
or the MOPT, but must also be able to connect women to employment or entrepreneurial opportunities, whether they serve as providers to the institution 
or are independent. These jobs must be framed in formality and if possible be technical jobs in the STEM sector.  On the other hand, it should be ensured 
that women are involved in decision making and policy dialogue in order to ensure implementation of programs and policies that take into account their 
perspectives and views. 
 
 
3.1 Generation of direct and indirect jobs for women in the public transport sector, in particular on the train 
 
3.1.1 Program to attract women to 
join the Incofer workforce and 
offer equal conditions to men 
Number of programs (incl. assessmetns and 
actions) to attract women trained in the STEM field 
designed and implemented (WP: 0, Target: 1) 
Percentage of total technical positions that are 
women hired in technical positions (WP: Target: 
15% per year 2, 25% per year 4; 40% per year 10)) 
Percentage of total drivers who are women drivers 
(WP: 0, Target: 10% per year 2, 20% per year 4; 
40% per year 10)  
Number of mentoring programs for women in the 
railway sector (LB: 0, Target: 1) 
Main responsible party: 
Incofer 
In coordination with: 
Public and private 
universities, technical 
training institutes (public 
and private), Ministry of 
Labor.  
year 5 
--- 26 
 
26 No specific budget because it is considered a task within the normal responsibilities of Incofer

=== PAGE 152 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
43 
Activities 
Goals and indicators 
Responsibility 
Timeline 
Approximate 
budget (US$) 
3.1.2 To encourage the hiring and 
provide spaces for women 
entrepreneurs27 to be part of the 
tertiary service providers that the 
train acquires 
Number of programs (incl. assessments and 
actions) designed and implemented to facilitate 
access by women entrepreneurs as providers 
(mechanics, cleaning, collection, food, etc.) for 
train service (WP: 0, Target: 1) 
Number of protocols designed and implemented to 
prevent sexual harassment in the workplace (WP: 
0, Target: 1) 
Number of sexual harassment prevention trainings 
designed for Incofer staff (LB: 0, target: 1) 
Percentage of employees trained in workplace 
sexual harassment prevention (LB: 0, target: 80%) 
Percentage of total services that are administered 
by women (WP: 0, target: 45%) 
Main responsible party: 
Incofer 
 
In coordination with: 
National Learning 
Institute, Ministry of 
Labor 
year 5 
--- 28 
3.2 Creating spaces for women to participate at all levels of decision-making 
3.2.1 Establish spaces for women 
to be promoted to decision-making 
positions within the activities 
relevant to the train.  
Number of programs designed and implemented 
for the promotion and participation of women in 
decision-making (WP: 0, Target: 1) 
Percentage of total board members and 
management positions that are women (LB: ; 
target: 50%) 
Incofer 
year 4 and 5 
US$ 30,000 
4. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
4.1. Create and disseminate knowledge products 
4.1.1. Create  knowledge product 
on lessons learned and disseminate 
Final report on lessons learnt in gender sensitive 
LRT (WP: 0; target: 1) 
Disseminate report online (WP: 0; Target:1) 
Incofer 
Year 4 
US$ 30,000 
Total budget: 
 
 
 
US$ 330,000 
 
year 1 
year 2 
year 3 
year 4 
year 5 
year 6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
255,000 
75,000 
 
 27 According to the definition of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) of the World Bank Group are those businesses where at least 51% of the ownership, the vast 
majority of operational and management activities are in the hands of women.  
28 No specific budget because it is considered a task within the normal responsibilities of Incofer

=== PAGE 153 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
44 
 
Annex A – Civil society organizations

=== PAGE 154 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
45

=== PAGE 155 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
46

=== PAGE 156 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
47 
Annex B. Stakeholder Meetings 
 
In the development of the Funding Proposal to be submitted to the Green Climate Fund, several meetings were 
held with stakeholders regarding the gender issue. In this sense, the following actions were carried out: 
1. Meeting June 14, 2020 
 
The objective of this meeting was to identify synergies, coordinate activities, list stakeholders and review sources 
of information with the ongoing GEF/UNDP study (see file 1). In this regard, it was identified that the Gender Plan 
developed for the GEF/UNDP study was discussed with different stakeholders. 
 
 
2. Meeting August 18, 2020 
 
The objective of this meeting was to identify the actions carried out by INCOFER and the National Women's 
Institute (INAMU) related to gender in the operation of the Train (see file 3):  
• 
INCOFER as part of the Institutional Commission for Gender Equality. 
• 
INCOFER and the National Women's Institute signed an agreement to contribute to the Eradication of 
Violence Against Women and the Promotion of Respectful Relationships. 
• 
INCOFER and Transfeco y Cía. S.A. personnel were trained on the Prevention of Sexual Harassment in 
Public Spaces". Advertising was installed on passenger train cars internally and externally "Campaign for 
the Prevention of Sexual Harassment in Public Spaces". In addition, advertising is installed in stations on 
"Campaign for the Prevention of Sexual Harassment in Public Spaces". 
 
3. Meeting September 19, 2020 
 
Since August 2018 the Multilevel Technical Table (Mesa de Técnica Multinivel, MTM) has been created as a 
coordination and participation mechanism to define, enable and implement the urban and territorial planning 
conditions necessary to generate Transport-Oriented Development (TOD), taking as a starting point the area of 
influence of the TRP project and its stations, as well as the accessibility infrastructure generated by the 
municipalities, such as sidewalks, boulevards, bike paths and parking lots. The MTM is coordinated by the Ministry 
of Housing and Human Settlements (MIVAH), as it is the governing body for land management in Costa Rica.  
 
Other participants in the MTM include the Office of the First Lady, the National Institute of Housing and Urban 
Development (INVU), the Institute of Municipal Development and Advisory Services (IFAM) and the National 
Union of Local Governments (UNGL), the Ministry of Planning, the Ministry of Environment and Energy (MINAE), 
the Ministry of Finance, the National Registry, the Costa Rican Railway Institute (INCOFER) and the Ministry of 
Public Works and Transport (MOPT). On the private sector side, the Chamber of Commerce, the Chamber of 
Construction and the Council for Real Estate Development (CODI) participate, as well as international cooperation 
actors such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the German Cooperation Agency (GIZ) and 
the Global Environment Facility (GEF), and representatives of the academic sector and civil society (urban 
collectives, development associations, impacted population). 
 
On September 19, 2020, Grütter Consulting presented to the MTM the progress of the project funding proposal, 
including the socialization of the results of gender diagnostic and the proposed Gender Action Plan. More than 50 
people attended the meeting from entities listed above. Due to covid-19 restrictions, this meeting was conducted 
through zoom (virtual platform).

=== PAGE 157 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
 
48 
 
 
 
Bibliography and References  
 
Banco Mundial. (2020). Enterprise Survey. Retrieved from Costa Rica: 
https://www.enterprisesurveys.org/en/data/exploreeconomies/2010/costa-rica 
Banco Mundial. (20 de September de 2020). World Development Indicators. Obtenido de World Development 
Indicators: https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/world-development-indicators 
Benavente M.C., V. A. (2014). Public policies for gender equality. A contribution to women's autonomy. Retrieved 
from jhttps://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/37226/S1420372_es.pdf?sequence=6 
IDB. (2016). Inter-American Development Bank - Publications. Retrieved from The Why of the Relationship 
between Gender and Transport: https://publications.iadb.org/publications/spanish/document/El-
porqu%C3%A9-de-la-relaci%C3%B3n-entre-g%C3%A9nero-y-transporte.pdf 
cd. (n.d.). 
ECLAC. (2013). ECLAC, FAO, UN Women, UNDP, ILO (2013). Regional Report: Decent Work and Gender Equality. 
Policies to Improve Access to and Quality of Women's Employment in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Santiago, ECLAC, FAO, UN Women, UNDP, ILO, 2013. Retrieved from 
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@americas/@ro-lima/@sro-
santiago/documents/publication/wcms_233161.pdf 
CEPALSTAT. (2020). CEPALSTAT - Statistical Databases and Publications. Retrieved from Statistics and Indicators: 
https://estadisticas.cepal.org/cepalstat/WEB_CEPALSTAT/estadisticasIndicadores.asp?idioma=e 
CEPALSTAT. (2020). CEPALSTAT Databases and Statistical Publications . Retrieved from Statistics and Indicators: 
https://estadisticas.cepal.org/cepalstat/WEB_CEPALSTAT/estadisticasIndicadores.asp?idioma=e 
CGR. (2019). National Survey of Perception of Public Services. Retrieved from National Utility Perception Survey: 
https://cgrfiles.cgr.go.cr/publico/docsweb/enpsp-2018/index.html 
Council of the Young Person - Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports. (2018). III National Youth Survey Costa Rica 
2018. Retrieved from III Encuesta Nacional de Juventudes Costa Rica 2018: 
https://cpj.go.cr/documento/3da-encuesta-nacional-de-juventudes-costa-rica-2018/ 
COSEVI. (2020). Road Safety Council. Retrieved from Observatorio Costarricense de Seguridad Vial: 
https://datosabiertos.csv.go.cr/dashboards/19737/informacion-general-de-costa-rica/ 
FEM. (2019). Global Gender Gap Report 2020. Retrieved from Global Gender Gap Report 2020: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf 
GIZ. (2018). My Transport. Retrieved from Gender Analysis of the Transport Sector in Costa Rica: 
https://issuu.com/a-01net/docs/a01_giz_informe_final_web 
INEC. (2011). National Institute of Statistics. Retrieved from Census 2011: https://www.inec.cr/censos/censos-
2011 
INEC. (2017). National Time Use Survey. Retrieved from Results - National Time Use Survey: 
https://www.inec.cr/sites/default/files/documetos-biblioteca-virtual/reenut2017.pdf 
INEC. (2020). National Institute of Statistics. Retrieved from Employment: https://www.inec.cr/empleo 
Latinobarometer. (2015). Latinobarómetro. Retrieved from Informe Latinobarómetro 2015: 
https://www.latinobarometro.org/latNewsShowMore.jsp?evYEAR=2015&evMONTH=9 
Lentini, Valeria. (2020). Transition to an urban green economy: generating global environmental benefits - 
Gender Plan. UNDP.

=== PAGE 158 ===
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
49 
Ministry of Health and CCP. (2016). II Sexual and Reproductive Health Survey. Retrieved from II Encuesta de 
Salud Sexual y Reproductiva: https://ccp.ucr.ac.cr/documentos/portal/Informe-2daEncuesta-2015.pdf 
Mundial, B. (2020, August). World Development Indicators. Retrieved from World Development Indicators: 
https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/world-development-indicators 
OCDE. (2017). OECDs Library. Retrieved from OECD Reviews of Labour Market and Social Policies: Costa Rica: 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264282773-en 
ILO. (2020). COVID-19 and the World of Work: Starting point, response and challenges in Costa Rica. Retrieved 
from COVID-19 and the World of Work: Starting point, response and challenges in Costa Rica: 
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---americas/---ro-lima/---sro-
san_jose/documents/publication/wcms_747046.pdf 
Judicial Power. (2019). Police Yearbook 2018. Retrieved from Persons Killed in Traffic Accidents: 
https://www.poder-judicial.go.cr/planificacion/index.php/anuario-policial-2018 
Judicial Power. (2020). Observatory on Gender Violence against Women and Access to Justice. Retrieved from 
Statistics: https://observatoriodegenero.poder-judicial.go.cr/index.php/soy-especialista-y-
busco/estadisticas/femicidio 
Judicial Power. (n.d.). Judicial Branch. Retrieved from Anuario Policial 2018 - : https://www.poder-
judicial.go.cr/planificacion/index.php/anuario-policial-2018 
State of the Nation Program. (2019). State of the Nation Program. Retrieved from State of Education: 
https://estadonacion.or.cr/proyectos-estado-de-la-educacion/ 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (September 2020). UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAMME Human Development Reports. Retrieved from Human Development Data (1990-2018): 
http://hdr.undp.org/en/data 
State of the Nation Program. (2018). State of the Nation Program. Retrieved from Reports: 
https://estadonacion.or.cr/informes/ 
State of the Nation Program. (2019). State of the Nation Program. Retrieved from State of Education: 
https://estadonacion.or.cr/proyectos-estado-de-la-educacion/ 
Science and Technology Indicators Network. (2017). Publications. Retrieved from State of Science 2017: 
http://www.ricyt.org/2017/10/el-estado-de-la-ciencia-2017/ 
UNFPA. (2018). Public Social Investment in Adolescents and Youth 2013-2016 Costa Rica. Retrieved from 
Inversión Pública Social en Adolescencia y Juventud 2013-2016 Costa Rica: 
https://costarica.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/informe%20COSTARICA-2018.11.03c.pdf 
University of Costa Rica. (2015). School of Statistics. Retrieved from Encuesta Actualidades 2015: 
http://www.estadistica.ucr.ac.cr/index.php/es/encuestas/actualidades/informes/71-2015-estadistica-
ucr-actualidades/file 
National University of Costa Rica. (2013). Costa Rican Population Perceptions of Violence Against Women Survey. 
Retrieved from the survey of Perceptions of the Costa Rican Population on Violence Against Women : 
https://repositorio.una.ac.cr/bitstream/handle/11056/7339/Percepciones%20de%20la%20poblaci%C3%
B3n%20costarricense%20sobre%20la%20violencia%20contra%20las%20mujeres-
Pulso%2067?sequence=1&isAllowed=y 
___________________
