=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.1.20138
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.1.20138
creationDate: D:20210222163309+09'00'
modDate: D:20210222190412+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
16 – 19 March 2021 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 14 
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
23 February 2021 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum X 
Funding proposal package for FP163 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Sustainable Renewables Risk Mitigation Initiative (SRMI) 
Facility"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
75 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
87 
Secretariat’s assessment 
90 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
110 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
130 
Gender documentation 
132

=== PAGE 3 ===
Programme title: 
Sustainable Renewables Risk Mitigation Initiative (SRMI) 
Facility 
Multiple Countries: 
Botswana, Central African Republic (CAR), Democratic 
Republic of Congo (DRC), Kenya, Mali, Namibia and 
Uzbekistan  
Accredited Entity: 
World Bank  
Date of first submission: 
2020/05/19  
Date of current submission  
2021/02/15 
Version number 
V.12

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE b OF 72 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
 
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to 
annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in the 
funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all relevant 
documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60. 
Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be 
disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction 
of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are asked to fill 
out information on disclosure in section G.4.     
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 3 OF 72 
 
 PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Public 
 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
Not applicable  
 
A.4. Result area(s) 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed 
project/programme targets. For each checked result area(s), indicate the 
estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it. The total of the percentages 
when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
☒ 
Energy access and power generation:  
 
☐ 
Low-emission transport:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:   
☐ 
Forestry and land use:  
 
 
 
 
 
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
☐ 
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions: 
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security: 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment:  
 
☐ 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution:  
100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enter number 
A.5. Expected 
mitigation impact  
88,980,000 CO2eq tons 
A.6. 
Expected 
adaptation impact  
 
 
A.7. 
Total 
financing 
(GCF + co-finance)  
USD 1,563,500,000 
 
A.9. Project size 
Large (Over USD 250 
million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
USD 280,000,000 
A.10. Financial 
instruments requested 
for the GCF funding 
 
☒ Grant 
USD 54,000,000 
☒ Loan 
USD 176,000,000 
☒ Guarantee USD 20,000,000 
☒ Reimbursable Grant USD 30,000,000 
☐ Results-based payment n/a 
A.11. 
Implementation 
period 
12 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
25 years for solar and wind 
projects / 50 years + for grid 
infrastructure  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
February 2, 2021 
A.14. ESS category  A  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.16. 
Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. 
Is 
this 
FP 
included in the entity 
work programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included 
in 
the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☒       No ☐

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 4 OF 72 
 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information1 
Republic of Botswana represented by the Ministry of Finance and acting through 
the Ministry of Energy and the Botswana Power Corporation (BPC – the State 
Utility) 
 
Central African Republic (CAR) represented by the Ministry of Economy, 
Planning and Cooperation and acting through the Ministry of Energy 
 
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) represented by the Ministry of Finance 
and acting through the Ministry of Energy 
 
Republic of Kenya represented by the National Treasury and acting through the 
Ministry of Energy 
 
Republic of Mali represented by the Ministry of Finance and acting through the 
Ministry of Energy, the Société de Gestion de l’Energie de Manantali (SOGEM), 
and Electricité du Mali (EDM – the State Utility) 
 
Republic of Namibia represented by the Ministry of Finance and acting through 
the Ministry of Energy and NamPower (the State Utility) 
 
Republic of Uzbekistan represented by the Ministry of Finance and acting 
through the Ministry of Energy 
 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
 
While the proportion of renewable energy (RE) generation is rising every year, it remains a small 
percentage of the total world-wide electricity production and far from the targets needed to meet 
the Paris Agreement objectives. The proportion of the world electricity generated by wind, solar – together 
Variable Renewable Energy (VRE), biomass and waste-to-energy, geothermal, marine and small hydro 
rose from 6 percent in 2010 to 12.9 percent in 2018. Large solar and wind energy deployment is needed 
for enhancing energy access and energy security and to stay below the Climate Change Paris Agreement 
2Co scenario. According to the Sustainable Development Scenario of the International Energy Agency 
(World Energy Outlook 2018), 950 GW of solar PV and 580 GW of wind need to be installed by 2025 in 
developing countries. It represents another 690 GW solar and 330 GW wind installation from 2019’s level. 
The limited installed capacity of cost-competitive solar and wind in developing countries reveals 
important regulatory, structural, and technical constraints. The main constraints identified are (i) 
limited generation and transmission planning capacity, (ii) inadequate regulatory framework that constrains 
the mobilization of sustainable private investments, (iii) limited procurement capacity to select the 
Independent Power Producers (IPPs), (iv) limited financial viability of off-takers and (v) VRE grid integration 
challenges due to weak grids especially in Sub-Saharan Africa.  
The World Bank through its Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP), developed 
the Sustainable Renewables Risk Mitigation Initiative (SRMI) to address these challenges and 
propose a comprehensive financial and technical support to countries. Launched in 2018 for the COP 
 
1 For the purposes of the loans and grants, the Executing Entities (EEs) would be the Borrowers/Recipients of 
the loans/grants. For the purposes of the guarantees contemplated under Component 3.2, the EEs would be the 
private sector RE project companies.

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 72 
 
24 under the leadership of the World Bank in partnership with the Agence Française de Développement 
(AFD), the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and the International Solar Alliance (ISA), 
SRMI – previously known as the Solar Risk Mitigation Initiative – aims to support countries in developing 
and implementing sustainable renewable energy programs that will be more conducive to private 
investments to reduce reliance on public sector financing while maximizing socio-economic benefits for the 
countries (including from women empowerment’s perspective). 
Under the context of the Covid-19 crisis, SRMI’s unique, integrated and replicable approach can 
support countries unlock a green economic stimulus through targeted public investments in order 
to leverage private sector investments at scale. SRMI aims to offer development and climate financing 
for (i) technical assistance to help countries develop evidence-based VRE targets, implement a sustainable 
renewable energy program, and maintain robust procurement processes with transaction advisors; (ii) 
critical public investments to enable integration of VRE, finance solar/wind park infrastructure, and increase 
access to electricity; and (iii) risk mitigation instruments to cover residual risks perceived by private 
investors. This financial support for renewable energy development is needed more than ever in the current 
situation alongside government economic support measures (such as short-term job allowances, direct 
cash transfers to citizens or targeted liquidity support to small and medium size enterprises). 
The SRMI Facility to be funded by the GCF aims to provide technical and financial support to seven 
initial countries (Phase 1), namely Botswana, Central African Republic (CAR), Democratic Republic 
of Congo (DRC), Kenya, Mali, Namibia and Uzbekistan. If in 2017 those countries represented 1.2 
percent of the total global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, under a BAU scenario they would on average 
triple their emissions between 2017 and 2030. With international support, the seven countries are 
committed to contribute to GHG emissions reductions especially focusing on their energy sector which is 
the main contributing sector. However, the countries have now prioritized immediate emergency response 
to manage the current Covid-19 crisis. The question of how the economic recovery is designed remains 
crucial in shaping the long-term pathways for emissions and determining whether the NDC targets can be 
achieved. If governments do not roll out low carbon development strategies and policies in response to the 
coming economic crisis, emissions could rebound and even overshoot previously projected levels by 2030, 
despite lower economic growth in the period to 2030.  
It is therefore critical in this context to support policymakers to develop green stimulus 
interventions with catalytic concessional climate financing and support a medium-term strategy. 
The SRMI Facility, through the seven projects, is expected to contribute to the shift to low-emission 
sustainable development pathways as follows: 
- 
Directly support the development of an estimated 2.5 GW of RE, (i) 1.8 GW of solar PV, (ii) 400 
MW of concentrated solar plants (CSP), and (iii) 300 MW of onshore wind. Of this 2.1 GW are 
expected to be built during the lifetime of the projects and 400 MW expected to be built after the 
end of the projects. To unlock the RE power plants expected to be built during the lifetime of the 
projects, around USD 1 billion in public investment of which USD 250 million from GCF would need 
to have been disbursed. These public investment projects will also enable the integration of another 
1.9 GW of RE. The integration of other projects is enabled due to the VRE integration analysis and 
grid investments.  
 
- 
Directly reduce GHG emissions by an estimated 97.93 m metrics tons of CO2, more precisely 
88.98m reduction for the 2.1 GW RE built under the projects over the 25 years of their operation, 
and 8.95m metric tons of CO2 for 0.4 GW of RE power plants over the 25 years of their operation 
that are expected to be prepared under the SRMI Facility projects but not built during the lifetime of 
the projects.

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 72 
 
- 
Unlock an estimated USD 3.3 billion of private investments, including USD 3 billion for the 2.1 
GW built during the lifetime of the projects and USD 300 million for the 0.4 GW built after the end 
of the projects. 
 
- 
Provide access to clean low-emission electricity to an estimated 4.2 million people through 
the electrification investments. 
 
- 
Strengthen institutional and regulatory systems for planning and development. 
 
- 
Reduce locking-in long-lived, climate-vulnerable infrastructure by increasing resilience of 
grid infrastructure. 
 
The SRMI Facility aims to be scaled up to a total USD 400 million in GCF funding amount by 
including additional countries, namely Indonesia and Vietnam, with whom significant and extensive 
engagements have been had to date. These efforts are expected to result into NOLs from these two 
countries post submission of this funding proposal. Vietnam and Indonesia are expected to have 
projects that meet the agreed eligibility criteria as defined in the present funding proposal. The 
Phase 2 of the Facility that is to be complementary to the current Phase 1  aims to –based on current project 
information - (i) avoid a total of 286.32 m metric tons of CO2, including 60.6 m metric tons of CO2 during 
project lifetime and 225.7 m metrics tons built after the end of the project, (ii) unlock a total of 6.1 GW, 
including in the short-term 2 GW and in the medium-term 4.1 GW of RE, and (iii) leverage a total of USD 
10.2 bl, including USD 1.2 bl during the project lifetime and USD 9 bl built after the end of the project. Once 
and if approved by GCF Board, Phase 2 will be complementary to the present Funding Proposal.

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 72 
 
 
 PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
 
The SRMI Facility aims at deploying the SRMI approach to unlock RE deployment by leveraging 
sustainable private investments starting with seven countries, namely Botswana, CAR, DRC, Kenya, 
Mali, Namibia and Uzbekistan. These countries were selected based on the willingness and interest of 
their respective governments to embrace renewable energy deployment and combat the challenges they 
face in the implementation of their NDCs and low-emissions development pathways. In addition, those 
countries represent a large sample of developing countries – with around 200 million inhabitants – facing 
different constraints, from very small to very large grids, low to high electrification rates, availability or not of 
domestic fossil fuels, and fragile and post conflict countries to medium income countries. The lessons learnt 
from the implementation of SRMI in those countries will enable to replicate the approach at scale in a 
sustainable and affordable manner, contributing to fast-track the Sustainable Development Goals (in 
particular SDG 13 on Climate Action and SDG 7 on Affordable and Clean Energy). 
Under the context of the Covid-19 crisis, the SRMI Facility’s projects aim to support countries in their 
energy transition and contribute to the overall mitigation agenda at a time where the economic 
recovery design will determine whether the Paris Agreement targets can be achieved. In that regard, 
macro-level economic stimulus packages need to be combined with catalytic climate finance for specific 
programs such as this one to ensure that this is achieved. If in 2017 those countries represented 1.2 percent 
of the total global GHG emissions, under a BAU scenario they would on average triple their emissions 
between 2017 and 2030. With international support, the seven countries are committed to contribute to GHG 
emissions reductions. As per their NDCs presented in Figure 1, Botswana, CAR, DRC, Kenya, Mali, Namibia 
and Uzbekistan committed to reduce, conditionally to external financing with the exception of Botswana, 
compared to their BAU scenario their emissions by 15 percent, 5 percent, 55 percent, 30 percent, 30 percent, 
89 percent and 10 percent, respectively. However, the priority of countries is the immediate emergency 
response to the current Covid-19 crisis. The question of how the economic recovery is designed remains 
crucial in shaping the long-term pathways for emissions and determining whether the NDC targets can be 
achieved. If government do not roll out low carbon development strategies and policies in response to the 
coming economic crisis, emissions could rebound and even overshoot previously project levels by 2030, 
despite lower economic growth in the period to 2030. 
Figure 1: NDC target (conditional and unconditional – when applicable) 
 
 
Sources: countries’ NDC UNFCCC submissions 
48%
79%
15%
5%
10%
29%
30%
55%
89%
Botsw ana
C A R 
Uzbekistan
Mali
K enya
DRC
Nam ibia
Unconditional (%)
Conditional (%)

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 72 
 
 
To reach their NDC targets, the seven countries will need to transform their energy sector. The energy 
sector represents in most of these countries the main contributor of emissions. The energy sector represents 
84 percent of GHG emissions in Uzbekistan, 68 percent in Botswana and Mali 31 percent.  
Figure 2: Energy Sector GHG Contribution per Country 
 
 
Sources: countries’ NDC submissions and various online sources 
However, if the seven countries have ambitious GHG emissions reduction objectives as part of their 
NDCs, their current energy policies in place, the planned deployment of coal and the Covid-19 crisis 
may inhibit the NDC achievements. In the seven countries, total installed coal capacity is expected to 
increase from 0.5 GW to 7 GW from today’s levels to 2030. As per their current plans by 2030, 8.5 GW of 
solar and wind generation will be built out of a total of 60 GW installed capacity – representing 14 percent. 
If representing these shares in GWh energy production, the solar and wind share would drop to 6-7 percent.  
Figure 3: Planned Installed Coal Capacity 2018 to 2030 
 
 
 
Sources: countries existing generation plans 
5.2%
5.5%
22.5%
25%
31%
68%
84%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
CAR
DRC
Namibia
Kenya
Mali
Botswana
Uzbekistan
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2018
2030
Coal (GW)
Botswana
CAR
DRC
Kenya
Mali
Namibia
Uzbekistan

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 72 
 
 
It will be critical in this context to support policymakers to develop green stimulus interventions with 
targeted public investments in order to unlock large private investments for economic recovery. 
According to the IEA and estimations by the World Bank, around 20 GW and 45 GW of RE (including large 
hydropower) by 2025 and 2030, respectively, will need to be deployed in those seven countries as part of 
their electricity mix to reach the 2C° targets and universal access. This represents around USD 15 billion in 
investments needed just for new solar and wind generation by 2025. To reach this objective, large amounts 
of private funding will have to be unlocked to complement the limited public sector financing available. Yet 
most developing countries still lack a pipeline of bankable solar and wind projects for consideration by the 
private sector. To develop one, countries must take a series of key steps to tackle critical risks perceived by 
the private sector such as grid constraints and procurement while also minimizing risks for the public sector. 
The seven countries have been receiving support from other multilateral development banks (MDB) 
and bilateral banks to deploy RE in their countries outside of SRMI and of the scope of the present 
Funding Proposal – with a coordination at World Bank sector strategy level to ensure 
complementarity of programs, avoid overlaps and enhance synergies. More precisely: 
a. Botswana: The new World Bank-supported solar program is aligned with current support provided 
by Power Africa and the AfDB under a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on solar deployment. 
 
b. CAR: MDBs and donors are focusing their support in CAR – which is all grant – on access and 
generation: (i) the World Bank is financing an ongoing project consisting of a 25 MWp solar plant with 
25 MWh battery storage – the PURACEL project, (ii) AfDB is currently financing the extension of 
Boali 2 hydropower system from 10 MW to 20 MW, plus the upgrade of the (only) transmission line 
between Boali and Bangui to 110 kV, (iii) AFD is working on refurbishing the existing 10 MW of Boali 
2, (iv) the Chinese Government is supporting another solar project in Bangui (15 MWp), and 
eventually the construction of Boali 3 hydropower plant (5 MW) and (v) a Saudi fund is supporting 
investment in thermal generation for Bangui (10 MW). The new World Bank grant-funded project 
aims to transform the current 100 percent publicly owned energy sector by supporting the first steps 
towards mobilization of private investments and such, while supporting further deployment of 
disruptive technologies such as battery storage – CAR having the largest battery storage project 
being built in the African continent under the PURACEL project.  
 
c. DRC: The World Bank has been financing investments and technical assistance in DRC focusing on 
grid-connection, private investment mobilization for electrification, technical and financial support to 
the utility and interconnection to the neighboring countries. The World Bank program is aligned with 
the current portfolio of other MDBs such as AfDB, AFD, United Nations Development Program 
(UNDP), Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the UK Department for International 
Development (DFID), USAID and the KfW. As the electrification agenda is critical to DRC while there 
are limited domestic financial resources, support for PPP RE mini-grids have been promoted under 
a DFID technical assistance financed by AfDB and GCF. The new USD 500 million DRC World Bank-
supported project aims to leverage the lessons learnt from this PPP program and develop at a larger-
scale fully privately financed mini-grids in some of the biggest regional capital cities. To unlock private 
financing for mini-grids, the project will propose tailor-made guarantees to the selected private 
investors to reduce the risk perceived. 
 
d. Kenya: The World Bank has been working on last mile electrification, generation (mostly geothermal) 
and utility strengthening/capacity building in Kenya as part of a large program funded by various 
donors. Since 2016, the World Bank Group, AFD and EIB are supporting solar and wind development 
with AFD financing a strategy on solar auction. The solar auction program has not yet been 
implemented due to limited appetite of the utility. However, the government has requested the World

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 72 
 
 
Bank to support the modification of the solar auction program under its new RE program which will 
include least-cost generation plan, VRE integration and IPP procurement support. EIB financed IPPs 
in renewables and accessed GCF funding for its Global Energy Efficiency and RE Fund, and World 
Bank Group, through MIGA, is assessing providing support to RE IPP projects.  
 
e. Mali: The World Bank energy portfolio in Mali is focusing on access, sector strengthening and new 
generation. As part of its support to the West Africa Power Pool (WAPP), the World Bank is 
supporting the deployment of two regional solar with battery plants. These are being developed in 
coordination with other MDBs that are also supporting the utility and the energy sector, namely AfDB, 
the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), the European Union, the West African Development Bank (la 
Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement, BOAD), AFD and KfW. These partners are preparing 
specific projects in the electricity sector in Mali and working in partnership on supporting the 
deployment of solar generation – with the World Bank leading the support to the VRE grid upgrades 
investment and the first deployment of competitive selection of IPPs. The ongoing OMVS 225 kV 
transmission line from Bamako to Manantali, Kayes to Senegal, and Kayes to Mauritania is funded 
by the AFD, IDA, and China Exim Bank. The IsDB is funding the mini-grids with productive uses in 
rural remote areas; the AFD is preparing a rural electrification program for some 60 localities; and 
the AfDB, AFD, and BOAD are co-financing the Guinea-Mali interconnection with the World Bank. 
GCF financing was accessed by BOAD for its climate finance facility to scale-up solar energy 
investments in francophone West Africa and its Mali solar rural electrification project. Clean 
Technology Fund (CTF) financing is being sought for the new investment project to support Mali in 
this transformative program with some of the largest solar and battery plants in the world (subject to 
CTF approvals). 
 
f. Namibia: The new World Bank-supported solar program is aligned with current support provided by 
Power Africa and the AfDB under a MOU on solar deployment. KfW and GIZ have also been 
supporting NamPower – the utility – in developing their least-cost generation plans and grid analysis 
as well as a battery storage pilot. Proparco provided debt financing for the 37 MWp PV.  The 
Deutsche Bank accessed GCF funding for its universal green energy access programme. Together 
with the other MDBs and Development Finance Institutions (DFIs), the World Bank is coordinating 
its RE support to ensure complementarity of the different work streams. 
 
 
g. Uzbekistan: The World Bank Group has been very active in solar deployment and such with the 
support of ADB and EBRD. ADB financed a solar roadmap that was implemented with the support 
of the World Bank Group Scaling Solar Program with 1 GW of solar PV targeted. Asian Development 
Bank (ADB) is further supporting the deployment of solar and EBRD is supporting wind deployment 
in the country. Strong cooperation is ongoing to ensure that the tenders have similar bankable risk 
allocation. The new World Bank-supported VRE program in Uzbekistan will enable the integration of 
the VRE being deployed under the three MDB supported programs. 
 
Outside of the scope of the present Funding Proposal, to facilitate the development of the Initiative’s 
core objectives, a collaborative multi-stakeholder group has been established.  The multi-stakeholder 
group comprises of AfDB, KfW, and EIB in addition to AFD, ISA and IRENA. The multi-stakeholder group is 
an informal high-level platform where stakeholders are expected to discuss SRMI’s core principles during 
workshops sharing each stakeholder’s vision to support the development of renewables in developing 
countries. A high-level collaboration with the Initiative stakeholders is ongoing (outside of the present 
Funding Proposal), including with AfDB’s team working on their initiative Desert to Power and their new 
SEFA initiative on developing RE aligned with SRMI’s principles, and AFD’s work program on RE

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 72 
 
 
deployment. Discussions are also on-going with the Energy Transition Coalition and in particular the Climate 
Investment Platform (CIP) to enhance cooperation and maximize synergies. 
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) 
 
The SRMI Facility aims at tackling the lack of sustainable and bankable pipeline of RE projects in 
developing countries to achieve low-emission development pathways. The SRMI theory of change is 
for the entire Programme and draws on the lessons learned from the successes and failures of national 
electricity policies and IPP selection processes in developing countries. Under the current context, it also 
aims to support the development of renewable energy in parallel with green stimulus packages for these 
countries to provide core support in the economic recovery post Covid-19. The SRMI Facility aims at 
supporting multiple countries in their energy transition starting with seven pilot countries and quickly after 
adding other countries via a complementary funding proposal presenting information on the new countries, 
such as Indonesia and Vietnam, once NOLs are received, for projects following the Facility’s eligibility criteria 
presented in the present Funding Proposal. 
The main barriers identified that need to be addressed to leverage private investments can be 
grouped into two broad categories: (i) risks occurring during the development phase, that is, prior to 
construction and operation; and (ii) those that arise once the project begins to operate. Both types of risk are 
integrated into the IPPs and lenders’ cost of capital. These risks have been exacerbated under the current 
crisis, and comprehensive risk support will need to be provided to leverage private investments. 
a. Development risks encompass:  
- 
grid risk, including connection risks; 
- 
land risk, including availability, permitting, and environmental and social (E&S) aspects; 
- 
legal risk, including the applicable regulatory, dispute resolution, and judicial frameworks; 
- 
procurement risk; and 
- 
integrity risk. 
 
b. Operational risks encompass:  
- 
off-taker credit risk (including the off-taker’s record of performance and timely payment) and risk 
of contract termination; 
- 
the country’s power sector risk (including sector financial sustainability risk, reform risk, regulatory 
risk, and delay in the government’s construction work; 
- 
market risk (including currency risk and interest rate risk; 
- 
country and macroeconomic risks; and 
- 
political risk (including risks of breach of contract; expropriation; transfer restriction and currency 
inconvertibility; and war and civil disturbance). 
 
To tackle those risks, the SRMI Facility developed activities around four components – that are 
adapted to the needs of each country as part of the Facility, namely:  
a. Component 1: Technical Assistance – concentrates on: (i) comprehensive and integrated planning 
support to develop least-cost generation plans combined with VRE integration analysis and dispatch 
and planning capacity building, (ii)  legal, financial and procurement aspects capacity building and  
transaction advisory support to implement  competitive and transparent tendering of privately-
financed RE project, and (iii) technical and environmental and social (E&S) studies to prepare solar 
and wind parks for future tenders;

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 72 
 
 
b. Component 2: Public Investments – concentrates on public investments for: (i) solar and/or wind 
park common/shared infrastructure, (ii) VRE integration grid upgrades (including publicly-owned 
battery storage) and enhancing grid resilience to climate change, and (iii) electrification to increase 
population’s resilience;  
 
c. Component 3: Risk Mitigation Instruments – concentrates on providing risk mitigation instruments 
to private investors for grid-connected and off-grid renewable energy/storage projects; and 
 
d. Component 4: Project Management – concentrates on the management of the projects and 
coordination and implementation of their activities, in compliance with the Executing Entities (EEs)’ 
and Program Implementing Entities (PIEs)’ contractual obligations included or referred to in the legal 
agreements entered into with the Accredited Entities (AE). 
The technical assistance component focusses on the country/macro level risks looking at (i) 
developing sustainable RE targets to reduce planning risks and provide evidence-based targets for low-
emission pathways, (iii) reducing procurement risks through a robust and transparent selection of IPPs; and 
(iii) increasing government’s internal capacity, and reducing developing risks for IPPs by providing land and 
permits through solar/wind park schemes.  
The public investment component focusses on the grid and infrastructure level risks looking at (i) 
ensuring minimal curtailment and risk to the grid stability due to high penetration of VRE, (ii) increasing grid 
resilience to climate change impacts, finance the public infrastructure needed for the IPPs and (iii) providing 
access to electricity to vulnerable populations.  
The risk mitigation instrument component focusses on the residual risks for private investors looking 
at ensuring a sustainable leveraging of private investments in grid-connected and off-grid RE projects.

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 72 
 
 
 
2 All the financing presented in Table 1 are estimates based on current scope of the projects. These are indicative 
and subject to approval by the World Bank Board and agreements with the EE. 
 
Table 1: Components Financing per Project (indicative financing in million USD)2 
 
The main expected outcomes under the SRMI Facility are: 
a. a reduction in GHG emissions thanks to an increase in investments in VRE capacity through private 
investments in grid-connected and off-grid projects, and enabled VRE integration, 
b. the leveraging of private investments reducing the burden on public sector finances, 
c. improvement of grid resilience as well as resilience of local communities around the projects, and 
d. strengthening of institutional and regulatory capacity. 
 
The SRMI Facility’s objective is to support the eligible countries to shift to low-emission sustainable 
development pathways and increase access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy 
to its populations. 
 
 
 
 
Sub-Component 1.1 Generation plans with VRE 
integration and Capacity Building (technical)
0.5
1
1
1
1
0.5
Sub-Component 1.2 Transaction Advisory and 
Capacity Building (procurement, legal)
1.5
1
1.5
1
1
1
1.5
Sub-Component 1.3 RE Park Infrastructure studies
1.5
0.5
1
1
2.5
1.5
1.5
Component 1 indicative budget per country (all)
23
3.5
1.5
3.5
3
4.5
3.5
3.5
Component 1 indicative budget (GCF)
21.5
3.5
3.5
3
4.5
3.5
3.5
Sub-Component 2.1 Public investments in solar 
and wind park infrastructure 
30
20
25
21
50
Sub-Component 2.2 Public investments for VRE 
integration grid upgrades and grid resilience
68
10
75
46
40
250
Sub-Component 2.3 Public investments for 
electrification (PPP mini-grids, grid extension)
49
60
500
125
62
35
Component 2 indicative budget per country (all)
1466
147
90
500
200
133
96
300
Component 2 indicative budget (GCF)
206
30
30
45
38
20
43
Sub-Component 3.1 Risk mitigation instrument for 
grid-connected RE
Reimbursable 
Grants 
30
Sub-Component  3.2 Risk mitigation instrument 
for mini-grids
Guarantees
10
10
Component 3 indicative budget per country (all)
50
10
30
10
Component 3 indicative budget (GCF)
50
10
30
10
Component 4 indicative budget per country (all)
24.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
Component 4 indicative budget (GCF)
2.5
0.5
0
0.5
0.5
0.5
0
0.5
Total indicative budget per country
1563.5
164
95
537
206.5
141
113
307
Kenya 
Mali 
Namibia 
Uzbekistan
Botswana 
CAR
Total Financing 
Instrument 
Components 
DRC
Component 3: Risk Mitigation Instruments
Component 4: Project Management (Grants)
Component 1: Technical Assistance
Grants
Component 2: Public Investments
Loans (with the 
exception of CAR 
which is grant)

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 72 
 
 
Figure 4: SRMI Facility Theory of Change

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 72 
 
 
B.3. Programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) 
 
Programme Overall Background 
 
Solar and wind energy generation, as part of a green stimulus package post covid-19, could 
become game changers as they are already least-cost source of generation in most countries 
and are modular with shorter construction timeline than other power plants. Solar and wind energy 
generation can play a critical role from different perspectives: (i) climate change, (ii) energy security, (iii) 
energy access as it is a modular source of energy, (iv) responding to fast growing demand as they have 
short construction timeline, and (v) local development with industrial integration and community 
development (including from women empowerment’s perspective). Moreover, solar and wind can help 
countries deal with their potential power shortages while ensuring they are not dependent on imported 
fuels. 
However, large penetration of VRE is usually rapidly constrained due to grid technical limitations 
and lack of flexibility in the grids. The main challenges related to the integration of VRE into the grid 
are its variable nature, uncertain availability and that it can only produce power during the day for solar 
and when the wind is blowing. Three issues must be considered when deploying VRE into a grid: (i) the 
capacity for the generation mix to meet demand at any hour of the year, considering VRE variability; (ii) 
the economic optimum in terms of power system operating costs, after considering both cost reductions 
thanks to VRE and the investment costs required for deploying and integrating VRE; and (iii) the 
limitations of solar PV/wind capacity to maintain grid stability, due to its variability and its limited capacity 
to contribute to the balancing of demand and generation. The flexibility needed in the grid to enable a 
sustainable penetration of VRE can be constrained due to (i) technical limitations, i.e. can the grid have 
the dispatch and transmission capacity to integrate such variability, and (ii) commercial arrangements, 
i.e. even if there is in a given grid very flexible generators such as gas plants, they may not be able to 
provide flexibility to the grid as ancillary services may not be priced in their power purchase agreement 
(PPA) or they would have “take or pay” arrangements pushing the utility to dispatch them prior to 
considering new renewables. 
Investment for grid modernization and upgrade will be required to ensure large penetration of 
VRE in the seven countries. Taking advantage of variable renewable generation requires significant 
expansion and modernization of electrical grids. Specific technologies and processes may be used to 
support the gradual transition of power systems into “VRE-friendly” grids that will significantly reduce 
integration costs in the long term. The penetration of VRE requires power system planning and grid 
management to adapt to the particular characteristics of VRE. It also requires better forecasting methods 
and stringent grid code requirements. In addition, this may provide the opportunity for the country to also 
look at its grid from a climate change resilience perspective and adapt it to future shocks. 
If the technical aspects are critical, the deployment schemes selected to mobilize and select IPPs 
are also crucial. Since 2015, most countries that moved into competitive selection of IPPs directly 
benefited from the reduction in solar construction and equipment, and in cost of capital, through lower 
PPA prices compared to countries with FIT policies or bilaterally negotiated deals. As of the date of this 
Funding Proposal, Vietnam, Kenya and Mongolia have FIT prices of USD 9.35 cents, USD 12 cents and 
USD 15 cents per kWh, respectively. In comparison, in 2019, under competitive selection, Tunisia, 
Ethiopia, Zambia and Philippines announced PPA prices of USD 2.44, USD 2.56, USD 3.9 and USD 4.5 
cents per kWh, respectively. The main difference between FIT and competitive bidding is that under FIT, 
Governments are fixing the price whereas under a competitive bidding process the private investors are.

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 72 
 
 
Under competitive bidding, governments can access lower prices as IPPs will reflect in their 
proposed PPA price: (i) the capital expenditure (CAPEX) cost at the time of the bid – since 2010 CAPEX 
in wind and solar decreased rapidly, in particular solar module cost and it is difficult to assess its cost a 
few years ahead, (ii) high competition between solar IPPs leading to reduced equity returns expectations, 
(iii) bankable contractual arrangements with fair risk allocation between the private and public 
stakeholders that enable IPPs to attract long-term non-/limited recourse project finance that lower the 
cost of capital, and (iv) the scale of the market in the country and the region. Therefore, a bankable well-
organized competitive selection can attract cost-competitive IPPs and ensure low cost of capital.  
Based on the identified development challenges and in particular grid curtailment risks for VRE, 
two deployment schemes, namely substation-based competitive bidding and solar/wind park 
competitive bidding, are recommended. Both schemes aim to reduce the development risks perceived 
by IPPs, thus reducing the risk premium in the cost of capital and reduce the utility’s cost of integrating 
solar generation into the grid. The main outcome expected is a reduced PPA tariff proposed by 
developers. More precisely:  
- 
Under the substation-based competitive bidding scheme, the government sets a target of 
solar PV capacity to be procured at a certain time. It identifies substations/feeders with available 
MW capacity, and a certain MW capacity at each substation/feeder is opened for bidding to 
achieve the target. IPPs compete through a competitive bidding process to obtain the right to 
connect their projects to the identified substations/feeders based on a set of pre-determined 
selection criteria comprising technical, financial and safeguard aspects. IPPs are responsible for 
selecting the land, obtaining the investment license and have to follow the E&S requirements as 
required in the bidding documents. This scheme support countries better manage the volume of 
new solar PV/wind installation connected to the grid and develop RE in selected areas. It will 
enable the utility to optimize the use of existing transmission capacity, reducing the potential 
curtailment and/or additional costs to integrate the solar PV and wind projects. It can also 
proactively drive grid investments needed for new VRE generation. 
- 
The solar/wind park concept, with pre-arranged comprehensive de-risking measures (including 
land, power evacuation and permits secured), can contribute to reach fully cost-effective 
electricity tariff. The government identifies project site(s), conducts land clearance, and 
constructs shared infrastructure for the solar/wind park that can range from the evacuation line 
to basic elements, such as the fence, roads, street lighting. The government conducts the E&S 
assessments as well as the geotechnical studies. Once the project is ready for competitive 
bidding, the bidding procedure begins and the winning IPP is responsible for the financing, 
construction, and operation of the solar/wind energy project. This scheme is critical when IPPs 
are identifying risk of curtailment and land ownership issues as paramount to the deployment of 
solar and wind in the country. 
RE deployment can also be an opportunity for countries to maximize socio-economic benefits 
which is particularly important in the Covid-19 context. The lack of visibility on the local opportunities, 
the tight timeframe of the tenders, the existence of suppliers already tested, and the costs to assess the 
potential of the local industries do not encourage the bidders to explore what could be done competitively 
in a given country. Assessing the positioning of the local players on the solar/wind value chain and 
identifying the measures needed to improve their involvement in a competitive manner on such a value 
chain will increase their chances to benefit from the opportunities offered by the new RE projects. 
Factoring these measures in an RE roadmap and in the bidding processes launched can increase the 
participation of local players in a competitive manner, fostering the transfer of knowledge and the skills

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 72 
 
 
development and allowing them to build a track record to the extent possible. In addition, expanding the 
RE roadmap to assess the needs of the local communities around the RE projects implemented and to 
design adequate programs to increase their resilience and enhance their livelihoods will ensure that they 
effectively benefit from the implementation of the projects. Sites with good solar/wind resources and 
large plots of lands are usually located in areas where the level of living is below the national average. 
The local communities there face numerous challenges hindering their development. Including tailor-
made development programs in an integrated manner in the RE roadmap of a given country and 
operationalizing them through the RE projects deployed will ensure local communities benefit positively 
from them.  
These programs aim to maximize the socio-economic benefits of the RE projects from the local 
industry as well as from the local community perspectives will pay a specific attention to women 
empowerment. Employment opportunities created by large-scale solar and wind infrastructure projects 
often benefit men more than women, resulting in a significant employment gap in the RE industry. Also, 
in the remote areas where large projects are developed, women, if employed, are more exposed to 
lower-paid, lower-quality employment in the informal sector. As a result, without a proactive policy to 
promote female employment throughout the RE project-cycle, men may benefit disproportionately from 
new employment opportunities across the RE value chain. 
The World Bank SRMI aims at addressing in a comprehensive manner the different challenges 
that are limiting the uptake of sustainable privately financed RE and the associated socio-
economic benefits. Launched in 2018 for the COP 24 under the leadership of the World Bank in 
partnership with the AFD, IRENA and ISA, SRMI aims to support countries in developing sustainable 
solar and wind programs designed to attract private investments and so reduce reliance on public sector 
financing, while maximizing the socio-economic benefits triggered by the projects deployed. Its unique 
and integrated approach offers development and climate financing for (i) technical assistance to help 
countries develop evidence-based RE targets, implement a sustainable renewable energy program, and 
set up and maintain transparent and competitive procurement processes with transaction advisors; (ii) 
critical public investments to enable integration of VRE, finance solar/wind park infrastructures, and 
increase access to electricity; and (iii) risk mitigation instruments to cover residual risks perceived by 
private investors. Its framework is supporting the creation of jobs, the development of skills as well as 
increasing the resilience and enhancing the livelihoods of the local communities around the projects. 
SRMI aims to support countries to: 
- 
develop sustainable RE programs to leverage private investment at scale for grid-connected and 
off-grid RE projects, 
- 
implement the country’s RE programs through transparent and robust competitive tenders, 
- 
improve their grid capacity to integrate VRE and resilience to climate change, 
- 
leverage private investments for RE grid-connected and off-grid projects, 
- 
build RE capacity, 
- 
avoid GHG emissions, and 
- 
maximize the socio-economic benefits triggered by the RE projects developed.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 72 
 
 
Figure 5: SRMI Methodology 
 
 
 
Country Context 
The SRMI approach aims to support countries in a comprehensive multi-dimensional risk 
mitigation approach, yet in a flexible manner adapting to their current situation and constraints. 
Therefore, it is critical to understand the different constraints and starting points of each of the countries 
currently identified to benefit from the Facility: 
- 
Botswana’s power sector currently relies on high-carbon electricity, largely produced from coal 
at the Morupule power station using the country’s large coal reserves (around 200 billion tons). 
To meet domestic demand, 30 percent of electricity is imported from South Africa (92 percent 
coal) and the SAPP market (74.5 percent coal) contributing to coal-fired emissions and 
unnecessary fiscal outflow as tariffs do not cover peak power prices. Only sixty percent of national 
households in Botswana have access to electricity, and the government wants to reach universal 
access by 2030.  Under a BAU scenario, Botswana could see increased output of coal-fired 
power generation, and annual emissions of greenhouse gases will be 2.5 times their 2012 levels 
by 2030. Yet, Botswana enjoys one of the highest irradiation densities in the world, with over 
3,200 hours of sunshine per year and an average global irradiation throughout the country. This 
resource, while largely underexploited today could place Botswana as a leader for developing 
solar. Botswana also benefits from a good wind resource, complementary with the solar resource, 
with a potential currently estimated between 300 MW and 500 MW. No solar/wind projects are 
built to date in the country. 
 
- 
CAR’s electricity sector is characterized by inadequate infrastructure, a weak policy and 
regulatory framework and a utility that is struggling to recover costs and thus maintain and expand 
services. The overall rate of access is 8 percent in the country. Total installed capacity is 28 MW, 
of which 23 MW is available, whereas the current load is 45 MW, and the projected unmet 
demand is estimated at around 60 MW. The majority of the generation is hydropower and diesel 
plants. Therefore, to improve reliability in the power system, support stability, and promote

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 72 
 
 
peacebuilding in a context of fragility, the country is in dire need of sizeable and urgent increases 
in its electricity generation capacity. Solar with battery storage is being sought as a solution with 
a World Bank financed utility-owned solar plant under construction and a deployment of 
solar/battery mini-grid, and off-grid solutions. The country does not have yet any privately-owned 
generation but has a provision for IPPs in its new Electricity Law and started working on the 
decrees for the implementation of the law. 
 
- 
DRC has an access rate of around 9 percent. The well-distributed potential of both hydro and 
solar resources remains mainly untapped, as power sector development has focused on a few 
large hydropower plants over the last decades, leaving most of the country’s population 
unelectrified. SNEL, the national state-owned utility, has a critical role to play in access, in 
particular in Kinshasa, but is caught in a vicious cycle of mounting commercial losses, 
deteriorating assets and mounting debt that hinder its ability to drive electrification outside of 
Kinshasa.  Therefore, it will be critical for the future of the electrification in DRC to develop large 
solar/battery mini-grids in off-grid zones by leveraging private investments. To enable private 
investments, the government must improve its institutional and regulatory framework. 
 
- 
After decades of shortages, Kenya now has enough generation capacity to meet its demand, 
and supply is predominantly from renewable energy sources. The current installed generation 
capacity is 2,819 MW with a peak demand of 1,912 MW, resulting in a peak reserve margin of 
over 30 percent. Renewable energy (geothermal and hydro) account for 65 percent of total 
installed capacity and almost 90 percent of total electricity generation. Geothermal energy 
contributes more than 45 percent of total energy generated, making Kenya one of the global 
leaders in use of this firm, renewable resource. Kenya has a FIT since 2008, and revised in 2012, 
for wind, biomass, small-hydro, geothermal, biogas and solar with a standardized PPA. However, 
little solar and wind generation were built under the FIT, with only 65 MW and 335 MW, 
respectively. 
 
- 
Despite significant progress over the last decade, Mali’s access to modern energy services 
remains low and overall unreliable. Mali relies heavily on expensive thermal power generation 
(heavy fuel oil (HFO) and diesel) and have an access rate of around 39 percent. The development 
of interconnections with its neighboring countries is enabling the country to reduce its cost of 
electricity, while improving its reliability. However, to ensure energy security, the country have 
been bilaterally negotiating with IPPs for new solar projects. No solar/wind projects are built to 
date as prices negotiated are well above the regional standards (with prices well above USD 0.10 
per kWh). In addition, Mali’s grid is under development with key backbones under construction 
and therefore, will face issues with integrating large amounts of VRE without any critical 
investments put in place first. 
 
- 
Namibia imports 73 percent of its electricity needs and is particularly reliant on South Africa’s 
imports. High imports also lead to high foreign exchange, high electricity costs which place a 
burden on the balance of payments and budget, and vulnerable electricity supply. The 
government has taken an important policy decision to increase domestic supply and reduce 
electricity import-dependency through the procurement of public and private investments in 
electricity generation and transmission. Namibia aims to achieve 80 percent self-sufficiency 
through domestic electricity production by 2022. Namibia is one of the best countries in the world 
for CSP, PV and wind production. Namibia has an experience in FIT for very small VRE projects

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 72 
 
 
and a limited experience in competitive bidding. Namibia has an installed 120 MW of PV capacity 
and 5 MW of wind. 
 
- 
Uzbekistan’s energy system is characterized by high losses and low reliability of supply due in 
part to the rapidly aging supply infrastructure that was mostly constructed during the Soviet era. 
The energy sector is highly dependent on natural gas, which is a major source of commodity 
exports but getting depleted and making the system vulnerable, thereby prompting the country to 
seek sustainable energy transition pathways. Natural gas accounts for 86 percent of the total 
primary energy supply. Diversification of Uzbekistan’s electricity generation is also limited, as 
more than 80 percent of the total installed capacity of 12.5 GW in Uzbekistan is natural gas based, 
followed by hydropower (16 percent) and coal (11 percent). The least-cost power generation 
expansion plan for Uzbekistan provides a path to solar and wind transition with solar and wind 
accounting for around 30 percent of the total capacity mix (7.7 GW). Uzbekistan has already a 
very successful tendering system in place with the support of the World Bank Group Scaling Solar 
that was implemented and reached prices of US$ 3.9 cents per kWh. However, to be able to 
reach their ambitious VRE targets, Uzbekistan needs to tackle the limitation on its grid 
availability/flexibility which is expected once a higher penetration of VRE will be reached. 
 
 
Programme’s Objective & Components 
 
The SRMI Facility’s objective is to support the eligible countries to shift to low-emission 
sustainable development pathways and increase access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and 
modern energy to its populations. The SRMI Facility is developed around four components that are 
complementary. Depending on the country specificities such as access rate, available plans and grid 
flexibility, sub-components may not all be required for each project. These components are based on the 
identified risk mitigant that will enable to reduce the cost of RE deployment, contributing to low-emission 
development pathways. At individual project level, the Facility development objectives will be adjusted 
to reflect what is specifically done under each project and which objective and impacts the activities in 
each project are particularly designed to focus on.  
The Facility and its Components have been developed with enough flexibility to be able to add countries 
to the Facility once (and if) approved by GCF Board under subsequent phases. The design of the Facility, 
its components as well as its instruments are applicable to all countries that aim to apply the SRMI 
approach to sustainably move forward with their energy transition. 
Component 1: Technical Assistance 
 
Grant amounts will be allocated by the EE (Host Country) to the financing of the following types of 
activities to be carried out by their Ministry or state utility responsible for energy, on an as country-needed 
basis:  
 
Sub-Component 1.1: Generation plans with VRE integration and Capacity Building (technical)  
- 
Preparation of a new national (or adaptation of an existing) least-cost power generation plan, 
which includes reiterative VRE integration analyses based on technical and commercial 
constraints, an evaluation of the dispatch capabilities and the limits of grid integration and 
determines a cost-optimized electricity mix that can meet demand at any time;  
- 
Preparation of a new national (or adaptation of an existing) least-cost transmission/distribution 
plan, which includes capacity expansion models simulating generation and transmission capacity

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 72 
 
 
investment, given assumptions about future electricity demand, fuel prices, technology cost and 
performance, policy and regulations, and providing informed solar targets and indication of where 
best to locate future projects as well as a list of key investments needed to improve grid VRE 
integration capacity; and 
- 
Provision of institutional capacity building support to government institutions and/or 
utilities/dispatching entities (as identified and designated by the EE) for energy planning and 
dispatch (including using grid-connected battery storage). 
 
Sub-Component 1.2: Transaction Advisory and Capacity Building (procurement, legal)  
- 
Provision of technical assistance (including legal, procurement and transaction advisory services) 
and implementation of capacity building activities to support: (i) the assessment of the existing 
legal framework and the development of a legal framework for IPPs and a competitive bidding 
scheme that is conducive to private sector investment; (ii) the design of energy projects (including 
key terms of the PPA and the government support agreements) with fair risk allocation among 
stakeholders and contractual arrangements acceptable to potential investors; (iii) the competitive 
selection of IPPs and mini-grid developers; and (iv) the negotiations of the final contractual 
arrangement with the selected investors and closing..  If the relevant Project includes Component 
3, the development, structuring and preparatory work for Sub-component 3.1 and Sub-
component 3.2 will be expected to be financed and carried out under this Sub-component 1.2.  
Under such technical assistance, a specific attention will be brought to inform clients on how to 
leverage an effective and efficient competitive bidding process (including in terms of evaluation 
formula to select the IPPs) to maximize the socio-economic benefits, building on the results of 
the associated studies, lessons learnt and best practices. 
 
Sub-Component 1.3: Solar and wind park preparatory studies   
- 
Preparation of preparatory and feasibility studies and environmental and social risk mitigation 
instruments, for the development of solar PV, solar PV with battery storage, CSP, onshore wind 
and offshore wind parks in support of investment de-risking and investor (IPPs and mini-grids 
developers) selection process. Preparatory and feasibility studies may include, as needed, 
geospatial analyses of the land around the substation, topography and geotechnical analyses, 
environmental and social analyses, site-specific grid interconnection studies, solar 
irradiation/wind measurement analyses and other studies as needed.  
 
Component 2: Public Investment  
 
Loan amounts (or grant for grant only countries) will be allocated by the EE (Host Country) to the 
financing of the following types of activities to be carried out by their Ministry or state utility responsible 
for energy, on an as country-needed basis: 
 
Sub-Component 2.1: Public investments in solar and wind park infrastructure.  
- 
Carrying out infrastructure investments in support of the development of solar and wind parks, 
such as acquisition of land, construction of transmission lines and fencing of such infrastructure 
for solar and wind parks. 
 
Sub-Component 2.2: Public investments for VRE integration grid upgrades and grid resilience  
- 
Investment for grid modernization and upgrade to improve grid’s flexibility to integrate larger 
amounts of VRE, limit curtailment or grid instability and adapt to climate change related shocks,

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 72 
 
 
including power system planning, grid management, strengthening of forecasting methods and 
grid code requirements. Grid reinforcements that support VRE integration may include (i) addition 
or replacement of lines and transformers for grid extension and capacity enhancements (both for 
answering growing demand and for integrating VRE power), (ii) equipment for smoothing the 
voltage and frequency issues, such as capacitor banks, battery storage and other reactive power 
compensators, together with flexible alternating current transmission systems, (iii) equipment for 
faster and more efficient grid operation, such as monitoring systems, demand and production 
forecasting systems, and automats for controlling generation units and grid operations through 
automatic generation control; and (iv) other innovative technologies whose commercially viability 
may not have been established yet such as load shifting battery storage. 
  
Sub-Component 2.3: Public investments for electrification  
- 
Investments as needed to support increased electrification, in partnership with the private sector 
when feasible, including through solar home systems, mini-grids and grid connection, as best 
appropriate to the country context, with a particular focus on women. 
 
Component 3: Risk Mitigation Instruments  
 
Provision of financial instruments (in the form of guarantees or reimbursable grants whose 
reimbursement is conditional and modular based on verified performance, or other instruments derived 
from their financial engineering) to reduce the following risks of investors or their commercial financiers 
and enhance financial sustainability, in the following areas:  
 
Sub-Component 3.1: Risk mitigation instruments for solar/battery mini-grids and/or off-grid 
private investors  
- 
Provision of reimbursable grant to mitigate the critical risks related to private capital investment 
in the off-grid space (mini grids and/or SHS – for which Multi-Tier Framework (MTF) data will be 
used when available), such as for instance demand off-take risk affecting the investors for the 
first few years of operation and consequently financial risks affecting pricing and tenor of financing 
available to the investors.  
 
Sub-Component 3.2: Risk mitigation instruments for grid-connected RE projects  
- 
Provision of guarantees to mitigate the critical risks related to private capital investment and 
provision of credit enhancement to private sector investors (and financiers) and electricity off-
takers as needed to leverage private sector investments in grid-connected RE projects. If GCF 
so approves, these risk mitigation instruments may be provided without member country counter-
guarantee, meaning that any amounts paid under the risk mitigation instrument following the 
occurrence of a covered risk would not be reimbursed to the AE or to GCF. 
 
Component 4: Project Management  
 
Management of the projects and coordination and implementation of their activities, in compliance with 
the EEs’ and PIEs’ contractual obligations included or referred to in their subsidiary agreements entered 
into with the AE.

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 72 
 
 
 
Programme’s Project Eligibility Criteria  
Each of the Projects which will be included in the Program – under the present Funding Proposal 
and any subsequent phases - will have to meet the following eligibility criteria that are aligned 
with and organized along the GCF Investment Criteria, prior to being approved by the Accredited 
Entity’s approval body and being able to access the Facility financing: 
 
- 
Impact potential:  
- 
The project will directly support: (i) the financing and the integration of solar and wind energy 
representing a minimum of 15 percent of future total installed capacity by 2025 in the given 
country (or grid), or (ii) the financing and the integration of a minimum of 60 percent of future solar 
and wind installed capacity by 2025 in the given country (or grid), or (iii) the financing of a 
minimum of 1 GW of solar and wind in a given Host Country (excluding projects that are not 
requesting financing for Sub-component 2.1 and 2.2). 
- 
The project will support the country in its effort to leverage private investments in a competitive 
and efficient manner. This criterion’s applicability is dependent on the current security and macro-
fiscal constraints that the country may have. However, even in Fragile, Conflict-affected 
Situations (FCS) countries such as CAR, DRC and Mali, it is critical to develop a path to private 
sector leveraging to reduce the impact of large-scale infrastructure financing onto the 
government’s budget. 
- 
The project will not directly finance nor support non-RE sources and will instead support VRE 
deployment by financing (i) investment for grid modernization and upgrade to improve grid’s 
flexibility to integrate larger amounts of VRE (using technology such as new SCADA systems, 
STATCOM, capacitor banks, substation upgrades with transformer, battery storage, transmission 
line upgrades/increased voltage, and new transmission lines), limit curtailment or grid instability 
(using technology such as  battery storage and other climate friendly technologies - and other 
technical solutions which may be developed after the date of this FP, whose reliability and 
efficiency, based on the technical data available at the time, have been considered sufficient by 
the AE at the time of its internal approval of the project) and adapt to climate change related 
shocks (technology such as lines and substation following climate change resilience guidelines) 
(ii) and/or solar/wind park infrastructure (such as land, substations, new transmission line 
connecting the park to the grid, fencing, security system and all infrastructure needed to complete 
the park as the case may be), and/or (iii) renewable energy-based electrification (including solar 
home systems and mini-grids or any climate friendly technologies). 
- 
If the project includes activities under Sub-component 3.1 or Sub-component 3.2, it will cover 
risks related to long-term mobilization of private capital selected in a competitive manner, and in 
RE investments in utility-scale or mini-grids. 
- 
The estimated installed capacity (MW) as a result of infrastructure financed under the Facility 
shall not deviate more than 15 percent less than the initially planned installed capacity for the 
whole Facility as indicated in Table 2 below.  
- 
The estimated mitigation impact (tCO2eq) as a result of infrastructure financed under the Facility 
shall not deviate more than 15 percent less than the initially planned mitigation impact for the 
whole Facility as indicated in Annex 3 of the Funding Proposal. 
- 
The project will support solar and/or wind (with or without storage) technologies. 
 
- 
Paradigm shift potential:

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 72 
 
 
 
3 Defined as cost per ton CO2 equivalent, calculated as total investment cost divided by expected lifetime 
emissions reductions. 
 
- 
The project will focus on increasing RE deployment in the country (grid-connecting and/or off-
grid) in a transformative manner – from different angles such as legal, procurement, technical, 
economic and social development etc., depending on the starting point of the country.  
- 
The project will include a capacity building plan to be financed under the project to support the 
long-term impact of the change promoted under the project. 
 
- 
Sustainable development potential:  
- 
The project will, to the extent possible, support the development of an industrial integration plan 
to support local industries, skills development and long-term jobs’ creation. 
- 
The project will, to the extent possible, support the development of a local development action 
plan to increase the resilience and enhance the livelihoods of the local communities. 
 
- 
Country ownership: 
- 
The relevant Host Country will demonstrate a strong willingness to develop a comprehensive and 
streamlined strategy to deploy and integrate VRE and leverage in a sustainable manner private 
investment.  
- 
The VRE targets and revised policy supported by the project will be aligned with the NDC/low-
emission development plans as reflected in the no-objection letter issued by the Host Country. 
 
- 
Recipients’ needs: 
- 
The Host Country will be vulnerable to climate change and in need to fundamentally adapt its 
energy systems by harnessing its domestic renewable resources to mitigate climate change. 
 
- 
Efficiency and effectiveness:  
- 
The project will aim at substantially reducing GHG emissions in the given country compared to 
BAU in the energy sector of the Host Country(ies) and support the achievement of the Host 
Country(ies)’ NDC. 
- 
The project’s expected ratio of total USD per carbon dioxide invested3  is maximum 45, and per 
GCF USD invested – the GCF Proceeds – is maximum 10 for each project excluding projects 
that are not requesting financing for Sub-component 2.1 and 2.2, and full grant projects 
- 
The SRMI Facility budget (GCF Proceeds) allocated per Host Country shall not deviate more 
than 15% percent from the initial budget allocated per Host Country as indicated in Table 2 below.  
- 
The project’s financing will be structured with a minimum co-financing ratio GCF to co-financing 
of 3 (one to two co-financing) in each country. 
- 
The project will have been prepared in compliance with the Accredited Entity’s applicable policies 
and procedures and the relevant provisions of the AMA and the FAA. 
- 
The project will be approved by the World Bank within 3 years after the Facility’s GCF Board 
approval. 
 
- 
Gender:

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 72 
 
 
 
4 The four pillars: (i) improving human endowments, (ii) removing constraints for more and better jobs, (iii) finding 
solutions that help increase women's ownership of and control over assets, and (iv) enhancing women’s voice 
and agency and engaging men and boys. 
5 All the financing presented in Table 2 are estimates based on current scope of the projects. These are indicative 
and subject to approval by the World Bank appropriate bodies and agreements with the EEs. Component 1 
financing instrument is grants, Component 2 financing instrument is loans except for CAR which will be full grant, 
and Component 3 is a mix between reimbursable grants for DRC mini-grids and the others will be GCF 
guarantees. For further information on the split between sub-components please see Table 1.  
- 
The project will contribute to closing gender gaps in the energy subsector by (i) identifying gaps 
relevant to the four pillars of the World Bank Group (WBG) Gender Strategy4, and (ii) aiming to 
address these gaps through specific actions supported by the project.  
The projects presented in this Facility are aligned with the eligibility criteria proposed, as illustrated in 
the feasibility study annexed to this Funding Proposal. The World Bank will work with each Executing 
Entity covered under this Facility to finalize the scope and co-financing of these projects, taking into 
account (i) the needs of the clients as they may evolve, (ii) the results of the studies at project’s level 
and (iii) the national dialog involving all relevant stakeholders. A multi-disciplinary World Bank team will 
closely coordinate with the operational teams to ensure that the preparatory work carried-out at the 
project’s level is adequate for the projects to meet all the eligibility criteria as agreed under the Facility 
with the GCF. 
 
Identified Project’s Scope and Financing 
Subject to IBRD/IDA/ESMAP corporate approval as appropriate in due course, the projects 
currently considered for inclusion in the Programme are expected to be financed through GCF 
financing and a co-financing from IBRD/IDA in the form of loans and IDA and ESMAP in the form 
of non-reimbursable grants. Co-financing does not include any other sources of financing for separate 
(even if coordinated/complementary) projects/activities that fall outside the scope of this Funding 
Proposal nor private investments that are only leveraged. CTF financing may be sought for Mali – 
however, this financing is not yet approved.  Given the limited CTF resources expected to be available, 
the contemplated CTF financing is expected to substitute a very limited part of the World Bank resources 
if the CTF resources are eventually approved. The CTF portion is currently included in the WB financing 
described in the present Funding Proposal and therefore there is no financing gap in what is presented 
in the Funding Proposal. For the avoidance of doubt, in the event that the CTF resources are approved, 
CTF resources will replace IBRD/IDA/ESMAP resources.  In the event that the CTF resources are not 
approved, IBRD/IDA/ESMAP resources will continue to be used so there will not be any financing gap. 
The World Bank targets to submit a request for CTF financing for the Mali project upon opening of the 
new CTF window supporting VRE integration. However, as this window is expected to be operational by 
late Q3 2021 (as the operationalization of the associated modalities is still on-going), it is likely that the 
Mali project will be submitted to the CTF Trust Fund Committee for approval post the GCF Board targeted 
for the SRMI Facility (B28). Meanwhile, these projects are included in the CTF pipeline and the World 
Bank will be monitoring every opportunity to advance CTF financing to these projects.   
 
Table 2: Indicative Projects Scope and Financing Needs (in million USD)5 
Country 
Scope of project 
Comp. 1 
Comp. 2 
Comp. 3 
Comp. 4 
Total cost 
Botswana 
a. park shared infrastructure for 200 
MW CSP and 100 MW wind,  
3.5  
(GCF: 3.5) 
147 
(GCF:30) 
10  
(GCF: 10) 
3.5  
(GCF: 0.5) 
164  
(GCF 44)

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 72 
 
 
b. VRE integration and grid upgrades 
including 50 MWh of storage, and 
c. 
electrification 
for 
estimated 
600,000 people; and 
d. 
risk 
mitigation 
instrument 
covering liquidity/termination for 
private 
investors 
competitively 
selected for CSP and/or wind 
projects developed under SRMI. 
CAR 
a. solar PV (15 MWp) with battery 
storage 
(15 
MWh) 
and 
VRE 
integration upgrades, 
b. mini-grid (20 MW PV with 20 
MWh storage) and off-grid RE 
solutions for provincial cities and 
rural areas to electrify estimated 
250,000 people, and 
c. support energy sector and utility’s 
financial performance to attract 
private 
sector 
participation 
in 
renewable energy generation. 
1.5 
90 (IDA 
grant) 
(GCF: 30) 
- 
3.5 
95  
(GCF: 30) 
DRC 
a. Public-private-partnership (PPP) 
100 MW PV and 140 MWh storage 
mini-grids to electrify estimated 
1.5m people,  
b. grid infrastructure and resilience,  
c. risk mitigation instrument to cover 
demand risks for private investors 
for mini-grids. 
3.5  
(GCF: 3.5) 
500 
30  
(GCF: 30) 
3.5 
(GCF:0.5) 
536.5  
(GCF: 34) 
Kenya 
a. park shared infrastructure for 300 
MW grid-connected solar,  
b. VRE integration including 150 
MWh 
of 
storage, 
enabling 
integration of 250 MW solar and 
wind, and 
c. 
electrification 
for 
estimated 
420,000 people. 
3  
(GCF: 3) 
200  
(GCF: 45) 
- 
3.5 
(GCF: 0.5) 
206.5 
(GCF: 48.5) 
Mali 
a. park shared infrastructure for 300 
MW grid-connected solar with 300 
MWh storage,  
b. VRE integration incl. 50 MWh 
storage enabling integration of 150 
MW PV, and 
c. electrification for   estimated 
400,000 people. 
4.5  
(GCF: 4.5) 
133  
(GCF: 38) 
- 
3.5  
(GCF: 0.5) 
141  
(GCF: 43) 
Namibia 
a. park shared infrastructure for 200 
MW CSP and 200 MW wind, 
b. VRE integration incl. 200 MWh 
storage,  
c. electrification for estimated 1m 
people, and 
3.5  
(GCF: 3.5) 
96  
(GCF: 20) 
10  
(GCF: 10) 
3.5 
(GCF: 0) 
113 
(GCF: 33.5)

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 72 
 
 
d.  risk mitigation instrument 
covering liquidity/termination for 
private 
investors 
competitively 
selected for CSP and/or wind 
projects developed under SRMI. 
Uzbekistan 
a. park shared infrastructure for 1 
GW solar PV,  
b. VRE integration including 50 MWh 
enabling integration of 1.5 GW VRE,  
c. grid upgrade and deployment. 
3.5  
(GCF: 3.5) 
300  
(GCF: 43) 
- 
3.5 
(GCF: 0.5) 
307 
(GCF: 47) 
 
 
23 
(GCF:21.5) 
1,466 
(GCF: 206) 
50  
(GCF: 50) 
24.5  
(GCF: 2.5) 
1,563.5 
(GCF:280) 
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
 
The following section describes the overall Facility management, the management process to ensure the 
most transformational projects are selected, and to deploy the legal arrangements between GCF, World 
Bank and the countries. 
 
1. SRMI Facility as a GCF Program 
 
The SRMI Facility is a program to support a series of projects, that currently proposes to support seven 
projects subject to the results of their appraisal but possibly more. All projects which will ultimately be 
supported by the SRMI Facility will have the common purpose to scale-up RE in a systematic and integrated 
manner. This Programme aims to enhance coordination and strategic alignment of the projects in a manner 
that can increase the prospects of transformational change, provide operational efficiencies and accelerate 
implementation of the SRMI methodology across countries and regions. The Facility is being developed as 
a Programme to ensure enough flexibility to include countries under subsequent phases, such as Indonesia 
and Vietnam when the NOLs are received and upon confirmation of them meeting the eligibility criteria.  
 
This Funding Proposal includes indicative information for each of the currently proposed seven projects. 
Under the programmatic approach, the GCF would rely on the AE’s due diligence on the proposed projects 
included in the Program. Subject to the outcome of such due diligence, the World Bank will approve funding 
for such projects that meet the eligibility criteria as presented in Section B3. 
 
The EE are responsible for ensuring the implementation of the projects and the fulfilment of their 
development objective. The AE will provide implementation support to the EE to the extent permitted under 
its policies. 
 
2. Implementation Arrangements  
 
As part of its role as GCF AE and co-financier of the projects to be supported under the Facility, the World 
Bank will assess and confirm the eligibility of each such Project to be included in the Facility and benefit from 
the Bank’s and GCF Financing. In order to do so, for each project proposed to be included in the Facility, 
the World Bank will comprise energy and climate finance experts to manage and be responsible for the 
Facility’s overall objectives and ensure that the projects selected meet all the eligibility criteria (and their 
limitations) as presented in Section B3.

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 72 
 
 
 
Following the GCF Board approval, the World Bank and the GCF will, based on the Accreditation Master 
Agreement (AMA), enter into one Funded Activity Agreement – FAA for the provision of the funds under all 
GCF instruments supporting the Program. The World Bank will be solely responsible for the management 
and administration of GCF resources and will carry out such management and administration in accordance 
with its policies, procedures and practices, and the relevant provisions of the FAA and AMA. The World Bank 
will apply its own fiduciary principles and standards relating to any integrity checks, anti-corruption, 
countering of financing of terrorism, fraud, financial sanctions, embargoes and anti-money laundering.  
 
The World Bank will inform the GCF Secretariat about projects selected in accordance with the Eligibility 
Criteria as part of the periodic reporting outlined in Section E7. During the implementation of the Facility, the 
World Bank will be responsible for providing the necessary governance, oversight and quality assurance in 
accordance with its policies, procedures and any specific requirements in the AMA and FAA. 
 
The World Bank will use its operation systems and established processes to review individual project 
proposals that would meet the eligibility criteria as presented in the present Funding Proposal and approve 
allocations. It would also facilitate the reporting in an integrated way to the GCF on the SRMI Facility’s 
projects, as well as the learning across projects.  Following approval of Projects, the World Bank will sign 
Subsidiary Agreements with the EEs and other agreements as applicable with any loan/grant PIEs and 
guarantee obligors and beneficiaries. These transactions will make available World Bank finance as well as 
GCF finance for investments in line with the provisions of the FAA.  
 
There is no capacity assessment of the countries presently in the Facility, as those will be conducted during 
the appraisal stage of each project. When the projects go through the appraisal stage, some of the capacity 
assessment information will be summarized in the projects’ appraisal documents and will be publicly 
disclosed. As part of the World Bank’s due diligence in accordance with its own policies and procedures, 
WB ensures that adequate fiduciary (procurement and financial management [FM]), safeguards, legal and 
M&E frameworks are in place: (i) the different experts within the World Bank are assessing the client’s 
capacity, (ii) they provide recommendations in the event where the capacity is not sufficient and (iii) an 
effective project management unit (PMU) with the core experts is usually part of the legal covenants for EEs 
to meet.

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 72 
 
 
Figure 7: Indicative Implementation Arrangements for Component 1 and 2 
 
 
 
With regards to risk mitigation instruments, depending on the final arrangements that will be developed as 
part of the preparation and appraisal of each project, figure 8 presents the links between the country, 
commercial banks and private developers for Component 3.1 and figure 9 for Component 3.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Indicative Implementation Arrangements for Component 3.1

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 72 
 
 
Overview of the indicative mechanism contemplated for the reimbursable grants, subject to future 
due diligence, market sounding, and World Bank management approval: 
 
a. Eligible sub-projects: RE private sector projects selected by the Executing Entity, with the technical 
assistance of the World Bank to ensure that they meet both the eligibility criteria as well as the Bank’s 
mandatory requirements (including safeguards and fiduciary) for sub-projects, as stated in the GCF 
financing agreement between the Accredited Entity and the Executing Entity 
b. Executing Entity(ies): a Host Country, expected to be the Democratic Republic of Congo, or a state-
owned company mandated by the Host Country 
c. Beneficiaries: private sector developers preparing a public private partnership for the development 
of mini-grid sub-projects with an agreed business plan 
d. Covered Risk: mitigation of the critical risks related to private capital investment in the off-grid space, 
mainly demand off-take risk affecting the investors for the first few years of operation and 
consequently financial risks affecting pricing and tenor of financing available to the investors (to 
support viability during the initial years of the sub-projects) 
e. Financial terms:  
- 
Disbursement to the project company established by the private developers for the 
implementation of its sub-project, during a pre agreed number of years at the beginning of the 
operation period during which demand/revenues are ramping up and may not be sufficient to 
reach viability of the mini grid projected in the pre-agreed business plan 
- 
Reimbursement during a pre agreed number of years starting not later than the date when the 
demand/revenues in the pre-agreed business plan are sufficient to achieve viability as reflected 
in the pre-agreed business plan 
- 
Triggering events to draw down expected to be set by reference to the verified level of the project 
company revenues below the agreed viability level in the audited business plan during initial (and 
riskier) stages of the operation of the sub-project 
- 
Triggering event for reimbursement expected to be set by reference to the verified level of the 
project company revenues above the pre-agreed viability threshold 
Figure 9. Indicative structure for the contemplated reimbursable grants 
 
Funded Activity 
Agreement
Mini Grid 
Developer
(SPV)
Country
Electricity
Payments
Lenders
Developers/ 
Sponsors
Loans and equity
Verification 
agent
GCF Reimbursable Grant 
Agreement
Key:
GCF cash flow
Legal agreements for grant
Other
On-granting 
Agreement?
Consumers, 
including small 
businesses
Project 
Implementing
Entity
[Escrow Bank]
[Escrow Agreement]
[Escrow 
Agreement]
Viability Gap 
Financing Agreement 
with agreed business 
plan
GCF cash reflow

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 72 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Indicative Implementation Arrangements for Component 3.2

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
Overview of the indicative mechanism contemplated for the guarantees: 
 
a. Eligible projects: RE private sector projects competitively selected by the Host Country or a state-
owned company mandated by the Host Country, with the technical assistance of the World Bank 
b. Executing Entity(ies): private sector RE project company 
c. Beneficiaries: (i) private sector RE project companies (in the case of the direct payment guarantee) 
or (ii) commercial international or local letter of credit issuing banks providing payment security to 
such private sector RE project companies (in the case of a letter-of-credit payment guarantee) or (iii) 
in the case of a loan guarantee, commercial lenders to the private sector RE project company.   
d. Covered Risk: Two of the three structures (the letter-of-credit payment guarantee and direct 
payment guarantee) would support payments under a power purchase agreement (PPA) to an 
Executing Entity from a public-sector off-taker (i.e. liquidity risk), and the nature of the structure 
provided would depend on the project itself as it takes shape. The third structure, a loan guarantee, 
could provide appropriate support to commercial lenders (against public-sector risks related to long-
term mobilization of private capital) to. private investors (that is, Executing Entity RE project 
companies) for a RE project. 
e. Financial terms: The conditions of guarantee would reflect World Bank’s policy and procedural 
requirements but given the nature of guarantee projects, would be specifically negotiated with the 
participants in each project. In accordance with World Bank’s policies and procedures, guarantees 
would only be provided to the extent necessary to mobilize private financing for the projects and/or 
to mitigate payment risks of the projects, taking into account country, project and market 
circumstances.  
 
3. Projects Arrangements and Reporting Requirements 
 
World Bank-financed projects follow a robust framework to design, prepare, implement, and supervise 
projects, as assessed by GCF prior to entering into its AMA with the WB.  All the potential Facility-supported

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 72 
 
 
projects will follow the WB project cycle, as well as the Bank’s operational policies and procedures. For each 
Project included in the Programme, including those for which a GCF financing would be requested, the World 
Bank will carry out its due diligence and submit an appraisal-stage Project Appraisal Document (PAD) for 
quality control covering the IBRD/IDA financing and GCF financing, following standard WB procedures. Once 
all the relevant internal World Bank’s requirements are met, the project moves to negotiations and World 
Bank Board approval stage, which cover the GCF financing and all WB or WB administered co-financing. 
The implementation of the Facility-supported projects (project implementation through completion and 
evaluation) follows the World Bank’s applicable policies and procedures. For each project, a project 
management unit (PMU) will be established with a team expected to include at least a team lead, technical 
expert, procurement specialist, financial management specialist, environmental specialist and social/gender 
specialist, and a lawyer. Each project will have its own monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and reporting 
process, and the EE will be accountable for its implementation.  
Figure 11: Key Personnel (Staff or Consultants) Typically Included in a Project Management Unit 
 
 
 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
 
GCF funding is critical to address the current RE market failures identified and to ensure that 
countries continue their low carbon development pathway. Today, the deployment of solar and wind is 
constrained due to (i) lack of existing government strategy to adapt the current energy sector to the new 
disruptive technologies, (ii) weak grids that require upfront investments by public parties, (iii) government 
financing constraints, (iv) conflicting views on short-term vs medium-term economic growth needs, and (v) 
domestic production/import of fossil fuel. VRE deployment is also expensive when accounting the integration 
cost and when there is no organized competitive selection of IPPs, VRE deployment is not always 
competitive with coal generation. This may lead to a tough politico-economic decision when a government 
has to choose between promoting least-cost coal production versus slightly more expensive and more 
complex to integrate VRE as the case may be. 
This situation is aggravated by the Covid-19 crisis which is impacting the RE deployment today. It is 
more difficult for the governments to spare public financing for critical public investments needed to unlock 
private investments as public financing is prioritized to tackle critical challenges hindering health and jobs. 
In addition, the utilities themselves are facing unprecedented challenges with payments issues and lower 
demand affecting their revenues, and therefore, private investors are perceiving them as riskier, increasing 
the premium on their cost of capital which in turn would increase the electricity price. 
To face these challenges, the SRMI Facility is providing an integrated risk mitigation framework to 
(i) reduce the cost of privately-owned generation (lowering the risk premium embedded in the tariff) making

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 72 
 
 
the electricity price more affordable, (ii) provide concessional funding leveraging climate finance to unlock 
critical public investments needed to enable private investments making them more affordable for the 
countries, and (iii) maximizing socio-economic benefits fostering jobs creation, skills development and 
women empowerment, leveraging the bidding processes. 
Catalytic GCF concessional financing will be critical as (i) some countries among the poorest in the 
world are undergoing dramatic tensions on their budgets due to Covid-19; (ii) all will turn towards 
the cheapest source of energy with the lowest CAPEX under the current budgetary constraints 
excepts if it is not immediately impacting their budgets; and (iii) with the investment environment 
improving, concessionality is the last mile to raising private investors’ interest. Under the current 
Covid-19 crisis and the risk to have coal and gas stranded assets supported by fossil fuel subsidies, climate 
financing and grant technical assistance to support developing countries in their energy transition are more 
critical than ever. Access to concessional public climate financing and DFI financing would enable solar and 
wind generation to be cheaper than the operating costs of most fossil fuel plants. In a context where the 
governments grapple with the critical task of dealing with the very real impacts of Covid-19 on the health and 
welfare of their population, countries may fall into a fast recovery strategy that would promote fossil fuel 
generation unless there is strong parallel support for renewable energy development. Therefore, countries 
need to be supported financially and technically to revise their current plans and implement the revised ones 
to avoid building new coal and gas plants. These are critical times to support new solar and wind projects in 
competing with the billions of USD spent on fossil fuel subsidies. In addition, by using concessional financing 
to reduce perceived risks by private sector investors, countries would be able to unlock at scale privately 
financed RE projects especially at a time where the utilities are weakened due to the financial situation of 
the countries. The GCF, thanks to its mandate and scale, will enable a scale-up of the SRMI approach that 
will enable real impact. In addition, supporting the scale-up of RE through a systematic, integrated and open 
approach such as SRMI will ensure the replicability in a timely manner of low-emission development 
pathways. 
The use of climate concessional financing under the Initiative is also essential to support innovative 
technologies with a significant mitigation potential that are not yet commercially viable such as 
battery storage. GCF’s risk appetite will be critical to provide innovative support to these countries. The 
industry supporting these paradigm- shifting disruptive technologies is at a nascent stage and will also suffer 
due to lack of market uptake unless there is continued demand from countries. Without additional 
investments in dispatch and system operation – including battery storage, VRE generation is likely to 
increase the risks of load shedding and systems’ defaults. However, given the high cost of technologies and 
the risk arising from lack of experience in deploying these technologies at scale in the context of developing 
countries, private sector investors may not be willing to invest in these innovative technologies without 
development support and strong risk coverage. 
Private investments in the off-grid RE space requires adapted risk mitigation instruments that can 
be developed with climate financing that is more flexible than DFI guarantees. A risk mitigation 
mechanism, as developed under Component 3.1, that covers critical risks such as demand off-take risk will 
be an important catalyst in helping attract more private sector investment and scale up mini grids and SHS. 
This demand risk is not covered by traditional DFI risk mitigation mechanisms like MIGA insurance or WB 
guarantees. GCF’s support will be crucial to ensure that the right risk mitigation instrument is being provided. 
With the exception of countries which receive full grants from the World Bank for instance due to 
their level of GDP per capita or post-conflict status (such as CAR in the current list of projects 
proposed to be supported by the SRMI Facility), the allocation between grants and loans is done 
between technical assistance/capacity building and infrastructure. IDA is providing grants to CAR

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 72 
 
 
because it is an FCS country and is recovering from the recent major domestic political and security crisis in 
2013. The ensuing insecurity led to massive forced displacement, the collapse of state institutions, and 
devastation of the country’s economy. The country is in dire needs of IDA grant to recover its infrastructure 
and its economy. CAR remains among the poorest countries in the world and ranks second to last out of 
188 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index. The other seven countries are split between 
three IDA and three IBRD. As per the SRMI methodology, the activities promoted under the technical 
assistance component are critical requirements for the development of a well-organized, sustainable and 
affordable generation mix as well as developing an enabling environment to private sector mobilization. 
These plans and studies are too expensive or complex in general for the countries to do without concessional 
support. Therefore, without targeted grant technical assistance, those studies are usually not being 
completed which leads to far from optimal decision with regards to new generation or transmission 
investments and they are usually not compatible with the current climate urgency. GCF’s financing will be 
needed to ensure that the most fragile countries are able to reduce their debt weight and the cost of the 
interest. 
Public investments are critical to enable the sustainable unlocking of private investments. However, 
governments are often stretched in their budget due to overwhelming social sector priorities. In this 
context, catalytic climate financing will help support more investments in RE. The approach promoted 
under SRMI targets private financing for the generation of renewables with the public investment being 
limited to critical public investment required for a higher penetration of renewables such as VRE integration 
investment, and solar parks infrastructures. However, governments need to continuously look at the budget 
allocation between different sectors, especially driven by pressing needs in the social sectors which is being 
exacerbated by the Covid-19 crisis. The possibility to access climate financing for those critical infrastructure 
investments, means that those countries would not need to reduce their IDA/IBRD envelopes for education 
or health sectors. The level of GCF participation in the financing of the currently proposed projects has been 
determined based on discussions with countries and their possibility to increase their financing for their 
access and RE generation agendas. 
Another critical aspect of the SRMI Facility that will support an increased public investment 
allocation towards critical investments is the concessionality of GCF compared to IBRD and to a 
certain extent IDA as well. Under the SRMI Facility, GCF high concessional terms for vulnerable countries 
will be sought to be able to not increase the cost for the IDA countries while being attractive enough for the 
IBRD countries to make the investment towards low-carbon infrastructure fostering low-emission 
development pathways. 
The GCF high concessional terms will enable the investments to be viable for both IDA and IBRD 
countries – and in turn the concessionality will fully benefit the electricity households of these 
countries. The GCF high concessional loan terms with a maturity period of 40 years and 10 years grace 
period with an all-in fee of 0.25 percent, i.e., 0.00 percent interest rate, 0.25 percent service fee (and waiver 
of 0.50 percent commitment fee) will result in an increase of 2 percent in project internal rate of return (IRR). 
 
Given the abovementioned rationale, the GCF financing will be critical from the additionality 
perspective to unlock the sustainable programs presented by the seven countries included in this 
Funding Proposal from different perspectives, including (i) making the critical public investments needed 
more affordable, (ii) encouraging de-risking measures meeting the needs of the private sector through the 
availability of this concessional financing (e.g. mitigating the development risk for the private sector by 
financing solar/wind park infrastructures), (iii) adapting to the specific needs of some countries who need 
innovative risk mitigation approaches that are complex to provide by DFIs but that are within the mandate of 
the GCF and (iv) unlocking sustainable and bankable projects under SRMI at scale.

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 72 
 
 
 
With the support of the GCF financing, the integrated risk mitigation framework promoted under the 
SRMI Facility is expected to play a key role on (i) a short-term basis by contributing to a green stimulus 
package for recovery and (ii) on a medium-term basis by ensuring a clean development path, mitigating 
significantly the GHG emissions trajectory. 
 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Sustainability is at the heart of SRMI, mainstreamed in a cross-cutting integrated approach. 
Supporting countries to design and implement a sustainable low-emission development pathway, from a 
multi-dimensional perspective, fostering a transformational change with projects replicable at the level of the 
countries themselves: 
a. From a technical perspective, ensuring through comprehensive planning that sound RE targets are 
defined based on least cost planning, factoring in integration of VRE and grid resilience, and 
promoting a sector-coupling approach to the extent possible. 
 
b. From a financial perspective, reducing the reliance on public sector financing by supporting the design 
and implementation of bankable projects that could be financed by the private sector. 
 
c. From a strategy perspective, ensuring upfront that the RE program designed is aligned with the 
countries’ priorities and strategic considerations (including in terms of risk allocation and roles and 
responsibilities of public parties). 
 
d. From an environmental perspective, financing countries’ NDC in an economically viable manner while 
ensuring their implementation.  
 
e. From institutional and regulatory perspective, strengthening the countries’ framework and developing 
the skills needed (including by financing the transaction advisors for the first round of projects under 
the RE program defined allowing ‘a learning by doing’ with hands-on experience), to give to the seven 
or more countries the ability to replicate the projects, and fully integrate the changes they are facing 
in our energy systems into their long-term strategy.  
 
f. From a socio-economic perspective, maximizing the positive impacts on the local industries, 
(positioning the local players on the solar/wind value chain in a competitive manner to the extent 
possible) and supporting local community development (through actions increasing their resilience 
and enhancing their livelihoods). 
 
g. From a gender perspective, ensuring that men and women benefit from the RE projects launched 
with a proactive policy to promote female employment throughout the RE project-cycle as otherwise 
men may benefit disproportionately from new employment opportunities across the RE value chain. 
 
h. From a financial perspective, SRMI’s core investments in infrastructure for the grid and with regards 
to electrification are long-term investments that have long-term potential impact and will be critical to 
the economic development and transition to a new energy paradigm. The grid upgrades for VRE 
integration is expected to enable a shift on average from 7 percent penetration of VRE to over 35 
percent by 2025 and electrification investments are core to the development of a population.  
 
Therefore, the approach used by the SRMI Facility is supporting countries in developing a multi-
dimensional sustainable RE program and operationalizing the first round of bankable projects. By 
laying strong foundations and implementing an adequate capacity building program, key public stakeholders

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
will be able to capitalize on the work done, the track-record built, and the skills developed for their next round 
of RE projects.  
 
The SRMI Facility is expected to act as a catalyst to unlock these sustainable RE programs in the 
countries and pave the way to operationalize them through bankable projects privately financed. With 
a strong framework in place, a successful track-record and a sustainable ecosystem implemented, countries 
would be in a position to replicate these projects and to attract private investment in optimized conditions.

=== PAGE 40 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
280 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
176 
40 years 
10 years 
0.25% 
(ii) 
Subordinated loans 
n/a 
n/a years 
n/a years 
n/a % 
(iii) 
Equity 
n/a 
 
 
n/a % 
 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
20  
25 years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable grants6 
30  
15 years 
 
 
(vi) 
Grants 
54 
 
 
 
(vii) 
Results-based 
payments 
n/a 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing information 
Total amount 
Currency 
1,283.57  
million USD ($) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
(grace)8 
Pricing 
Seniority 
World Bank (ESMAP) 
Grant 
1.5 
million 
USD ($)  
 
 
 
World Bank (IBRD) 
Senior 
Loans 
459.5 
million 
USD ($)  
20 years 
3.4% 
 
World Bank (IDA) 
Senior 
Loans 
750 
million 
USD ($)  
30-40 
years 
(5-10 
years) 
0.75% 9 
 
World Bank (IDA) 
Grant 
72.5 
Million 
USD ($) 
 
 
 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
1,563.5 
million USD ($)  
(d) 
Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 
250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page) 
CTF co-financing is considered for Mali to complement efficiently the GCF financing and 
benefit from the synergies between the CTF and the GCF. However, the CTF financing 
is not yet allocated for either projects. Therefore, it is not included in the co-financing 
section. 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
 
6 The reimbursable grant will be used as a risk mitigation instrument  
7 The World Bank (IBRD/IDA/ESMAP) co-financing amounts are indicative and subject to approval by the World 
Bank Board and agreement with the EEs. 
8 The pricing information for IBRD/IDA is indicative as the Bank Board periodically approves updated IBRD/IDA 
financing terms and they may change for a given country depending on when the project is submitted for Board 
approval. The prices presented in the table are for general IBRD and IDA projects. 
9 The IDA pricing presented in the table refers to the standard service charge on IDA credits to SDR credits. As 
mentioned above, the pricing is indicative and additional interest charges and service charges may be imposed 
on borrowers depending on their categorization under the World Bank Directive on IBRD/IDA financing terms.

=== PAGE 41 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
Component 
Sub-
Component 
Activity 
Indicative 
cost 
million 
USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million 
USD 
($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Component 1: 
Technical 
Assistance 
Generation 
plans 
with 
VRE 
integration 
and Capacity 
Building 
(technical) 
Generation 
plans with 
VRE 
integration 
and Capacity 
Building 
(technical) 
5 
5  
Grants 
0  
Grants 
Click here 
to enter 
text. 
Transaction 
Advisory and 
Capacity 
Building 
(procurement, 
legal) 
Transaction 
Advisory and 
Capacity 
Building 
(procurement, 
legal) 
8.5 
7.5 
Grants 
1  
Grants 
World Bank 
(ESMAP) 
Solar 
and 
wind 
park 
preparatory 
studies 
Solar and 
wind park 
preparatory 
studies 
9.5 
9 
Grants 
0.5 
Grants 
World Bank 
(ESMAP) 
Component 2: 
Public 
Investments 
Public 
investments 
in solar and 
wind 
park 
infrastructure 
Public 
investments 
in solar and 
wind park 
infrastructure 
126  
28  
Senior loans  
98 
Senior loans 
World Bank 
(IDA/IBRD) 
Public 
investments 
for 
VRE 
integration 
grid upgrades 
and 
grid 
resilience 
Public 
investments 
for VRE 
integration 
grid upgrades 
and grid 
resilience 
479  
128 
Senior loans 
351  
Senior loans 
World Bank 
(IDA/IBRD) 
Public 
investments 
for 
electrification 
Public 
investments 
for 
electrification 
771  
20  
Senior loans 
751  
Senior loans 
World Bank 
(IDA/IBRD) 
[All 
sub-
component 2 
activities 
for 
FCS 
countries 
(CAR)] 
[All sub-
component 2 
activities for 
FCS 
countries 
(CAR)] 
90  
30  
Grants 
60  
Grants 
World Bank 
(IDA) 
Component 3: 
Risk 
Mitigation 
Instruments 
Risk 
mitigation 
instrument for 
solar/battery 
mini-grids and 
off-grid 
private 
investors 
Risk 
mitigation 
instrument for 
solar/battery 
mini-grids 
and off-grid 
private 
investors 
30 
30 
Reimbursabl
e grants 
tbd 
Guarantees 
World Bank 
(IDA/IBRD)

=== PAGE 42 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
Risk 
mitigation 
instrument for 
grid-
connected RE 
projects 
Risk 
mitigation 
instrument for 
grid-
connected 
RE projects 
20  
20 
Guarantees 
tbd 
Guarantees 
World Bank 
(IDA/IBRD) 
Project 
Management  
Project 
management 
Project 
management 
24.5  
2.5  
Grant 
22 
Grant/Loans 
World Bank 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
 
1,563,500,
000 
280,000,000 
1,283,500,000 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
 
Promoting a sustainable environment for private investments as part of the energy sector is critical to 
the SRMI approach. Capacity building is key from that perspective to ensure that local stakeholders are 
effectively empowered in relation to the solar/wind value chain to the extent possible. A multi-dimensional 
capacity building program is considered under SRMI for that purpose, covering from the design of the RE 
strategy to their implementation. 
 
To increase the effectiveness of capacity building, the approach promotes a strategic analysis upfront 
to identify the targeted roles and responsibilities of the key stakeholders and assess the local 
industries’ potential as to their positioning on the value chain. The objective being to define a concrete 
action plan to develop the targeted skills of the key stakeholders and improve their chances to benefit from 
their own RE projects. For example, by defining a cross-cutting country program to position the local players 
on the operation and maintenance of the solar/wind plants, allowing them to benefit from the transfer of 
knowledge needed as well as from the hands-on experience thanks to adequate arrangements reflected in the 
tender documents. This plan will benefit from the support of transaction advisors financed under SRMI to 
accompany the countries in this pathway throughout a ‘learning by doing’ approach for the pre-identified 
stakeholders. 
 
In addition, as integration of VRE is a key aspect, SRMI is also promoting a transfer of knowledge in 
favor of key local stakeholders in relation to storage and more particularly with respect to battery 
storage. SRMI is leveraging the Energy Storage Partnership (ESP) launched by the World Bank in 
collaboration with partners to support this technology, not yet mature but presenting a significant potential to 
enable higher penetration of VRE in the grid. The SRMI Facility is directly contributing to the development of 
the battery storage technology by enabling the countries to implement it, building a track-record as well as 
crucial knowledge.

=== PAGE 43 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in 
the GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
The seven proposed projects are expected to contribute to the shift to low-emission sustainable 
development pathways with the following: 
- 
Directly support the development of 2.5 GW of RE, (i) 1.8 GW of solar PV, (ii) 400 MW of CSP, 
and (iii) 300 MW of onshore wind. Of this 2.1 GW are expected to be built during the lifetime of the 
projects and 0.4 GW expected to be built after the end of the projects. The direct support is enabled 
through Sub-Component 1.3 financing the solar and wind park analysis and Sub-Component 2.1 
financing the public infrastructure of solar and wind park infrastructure and Sub-Component 1.2 for 
the hiring of transaction advisors to select IPPs. The SRMI Facility will also enable the integration of 
another 1.9 GW of RE. The integration of other projects is enabled thanks to the VRE integration 
analysis conducted under Sub-Component 1.1 and Sub-Component 2.2 under which core grid 
infrastructure are being financed. 
 
- 
Directly reduce GHG emissions by 97.93m metrics tons of CO2, more precisely 88.98m reduction 
for the 2.1 GW RE built under the projects over the 25 years of their operation, and 8.95m metric 
tons of CO2 for 0.4 GW of RE projects that were prepared under the projects but not built during the 
lifetime of the projects10. The GHG emission reduction is based on RE projects being built. 
  
- 
Unlock USD 3.3 billion of private investments, including USD 3 billion for the 2.1 GW built during 
the lifetime of the projects and USD 300 million for the 10.4 GW built after the end of the projects. 
The private investment is leveraged thanks to Component 1.2 transaction advisory and the general 
environment and bankable support provided to them through the general SRMI support of technical 
assistance to governments under Component 1, critical infrastructure under Component 2 and 
guarantees and risk mitigation instruments under Component 3.  
 
- 
Provide access to clean low-emission electricity to 4.2 million people thanks to the 
electrification investments. Component 2.3 is critical in enabling public investments in clean 
energy mini-grids and connection to the grid that would have been made greener thanks to Sub-
Components 2.1 and 2.2, and Sub-Component 3.1 that will enable unlocking private investments for 
green mini-grids. 
 
- 
Strengthen institutional and regulatory systems for planning and development. 
 
- 
Reduce locking-in long-lived, climate-vulnerable infrastructure by increasing resilience of 
grid infrastructure. 
 
Table 3: SRMI Facility Proposed Projects Expected Outcomes 
 
Country  
VRE 
installed 
capacity 
(MW)  
VRE 
projects 
prepared 
(MW) 
VRE 
integration 
(enabled 
MW) 
Battery 
Storage 
(MWh) 
Private 
sector 
directly 
leveraged 
(mUSD) 
Private 
sector 
enabled 
(mUSD) 
Access 
(people) 
Total GHG 
Emissions 
Reduced 
(Mtons/CO2eq)
during/after 
project 
Botswana  
300 
0 
0 
50 
820 
0 
600,000 
52.3/0 
 
10 GHG emissions calculations were made following the World Bank standards using the official combined margin 
grid emission factor per country was used.

=== PAGE 44 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
CAR 
35  
0 
0 
35 
 10 
0  
250,000  
0.4/0 
DRC 
100 
0 
0 
140 
200 
0 
 1,500,000 
0.06/0 
Kenya  
300 
0 
250 
150 
225 
0 
450,000 
5.8/0 
Mali  
300 
0 
150 
350 
350 
0 
400,000 
8.5/0 
Namibia  
400 
0 
0 
200 
940 
0 
 1,000,000 
8.4/0 
Uzbekistan  
600 
400 
1,500 
50 
450 
300 
0 
13.5/9 
Results 
2035 
400 
1,900 
975 
2,995 
300 
4,200,000 
89/9 
 
The SRMI Facility aims to be scaled up to a total USD 400 million by adding countries, namely 
Indonesia and Vietnam, that would have projects following the agreed upon eligibility criteria as per 
the term sheet and the present funding proposal. The Phase 2 of the Facility – that is to be 
complementary to the current Phase – aims to – and such based on current project information - (i) avoid a 
total of 286.32 m metrics tons of CO2, including 60.6 m metrics tons of CO2 during project lifetime and 225.7 
m metrics tons built after the end of the project, (ii) unlock a total of 6.1 GW, including in the short-term 2 
GW and in the medium-term 4.1 GW of RE, and (iii) leverage a total of USD 10.2 bl, including USD 1.2 bl 
during the project lifetime and USD 9 bl built after the end of the project.  
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
By tackling in a coordinated manner planning, procurement, development and curtailment risks to 
attract affordable private investments, SRMI aims at supporting countries in their shift to low-
emission development pathways. Most countries have reached a point where most of their “easy” RE 
projects have been implemented. To move from a situation with a low VRE penetration to one where the 
majority of the electricity is produced from RE sources, governments will need to put in place sustainable 
generation plans, upgrade their grids and develop the right legal and procurement framework to leverage 
private investments at scale. This represents large investments from the public sector to enable such 
framework and will require strong governments buy-in and ownership. The SRMI Facility aims at 
accompanying governments in their path to low-emission development while ensuring it does not become 
an economic burden.  
Building on a sound methodology11, SRMI aims at supporting countries transform their strategy to 
low-emission development allowing them to harness their domestic resources at scale.  
- 
The first step to a sound deployment is the setting of sustainable long-term targets for RE based on 
concrete analysis for demand, domestic resources and grid flexibility and stability. These targets will 
be the basis for a realistic but also ambitious plan to deploy RE in the given country. Through the 
SRMI Facility, the World Bank is supporting the seven countries to revise their generation plans and 
to identify the critical investments needed to integrate VRE into their grids while improving its 
reliability and resilience. These targets will then need to be integrated into their NDC revisions 
ensuring they are implementable. 
 
- 
After the targets are set, the SRMI Facility is supporting the seven countries to develop a long-term 
strategy to implement those targets. The strategy looks at who and how to finance the deployment 
of RE and the associated infrastructure. It also identifies all the legal changes that need to be 
implemented to attract private investments and how the domestic lending sector can be leveraged to 
finance the debt part of the privately-owned power plants to reduce the risk of foreign exchange to 
 
11  “A Sure Path to Sustainable Solar : Solar Deployment Guidelines” was released during the 2019 United Nations 
Climate 
Summit 
in 
New 
York 
and 
are 
accessible 
online 
through 
the 
following 
link: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/244251575642432241/A-Sure-Path-to-Sustainable-Solar-Solar-
Deployment-Guidelines

=== PAGE 45 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
the utility. In addition, socio-economic benefits can be integrated into the long-term strategy. It can 
support countries in leveraging the deployment of solar and wind to enable the population to gain 
opportunities for jobs and development. 
 
- 
The first main pillar to the paradigm shift is capacity building. As part of SRMI, it is critical to increase 
capacity within the government on all fronts so that afterwards they will be able to conduct analysis 
without the support of consultants and to negotiate with the private sector on fair grounds. 
After supporting the development of the country’s long-term targets, its strategy to implement them 
and increase capacity, the SRMI Facility is financing the implementation its strategy. It is critical to 
countries to have a support which encompasses all from the target setting to its financing. Without such 
combined approach, the countries may not be able to finance the targets or have the right target in the first 
place. 
As a consequence, countries will be able to operationalize their NDCs in a sustainable and timely 
manner in spite of the effect of the Covid-19 crisis, reducing significantly their GHG emissions 
trajectory by shifting to a lasting low-emission development pathway. Built on strong foundations 
through this comprehensive and integrated approach with a multi-dimensional sustainability perspective at 
its heart. This low-emission development pathway will be replicable, fast-tracking the road towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals for these countries. 
The seven countries are representative of different types of markets/energy sector, with low to high 
electrification rates, low to high cost of generation, small to large grids etc. The success and lessons 
learnt from those seven countries will enable to replicate the SRMI approach across countries and enable 
to unlock sustainable RE markets for private investments. SRMI is currently being implemented/considered 
for another 30 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia which will benefit from the results and lessons learnt 
of this first phase. 
Tailored support for each country will be provided under the SRMI approach. The status of RE 
deployment is very different from one country to another and will be further assessed at Project’s level to 
leverage the existing related activities. The technical assistance deployed under the SRMI Facility will be 
tailored for each country needs and will, to the extent possible, build on the current RE activities deployed, 
in coordination with all stakeholders involved (including other DFIs as applicable) to enhance synergies. This 
will include for example adjusting existing least cost plans in place if needed or including the lessons learnt 
from existing RE projects in terms of risk allocation, government support, support to jobs’ creation etc. 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Sustainability is at the heart of the multi-dimensional approach of SRMI. The SRMI approach aims at 
anchoring RE projects of the targeted countries in a sustainable ecosystem ensuring a lasting and replicable 
low-emission development pathway, fast-tracking in particular the SDG 13 Climate Action and the SDG 7 
Affordable and Clean Energy. 
Sound planning associated with adequate grid investments to enable a higher penetration of 
renewables while enhancing resilience will lead to the development of sustainable RE targets. It will 
avoid the lock-in of the countries in long-term high-emission development pathways. Harnessing domestic 
resources such as solar or wind for generation will also reduce the need for fuel imports and the potential 
economic impact of fuel cost fluctuations. It will increase the energy security of the countries, diversifying

=== PAGE 46 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
their mix et improving their energy independence while reducing the price volatility (as electricity tariffs are 
set for a long-term period, around 25 years). 
The operationalization of these RE targets through bankable projects with a fair risk allocation, 
building on a strengthened institutional and regulatory framework with adequate risk mitigation 
arrangements, aims to ensure the timely implementation of these projects. It aims to leverage private 
investments at scale, ensuring the availability of the commercial financing and the appetite of the private 
sector to take these projects forward. Hence, it will spare limited public sector finance for the countries which 
could be directed to other sectors in need such as healthcare, in particular in the context of COVID-19. 
The strategic analysis upfront to define an action plan to maximize the socio-economic benefits of 
the RE program (embedded in the SRMI methodology), will be mainstreamed during the 
operationalization of the projects. It will enhance the involvement of the local players on the solar/wind 
value chain in a competitive manner to the extent possible, maximizing jobs creation, skills development and 
transfer of knowledge. It will also support local community development in the areas of implementation of 
the projects through actions increasing their resilience and enhancing their livelihoods. A specific attention 
will be brought to women empowerment as otherwise men may benefit disproportionately from new 
employment opportunities across the RE value chain. 
Capacity building will be mainstreamed throughout the RE projects cycle, strengthening the countries’ 
framework and developing the skills needed (including through ‘a learning by doing’ approach with the 
support of transaction advisors), to give to the seven countries the ability to replicate efficiently the projects. 
Building on the strong foundations of the program, key public stakeholders will be able to capitalize on the 
work done, the track-record built, and the skills developed for their next round of RE projects.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
The seven countries have different economic development level and the Covid-19 crisis will impact 
their economic growth projections. GDP per capita is below USD 1000 per capita for CAR, DRC and 
Mali, between USD 1000 to 4,000 for Kenya and Uzbekistan and above USD 5000 for Botswana and 
Namibia. Their GDP growth is on average quite strong with the exception of Namibia that was hit with 
droughts in the last few years. The GDP growth forecast for 2020 will be reviewed with the current Covid-19 
pandemic crisis. The countries also have quite different country investment ratings, with only Botswana 
considered as investment grade. 
Table 4: SRMI Facility Proposed Countries Macroeconomic Overview 
 
Country 
Population 
(million)  
GDP / capita 
2018 (USD) 
Inflation 
2018 (%) 
GDP growth 
2017 (%)  
GDP growth 
2018 (%) 
GDP growth 
forecast 
2019 (%) 
Country 
Investment 
Rating 
Botswana 
2.25 
8,258 
0.9 
2.9 
4.6 
3.9 
BBB+ 
CAR  
4.7 
475 
1.6 
4.5 
3.8 
3.0 
n/a 
DRC 
84 
562 
29 
3.7 
5.8 
4.4 
CCC+ 
Kenya 
51.4 
1,710 
4.7 
4.9 
6.3 
5.6 
B+ 
Mali 
19 
899 
1.7 
5.0 
5.2 
5.1 
n/a 
Namibia 
2.5 
5,931 
4.3 
-0.1 
0.3 
-1.4 
BB+

=== PAGE 47 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
Uzbekistan 
32.9 
1,532 
17.5 
4.5 
5.4 
5.6 
BB- 
Source: World Bank, IMF, S&P 
The seven countries have also quite different social development levels. The results of the Human 
Development Index (HDI) are also a good comparing instruments between the seven countries, with 
Botswana and Uzbekistan that have good HDI, Namibia and Kenya that have average HDI, and CAR, DRC 
and Mali with very low HDI. 
Table 5: SRMI Facility Proposed Countries Key Social Development Index Overview 
 
Country 
Corruption Index (/180) 
Human Development Index 
Gini coefficient 
Botswana 
34 
0.728 
53.3 
CAR  
153 
0.381 
56.2 
DRC 
168 
0.459 
42.1 
Kenya 
137 
0.579 
40.8 
Mali 
130 
0.427 
33 
Namibia 
56 
0.645 
59.1 
Uzbekistan 
153 
0.71 
35.3 
Sources: World Bank, Transparency International, United Nations 
The seven proposed countries have clear future climate change impacts and a need to fundamentally 
adapt their energy systems by embracing disruptive technologies and transition to the grid of the future 
increasing resilience and sustainability while adopting low-development emission pathways. Further noting 
that Namibia and Botswana are not eligible for climate finance provided by the Climate Investment Funds 
(CIF). 
SRMI aims at limiting the needs for public resources. Climate financing will be critical in providing 
sufficient financial incentives for those countries to change their business as usual way to tomorrow’s energy 
system. This investment will be critical for countries to implement a clear strategy without impeding economic 
development or putting at risk their grid and therefore, their industrial development. 
The countries considered will need strong support to strengthen their institutions and 
implementation capacity to transition to a disruptive technology grid. SRMI aims to provide upstream 
support to work with the countries on their technical and regulatory constraints and as a second step 
managing the implementation of their new strategy, such as with regards to managing battery storage into 
their grid, procuring IPPs and adapting their grid to electric mobility development. 
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
While ensuring alignment with NDCs, relevant national plans, and/or enabling policy and institutional 
frameworks, Component 1 will be critical in providing inputs to the NDC/low-emissions development 
plans’ objectives and regulatory frameworks and to enable competitive selection of IPPs with fair 
risk allocation. In each country, the World Bank has extensive engagement with relevant stakeholders, 
including national designated authorities. The proposed countries all have NDCs with the following 
commitments: 
a. Botswana: The Government of Botswana has been spending a significant portion of its national 
resources to adapt to the impacts of climate variability over the years. The country intends to achieve

=== PAGE 48 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
an overall emissions reduction of 15 percent by 2030, taking 2010 as the base year. The emission 
reduction target was estimated based on the baseline inventory for the three GHGs being CO2, 
methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O). The reductions will be realized from the energy sources 
which is categorized as the stationary and mobile sources. The country is still working on developing 
initiatives for emission reductions in terms of long-term low carbon strategy.  
 
b. CAR: The annual emissions of the Central African Republic, estimated at 116,285.49 kt eq-CO2 in 
2010, or 26 tons eq-CO2/person, represent less than 0.002 percent of global emissions. Despite its 
low rate of GHG emissions, the Central African Republic reaffirms its adherence to the principle of 
collective but differentiated responsibility and, in accordance with Decision 1CP/19, is taking the 
present ambitious measures to respond to this challenge without impeding its economic, social and 
environmental development.  The Central African Republic aspires to reduce its emissions by 5% 
and 25 percent, respectively, in the 2030 and 2050 horizons in comparison to its reference BAU 
emissions and to increase its sequestration potential. With international support, it will emit around 
33,076.1 kt eq-CO2 less in 2050 than the annual reference emissions. The Central African Republic 
also aspires to reduce emissions of short-lived climate pollutants (SLCP), which science has shown 
have a significant short-term climate-warming potential and harmful effects on health, agriculture and 
ecosystems. Greenhouse gas emissions total 116,285.49 kt eqCO2 with sectoral contributions of 
89.46 percent for land use change and forestry; 5.26 percent for agriculture; 5.19 percent for energy 
(of which 4.91 percent is wood energy); 0.09 percent for waste and marginal amounts for industrial 
processes and use of solvents.  
 
c. DRC: As one of the most fragile states and poorest countries in the world, DRC faces a number 
of challenges which it seeks to address through its climate targets and focus on the SDGs. The 
contribution of the DRC to global GHG emissions is low (around 0.5 percent). Moreover, GHG 
intensity relative to GDP is also low. DRC has committed to reduce its GHG emissions by 17 
percent by 2030, focusing specifically on three sectors – energy, agriculture and land use, land 
use change, and forestry (LULUCF) - which collectively produce nearly 98 percent of its GHG 
emissions. 
 
d. Kenya: Kenya’s planning process on mitigation and adaptation hinges on the National Climate 
Change Action Plan (NCCAP) and the National Adaptation Plan (NAP). The two shall be reviewed 
every five years to inform the Kenya’s Vision 2030 Medium Term Plan (MTP). The adaptation actions 
are further amplified in the NAP. Mitigation and adaptation actions are implemented across the 
various sectors at both the national and county government levels. The Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry coordinates the country’s climate change affairs through the National Climate Change 
Secretariat (NCCS). The planning process follows the Climate Change Act (2016) that introduced 
several institutional reforms to enhance coordination of climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
These include the establishment of:  
- 
A high-level National Climate Change Council chaired by the President. The Council shall provide 
an overarching national climate change coordination mechanism and, among other roles, ensure 
the mainstreaming of climate change functions by the national and county governments, and 
approve and oversee the implementation of the NCCAP.  
- 
A Climate Change Directorate as the lead agency of the government on national climate change 
plans and actions to deliver operational coordination; and provide technical assistance on climate 
change actions and responses to County governments.

=== PAGE 49 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
- 
Climate Fund to be a financing mechanism for priority climate change actions and interventions 
approved by the Council. In addressing climate change issues, public entities are required to 
undertake public awareness and consultations, and ensure a focus on gender, in line with the 
Constitution and the Climate Change Act (2016). 
 
e. Mali: The Ministry of Environment is responsible for adoption of NDC targets.  There is no stakeholder 
involvement or multisector commission for the development of NDC targets.  Currently, the country 
has no climate policies in place to mitigate climate change. However, Mali has requested technology 
transfer for means of implementation.  
 
f. Namibia: Namibia aims at a reduction of about 89 percent of its GHG emissions at the 2030-time 
horizon compared to the BAU scenario. The projected GHG emissions to be avoided in 2030 is of 
the order of 20000 Gg CO2-eq. The Cabinet of Namibia is the Government entity responsible for 
approving policies. The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Economics, Natural Resources and 
Public Administration which usually advises Cabinet on relevant policy matters caters for the NDC. 
The Ministry of Environment and Tourism, which is responsible for all environmental issues in the 
country, is also the National Focal Point to the UNFCCC. It is the coordinating body for all climate 
change activities through its Climate Change Unit (CCU) of the Directorate of Environmental Affairs.  
 
g. Uzbekistan: In the long-term perspective up to 2030, Uzbekistan intends to strengthen measures 
and actions to struggle against climate change, in order to achieve the mitigation objectives: (i) to 
decrease specific emissions of greenhouse gases per unit of GDP by 10 percent by 2030 from level 
of 2010. Achievement of the INDC long-term objective envisages support from the international 
organizations and financial institutions, ensuring access to the advanced energy saving and 
environmentally sound technologies, resources for climate financing. There are currently some 
legally binding programs and acts aimed at ensuring by 2020 the implementation of measures for 
decrease in energy consumption, introduction of energy saving technologies in various sectors of the 
economy, social sphere and development of renewable energy: Decree of the President of the 
Republic of Uzbekistan, “On Measures for Further Development of Alternative Energy Sources”;  
Decree of the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan, “On Program of Measures for Ensuring 
Structural Reformation, Modernization and Diversification of Production for 2015-2019”;  Resolution 
of the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan “ On Program of Measures for Reduction in Energy 
Consumption, Introduction of Energy Saving Technologies in Economy Sectors and Social Sphere”; 
Program of Actions for Environmental Protection of the Republic of Uzbekistan; Resolution of the 
Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Uzbekistan, “On Integrated Program of Actions for Mitigation 
of the Aral Sea Disaster Impacts, Rehabilitation and Socio-Economic Development of Priaralie 
Region for 2015-2018”; Program for Further Development of Agricultural Production; Program for 
Further Irrigated Lands Improvement and Rational Use of Water Resources. 
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Since this is a Program level facility, economic and financial viability will vary from project to project. 
The Program efficiency and effectiveness is further presented in terms of cost-effectiveness, co-financing 
and leveraging, financial viability, and application of best practices. 
 
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency

=== PAGE 50 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
The GCF will have a catalytical role to enable VRE at scale through the comprehensive and integrated risk 
mitigation framework promoted under SRMI by: (i) financing the critical public investments needed in an 
affordable manner and such by reducing the burden for the countries in particular in the context of the Covid-
19 crisis where limited pubic financing is available; (ii) encouraging de-risking measures meeting the needs 
of the private sector through the availability of this concessional financing (e.g. solar/wind park infrastructure 
to mitigate the development risk); (iii) adapting to the specific needs of countries that need innovative risk 
mitigation approaches that are complex to provide by DFIs but are within the mandate of the GCF (e.g., to 
unlock large-scale mini-grids business models); and (iv) unlocking sustainable and bankable projects under 
SRMI at scale. 
 
As described in B5, the concessionality of GCF financing will be critical to ensure that the countries are to 
implement those projects and avoid a path involving deployment of more coal and gas with limited RE. The 
cost of the public loans is a crucial parameter in the political decision to implement or not a more sustainable 
path. The GCF additionality is therefore paramount to a successful result. To change the course of a given 
political path, these countries are requesting financial support through their NDCs and as part of our ongoing 
dialogue. Therefore, the SRMI Facility is requesting the highest level of concessionality for the seven 
countries that are part of the Program. 
 
The financial structure is a mix between grants for technical assistance, concessional loans for critical public 
infrastructure – with the exception of CAR which will get full grants due to its FCS situation – and risk 
mitigation instruments for private investors. Each financial instrument is critical in order to achieve the 
Program’s objective to support countries in their low-emission pathways: (i) grants for key studies and 
capacity building will be critical to ensure that the right targets for RE are set and capacity is built within the 
government, (ii) concessional financing for public investments will support countries in increasing their 
penetration of VRE and improve grid reliability and resilience, and (iii) risk mitigation instruments are enabling 
the mobilization at scale of private investments. These are critical especially in countries where the counter-
factual is cheap coal production such as in Botswana and Uzbekistan. 
 
The Facility aims to unlock over 2.1 GW of RE in the short-term and 0.4 GW in the medium-term. The division 
between short-term and medium-term is mostly due to the planning for demand increase and preparation of 
parks. The expected GHG emission reduction is 89 million tons of CO2eq which represents an average GCF 
dollar per GHG emission reduced of USD 3.15 and USD 17.57 if compared to the total public investments.  
 
 
Co-financing, leveraging and leveraged long-term investments 
The USD 280 million GCF will be complemented by an expected USD 1.3 billion in World Bank financing 
which in turn is expected to leverage around USD 3 billion in private investments. The indicative leveraging 
between public investments (World Bank and GCF financing) and private investments is 1 to 3. The private 
investments are a result of the projects’ public investments and therefore, are not considered as part of the 
co-financing and the Funded Activity. 
 
 
Financial viability 
 
The GCF concessional financing will be critical to improve the economic and financial rate of returns of 
the projects. Keeping in mind that fuel taxes and subsidies are included in the economic analysis when 
data is available, the GCF financing increases the financial IRR on average by around 2 percent but

=== PAGE 51 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
more importantly makes possible those projects that would not be accepted by the countries without 
the highly concessional climate financing support.  GCF financing is a game changer for the 
governments as because it is concessional countries which would otherwise select polluting energy 
would be incentivized to join the program. 
 
The financial analysis conducted for Botswana, Kenya, Mali, Namibia and Uzbekistan for Component 
2.1 and 2.2 activities resulted in financial IRR of 13 percent,18 percent, 27 percent, 12 percent, and 14 
percent respectively. The level of concessionality proposed for each of these projects enables the 
financial IRRs to be financially viable for the countries. 
 
 
 
Application of best practices 
 
To ensure that the best available technologies are considered, the government will hire transaction 
advisors that will develop the request for proposals to IPPs and ensure that the IPPs only select Tier 1 
technologies. The best practice with regards to selection of IPPs will also be implemented to ensure 
financial sustainability of all the contracts and develop a track-record within the countries in selection 
of IPPs.

=== PAGE 52 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement 
Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes as a whole, 
including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development 
 
 
 
12 The disaggregation of targets per country is provided in Annex 17. 
E.2. Core indicator targets 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. Methodologies 
for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in section A. 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to be 
reduced or avoided (mitigation 
and cross-cutting only) 
Annual 
3,559,000 t CO2 eq12 
Lifetime 
88,978,000 t CO2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) 
(a) Total project financing 
USD 1,563,500,000 
(b) Requested GCF amount  
 USD 280,000,000 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
88,978,000 t CO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
17.57 USD / t CO2eq  
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed 
(e = b / c) 
3.15 USD / t CO2eq  
E.2.3. Expected volume of finance 
to be leveraged by the proposed 
project/programme as a result of 
the 
Fund’s 
financing, 
disaggregated 
by 
public 
and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross-cutting only) 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
4,278,500,000   USD 
(g) Public source co-financed 
1,283,500,000 USD  
(h) Private source finance leveraged  
2,995,000,000   USD 
 
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
15.3 
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
4.6 
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
10.7 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
n/a 
Indirect 
n/a 
n/a 
For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data per 
country in annex 17. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative 
to 
total 
population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
Click here to enter text.  (Expressed as %) of country(ies) 
Indirect 
Click here to enter text.  (Expressed as %) of country(ies) 
For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.

=== PAGE 53 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
E.3. Fund-level impacts 
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and corresponding 
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected 
impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above. Add rows as 
needed.  
Expected 
Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
Tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent 
(t 
CO2eq) 
reduced as a result of 
Fund- funded projects/ 
programmes 
ex-ante and ex-
post 
analyses, 
electricity 
generation data for 
individual 
power 
plants  
0 
7.12 ml t 
CO2 eq 
28.47 
ml 
t 
CO2 
- Methodology: 
detailed in 
Annex 3 to the 
FP 
- Project 
lifetime: 25 
years (which 
corresponds 
to the duration 
of the 
operation of 
the RE power 
plants by the 
private IPPs 
selected as 
expected to be 
reflected in the 
power 
purchase 
agreement to 
be signed) 
- Annual 
emission 
reductions: 
3,559,000 t 
CO2 eq 
- Lifetime 
emission 
reductions: 
88,978,000 t 
CO2 eq 
- Project 
implementatio
n period: 12 
years 
- Given the 
country 
investment 
project 
development 
is expected to 
take 1-3 
years, the 
tender and 
IPP selection 
1.5 years, and 
the 
construction is 
expected to 
1.5 years, the 
average 
commercial 
operation date 
of the power 
plants is 
expected to 
start 5 years 
as from the 
Cost per tonne of CO2-
equivalent reduced 
Third party report 
and ex-ante and 
ex-post analyses 
0 
17.57 
USD  
17.57 
USD  
Volume of public and 
private funds catalyzed 
by the GCF 
Third party report 
0 
4,278,000,
000 USD 
4,278,0
00,000 
USD 
M1.0 
Reduced 
emissions 
through 
increased 
low-
emission energy 
access 
and 
power 
generation 
M1.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent 
(t 
CO2eq) 
reduced 
or 
avoided 
- 
gender-
sensitive energy access 
power generation 
ex-ante and ex-
post 
analyses, 
electricity 
generation data for 
individual 
power 
plants 
0 
7.12 ml t 
CO2 eq  
28.47 
ml 
t 
CO2

=== PAGE 54 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
start of the 
project 
implementatio
n period 
(should all the 
projects start 
at the same 
time). Lifetime 
costs of the 
programme: 
USD 
1,563,,000 
(capacity 
building costs 
for USD 22.5 
ml are 
included as 
they directly 
lead to GHG 
emission 
reductions) 
- Total financing 
is expected to 
be confirmed 
at project’s 
stage (under 
the 
assumption 
that all the 
projects start 
at the 
beginning of 
the 
implementatio
n period of the 
facility) and to 
be fully 
leveraged by 
the mid-term. 
At the stage of 
the Facility, it 
is expected as 
follows: 
 Expected co-
financing from 
the public 
source: USD 
1,283,000,000  
Expected private 
financing to be 
leveraged by the 
private 
sector 
IPPs 
selected 
during the tender 
process: 
USD 
2,995,000,000 
(expected 
to 
become 
available at the 
financial close of 
each project)

=== PAGE 55 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
E.4. Fund-level outcomes 
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected 
per expected outcome. Add rows as needed. 
Expected 
Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verificati
on (MoV) 
Bas
eline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
Number 
of 
technologies and 
innovative 
solutions 
transferred 
or 
licensed 
to 
support 
low-
emission 
development as a 
result 
of 
GCF 
support 
ex-ante 
and 
ex-
post 
analyses, 
project 
installatio
n reports 
or 
any 
other 
source of 
informati
on 
available 
0 
tech
nolo
gies 
1 
technology: 
BESS 
487.5 MWh 
of 
BESS 
installed with 
dedicated 
capacity 
building  
1 technology: 
BESS 
975 MWh of 
BESS installed 
with dedicated 
capacity 
building  
Technical 
studies 
confirming the needs of 
BESS 
and 
associated 
sizing  
Specific measures will be 
deployed 
under 
the 
Facility 
to 
support 
integration 
of 
variable 
renewable energy in the 
grid, among which the 
deployment 
of 
1 
technology 
the 
battery 
energy storage systems 
(BESS). 
1 
associated 
measure is expected: a 
dedicated 
capacity 
building 
covering 
VRE 
integration 
training 
in 
particular BESS 
M5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory 
systems 
M5.1 Institutional 
and 
regulatory 
systems 
that 
improve 
incentives for low-
emission planning 
and development 
and their effective 
implementation  
planning 
and 
strategic 
instrume
nts 
develope
d in each 
country 
0 
syst
ems 
Adoption or 
adjustment 
(to 
the 
extent 
needed) of 6 
integrated 
roadmaps to 
deploy 
RE 
projects 
through 
a 
competitive 
procurement 
scheme  
6 
RE 
roadmaps are 
operationalize
d 
through 
sustainable 
and bankable 
RE programs 
leading to a 
significant 
increase in the 
supply of RE 
by 
IPPS 
selected 
through 
the 
competitive 
procurement 
scheme put in 
place  
 
The countries will have 
developed 
integrated 
roadmaps to harness their 
RE 
potential, 
updating 
their 
institutional 
and 
regulatory framework to 
the extent needed (in 
particular to allow for 
competitive RE tenders) 
and 
operationalizing 
these 
roadmaps 
into 
sustainable and bankable 
projects expected to be 
implemented by private 
IPPs selected through a 
competitive procurement 
scheme (except in some 
cases detailed in the FP 
such as in the case of 
CAR 
where 
a 
public 
procurement 
is 
contemplated given the 
FCV status of the country)

=== PAGE 56 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium 
and 
large 
low-
emission power 
suppliers 
 
M6.3 MWs of low-
emission 
energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated as a 
result 
of 
GCF 
support  
ex-ante 
and 
ex-
post 
analyses, 
project 
installatio
n reports 
or 
any 
other 
source of 
informati
on 
available 
 
0 
1,027.5 MW 
2,035 MW 
The 
studies 
under 
Component 
1.3 
are 
carried-out on time 
The implementation of the 
projects is completed as 
planned (no delay) 
The targets expressed in 
MW refer to the VRE 
capacity constructed (new 
grid-connected solar and 
wind power generation 
systems installed) 
M6.2 Number of 
households 
and 
individuals (males 
and females) with 
improved access 
to 
low-emission 
energy sources 
ex-ante 
and 
ex-
post 
analyses, 
househol
d 
data, 
surveys, 
or 
any 
other 
source of 
informati
on 
available 
0 
hou
seh
olds 
0 
indiv
idua
ls, 
inclu
ding 
0 
mal
es 
0 
fem
ales 
420,000 
households 
2,100,000 
individuals, 
including 
1,050,000 
males 
1,050,000 
females 
840,000 
households 
4,200,000 
individuals, 
including 
2,100,000 
males 
2,100,000 
females 
The pre-requisite studies 
are carried-out on time 
and 
the 
associated 
electrification 
plan 
is 
adopted on time 
The implementation of the 
projects is completed as 
planned (no delay) 
A 
total 
of 
840,000 
household 
representing 
4,200,000 people out of 
which 2,100,000 women 
(precise numbers to be 
confirmed 
at 
projects’ 
stage) is expected to 
benefit from access to 
electricity 
through 
different 
techniques 
of 
electrification (PPP mini-
grids, grid extension etc.)

=== PAGE 57 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators 
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing conditions, 
progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as needed. 
Expected 
Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
Sustainable 
RE targets 
available 
and 
presented in 
a 
government-
owned least-
cost 
generation 
plan 
Evidence-
based 
targets for 
low-emission 
pathways 
available in 
government-
owned least-
cost 
generation 
plan 
Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses, 
national 
plans and 
strategy 
documents, 
or any other 
source of 
information 
available 
0 
Sustainable 
RE targets in 
place in 3 
countries 
under the 
Facility (3 
plans with 
RE targets 
available) 
Sustainable 
RE targets in 
place in 6 
countries 
under the 
Facility 
(plans with 
RE targets 
available):  
Botswana, 
CAR, Kenya, 
Mali, 
Namibia and 
Uzbekistan 
Least 
cost 
plans 
demonstrating 
the 
RE 
capacity targeted are in 
place and owned by the 
countries  
Transparent 
and 
competitive 
selection of 
IPPs is in 
place  
Successful 
competitive 
selection of 
IPPs 
Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses, 
procuremen
t 
documents, 
or any other 
source of 
information 
available 
Limited to no 
number of 
IPPs 
procured 
competitively 
1 competitive 
process 
launched and 
successfully 
completed 
per country 
in 2 countries 
under the 
Facility (2 
competitive 
biddings 
launched) 
1 competitive 
process 
launched and 
successfully 
completed 
per country 
in 6 countries 
under the 
Facility 
(competitive 
biddings 
launched): 
Botswana, 
CAR, Kenya, 
Mali, 
Namibia and 
Uzbekistan 
including risk 
mitigation 
instruments 
proposed in 
Namibia and 
Botswana 
 
The sub-components 1.2 
and 1.3 are carried-out on 
time 
The design and bidding of 
the 
projects 
are 
completed as planned (no 
delay) 
 
Institutional 
and 
regulatory framework for 
competitive procurement 
of IPPs in place in the 
country 
 
Solar/wind 
projects 
procured competitively to 
select private IPPs in 
charge of the design, 
financing, 
construction, 
operation 
and 
maintenance of the plants 
with 
a 
bankable 
risk 
allocation 
 
Where needed the risk 
mitigation 
instruments 
requested by IPPs are 
provided, and they enable 
a reduction in the cost of 
PPA

=== PAGE 58 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
Solar and 
wind parks 
ready for 
tendering 
Solar and 
wind park 
critical 
studies are 
completed 
and the 
parks are 
ready for 
tendering 
Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses, 
construction 
completion 
reports, or 
any other 
source of 
information 
available 
0 
2 solar/wind 
parks are 
ready for 
tendering (2 
sets of 
associated 
studies 
completed)  
 
5 solar/wind 
parks are 
ready for 
tendering (5 
sets of 
associated 
studies 
completed)  
 
The sub-component 1.3 is 
carried-out on time 
RE 
projects 
tendered 
under a solar/wind park 
scheme (post completion 
of the critical solar and 
wind park studies) 
Higher 
penetration 
of VRE 
Enable an 
increase 
penetration 
of VRE in 
the grid 
Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses, 
energy 
statistics, 
country 
energy 
sector 
reports, 
studies or 
any other 
source of 
information 
available 
% of VRE in 
the grid that 
can be 
integrated 
safely before 
implementati
on of the 
Facility 
projects 
(baseline 
values per 
country will 
be provided 
as part of the 
baseline 
studies) 
Public 
investments 
in the grid 
enable a 
higher 
penetration 
of VRE to be 
safely 
integrated in 
the grid of 2 
countries (2 
countries 
with 
assessments 
showing a 
potential 
increase in 
VRE 
penetration 
from 
baseline) 
Public 
investments 
in the grid 
enable a 
higher 
penetration 
of VRE to be 
safely 
integrated in 
the grid of all 
countries 
except DRC 
(countries 
with 
assessments 
showing a 
potential 
increase in 
VRE 
penetration 
from 
baseline) 
No material changes to 
the 
least 
cost 
plans 
adopted 
 
RE projects deployed as 
planned 
 
Public investments for 
VRE 
integration 
grid 
upgrades 
implemented 
as planned 
 
Higher 
penetration 
of 
VRE is 15 percent and 
above 
of 
installed 
generation 
Increased 
capacity by 
the 
Government 
and/or 
utility/ 
dispatching 
entity with 
regards to 
VRE 
deployment 
and 
dispatch 
Increased 
capacity of 
key staff 
designated 
by the EE 
Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses, 
surveys, or 
any other 
source of 
information 
available 
Limited 
capacity in 
VRE 
deployment 
and dispatch 
by the 
Government 
and/or utility/ 
dispatching 
entity 
One training 
conducted in 
each country 
under the 
Facility  
Two trainings 
conducted in 
each country 
under the 
Facility  
Staff and experts have 
been designated by the 
EE for training and have 
adequate 
background 
and technical expertise to 
benefit from this capacity 
building and be able to 
apply the skills from the 
training in their operations 
 
Relevant 
staffs 
and 
experts designated by the 
EE 
have 
participated 
diligently in the training 
proposed 
Private 
capital is 
leveraged 
for mini-
grids in 
Volume of 
private 
capital 
leveraged as 
a result of 
Ex-ante and 
ex-post 
analyses, 
financial 
reports, or 
0 
0 
USD 500 
million  
The 
studies 
under 
Component 
1.3 
are 
carried-out on time

=== PAGE 59 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 
13 Deliverables are indicative. 
DRC, and 
utility-scale 
RE in 
Botswana 
and Namibia 
risk 
mitigation 
instruments 
any other 
source of 
information 
available 
The implementation of the 
projects is completed as 
planned (no delay) and 
the competitive selection 
of IPPs and mini-grid 
managers 
was 
successfully implemented 
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected 
in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed. 
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables13 
Component 1: Technical Assistance 
1.1.1 
Generation plans with 
VRE integration analysis 
and capacity building 
(technical) 
Least-cost generation and 
transmission plans are 
done jointly with VRE 
integration analysis and 
capacity building of 
technical planning teams 
and dispatch teams by 
each country EE 
1.1.1.1 
Preparation of a new (or 
adaptation of an existing) 
least-cost generation plan, 
which includes reiterative 
VRE integration analyses 
based on technical and 
commercial constraints, an 
evaluation of the dispatch 
capabilities and the limits of 
grid integration and 
determines a cost-optimized 
electricity mix that can meet 
demand at any time;  
 
1.1.1.2 
Preparation of a new (or 
adaptation of an existing) 
least-cost 
transmission/distribution 
plan, which includes capacity 
expansion models simulating 
generation and transmission 
capacity investment, given 
assumptions about future 
electricity demand, fuel 
prices, technology cost and 
performance, policy and 
regulations, and providing 
informed solar targets and 
indication of where best to 
locate future projects as well 
as a list of key investments 
needed to improve grid VRE 
integration capacity; and 
 
1.1.1.3 
 A least-cost generation plan 
for 6 countries in the Facility 
(including grid investment 
needed to enable the 
targeted VRE) and at least 
two trainings per 6 
countries, namely 
Botswana, DRC, Kenya, 
Mali, Namibia and 
Uzbekistan

=== PAGE 60 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
Provision of institutional 
capacity building support for 
energy planning and 
dispatch (including using 
grid-connected battery 
storage). 
 
1.2.1 
Transaction advisory and 
Capacity Building 
(procurement, legal) 
Transaction advisory for 
IPP selection under 
competitive bidding, 
including legal and 
procurement capacity 
building by each country 
EE 
 1.2.1.1 
Provision of technical 
assistance (including legal, 
procurement and transaction 
advisory services) and 
implementation of capacity 
building activities to support: 
(i) the assessment of the 
existing legal framework and 
the development of a legal 
framework for IPPs and 
competitive bidding 
conducive to private sector 
investment; (ii) the design of 
energy projects with fair risk 
allocation among 
stakeholders and contractual 
arrangements acceptable to 
potential investors; (iii) the 
competitive selection of 
investors; and (iv) the 
negotiations of the final 
contractual arrangement with 
the selected investors and 
closing. 
 
Set of bidding documents 
setting the capacity of the 
solar and wind power plants 
to be installed by the private 
sector (Request for 
Proposals package of 
documents informed by the 
legal and structuring 
analysis done) available per 
country in the Facility, 
namely Botswana, CAR, 
DRC, Kenya, Mali, Namibia 
and Uzbekistan  
 
1.3.1 
Solar and wind park 
preparatory studies  
Technical preparatory 
studies for solar and wind 
park infrastructure (i.e. 
feasibility studies, E&S 
instruments) by 
Botswana, CAR, Mali, 
Namibia, and/or 
Uzbekistan’ EE 
 
1.3.1.1 
Preparation of preparatory 
and feasibility studies and 
environmental and social risk 
mitigation instruments, for 
the development of solar PV, 
solar PV with battery 
storage, CSP, onshore wind 
and offshore wind parks in 
support of investment de-
risking and investor selection 
process. Preparatory and 
feasibility studies may 
include, as needed, 
geospatial analyses of the 
land around the substation, 
topography and geotechnical 
analyses, environmental and 
social analyses, site-specific 
5 solar and wind parks 
ready for auction (technical 
studies completed) in the 
following countries: 
Botswana, CAR, Mali, 
Namibia, and/or Uzbekistan

=== PAGE 61 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
grid interconnection studies, 
solar irradiation/wind 
measurement analyses and 
other studies as needed.  
Component 2: Public Investments 
2. 1.1 
Public investments in 
solar and wind park 
infrastructure 
Public investments in 
fencing, connection line, 
road, water access etc. 
for solar/wind parks by 
Botswana, CAR, Mali, 
Namibia, and/or 
Uzbekistan’s EE 
2.1.1.1 
Carrying out infrastructure 
investments in support of the 
development of solar and 
wind parks, such as 
acquisition of land, 
construction of transmission 
lines and fencing; and  
 
 
5 solar and wind park public 
investments completed in 
the following countries: 
Botswana, CAR, Mali, 
Namibia, and/or Uzbekistan  
2.2.1 
Public investments for 
VRE integration grid 
upgrades and grid 
resilience 
Public investments for 
VRE integration grid 
upgrades (FACTS, 
transformer, doubling line 
etc.) and public 
investments for climate 
change grid resilience 
(vegetation control, 
doubling line, tsunami 
resilience etc.) by 
Botswana, CAR, Kenya, 
Mali, Namibia, and/or 
Uzbekistan’s EE 
2.2.1.1 
Investment for grid 
modernization and upgrade 
to improve grid’s flexibility to 
integrate larger amounts of 
VRE, limit curtailment or grid 
instability and adapt to 
climate change related 
shocks, including power 
system planning, grid 
management, strengthening 
of forecasting methods and 
grid code requirements. Grid 
reinforcements that support 
VRE integration may include 
(i) addition or replacement of 
lines and transformers for 
grid extension and capacity 
enhancements (both for 
answering growing demand 
and for integrating VRE 
power), (ii) equipment for 
smoothing the voltage and 
frequency issues, such as 
capacitor banks, battery 
storage and other reactive 
power compensators, 
together with flexible 
alternating current 
transmission systems, (iii) 
equipment for faster and 
more efficient grid operation, 
such as monitoring systems, 
demand and production 
forecasting systems, and 
automats for controlling 
generation units and grid 
Reinforced grids enabling 
further safe VRE integration 
and grid more resilient to 
climate change in the 
following countries: 
Botswana, CAR, Kenya, 
Mali, Namibia,  and/or 
Uzbekistan

=== PAGE 62 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
operations through automatic 
generation control; and (iv) 
other innovative technologies 
whose commercially viability 
may not have been 
established yet such as load 
shifting battery storage. 
 
2.3.1 
Public investments for 
electrification  
Public investments for 
electrification (PPP mini-
grids, grid extension etc.) 
by Botswana, CAR, DRC,  
Kenya, Mali and 
Namibia’s EE 
2.3.1.1 
Investments in solar home 
systems (SHS), mini-grids 
and grid connection, as best 
appropriate to the country 
context, with a particular 
focus on women. 
Supply of electricity through 
grid expansion, mini-grids 
and/or SHS to 840,000 
households across 5 
countries: Botswana, CAR, 
DRC,  Kenya, Mali and 
Namibia  
Component 3: Risk Mitigation instruments 
3.1.1 
Risk mitigation 
instruments for 
solar/battery mini-grids 
and off-grid private 
investors 
Risk mitigation 
instruments for RE mini-
grids and off-grid private 
investors by DRC’s EE 
 
3.1.1.1 
Technical 
assessment 
(informed 
to 
the 
extent 
possible 
by 
a 
market 
sounding) to ensure that the 
coverage proposed meets 
the needs of the private 
sector 
investors, 
allowing 
long-term 
mobilization 
of 
private capital matching the 
needs of the projects 
 
Identification of the terms 
and conditions of the 
reimbursable grants 
available for inclusion in the 
sets of bidding documents 
for RE mini-grid selections 
in DRC  
3.2.1 Risk mitigation 
instruments for grid 
connected RE projects 
Risk mitigation 
instruments for RE grid 
connected projects by 
Namibia and Botswana’s 
EE 
 
3.2.1.1 
Technical 
assessment 
(informed 
to 
the 
extent 
possible 
by 
a 
market 
sounding) to ensure that the 
coverage proposed will meet 
the needs of the private 
sector 
investors, 
allowing 
long-term 
mobilization 
of 
private capital matching the 
needs of the projects. 
 
Identification of the terms 
and conditions of the 
guarantees available for 
inclusion in the sets of 
bidding documents for RE 
competitive bidding in 
Namibia and Botswana 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Besides the arrangements laid out in the AMA between the World Bank and the GCF, the 
implementation of the SRMI Facility involves (i) monitoring of program performance indicators (as per 
Section E5); (ii) periodic progress reports; and (iii) midterm review of implementation progress.  It is noted that 
the end targets of the Programme are best estimates as it is not known upfront exactly the results of each 
project that will be financed, and the targets may be revised during AE’s due diligence, project preparation and 
the mid-term review as necessary.  The AE will report to GCF the implementation status at both Facility and 
country level by aggregating specific country-level information and data. 
 
 
Monitoring

=== PAGE 63 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 
Specifically, the implementation of each project under the SRMI Facility will be managed and 
monitored at project and Facility level by World Bank’s in-house staff with inputs from, as applicable, 
Project Implementation Units (which may include staff and consultants). The World Bank has dedicated 
staff in its energy team, operation departments, Environment and Social departments and country offices that 
will conduct due diligence, monitor compliance and performance risks, implementation of the Environmental 
and Social Commitment Plans and the stakeholder engagement plans.  
 
The World Bank will follow its standard monitoring and reporting policies and procedures, which will 
include semi-annual reports on the implementation status and performance of each project. By the end 
of each project supported by the SRMI Facility, the Bank will conduct jointly with each respective Executing 
Entity an implementation completion assessment and prepare an implementation completion report (ICR) 
which will review the performance of the project, assess effectiveness and efficiency of project implementation, 
the achievement of the project development objective, and provide relevant lessons learned. Financial 
reporting is further discussed in Section G3. 
 
 
Reporting 
 
Reporting of EEs to World Bank. As specified in the subsidiary agreements between the EEs and the World 
Bank, the EEs are obliged to report on the implementation of the Project and the use of proceeds of the Facility 
in accordance with the terms and conditions of the subsidiary agreements, including on the environmental and 
social performance of the project and the achievement of the indicators agreed between the AE and the EE to 
the World Bank on an annual basis . For each project supported by the SRMI Facility, the respective EE will 
be responsible for overall M&E of the project, including collection of project performance information and 
reporting on project impacts and results.  
 
Reporting of World Bank to GCF. The World Bank will provide to the GCF (i) annual activity performance 
reports (APRs) on the status of the Facility throughout the relevant reporting period, (ii) mid-term evaluation 
reports at the midpoint of the implementation period of the Facility and (iii) final evaluation reports at the end 
of the implementation period of the Facility as per the FAA provisions.  The APRs will provide information 
specific to projects supported under the Facility, as relevant. 
 
 
 
Evaluation 
 
The evaluation methods for mid-term and final evaluations will include:  
a. Key informant interviews with relevant beneficiary staff and clients, as well as other key stakeholders, 
based on stakeholder mapping; and 
b. Desktop review of relevant Facility documentation, including Project Implementation Unit reports, 
based on an agreed list of evidence to be provided by the client. 
Please refer to Annex 11 for further details.

=== PAGE 64 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
 
The main risks identified to the successful implementation of the Facility are linked to Governance 
(political and governance, macroeconomic and sector strategies and policies), Technical and Operational 
(technical design of projects, institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability, fiduciary and 
stakeholders), uncertain depth and duration of Covid-19 pandemic (with direct impact on macro-economic 
environment and possibly project preparation and implementation context in various countries) as well as 
Security in specific project countries. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
 
Political and Governance. As DRC, CAR and Mali are facing complex political situations, it may impact their 
political commitment to the projects and the governance aspects of the implementation of the components: 
- 
DRC is still recovering from a series of conflicts that broke out in the 1990s, creating a protracted 
economic and social slump. Joseph Kabila served as head of state between 2001 and 2019. 
Presidential and parliamentary elections, initially slated for November 2016, were postponed until 
December 30, 2018 to facilitate an overhaul of the electoral register. Felix Antoine Tshisekedi—the son 
of Etienne Tshisekedi, the country’s longstanding opposition leader—secured 38.5 percent of the vote 
and was declared the winner by the national independent electoral commission.  This victory was 
contested, including by the National Episcopal Conference of Congo (CENCO), which had deployed 
40,000 election observers.  
- 
CAR’s elections in 2016 brought an end to three years of political transition and turmoil. Since 2016, 
CAR has been governed by President Faustin-Archange Touadéra and Prime Minister Simplice 
Sarandji. The next presidential elections are scheduled to be held between December 2020 and March 
2021.  
- 
Mali has been experiencing instability and conflict since the military coup of 2012 and the occupation 
of the northern regions by armed groups. The operations of the United Nations Multidimensional 
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) date back to July 2014. 
 
Macroeconomic. This risk category includes external and domestic macroeconomic risks that may derail the 
achievement of operations development results during either preparation or implementation. Overall, the seven 
countries are quite stable from a macroeconomic perspective. GDP growth in 2017 and 2018 has been 
negative in Namibia, between 2 and 4 percent in Kenya and Botswana and above 5 percent in DRC, Mali and 
Uzbekistan. Their inflation levels are aligned with their GDP growth levels with rates in 2018 between 0 to 5 
percent. However, it is important to note that it is currently unknown how the covid-19 crisis will impact their 
economies. The emerging view in the case of Kenya is that the Covid-19 crisis is having a large negative 
impact on the economy, there has been a significant widening of the fiscal and external financing gaps and 
consequently, GDP growth has been downgraded.  
 
Sector Strategies and Policies. It is critical to have in place the right regulatory framework: (i) Kenya are 
working on new legislation to implement competitive selection of IPPs, (ii) DRC does not have the full policy in

=== PAGE 65 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
place to enable privately-owned mini-grid operations, and (iii) Botswana, Namibia and Mali are missing clear 
generation plans with implementation strategies linked to it.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
The World Bank team is working closely with the different Governments to ensure the sustainability and 
relevance of the projects to the given country. In general, good governance of the projects will be ensured by 
the adoption of transparency, accountability and participation principles and attention to fraud, corruption and 
other unethical practices resulting from government failures. These will be enabled thanks to the World Bank 
implementation and M&E systems. 
 
The projects are expected to strengthen the country’s macro-fiscal situations as through the deployment of 
least-cost renewable energy it will reduce the cost of imported fossil fuel while reducing energy security risks 
and improving national capacity. 
 
In addition, the World Bank is working with the seven countries to ensure that a comprehensive regulatory 
framework is in place when the new investments come in play aiming to ensure the sustainability of the new 
generation projects. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
 
Technical Design of projects. As solar and wind generation are well known technologies and there are clear 
investments related to VRE integration, the technical design risk is minimal. In addition, with a clear and fair 
risk allocation between the private and the public stakeholders, RE projects are least-cost compared to other 
generation projects.  
 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability. The institutional capacity of the implementing 
agencies, implementation arrangements, and M&E arrangements is quite different from one country to the 
next. Indeed, Namibia, Botswana, Kenya and Uzbekistan have strong implementing agencies whereas CAR, 
DRC and Mali have weaker institutional capacity. 
 
Risk of RE Projects Not Materializing. Most RE power plants under the Facility will be prepared thanks to 
public investments. However, the financing for the power plants themselves will be financed by private 
investors. The private investment is not covered under the Facility. 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
To ensure that this risk is mitigated, the World Bank is supporting the proposed seven countries in their 
selection of the private investors. For the countries with limited capacity, larger capacity building components 
will be provided with additional external support for project implementation. A transparent and well-organized 
selection of private investors combined with the reduction in risks from curtailment, land and E&S perspective

=== PAGE 66 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
thanks to the park scheme will ensure that private investment is indeed leveraged as a result to the Facility’s 
projects. 
Each country has a different fiduciary risk and it is being mitigated by previous experience with each client, and 
World Bank procurement and financial management requirements. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
 
Security. Security risks are key in countries such as Mali, CAR and DRC: 
- 
Mali’s security, which is critical for economic recovery and poverty reduction, remains fragile in the face 
of continued attacks by armed groups on UN peacekeepers, the Malian army, and civilians, mainly in 
the north and central regions. In July 2017, Germany, the African Development Bank, the World Bank, 
France, the European Union, and the United Nations Development Programme launched the Sahel 
Alliance in order to provide a coordinated and tailored response to the challenges faced by the G5 
Sahel member countries (Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, and Niger). Since that time, Denmark, 
Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain, and the United Kingdom have joined the Alliance. 
- 
On February 6, 2019, the Government of CAR signed an African Union-mediated peace agreement 
with 14 armed groups. This agreement has been endorsed by the international community. The African 
Union and the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) serve as guarantors of the 
agreement, while the UN peacekeeping force (MINUSCA) plays a critical support role in the 
background. 
- 
DRC is fraught with political instability, armed clashes, and human rights violations. Conflict erupted in 
2016 in the Kasai region, which includes five provinces in the center of the country. It is another instance 
of fighting between the military and splintered ethnic militias. Nationally, 2.1 million people were newly 
displaced in 2017 and 2018, making the DRC the African country with the highest number of internally 
displaced people — 4.5 million. 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
The security risk will be monitored, and the projects will rapidly adapt to any change in security levels in the 
three countries.

=== PAGE 67 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
 
The World Bank has a new Environmental & Social Framework (ESF) that will be used by all 
projects.14 The ESF is divided in ten E&S standards (ESS) that are each assessed based on their relevance 
depending on the project’s concept. The main aspects considered at this stage from an E&S perspective are 
summarized below. However, each project will have its own assessment completed during project 
preparation. As a few of the projects aim to finance 500kV lines to unlock GWs of VRE, these projects as 
part of the Facility will be Category A following the GCF classification and may be classified as high or 
substantial risk as per the World Bank ESF classification.  
 
 
ESS1: Assessment and Management of E&S Risks and Impacts 
 
The projects are expected to bring substantial direct environmental benefits by increasing the deployment 
of renewable energy. Transitioning to a higher percentage of renewable energy in the electricity mix has 
benefits for countries with regards to GHG emissions, air and water pollution, and use of water resources. 
The projects are likely to result in significant employment generation, including construction jobs, followed 
by a smaller number of long-term jobs associated with operation and maintenance (O&M) activities. There 
are substantial opportunities to promote female employment (direct and indirect) through training and 
incentives.  
 
If not properly managed, the downstream development of the infrastructure for the solar/wind parks, as well 
as the construction and operation of the RE power plants may result in potential land conversion (and 
potentially degradation), habitat loss, excessive water use, discharge of hazardous wastes in manufacturing 
of PV solar cells and wind turbines and disposal of solar cells, and risks to worker and community health 
and safety. However, most of these potential impacts are low to moderate in intensity/significance and are 
reversible and localized in nature, and therefore can be easily prevented, e.g. by aligning site selection with 
ESF requirements, and mitigated, e.g. by sound operational practice during operation. 
 
Under ESS1, an E&S Commitment Plan (ESCP) will be required, and it will specify all other E&S plans and 
instruments that would be required for each project. The ESCP is a legally binding document that is referred 
to in the legal agreements between the Bank and the EEs/implementing agencies. 
 
 
ESS2: Labor and Working Conditions 
 
Project workers are expected to be mobilized under all the projects. The EEs/implementing agencies will 
have to comply with the ESS2 requirements as presented in Labor Management Procedures (LMP) to be 
prepared for each project.  
 
 
ESS3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
 
The downstream risks and impacts related to potential water scarcity (also considering seasonal water 
availability and any cumulative effects by multiple demands), the release of pollutants, waste generation, the 
management of disposal materials and hazardous wastes, impacts on communities, and resource use 
 
14 Depending on the final design of the projects to be financed out of Component 3, the World Bank Group 
Performance Standards may apply to some of the financed activities under these projects, in accordance with the 
World Bank’s relevant policies and procedures.

=== PAGE 68 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
efficiency will be assessed for each project. However, most of these potential impacts are low to moderate 
in intensity/significance and are reversible and localized in nature, and therefore can be easily mitigated. 
 
During the construction phase of the solar and wind parks, there may be some potential negative 
environmental and social impacts including, air quality deterioration due to dust and exhaust emissions 
during construction activities. These impacts require appropriate assessments and management measures 
to contain them.  
 
 
ESS4: Community Health and Safety 
 
ESS4 requirements will be taken into account in the implementation of project’s activities. While the 
construction and operation of solar/wind power plants has risks accompanying both normal operations and 
potential accidents, there have to date not been any accidents of the severity that have occurred in other 
forms of energy production (e.g. in hydropower). There is a possibility of noise emissions from the running 
of construction machinery and related transportation activities, community nuisance etc. These impacts 
require appropriate assessment and management measures to contain them.   
 
 
ESS5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Land needs for solar and wind parks are substantial. Any potential land acquisition or land use restriction 
will be assessed and managed in a manner consistent with ESS5 requirements, in order to avoid, minimize, 
reduce/mitigate and compensate at replacement cost land acquisition based on due diligence and plans 
prepared in accordance with ESS5. 
 
 
ESS6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources 
 
The proposed solar/wind projects, if not properly designed and sited, may result in loss, degradation or 
fragmentation of habitats and other adverse impacts on biodiversity and living natural resources. Care will 
be taken to ensure that the impacts of such projects on natural habitats, terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems 
and species are well assessed and managed.  
 
 
ESS7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local 
Communities 
 
The presence of indigenous people in the project areas or their collective attachment to such areas will be 
screened and confirmed by the World Bank in consultation with the national authorities. Once it is confirmed, 
consistency with ESS7 objectives and requirements will be integrated into the design of the project and E&S 
documents, including the development of an indigenous peoples’ development plan or other types of plans 
depending on the country and project context, and Free, Prior and Informed Consent in the circumstances 
specified in ESS7. 
 
 
ESS8: Cultural Heritage 
 
Each project will screen the project area and assess potential impacts on cultural heritage, both tangible and 
intangible.  The site selection for each project will be mindful of cultural heritage and the application of ESS8 
will be further assessed under each project.

=== PAGE 69 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 
ESS9: Financial Intermediaries 
 
The projects are not expected to be financial intermediary projects. 
 
 
ESS10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
 
Project stakeholders can include communities or individuals affected by the project and their formal and 
informal representatives, national or local government authorities, politicians, religious or community 
organizations and civil society groups with special interest, academic communities, and businesses. The 
identification of project-affected parties (individuals or groups) will also include those who, because of their 
circumstances, may be disadvantaged or vulnerable; i.e. those who may be more likely to be adversely 
affected by the project impacts and/or more limited than others in their ability to take advantage of the project 
benefits.  
A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be developed for each project, to ensure transparency and 
meaningful consultation with the project-affected and interested parties. Stakeholder engagement and 
consultations will be conducted throughout the project cycle. This will include discussions of project design 
and impacts as well as multi-stakeholder discussions on these issues during the preparation phase. The 
SEP, along with other E&S instruments, will be subject to public consultation and disclosure per requirements 
of ESS10 and will be treated as a living document to be regularly updated as needed during project 
implementation. 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
The Facility aims to enhance female economic participation in the energy sector and create income-
generating opportunities for women in project countries. Proposed interventions under the Gender 
Action Plan are both aligned with the World Bank Group Gender Strategy (2016-2021): (i) advancing equality 
between men and women through climate change mitigation and adaptation actions, and (ii) minimizing 
gender-related risks in climate change actions. Employment opportunities created by large-scale solar and 
wind infrastructure projects often benefit men more than women, resulting in a significant employment gap 
in the RE industry. Female access to electricity can at times also be limited in target countries, and specific 
attention to women’s connectivity will be key in ensuring men and women equally gain from energy services. 
Under the SRMI approach, issues related to female employment and access to electricity will be effectively 
embedded across the RE project-cycle, from the procurement of the RE project to its implementation, going 
beyond whenever possible to also enhance livelihood in affected areas.  
 
These issues will be tackled in a sustainable manner, raising awareness, improving gender policies, 
building capacities and generating knowledge on the program’s differentiated impact on men and 
women. Preliminary gender assessments for each of the seven countries under the Facility highlighted the 
following gender gaps and their potential mitigation actions: 
 
a. Female employment and skill gaps in the energy sector: the main barriers to women’s 
participation in the energy sector include social norms that confine women to unpaid household and 
care work, occupational gender segregation, limited capacities and skills, as well as discriminatory 
work environments. Worldwide, the RE industry employs only about 32 percent of women. Therefore, 
without a pro-active focus on institutional reform to promote female employment gender-policy, men 
may benefit disproportionately from new employment opportunities across the RE value chain,

=== PAGE 70 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
particularly in construction, operation and maintenance. This gap will be addressed through skills 
building and, outreach efforts, as well as the promotion of equal opportunities practices at the 
corporate level (including through programs to afford women the ability to gain hands-on professional 
experience).  
 
b. Female employment in the areas of implementation of RE projects: RE projects are frequently 
located in remote areas with good solar/wind resources and large plots of lands, but where living 
standards are below the country average. Women, if employed, are more exposed to lower-paid, 
lower-quality employment in the informal sector. Under the SRMI approach, the socio-economic 
needs of the local communities will be assessed, and actions empowering women prioritized. Those 
may include investments in education and skill-building, for instance in traditional home-based 
activities such as handicrafts, or in agricultural activities. Special attention will be paid to the 
promotion of local women-run businesses along the project development cycle.  
 
c. Gender-based violence: women routinely experience sexual harassment and intimate partner 
violence in target countries, and the risk of gender-based violence may increase during the realization 
of large-scale RE projects. This risk will be mitigated through implementing mitigation and response 
approaches and the adoption of internal prevention and response mechanisms in compliance with 
the World Bank Group GBV practices. These interventions are expected to efficiently complement 
actions empowering local women and men and aim to create a safe environment at the project site 
and in communities.  
 
d. Women access to services as energy consumers: among project countries with lower 
electrification rates and under-developed grids, women suffer from time-poverty and increased 
health-issues, as they bear the responsibility of food preparation, as well as fuel and water collection. 
Limited access to electricity among poor households, including female-headed households (FHH) 
can also be explained through affordability constraints regarding electricity connection or use of 
energy services. Improving access to electricity services (off-grid and on-grid) may reduce the time 
and labor burden of women, generate health and education benefits, increase female labor 
participation and incomes. For these reasons, the EEs will be required to (i) pay attention to women 
and men’s differentiated needs in the design of electrification programs, (ii) conduct inclusive 
stakeholders’ consultations to ensure women’s voice is heard and included in decision-making 
processes, (iii) undertake outreach and capacity-building initiatives to increase women’s knowledge 
about new forms of energy, and  (iv) prioritize FHH in the design of actions to assist poorer 
households with connection charges.  
 
 
The Facility will follow a systematic approach and provide cross-support to projects interventions 
with a focus on data collection, policy engagement, project level actions and capacity-building 
activities. The WBG ESMAP Gender and Energy Program will be available to provide assistance to the 
SRMI facility, as part of its mandate to strengthen women’s role in the energy sector as consumers, 
employees and entrepreneurs. The Facility will encourage the recruitment of a balanced female-to-male 
employment ratio within the PMU team.  
 
Obtaining stakeholders buy-in will be key in ensuring that interventions to promote women’s 
employment and enhance their livelihood are effectively implemented with measurable outcomes. 
Countries adherence to international agreements and national normative frameworks on gender equality,

=== PAGE 71 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
will be a good starting point to strengthen government’s support. At the project and program level, the 
following approach will be followed: 
 
a. Data collection and initial assessments: 
- 
Build upon existing country gender diagnostics and action plans; 
- 
Document the baseline situation and identify gaps through collection of sex-disaggregated data; 
- 
Conduct stakeholders’ consultations involving female participants, to understand men and 
women differentiated needs; and 
- 
Include an analysis of the differentiated impact of the SRMI project on men and women in initial 
assessments, through the involvement of gender and energy experts (Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment, Resettlement Action Plans etc.). 
 
b. Identifying and implementing relevant actions:  
- 
Identify and implement relevant interventions to narrow gaps in terms of employment and energy 
access, based on the initial diagnosis and inclusive stakeholders’ consultations; and 
- 
These may include (i) actions to promote female employment in the renewables sector (including 
capacity building and programs for women to gain hands-on experience in the energy sector such 
as support for school-to-work transition), (ii) financing of local communities projects empowering 
women in the area of implementation of the RE projects (such as activities generating revenues), 
(iii) implementation of prevention measures to mitigate GBV in the area of implementation of the 
RE projects and (iv) facilitating of the energy access for FHH). 
 
 
c. M&E and Knowledge management: 
- 
Monitor results throughout the project cycle to assess impact on men and women and allow for 
real-time adjustments; and 
- 
Expand the knowledge base by documenting lessons learnt from prior projects, knowledge 
production and exchange. 
 
 
d. Strengthening female participation and voice during Stakeholders Consultations: 
- 
Organize stakeholders’ consultations throughout the project cycle. Ensure effective participation 
of women while conducting consultations to gain knowledge about their specific concerns during 
project preparation, and to monitor impacts and allow for real-time correction during 
implementation; 
- 
Use local dialects and involve female facilitators/local women leaders, as well as women 
representatives from the utility company whenever possible; 
Organize women-only discussion groups if appropriate; organize consultations and focus groups 
at a convenient time for women; and create partnerships with women’s groups and 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to assist in the process and ensure the projects’ 
sustainability. 
 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Each EE of loan/grant financing under the SRMI Facility will be required to conduct financial management 
and procurement according to the World Bank policies and procedures.

=== PAGE 72 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 
Procurement 
 
Each project supported by the SRMI Facility will follow the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations.15 
World Bank procurement staff provide implementation support to the EEs throughout the procurement 
process. They work with governments to achieve the highest bidding and contract management 
standards to get the best development results.  Each project is developed and supervised by a World 
Bank task team that includes a procurement specialist. Each project with the exception of the guarantees 
is also subject to the ‘World Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines, dated October 15, 2006 and revised in 
January 2011 and as of July 1, 2016’.16  
 
 
Financial Management 
 
Each project with the exception of the guarantees supported by the Facility is required to maintain 
financial management arrangements (including planning and budgeting, accounting, internal control, 
funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing arrangements of the EE and other entities responsible for 
project implementation) acceptable to the World Bank.  For each project, the task team includes an 
accredited Financial Management (FM) specialist who provides support during the entire project cycle 
(preparation, supervision and implementation) in accordance with the Bank’s operational policies and 
procedures (to work with partner countries to design financial management and disbursement 
arrangements and to supervise and support the performance of Bank-financed operations). The team’s 
FM specialist closely monitors the performance of the EE’s FM arrangements and their continued 
capacity to provide reasonable assurance that financing proceeds are being used for the purposes 
intended. 
 
Financial reporting will also be required for each project and (with the exception of the guarantees) is 
specified in each project’s Disbursement and Financial Information Letter (DFIL). Unless otherwise 
agreed by the Bank, the EE must submit annual audited project financial statements six months after the 
close of the financial year and unaudited interim financial (IFR) reports periodically. Audits are carried 
out by auditors with independence and capacity acceptable to the Bank, under terms of reference 
acceptable to the World Bank. 
  
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. 
Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding 
proposal, including all annexes: 
 
15
 https://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/brief/procurement-new-
framework#framework with the exception of guarantee projects, to which these regulations do not apply. 
16 Guarantees are subject to a similar anti-corruption regime defined in the Anti-Corruption Guidelines for World 
Bank 
Guarantee 
and 
Carbon 
Finance 
Transactions 
(https://policies.worldbank.org/sites/ppf3/PPFDocuments/Forms/DispPage.aspx?docid=1971) and to similar 
restrictions on participation by debarred entities.

=== PAGE 73 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 71 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, 
together with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for 
confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing 
confidential information.

=== PAGE 74 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 72 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☒ Environmental and Social Sustainability Framework (ESSF) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☐ 
Annex x  
Other references

=== PAGE 75 ===
TELEPHONE: 3950100 
FAX: 3956086 
Toll free: 0800600773 
REF: MFED 170/l/4A 
Executive Director
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund 
175 Art Center-daero
Yeonsu-gu, lncheon 22004 
Republic of Korea 
Dear Madam/Sir, 
Ml ISTRY OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT 
PRIVATE BAG 008 
GABORONE 
Date: 2211d April 2020 
RE: Fundin Pro osal for the Green Climate Fund GCF b the World Bank Re ardin 
the Solar Risk Mitigation Initiative (SRMD Facility 
We refer to the renewable energy project in Botswana as included in the funding proposal 
submitted by The World Bank for the Solar Risk Mitigation Initiative (SRMI) Facility. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development, the National Designated Authority of Botswana. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the renewable energy project as included in the funding 
proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)
The Government of Botswana has no-objection to the renewable energy project as
included in the funding proposal;
(b)
The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Botswana's
national priorities, strategies and plans; and
(c)
In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the renewable energy
project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws
and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the renewable energy 
project as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the renewable energy project. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Yours faithfully, 
oniface G. 
phetlhe 
for/Permanent Secretary 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 76 ===
MINISTERE DE L 
9ENVIRONNEMENT ET 
DU DEVELOPPEMENT DURABLE 
Republique Centrafricaine 
Unite - Digniti - Travail 
DIRECTION DE CABlNET 
COORDINATION NATIONALE CLIMAT 
N° 009 /MEDDillIRCAB 
ATTENTION: Le Fonds Vert Climat (FVC) 
2 O AVR 2020 
Re : Proposition de financement pour le FVC de la Banque mondiale concernant 
la facilite SRMI 
Chere Madame, Monsieur, 
Nous nous referons au projet d' energie renouvelable en Republique Centrafricaine tel qu'il 
est inclus dans la proposition de financement. 
Le soussigne est le representant dument autorise de la Coordination Nationale Climat, 
I' autorite nationale designee nationale pour le FVC en Republique Centrafricaineը 
Confonnement a la decision FVC B.08/10, dont nous reconnaissons avoir examine le 
contenu, nous communiquons par la presente notre Non-Objection au projet d'energie 
renouvelable tel qu'inclus dans la proposition du financement. 
· En communiquant notre non•objection, il est sous-entendu que :
(a) Le gouvemement de la Republique Centrafricaine n'a pas d'objection au projet
d'energie renouvelable tel qu'il est inclus dans la proposition de fmancement;
(b) Le programme tel qu'il figure dans la proposition de financement est conforme aux
priorites, strategies et plan nationaux de la Republique Centrafricaine;
(c) Confonnement aux sauvegardes environnementales et sociales du FVC, le projet
d' energie renouvelable tel qu'il figure dans la proposition de financement est
conforme aux lois et reglementations nationales applicables
Nous confirmons egalement que notre processus national de verifi.cation de la non-objection 
au projet d'energie renouvelable tel qu'inclus dans la proposition de financement a ete
dfunent suivi. 
Nous confirmons egalerJ?ent que notre non-objection s'applique a tous les projets ou activites 
a mettre en reuvre dans le cadre du pro jet d' energie renouvelable. 
Nous reconnaissons que cette lettre sera rendue publique sur թite internet du FVC. 
Respectueusement, 
1':u:. .,c;..,....---
Norn : Denis BEINA 
Titre: Point Focal FVC

=== PAGE 77 ===
RCA 248423.  WUI 64145  FAX (202) 477-6391 
 
The World Bank 
1818 H Street N.W. 
(202) 473-1010 
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 
Washington, D.C.  20433 
Cable Address:  INTBAFRAD 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
U.S.A. 
Cable Address:  INDEVAS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 5, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
 
Certificate of Accuracy – Job No. 2021000388 
 
 
I, Debyanne McCook, Senior Translator/Reviser in GCSTI, hereby certify on 
behalf of GCSTI that the attached translation from French to English of the document 
submitted under Job No. 2021000388 was revised by me and is, to the best of my 
knowledge and belief, a true and accurate translation of the original French document. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Debyanne McCook  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Senior Translator/Reviser 
English Translation Team (GCSTI)

=== PAGE 78 ===
Central African Republic 
Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development 
Ministerial Directorate 
Coordination Nationale Climat 
No. 009/MEDD/DIRCAB 
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 20, 2020 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the World Bank regarding the SRMI Facility 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the renewable energy project in the Central African Republic as included in the funding 
proposal. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Coordination Nationale Climat 
[National Climate Coordination Office], the GCF National Designated Authority of the Central 
African Republic. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the renewable energy project as included in the funding 
proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of the Central African Republic has no-objection to the renewable energy 
project as included in the funding proposal; 
(b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the Central African 
Republic’s national priorities, strategies and plans; 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the renewable energy 
project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and 
regulations. 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the renewable energy 
project as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within 
the scope of the renewable energy project. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
 
Kind regards, 
 
/s/ 
________________ 
Name: Denis Beina 
Title: GCF Focal Point

=== PAGE 86 ===
o,zBEKlsToN REýPUBtlKAsl
lNVEST|TS|YALAR vA TASHQl
SAvDo vAzlRtlcl
M|N|STRY оF lNvEýTMENTs AND
tоRЕlGN TRADE оF тнЕ
RЕрчвuс оt UZBEKlsTAN
Tashkent, 25/04|2020.
Re: Funding proposal for the GСF Ьу The World Bank regarding the Sustainable Risk Miti8ation lnitiative
(SRMl) Facility
Dear Madam, 5ir,
We refer lo the Electricity Тrапsmissiоп Modernizotion опd Morket Dеvеlорmепt Project (ETMMD) iп
Uzbekistan as included in the funding proposal submitted Ьу the World Вапk for the SRM| Facility which
aims at unlocking RE deployment Ьу mobilizing sustainable private investments Ьу addressing key risks
including inte8ration risks. The ETMMD project supports di8italization of the electricity transmission
sector and strengthenin8 and modernization of the Uzbek power grid essential to епаЬlе efficient
integration and Ьаlапсiпg of higher tarвets of renewable energy resources aimed for development in
Uzbekistan and included in the Government's electricity sector development program.
Pursuant to GcF decision В.08/10, the content of which we acknowled8e to have reviewed, we hereby
communicate our no-objection to the E/ectricity Tronsmission Modernization опd Morket Dечеlорmепt
Project as included iп the funding рrороsаl. We also confirm that the proiect is раrt of the electricity
sесtоr development priorities апd will Ье implemented iп conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations and environmental and social safeguards policies includin8 those applicable to the proiect Ьу
the world Ва nk.
Kind re8ards,
]0Фэ, To*ent sfEtri. l.Kgiтov ko'chei, ]W Tel,: }яа7] 2з5l9о +яУ 12за5эз,, +яв7lВ5i9' +яа7lzýýо. Ело]: jЕццшМ ео1|IlilrфдgМ www.mifl.(д
N9о7_17-0(З5s
То: The Grееп climate Fuпd ("GСF")
We acknowledge that this letter Will Ье made publicly available оп the GСF website.
Name: Abidov Badriddin
Title: Deputy Minister, Ministry of lnvestment апd Foreign Trade,
Republic of Uzbekistan, GСF focal point for Uzbekistan

=== PAGE 87 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Sustainable Renewables Risk Mitigation Initiative (SRMI) 
Facility 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
World Bank 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category A 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
The target countries under the SRMI Facility are Botswana, 
Central African Republic (CAR), Democratic Republic of 
Congo (DRC), Kenya, Namibia, Mali, Pakistan, Uzbekistan 
and Vietnam. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
 Sunday, June 21, 2020 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, French, Uzbek, and Vietnamese 
Explanation on language 
English is one of the official languages of Botswana, Kenya, 
Namibia and Pakistan. 
French is one of the official languages of CAR, DRC, Mali. 
Uzbek is the official language of Uzbekistan. 
Vietnamese is the official language of Vietnam. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/esmap-
files/A6_SRMI_ESSF_English_vF.pdf 
French:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/esmap-
files/A6_SRMI_ESSF_French_vF.pdf 
Uzbek:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/esmap-
files/A6_SRMI_ESSF_Uzbek_vF.pdf 
Vietnamese:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/esmap-
files/A6_SRMI_ESSF_Vietnamese_vF.pdf 
Other link(s) 
https://esmap.org/reportsrmi-
facilityenvironmentalsocialsustainabilityframewo 
Remarks 
An ESIA template consistent with the requirements for a 
Category A project is contained in the “Environmental and 
Social Sustainability Framework”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
 Sunday, June 21, 2020

=== PAGE 88 ===
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, French, Uzbek, and Vietnamese 
Explanation on language 
English is one of the official languages of Botswana, Kenya, 
Namibia and Pakistan. 
French is one of the official languages of CAR, DRC, Mali. 
Uzbek is the official language of Uzbekistan. 
Vietnamese is the official language of Vietnam. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/esmap-
files/A6_SRMI_ESSF_English_vF.pdf 
French:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/esmap-
files/A6_SRMI_ESSF_French_vF.pdf 
Uzbek:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/esmap-
files/A6_SRMI_ESSF_Uzbek_vF.pdf 
Vietnamese:  
https://esmap.org/sites/default/files/esmap-
files/A6_SRMI_ESSF_Vietnamese_vF.pdf 
Other link(s) 
https://esmap.org/reportsrmi-
facilityenvironmentalsocialsustainabilityframewo 
Remarks 
An ESMP template consistent with the requirements for a 
Category A project is contained in the “Environmental and 
Social Sustainability Framework”. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
N/A 
Place 
N/A

=== PAGE 89 ===
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
 TBC 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Thursday, 22 October 2020 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 90 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP163 
Proposal name: 
Sustainable Renewables Risk Mitigation Initiative (SRMI) Facility 
Accredited entity: 
World Bank 
Country/(ies): 
Botswana, Central African Republic (CAR), Democratic Republic 
of the Congo (DRC), Kenya, Mali, Namibia, and Uzbekistan  
Project/programme size:  
Large  
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
SRMI proposes a streamlined process with a 
one-stop shop approach from technical 
assistance to financing the critical public 
investments and the risk mitigation coverage 
needed to enable private investments at 
scale. This integrated approach can make a 
difference, particularly when countries are 
prioritizing the scarce resources available for 
an emergency response to COVID-19, 
focusing on healthcare. 
The SRMI Facility and the projects for 
investment are at pre-concept stage; proper 
assurances, including implementation 
arrangements need to be in place to ensure 
the Facility will deliver the impact as 
indicated in the proposal. It would be 
important that the accredited entity strictly 
comply with the agreed set of parameters in 
the term sheet throughout the process.  
GCF funding is critical to address the current 
renewable energy market failures identified 
and to ensure that countries continue their 
low carbon development pathway.  
 
The seven countries are representative of 
different types of markets/energy sectors, 
with various levels of electrification rates, 
low to high cost of generation, small to large 
grids and so on. The success and lessons 
learned from these seven countries will 
enable replication of the SRMI approach 
across countries and facilitate unlocking 
sustainable renewable energy markets for 
private investments. 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XVII, titled “List of proposed conditions and 
recommendations”, respectively.  
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 91 
 
 
2.1 
Project background  
3. 
Achieving global goals of climate change mitigation and universal access to electricity 
will require rapid growth in the share of variable renewable energy (VRE) used in global energy 
generation. According to the Sustainable Development Scenario of the International Energy 
Agency (World Energy Outlook, 2018), capacity to generate 950 gigawatts (GW) using solar 
photovoltaics (PV) and 580 GW from wind power need to be installed by 2025 in developing 
countries. This represents an investment of USD 150 billion capital expenditure needed 
annually for wind and solar deployment. To reach this objective, large amounts of private 
finance will have to be unlocked to complement the limited public funding available. 
4. 
The falling technology costs make investment in renewable energy (RE) commercially 
viable in more and more countries. Nevertheless, global investment remains below the targets 
needed to meet the Paris Agreement objectives and its potential. A range of constraints can 
obstruct private sector financing into RE projects, many of which are closely related to the 
national environment, including (i) the limited generation and transmission planning capacity 
of utilities to organize and contract future generation, which has resulted in additions to power 
generation capacity on an ad hoc and rarely optimum basis from a systems perspective; (ii) lack 
of adequate public–private partnership or independent power producer (IPP) regulatory 
framework that can ensure the development of IPP-owned generation; (iii) weak competitive 
procurement capacity to select the independent power producers that has often led to power 
purchase agreements (PPAs) with more expensive tariffs than if reached under structured 
competitive bidding; (iv) limited financial viability of off-takers, which resulted in poor 
creditworthiness to leverage private sector investments; and (v) grid integration challenges to 
support uptake of more VRE because of grid technical limitations and lack of flexibility in the 
grids.  
5. 
The proposed SRMI aims to address these challenges by creating an enabling 
environment that is more conductive to private investment while maximizing socioeconomic 
benefits for the countries in the context of COVID-19, which has increased challenges and 
fragility. The programme proposes various de-risking instruments for each of the identified 
constraints with a one-stop shop approach from technical assistance to financing the critical 
public investments and the coverage needed for risk mitigation to enable private investment at 
scale. SRMI offers climate financing for three core aspects: 
(a) 
Technical assistance to help countries develop evidence-based VRE targets, implement a 
sustainable RE programme, and maintain robust procurement processes with 
transaction advisors;  
(b) 
Critical public investments to enable integration of VRE, finance solar/wind park 
infrastructure, and increase access to electricity; and  
(c) 
Risk mitigation instruments to cover residual risks perceived by private investors.  
6. 
The SRMI Facility will start with seven countries, namely Botswana, CAR, DRC, Kenya, 
Mali, Namibia, and , Uzbekistan  The seven countries were selected based on the willingness and 
interest of their respective governments to deploy RE and combat the challenges they face in the 
implementation of their nationally determined contribution (NDC) and low-emissions 
development pathways. They are representative of different types of markets/energy sectors, 
with various levels of electrification rates, low to high cost of generation, small to large grids 
and so on. The success and lessons learned from these seven countries will enable the SRMI 
approach to be replicated across countries and facilitate unlocking sustainable RE markets for 
private investments.  
7. 
Table 1 provides details of the proposed financing plan for the SRMI Facility. The plan is 
financed through GCF financing with co-financing from the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development/International Development Association (IBRD/IDA) in the

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 92 
form of loan, and IDA and the Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme (ESMAP) in 
the form of grants.  
Table 1: Estimated financing plan of Sustainable Renewables Risk Mitigation Initiative 
Sources (USD million) 
Uses of GCF proceeds 
GCF grant  
24 
Technical assistance and project management cost in seven 
countries  
GCF grant 
GCF concessional loan  
30 (to CAR) 
176 
Finance to public infrastructure 
(i)
Common infrastructure for solar/wind parks: 48 
(ii)
Grid upgrade/resilience: 138 
(iii)
Mini grids: 20 
GCF reimbursable grant 
30 
Providing risk mitigation instrument (reimbursable grant) for 
CAR 
GCF guarantee 
20 
Providing guarantee for renewable energy-connected private 
projects as necessary in Botswana and Namibia 
World Bank ESMAP grant 
18 
IDA grant 
65 
IBRD concessional loans 
450 
IDA concessional loans 
750 
Total 
1,563.5 
Total (GCF) 
280 
Abbreviations: CAR = Central African Republic, ESMAP = Energy Sector Management Assistance 
Programme, IBRD = International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, IDA = International 
Development Association. 
8.
The total GCF funding contribution of USD 280 million is co-financed with USD 1.28
billion concessional finance from the accredited entity (AE). On top of AE co-financing, the AE
further projects that SRMI would mobilize an estimated USD 3.3 billion of private capital to
implement the RE projects downstream.
9.
The majority of GCF concessional financing (USD 128 million out of 206 million) will be
devoted to the grid upgrades because these upfront investments are preconditions for VRE
integration and unlocking private sector finance for the RE plants that could be made
commercially viable. Such upfront investments are usually borne by public parties and this
constitutes an incremental cost at system level when investing in renewable energy, leading to a
tough political and economic decision when a government has to prioritise. The concessional
finance provided by GCF is key and catalytic particularly under the current COVID-19 crisis
when countries are challenged and fragile and would prioritize public expenditure on the health
and welfare of their population.
10.
In addition to the concessional financing, the AE proposes to put in place a technical
assistance grant of USD 22.5 million, out of which GCF has been requested to provide USD 20
million, the balance being co-financed by the AE. The grant component will be used to build
institutional capacity of countries for energy planning, put in place the legal framework for IPP
procurement, and preparation of preparatory and feasibility studies and environmental and
social risk mitigation instruments, for the development of solar PV, solar PV with battery
storage, CSP, and onshore wind parks in support of investment de-risking and investor selection
process.

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 93 
 
 
11. 
The programme is expected to contribute to the shift to low-emission sustainable 
development pathways as summarized by the AE in the funding proposal and as follows: 
(a) 
Directly support the development of an estimated 2.4 GW of RE, (i) 1.7 GW of solar PV; 
(ii)0.4 GW of concentrated solar plants (CSP); and (iii) 0.3 GW of onshore wind;  Of this, 
2 GW are expected to be built during the lifetime of the projects and 0.4 GW are 
expected to be built after the end of the projects. It will also enable the integration of 
another 1.9 GW of RE. The integration of other projects is enabled due to the VRE 
integration analysis and grid investments; 
(b) 
Directly reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by an estimated 97.82 million tonnes 
of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2eq), made up of a reduction of 88.8 MtCO2eq for the 
2 GW RE built under the projects over the 25 years of their operation, and 9 MtCO2eq for 
0.4 GW of RE power plants over the 25 years of their operation that are expected to be 
prepared under the SRMI Facility projects but not built during their lifetime; 
(c) 
Unlock an estimated USD 3.3 billion of private investment, including USD 3 billion for 
the 2 GW built during the lifetime of the projects and USD 0.3 billion for the 0.4 GW built 
after the end of the projects;  
(d) 
Provide access to clean low-emission electricity to an estimated 4.2 million people 
through the electrification investments;  
(e) 
Strengthen institutional and regulatory systems for planning and development; and 
(f) 
Reduce locking-in long-lived climate-vulnerable infrastructure by increasing resilience 
of grid infrastructure. 
2.1.1. 
Implementation arrangements 
12. 
The Facility will be managed by the World Bank. In respect of each project in the seven 
countries, the World Bank will carry out due diligence to ensure that the individual projects 
meet the agreed eligibility criteria (section B.3 of the funding proposal), which are fully 
compliant with GCF investment criteria. The World Bank will provide implementation support 
to the projects, including necessary governance, oversight and quality assurance in accordance 
with its policies.  
13. 
The Facility will be category A/I-1 following the GCF classification, and the relevant 
environmental and social safeguards (ESS) disclosure at the facility level has been completed in 
accordance with the GCF Information Disclosure Policy. There is also an agreed approach 
between GCF and the World Bank on the disclosure and communication process for approval of 
each individual project.  
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis. 
Component 1: Technical assistance (total cost: USD 22.5 million; GCF cost: USD 21.5 million) 
14. 
Component 1 (technical assistance) focuses on the country/macro-level risks and aims 
at supporting countries to transform their strategy to low-emission development, allowing them 
to harness RE resources at scale.  
15. 
The first step to a sound deployment is to set a sustainable long-term target for 
renewables based on concrete analysis for demand, available resources and grid flexibility and 
stability. These targets will be the basis for a realistic but also ambitious plan to deploy RE 
capacity in the respective countries. Subcomponent 1.1 is therefore designed to support the 
seven countries to revise their generation plans and to identify the critical investment needs for

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 94 
 
 
large-scale VRE integration while maintaining grid reliability and resilience. The targets will 
then be integrated into revisions of the NDC to ensure that they are implementable. 
16. 
As an important aspect of the technical assistance, the SRMI will also identify all the 
legal changes that need to be implemented to attract private investments, and how the domestic 
lending sector can be leveraged to finance the debt part of privately owned power plants to 
reduce the risk of foreign exchange to the utility. Subcomponent 1.2, therefore, will focus on the 
legal, financial and procurement aspects, capacity-building and transaction advisory support to 
implement competitive and transparent tendering of privately financed RE projects. 
17. 
Complementary to setting out the legal framework for IPPs and the competitive bidding 
scheme that is conductive to private sector investment, subcomponent 1.3 will cover the cost of 
preparing feasibility studies and environmental and social risk mitigation instruments in 
support of investment de-risking and the investor selection process. Preparatory and feasibility 
studies may include geospatial analyses of the land around the substation, topography and 
geotechnical analyses, site-specific interconnection studies, solar radiation/wind measurement 
analyses, all of which will be made available for bidders.  
Component 2: Public investments (total cost: USD 1,466 million; GCF cost: USD 206 million) 
18. 
This public investment component focuses on the grid- and infrastructure-level risk.  
19. 
It will concentrate on public investments for: 
(a) 
Solar and/or wind park common/shared infrastructure, ranging from the evacuation 
line to basic elements such as fence, roads and street lighting. The Facility will use the 
solar/wind park competitive bidding concept to address the grid curtailment risks for 
deployment of renewables. The government will identify project sites, conducts land 
clearance, and construct sharing infrastructure for the solar/wind park. The 
government will also conduct the environmental and social assessments as well as the 
geotechnical studies. Once the solar/wind parks are ready for auction, the bidding 
procedure begins and competitively selected IPPs are responsible for financing, 
construction, and operation of the RE projects. This approach can contribute to reaching 
a fully cost-effective electricity tariff and can effectively mitigate the risk of curtailment 
and land ownership issues; 
(b) 
VRE integration grid upgrades (including publicly owned battery storage) and 
enhancing grid resilience. Deploying renewables requires significant expansion and 
modernization of electricity grids. The programme will support grid reinforcements 
through (i) addition or replacement of lines and transformers for grid extension and 
capacity enhancements; (ii) provision of equipment for smoothing the voltage plan, such 
as capacitor banks, and other reactive power compensators together with flexible 
alternating current transmission systems; and (iii) equipment for faster and more 
efficient grid operation, such as monitoring systems, demand and production forecasting 
systems, and automatic generation control systems for generation units and grid 
operations. Much attention will also be paid to increasing the grid’s resilience to the 
impacts of climate change, which is expected to increase the incidence and severity of 
extreme weather conditions, putting the structural integrity of ageing electric 
infrastructure under greater strain. The majority of GCF finance will be devoted to this 
activity because upfront investments are usually borne by public parties and constitute 
an incremental system level requirement that is not covered by IPPs and thus becomes 
challenges for countries. 
(c) 
Electrification to increase resilience of populations. This subcomponent aims to invest in 
solar home systems, mini grids and grid connection, providing access to 840,000 
households across different countries. This subcomponent is critical to enable public

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 95 
 
 
investments in clean energy mini grids and connection to the grid, which will be 
enhanced by the other interventions under the programme. 
Component 3: Risk mitigation (total cost: USD 50 million; GCF cost: USD 50 million) 
20. 
This component focuses on the residual risks for the private sector (i.e. excluding risk 
related to grid integration). It is intended to provide support to mobilize the private and 
commercial capital for investment in renewables (i) through reimbursable grants in DRC; and 
(ii) through guarantees in Namibia and Botswana.  
2.2.1. 
Reimbursable grant (Democratic Republic of Congo) 
21. 
The RE sector in the DRC is characterized by its weak governance and regulatory 
framework associated with a restrictive licensing/permissions process, which affects its ability 
to crowd in private sector finance. The lack of a proven track record with a successful revenue 
model is a structural challenge with mini grids project in a nascent market. Although the 
existence of latent demand for electricity in underserved communities is well known, the 
expected level of demand and associated ability to pay in the early years will likely have a 
significant level of uncertainty. Market analysis shows that the first years of activity are critical 
because the behaviour of productive users is still difficult to anticipate, despite a good 
preparation underpinned by a sound business plan and deployment of demand simulation 
measures. Therefore, large mini grids are commonly perceived as an investment risk, given the 
slow uptake in the early stages.  
22. 
The USD 30 million of GCF reimbursable grant aims to mitigate this demand risk during 
the initial years of operation. It is expected that this risk mitigation instrument will be made 
available as part of the tender for competitive bidding to select large-scale mini grid developers. 
Bidders will be requested to submit a business plan covering estimated demand as well as 
ability to pay and financial flows, to demonstrate how the expected payments from targeted 
clients will allow the special purpose vehicle to reimburse the lenders and equity providers. The 
business plans of the pre-selected bidders will be audited and agreed in advance with the AE to 
ensure it is robust. If the verified level of revenue from customers is below the pre-agreed 
minimum revenue level, the reimbursable grant (from the special purpose vehicle) will be 
triggered. The use of a reimbursable grant will not only crowd in the private sector, but it will 
also reduce the risk premium, ultimately ensuring a more affordable tariff in DRC.  
2.2.2. 
Guarantee instrument (Namibia and Botswana) 
23. 
In the context of Botswana and Namibia, limited financial viability of the utilities 
(payment and termination risk) may limit private sector interest in RE and therefore result in 
higher PPA prices. GCF guarantees will be used to strengthen the PPAs for project developers to 
improve private sector participation through mitigating two types of risks: the first relating to 
regular payments under the RE PPA contract, and the second relating to long-term recovery of 
capital investment. The guarantee merits for the former will ensure that the RE private investor 
receives the regular payments owed by the public entity or government under the RE PPA 
contract on a timely basis, whereas the latter will cover a one-off payment by the government 
following an early termination of the RE PPA. Further design of this activity will be finalized at 
the time of approval of subprojects and will be based on the AE’s due diligence and further 
market sounding.  
24. 
This component provides fit-for-purpose risk mitigation instruments based on needs in 
the individual countries and is expected to unlock the huge potential of the private sector in the 
targeted countries.  
Project management (total cost: USD 25 million; GCF cost: USD 2.5 million)

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 96 
 
 
25. 
This component will concentrate on the management of the projects and coordination 
and implementation of their activities, in compliance with the contractual obligations of the 
executing entities (EEs) and programme implementing entities, ’ as included or referred to in 
the legal agreements with the AE. The requested GCF finance responds to the needs of the 
programme and is in compliance with GCF policy on fees for accredited entities.   
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential    
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
26. 
As a mitigation project, the proposal reports reduction of GHG emissions in the seven 
countries by 88.9 MtCO2eq as a result of the 2 GW of RE built during the project implementation 
and an additional 9.0 MtCO2eq resulting from the 0.4 GW RE investment that will be prepared 
but not built during the project implementation. These impact figures exclude the indirect GHG 
emission reduction resulting from another 1.9 GW of RE enabled by integration into core grid 
infrastructure and the VRE integration analysis funded by the GCF investment. The AE will use 
the International Financial Institutions dataset of grid factors for GHG accounting for emissions 
from grid-connected RE projects. The AE agreed to provide the methodology for off-grid sub-
projects prior to them being financed by the programme. 
27. 
Adaptation co-benefits resulting from the Facility include access to clean electricity 
provided to an additional 4.2 million people, including in areas where the population is under 
severe threat from climate change.  
28. 
The programme’s impact potential in the long term is notable. Impacts resulting from 
direct and indirect investments under the Facility are further broken down in the proposal, 
therefore there is minimal concern about potential double counting. However, it is uncertain at 
this moment if any of the GHG emission reductions achieved by the programme will be 
converted into offset credits causing concerns over double dipping of climate finance. In the 
absence of universally acceptable methodology on attribution, it was agreed with the AE that in 
case that any executing entity seeks to convert any GHG emission reductions achieved by the 
Facility it has to seek consent of GCF, whilst the secretariat will continue to explore plausible 
ways to deal with this matter for future transactions. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
29. 
The key pillar of the programme’s paradigm shift potential lies in the comprehensive 
approach taken to mitigate the risks identified in the renewables development sector 
encountered in developing countries. It is intended to utilize the limited public resources to 
unlock the maximum private financing for a capital expenditure-intensive sector. 
30. 
At the strategic level, the SRMI aims at supporting countries to transform their strategy 
to low-emission development allowing them to harness their domestic resources at scale. The 
SRMI will assist countries to set long-term RE targets, based on concrete analysis of demand, 
grid flexibility and resilience, and available domestic renewable resources. The targets are then 
incorporated into the NDC revisions to guide the countries’ priority in subsequent phases.  
31. 
In terms of the grid- and infrastructure-level risk, SRMI, through its public investment 
component, will put in place the necessary common infrastructure for solar/wind parks which 
contributes to achieving a fully cost-effective electricity tariff and can effectively mitigate the 
risk of curtailment and land ownership issues. The SRMI focuses strongly on the grid upgrade 
and modernization based on countries’ least-cost transmission plans to support the integration

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 97 
 
 
of VRE and ensure a better quality of electricity service. This is critical to allow a higher 
penetration of RE and to mitigate the grid curtailment risk. 
32. 
Residual risks are being addressed by the provision of GCF risk mitigation instruments 
under the Facility. Different instruments are carefully assessed and designed to fit the specific 
country contexts. In the case of DRC, where the RE development is nascent, the reimbursable 
grant is an attractive option for private mini grid developers to mitigate the risk of low demand 
and slow uptake in the initial years of operation. In Botswana and Namibia, the guarantee 
instrument is designed to assist in backing up the utilities’ ability to pay for PPAs.  
33. 
The Secretariat considers the risk mitigation model offered by SRMI to be 
comprehensive and innovative, and having potential for replication. The seven targeted 
countries represent a large sample of developing countries, covering around 500 million people, 
each having different constraints and contexts with regard to the development of RE. The 
results and lessons learned from this Facility will enable replication of the approach at scale and 
may easily be adapted to countries with similarities. Indeed, SRMI is currently being 
implemented/considered for another 30 countries in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia, which will 
benefit from the results and lessons learned from this first phase. The proposal has huge 
potential to transform the RE sector in the targeted countries; therefore, the programme 
paradigm shift potential is rated as “high”. 
34. 
The mitigation impact of the project has been reviewed as part of the interdivisional 
review. The project has used the IFI TWG grid emission factors per country for grid connected 
electricity generation sub-projects. It is also the understanding of the Secretariat that despite 
the fact that the methodology has not been clearly specified, the project is following the general 
framework of CDM methodology ACM 0002, which is acceptable. The project has not provided a 
methodology for estimation of GHG emission reductions from off-grid power generation. The AE 
has agreed to provide to the Secretariat that methodology prior to investing into any off-grid 
projects.   
35. 
The project has also provided the data sources and references used in the estimates of 
mitigation impact.  
36. 
However, it is important to note that there is uncertainty in relation to the generation of 
impact as it will depend significantly to the use of parallel financing for the construction of the 
generation facilities.   
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
        Scale: High 
37. 
At the country level, implementation of the SRMI will avoid countries becoming locked 
in to long-term high-emission development pathways. Deploying domestic renewables will 
reduce the need for fuel imports and the potential economic impact of fuel cost fluctuations. It 
will increase the energy security of the countries, diversifying their energy mix and improving 
their energy independence while reducing price volatility. Clean grid connected RE parks, RE 
mini-grids and household services it is expected to bring in considerable environmental and 
health benefits thanks to reduced air and water pollution. 
38. 
The Facility will also support the socioeconomic benefits of the RE projects from the 
perspectives of local communities and local industries. Sites with good solar/wind resources 
and large plots of land are usually located in areas where the standard of living is below the 
national average. The tailor-made development programmes offered by the Facility will ensure 
that local communities benefit positively from creation of jobs and development of skills, as well 
as increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods.  
39. 
Regarding gender benefits, the programme recognizes the current gap in the RE 
industry especially the significant employment gap in large-scale solar and wind infrastructure

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 98 
 
 
projects which generally benefit men more than women. A proactive policy will be put in place 
to promote female employment throughout the project implementation and beyond. 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient   
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
40. 
Although the seven countries have different economic development levels, they are 
commonly undergoing dramatic tensions on their budgets due to the COVID-19 crisis, so they 
are likely to opt for a fast recovery strategy that would promote fossil fuel generation unless 
there is strong parallel support for RE development. Therefore, this is a critical time to support 
harnessing renewables through the best use of limited public finance. Private investments are a 
means to deploy renewables, which are generally more capital intense. To ensure that the trade-
off between public financing (which is limited and could be used better) and private financing 
(which may be more expensive) is fair for the society, SRMI aims to bring down the cost of 
privately owned generation through a comprehensive and integrated risk mitigation framework 
that is able to leverage climate finance.  
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
41. 
The AE reports that the seven countries targeted under the Facility in the initial phase 
were based on the willingness and interest of their respective governments to embrace RE 
deployment and combat the challenges they face in the implementation of their NDCs and low-
emission development pathways. All seven countries have ambitious GHG emission reduction 
objectives as part of their NDCs and their current energy policy in place. The programme aims 
to help the countries achieve their NDCs. Moreover, the SRMI has the potential to shape the 
countries’ NDCs in the coming years through the technical assistance offered by the programme. 
The SRMI is supporting the seven countries to revise their generation plans and to identify the 
critical investment needed to integrate VRE into their grids while improving grid reliability and 
resilience. Such revisions will then be integrated into revisions of the NDC that will guide the 
countries’ action in mitigation and adaptation in the following phase. 
42. 
In each country, the World Bank has extensive engagement with relevant stakeholders, 
and the funding proposal package contains a solid stakeholder engagement plan to ensure it 
continues engaging stakeholders throughout the project cycle.  
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
43. 
The GCF proposed contribution of USD 280 million will be complemented by an 
expected USD 1.28 billion of public finance from the World Bank and its administered ESMAP, 
which in turn is expected to leverage USD 2.9 billion of private finance during the project 
implementation, and another USD 300 million beyond the project completion. The financial 
structure is a mix of grant for technical assistance, concessional loan for critical public 
infrastructure (except for CAR, where because of its financial and economic situation, grants are 
given for public investments), and risk mitigation instruments for residual risk for private RE 
developers (a reimbursable rant for DRC and guarantees for Botswana and Namibia). Each 
instrument is designed to address specific types of risks in order to achieve the programme’s 
objective to support countries in their sustainable low-emission pathways. The expected GHG 
emission reductions to be achieved during the project implementation are 88.8 MtCO2eq, with 
an extra 9.0 MtCO2eq expected beyond project completion. This represents the cost of 
abatement to be USD 3/tCO2eq for GCF, which is a low abatement cost. 
44. 
The AE also presented country-specific economic and financial analysis. The economic 
and financial viability vary from country to country the financial analysis conducted for

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 99 
 
 
activities under Components 2.1 and 2.2 resulted in financial internal rates of return (IRR) of 13 
per cent (Botswana),18 per cent (Kenya), 27 per cent (Mali), 12 per cent (Namibia) and 14 per 
cent (Uzbekistan). However, it is worth pointing out that the financial analysis shows that the 
GCF concessional financing increases the financial IRR on average by around 2 per cent and, 
more importantly, makes possible projects that these countries could not otherwise implement.  
45. 
The Secretariat considers the programme’s efficiency and effectiveness to be “high”.  
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
46. 
The SRMI Facility aims to support countries in developing sustainable solar and wind 
programmes that will attract private investments and reduce reliance on public finances, while 
maximizing the socio-economic benefits triggered by the projects deployed.  It will finance 
seven projects in seven countries, and each project will have three components: (i) technical 
assistance grants to provide comprehensive and planning and advisory support; (ii) public 
investments in VRE infrastructure, in the form of solar and wind parks, wind and solar power 
plants, and grid integration upgrades, including storage infrastructure, and electrification 
projects; and (iii) risk mitigation instruments, which would provide risk mitigation instruments 
to private investors for RE/storage solutions. The Facility will be hosted at the World Bank, as 
the AE. Each project will individually go through the World Bank project cycle process, including 
safeguards review/appraisal and approval process. A project management unit will be 
established in each country. 
47. 
Environmental and social (E&S) risk category. The Facility is proposed as category A. 
The Secretariat confirms this categorization, and it is within the AE’s accreditation level. The 
investment projects expected to be funded under the programme include large solar PV and CSP 
parks/plants, as well as large offshore and inshore wind power plants/parks. The Facility is also 
expected to support solar home systems, mini-grids and grid connection. The larger solar and 
wind projects would most likely involve the acquisition of several hectares of land and would 
have involuntary resettlement issues involving formal and informal land occupants/settlers. 
Wind turbines may also: create visual and noise nuisance to the community residents in their 
vicinity; negatively impact birds; and, if built near the shore/offshore, negatively affect the 
marine ecosystem, economic activities and livelihoods, as well as cause coastal erosion due to 
alteration of bathymetry and wave patterns. Solar PV farms and solar PV with battery storage 
may also involve the handling of hazardous waste materials. Associated facilities and auxiliary 
infrastructure, such as transmission lines, substations and access roads, will have 
corresponding environmental and social impacts. 
48. 
Safeguards instrument and disclosure. The Facility will cover seven countries, which 
would have their own safeguards systems. An indicative scope of the country projects has been 
provided in the funding proposal, but the specific projects to be funded would have to be 
identified and developed only during the programme’s implementation. The AE has prepared a 
document titled Environmental and Social Sustainability Framework (ESSF). This document 
describes how the AE would conduct environmental and social (E&S) due diligence of each 
country project under its Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). It includes indicative 
outlines and frameworks of the environmental and social impact assessment, Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework, Resettlement Policy Framework and various other instruments 
for individual projects.  
49. 
The World Bank’s ESF requires that projects comply with its Environmental and Social 
Standards (ESS) (ESS1–ESS8 and ESS10), which fully covers the GCF environmental and social 
safeguards standards as well as the stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanism

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 100 
 
 
requirements. The following describes how the programme would comply with these standards 
and requirements at the project level. 
50. 
ESS 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and 
impacts. The AE has highlighted that the projects under the programme are expected to bring 
substantial direct environmental and social benefits, such as with regard to GHG emissions, air 
and water pollution, and use of water resources, employment and economic development. 
However, if not properly managed, the development of the infrastructure for the solar/wind 
parks, as well as the construction and operation of the RE power plants, may result in adverse 
environmental and social impacts. Each project to be funded by the Facility will undergo risk 
categorization, E&S assessment and mitigation planning commensurate to its size and 
complexity, in accordance with ESS1. The E&S assessments and mitigation/management 
planning will cover risks and impacts relating to ESS2–ESS8 and ESS10. The assessments and 
management of E&S risks and impacts for each project will have to take into consideration the 
country-specific context in terms of legal and institutional frameworks, capacities, and the 
country and local environmental and social conditions. The exact roles and responsibilities will 
be defined on a per project basis after discussions with each EE and, in particular, as will be 
stated in the environmental and social commitment plan developed by the borrower/EE. This 
plan will specify which entity will be responsible for the various E&S commitments, as well as 
any necessary capacity-building activities on E&S aspects.  
51. 
ESS 2: Labour and working conditions. The projects to be funded by the Facility are 
expected to involve the hiring of workers during construction and during the operation of the 
infrastructure. Under ESS1 and ESS2, the E&S assessments for these projects will cover issues 
relating to labour and working conditions, including possible violations of workers’ rights, child 
labour exploitation, discrimination and other unfair labour practices, occupational health and 
safety, and workplace gender-based violence (GBV). Aside from the environmental and social 
management plan (ESMP), each project that would involve the hiring of workers will be 
required to prepare a separate occupational health and safety plan as per the World Bank 
Group’s environmental, health and safety guidelines and a labour management procedure, 
which will also provide for the establishment of a dedicated grievance redress mechanism for 
project workers. All relevant measures in the ESMP, occupational health and safety plan, and 
labour management procedure will be reflected in the bidding and contractual documents of 
project contractors. 
52. 
ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention and management. The 
proposed Facility will contribute positively to the objectives and requirements of ESS3 in terms 
of RE sources and GHG reduction benefits. Even so, energy efficiency technologies and 
processes, energy conservation investments, best practices of RE, and GHG reduction benefits 
will be further considered in the design of individual projects. Moreover, the E&S assessment 
and mitigation plans will cover the downstream risks and impacts related to resource use and 
pollution, such as: potential water scarcity (especially in arid regions, and also considering 
seasonal water availability and any cumulative effects of multiple demands); noise and air 
emissions; soil waste generation; management of disposal of waste materials and hazardous 
wastes; and their effects on the local communities during construction and during the 
operations of the infrastructure facility. However, most of these potential impacts are expected 
to be low to moderate in intensity or significance, and to be reversible and localized in nature.  
53. 
ESS 4: Community health, safety and security. ESS4 requirements will be taken into 
account in the design and implementation of individual projects. The E&S assessments and 
mitigation planning will cover the impacts of labour influx into the project sites communities, 
which may include: potential spread of infectious diseases; increase in criminality, alcoholism 
and GBV; traffic and construction site accidents; and conflict between community and migrant 
workers, and other security-related issues. Moreover, the E&S assessments and 
mitigation/management planning will also consider the effects of nuisance and pollution from

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 101 
 
 
construction activities on the residents’ health and welfare. All measures under the 
responsibility of the contractors, such as management of construction traffic, ensuring safety of 
residents at construction sites, control of noise and dust, generation of wastes, health screening 
of workers, and workers’ conduct and good relations with communities, will be reflected in the 
bidding and contract documents.  
54. 
ESS 5: Land acquisition, restrictions on land-use and involuntary resettlement. 
Land requirements for solar and wind parks are substantial. Any potential land acquisition or 
land-use restrictions will be assessed and managed in a manner consistent with ESS5 
requirements, in order to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate at replacement cost land 
acquisition based on due diligence and plans prepared in accordance with ESS5. An indicative 
outline of a resettlement policy framework has been included in the programme’s ESSF. The EEs 
in the borrower country will be responsible for preparing, in a manner and substance 
satisfactory to the World Bank, the project-specific resettlement policy frameworks and/or 
resettlement action plans in line with its ESS5 requirements. 
55. 
ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources. Solar and wind projects, if not properly designed and sited, may result in loss, 
degradation or fragmentation of natural habitats, and other adverse impacts on biodiversity and 
living natural resources. Care will be taken to ensure that the impacts of such projects on 
natural habitats, and on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and species are well assessed and 
managed. All projects will include measures to ensure full compliance with ESS6.  
56. 
GCF indigenous peoples policy and ESS 7: Indigenous peoples/sub-Saharan 
African historically underserved traditional local communities. The presence of indigenous 
peoples in the project areas or their collective attachment to such areas will be screened and 
confirmed by the World Bank in consultation with the national authorities. Once such presence 
is confirmed, consistency with ESS7 objectives and requirements will be integrated into the 
design of the project and E&S documents, including the development of an indigenous peoples’ 
plan or other types of plans depending on the country and project context, and free, prior and 
informed consent (FPIC) in the circumstances specified in ESS7. An Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework is provided as part of the ESSF. 
57. 
ESS 8: Cultural heritage. The EE of the borrower country will screen the project area 
and assess potential impacts on cultural heritage, both tangible and intangible. The site 
selection for each project will be mindful of cultural heritage, and the application of ESS8 will be 
further assessed under each project. Chance find procedures will be developed and adopted 
based on existing country laws and regulations, and on international good practice, and will be 
included as part of the ESMP.  
58. 
Stakeholder engagement and disclosure. The AE has provided a stakeholder 
engagement approach and preliminary stakeholder engagements in the targeted seven 
countries where the SRMI Facility will be implemented. The various tasks on detailed 
stakeholder identification, analysis, information dissemination, consultation and engagement 
will be carried out later during individual project design and implementation. Stakeholders will 
include project site communities or individuals affected by the project, and their formal and 
informal representatives, national or local government authorities, politicians, religious or 
community organizations and civil society groups with special interests, academic communities, 
and businesses. The identification of project-affected parties (individuals or groups) will also 
include those who, because of their circumstances, may be disadvantaged or vulnerable; that is, 
those who may be more likely to be adversely affected by the project impacts and/or more 
limited than others in their ability to take advantage of the project benefits. A stakeholder 
engagement plan will be developed for each project to ensure transparency and meaningful 
consultation with the project-affected and interested parties. Stakeholder engagement and 
consultations will be conducted throughout the project cycle. These will include discussions of 
project design and impacts as well as multi-stakeholder discussions on these issues during the

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 102 
 
 
preparation phase. The stakeholder engagement plan, along with other E&S instruments, will be 
subject to public consultation and disclosure as per the requirements of ESS10, and it will be 
treated as a living document to be regularly updated as needed during project implementation. 
59. 
Grievance redress mechanism. The ESSF describes the requirements for establishing 
project-specific grievance redress mechanisms under the responsibility of the EE of the 
borrower country. In addition, the World Bank Grievance Redress Service may also be available 
for use by any aggrieved party. Communities and individuals who believe that they are 
adversely affected by a World Bank-supported project may submit complaints by phone or 
online.1 Moreover, project-affected communities and individuals may also submit their 
complaints to the World Bank’s Inspection Panel.  
4.2 
Gender policy  
60. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan, and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.  
61. 
The AE has provided information on the levels of enabling environment that exist in all 
seven countries to promote women’s empowerment and gender equality. An initial review of 
each country’s economic and social development reveals the different stages each of the 
countries are at but also demonstrates, regardless of the differences, that all share and face gaps 
in addressing prevailing gender inequalities in general and in the energy sector in particular. 
Some countries are more unequal than others and provide limited socioeconomic opportunities 
for women and their empowerment.  
62. 
At the national level, most of the countries are signatories of, for example, the 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, and the Beijing 
Declaration and Platform for Action. In addition, most have also adopted national strategies and 
mechanisms to promote gender equality. While national-level commitments exist in many of the 
countries, customary law and discriminatory norms prevail, curtailing the advances that women 
and girls can make in the social, economic and political spheres.  
63. 
In the energy sector, the assessment indicates that women suffer most from insufficient 
access to electricity and clean-cooking facilities, as they are mostly responsible for household 
chores. Moreover, women are found to have limited employment opportunities in the formal 
sector, including in the energy industry, due to limited education, qualifications and skills.  
Women’s limited political participation and representation results in lower levels of female 
access and participation in energy-related decision-making. In sub-Saharan Africa, the 
electrification rate stands at less than 48 percent, leaving nearly 600 million people without 
access to electricity, and further negatively impacting female economic empowerment, decision-
making, education and health outcomes. The assessment indicates that, every year, 4.3 million 
people – mainly women and children – die as a result of indoor air pollution. Overall, the level of 
access to electricity is skewed against women. However, there are marked differences among 
the target countries in terms of overall access to electricity. For example, Kenya is the only 
country in East Africa on track to meet the Sustainable Development Goal of universal electricity 
access by 2030, while Uzbekistan is the second-most energy-intensive country worldwide and 
has achieved near universal electricity access, as has Viet Nam (to be covered in the next phase). 
On the other hand, access to electricity stands at around 8 percent in the Central African 
Republic, and 15 percent in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with many of the population 
and especially women relying on fuelwood and charcoal for energy. Worldwide, only about 32 
percent of people employed in the RE industry are women, with possible increases in the 
number of available jobs in the sector from 10.3 million in 2017 to 29 million in 2050. However, 
 
1 World Bank. 2021. Grievance Redress Service. Available at <http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-
operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service>.

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 103 
 
 
the increased employment opportunities in RE might be constrained by existing cultural norms 
that limit women’s choice and access to non-traditional fields. Even when employment 
opportunities are created, the assessment indicates that these jobs are created in traditionally 
feminine sectors such as hospitality or administrative support.  
64. 
Furthermore, the assessment identifies female-headed households (FHHs) as being 
significantly more likely to be economically poorer than male-headed households. FHHs are 
characterized by lower levels of education, lower salaries and lower levels of access or control 
of resources. They are more dependent on unreliable sources of income for subsistence, such as 
remittances, maintenance, and destitute allowances. Because poverty levels are highest among 
FHHs, especially in rural areas, these households also have lower access to energy services, 
resulting in low electricity connection rates. Gender gaps in access to assets and financial 
literacy make it more difficult for women to access credit. For example, in Kenya, FHHs also 
have lower access to electricity, often because of high connection/subscription fees to the grid. 
65. 
Although more data are needed in order to assess the prevalence of GBV, studies 
indicate that women and girls often experience high levels of sexual harassment and intimate 
partner violence in target countries. Legal loopholes persist, especially with regard to GBV, and 
some legal provisions are directly discriminatory against women. The main drivers of GBV 
include social tolerance to violence against women, poverty, and the lack of a protective legal 
framework. 
66. 
The gender action plan provided complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender 
Policy, and includes activities, indicators, targets, timeline, human resources, and budget. As 
indicated in the assessment, further and country-specific analysis will be required at the project 
level, as will collection of sex disaggregated data including those on GBV. The gender analysis 
will be conducted for the required countries at the initial stages, ensuring the participation of 
communities, civil society organizations and women’s organizations. While the assessment will 
assist in reaffirming activities to be undertaken, with targets to be set per activity, it will also 
conduct country-level policy dialogue at the Facility level to close policy gaps as these relate to 
the sector and as will be identified through the assessments. The activities included will 
contribute in the 7 countries in the areas of increased employment in the energy sector by: 
breaking down the barriers to sex-based segregation of occupations; training programmes to 
build women’s skills; and creating income-generating opportunities for women. Thereby, the 
activities will help to improve women’s access to electricity and combat GBV, while at the same 
time making investments in providing evidence and best practices for improved gender equality 
and women’s empowerment in the countries and in the energy sector. The AE will provide 
technical and financial support to the EE to design and implement the required gender-related 
activities, while the recruitment of social and gender specialists in each of the seven countries 
will be the responsibility of the project management unit. 
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium-high risk)  
67. 
The project aims at tackling the lack of sustainable and bankable pipeline for RE projects 
in developing countries to achieve low-emission development pathways. The project consists of 
three main components: (i) grants for capacity-building, generation plans, transaction advisory, 
and solar and wind park preparatory studies; (ii) loans and grants for public investments in 
solar and wind park infrastructure, grid resilience, grid VRE integration and electrification; and 
(iii) reimbursable grants and guarantees for risk mitigation instruments for mini grids and grid-
connected RE projects. 
68. 
The total project cost is USD 1.56 billion, of which USD 280 million is GCF finance. GCF 
financing consists of USD 84 million in grants (of which USD 30 million is reimbursable), USD

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 104 
 
 
176 million in loans and USD 20 million in guarantees. Co-financing is provided by several 
World Bank entities.  IBRD will provide USD 460 million in senior loans, IDA will provide USD 
750 million loan and USD 60 million grant. To achieve the impact as presented in the funding 
proposal under A.5. an additional USD 3 billion in parallel financing is needed. However, this 
additional financing is beyond the scope of the project and not arranged by the AE. This leads to 
increased uncertainty about the impact materializing as envisaged.  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk) 
69. 
The World Bank is the AE for the proposed programme. Given the structure of the 
programme, the broad eligibility criteria, and limited visibility at this stage regarding the end 
projects, the success of the programme depends to a great extent on the capability of the AE. 
The AE has a strong institutional capacity and experience in executing similar programmes.  
70. 
For the purposes of the loans and grants, the respective countries represented though 
Ministries or a project implementing entity (PIE) will act as the Executing Entities (EEs). For the 
purposes of the guarantees, the private sector RE project companies will be the EEs. Thus, some 
of the potential EEs under the program are not yet identified and their capacity will be assessed 
by the AE during the appraisal stage of each project. In assessing the capacities of the EE the AE 
will apply its internal policies to ensure that the EE has the technical, financial management, 
procurement and ESS capacities for implementation.  
71. 
In addition to the EEs, the project is dependent on private sector entities for developing 
the estimated 2 GW RE projects in the solar parks and supporting the project’s grid-
strengthening activities. The project’s impact is contingent on the execution and operational 
capacities of the private sector entities. 
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (high risk) 
72. 
Impact risk: direct impact as presented in the funding proposal (A.5. Expected 
mitigation impact) is estimated based on new RE capacity of 2 GW operating over 25 years. 
These RE power plants will be located in the RE parks and will benefit from the grid-
strengthening activities under the project, but the financing and construction of RE projects is 
beyond the scope of this funding proposal. A total of USD 3 billion in parallel financing is needed 
to achieve the intended direct impact. Lack of appetite for financing for the RE power plants 
may reduce the impact. Comfort can be derived from the AE’s experience in working with the 
countries covered under the project.  
73. 
The construction of the 2 GW RE capacity will be contingent on the success of the 
activities undertaken under Components 1 and 2 to generate and implement necessary plans 
and reforms followed by construction activities. Lack of institutional capacity at the country 
level, as well as political and security risks, could impact the ability to complete this work, thus 
impeding the ability of the programme to generate viable RE plants.  
74. 
The AE will monitor the project impact for 12 years of the implementation period. 
Accordingly, the final target for emission reductions is stated in the log frame as 28 MtCO2eq as 
against the impact potential of 89 MtCO2eq as stated in A5. This 28 MtCO2eq is in turn based on 
the 2 GW capacity operating for 7 years during the 12-year implementation period. The impact 
quantum will be reduced if the financing and development of the RE projects is delayed.  
75. 
Sovereign credit risk: GCF will provide up to USD 176 million in sovereign loans under 
the programme, in addition via the risk mitigation mechanism will have indirect exposure to 
sovereign credit risk. The project countries have different levels of credit ratings ranging from 
investment grade to substantial risk. GCF loan tenor may exceed tenor of the senior loans 
provided by the AE. While it will be the lender of record for GCF loans, the AE has stated that

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 105 
 
 
GCF loans will not enjoy the AE’s preferred credit status in those countries, thus exposing GCF to 
higher risk.  
76. 
Carbon credits: while the FP estimates an impact of 89 million tCO2eqT, the impact is 
exposed to high risk of dilution. The term sheet proposed by AE provides that if the EEs seek to 
convert GHG emission reductions into offset credits, they are required to negotiate and agree 
with GCF on volume of impact directly attributable to GCF which may not be converted into 
offset credit. The attribution methodology is not defined. Further, the term sheet does not put 
any restriction on off-setting impact not attributable to GCF, but which would be included in the 
89 million tCO2eq of estimated emission reduction. In addition, it is also possible that the impact 
will be generated at the private sector RE generating projects level and not at EE level; the term 
sheet doesn’t put any restriction on the private sector RE generators to off-set the climate 
impact. Also, the GHG emissions converted into offset credits will be deducted from the impact 
reported to the Fund.It is advised that the AE clearly provides in the funding proposal the 
impact that will be attributable to GCF and requires the EE as well as the private sector RE 
generating projects to retire the carbon credits generated under the program. 
4.3.4. 
Project viability and concessionality 
77. 
The AE proposes providing a high concessional loan with equal terms for all seven 
countries in the programme. The recipient countries are at different levels of RE development. 
There are also meaningful differences in terms of credit ratings between the countries, for 
example Mali has Caa1 rating (Moody’s) while Botswana has an investment grade rating A2 by 
Moody’s. Given the current limited visibility of the financed activity and the structural 
differences between the seven countries, it is advised that the AE considers differentiation in 
financing terms among the countries and apply these terms in line with the minimum 
concessionality principle.   
4.3.5. 
Compliance risk (high risk)   
78. 
When asked whether it had conducted any assessment of risks to the project, the AE 
(World Bank) referred to its AMA requirements and said that it would apply those against the 
project.  Accordingly, the AE has acknowledged that it has not conducted any risk assessment 
specific to this project and its activities.  Without such project-specific assessment, GCF is unable 
to evaluate and provide an accurate and informed Compliance Risk rating for this project.  In 
light of specific information directed toward this project, the Compliance risk rating is rated as 
“HIGH”. 
4.3.6. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)   
79. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.7. 
Recommendation 
80. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment 
Rationale 
Overall programme 
Medium-high 
The project has benefit of an experienced AE – the 
World bank who is also co-financing along with 
GCF under the program.  
Accredited entity/executing 
entity capability 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
High

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 106 
 
 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low  
However, the climate impact estimated under the 
program is exposed to high risk because of  
i. need of additional funding of USD 3 bn for the 
RE generating projects to cause the impact but 
the funding is beyond the scope of the project 
and  
ii. term sheet not restricting the private sector RE 
generators from off-setting the GHG emission 
and introducing an attribution approach (not 
defined) for EEs to attribute some of the 
emission reductions to GCF while permitting 
the EEs to off-set the balance emission 
reductions. 
Compliance 
High 
4.4 
Fiduciary  
81. 
As the AE, the World Bank will be responsible for the management and administration 
of GCF resources and will carry out such in accordance with its policies, procedures and 
practices, and the relevant provisions of the funded activity agreement (FAA) and accreditation 
master agreement (AMA). The World Bank will apply its own fiduciary principles and standards 
relating to any integrity checks, anti-corruption, countering the financing of terrorism, fraud, 
financial sanctions, embargoes and anti-money laundering.  
82. 
During implementation of the Facility, the World Bank will be responsible for providing 
the necessary governance, oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies, 
procedures and any specific requirements in the AMA and FAA. 
83. 
The World Bank team will manage and be responsible for the Facility’s overall 
objectives and ensure that the projects selected meet all the set eligibility criteria. The World 
Bank will inform the GCF Secretariat about projects selected in accordance with the eligibility 
criteria as part of the periodic reporting.  
84. 
Implementation of the Facility-supported projects (project implementation through 
completion and evaluation) follows the World Bank’s applicable policies and procedures. For 
each project, a project management unit will be established with a team expected to include at 
least a team lead, technical expert, procurement specialist, financial management specialist, 
environmental specialist and social/gender specialist, and a lawyer. Each project will have its 
own monitoring and evaluation and reporting process, and the EE will be accountable for its 
implementation.  
85. 
Each EE of loan/grant financing under the SRMI Facility will be required to conduct 
financial management and procurement according to the World Bank policies and procedures. 
Financial reporting will also be required for each project and (with the exception of the 
guarantees) is specified in each project’s Disbursement and Financial Information Letter. Unless 
otherwise agreed by the Bank, the EE must submit annual audited project financial statements 
six months after the close of the financial year and unaudited interim financial reports 
periodically. Audits are carried out by auditors with independence and capacity acceptable to 
the Bank, under terms of reference acceptable to the World Bank. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting  
4.5.1. 
Results monitoring and reporting  
86. 
The project is a mitigation project focusing on the development of the infrastructure and 
support of investments in RE from public and private sources in seven countries in Africa and

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 107 
 
 
Asia. The project provides a set of de-risking instruments including development of wind and 
solar parks, upgrading grid infrastructure and financial guarantee instruments that are 
expected to attract more investments in the sector. Project interventions are expected to reduce 
GHG emissions by 88.9 MtCO2eq over 25 years as a result of the supply of carbon-free electricity 
to national grids.  
87. 
The AE has developed a detailed GHG emission estimation methodology, which is 
attached in Annexes 22 of the project proposal. However, the actual emission reduction 
calculations are provided not in Annex 22(b) as required in the programming manual, but as 
Annex 3. The assumptions in the methodological approach is generally transparent, 
conservative and aligned with the grid emission factors and methodologies recommended by 
the International Financial Institutions Technical Working Group on harmonization of GHG 
accounting. As the impact of the project will continue to be generated beyond the end of the 12-
year implementation period, the AE will arrange for impact reporting beyond that through 
performance reports. However, it is important that the AE specify which is the exact 
methodology that they are using, e.g. CDM ACM002, and how the additionality is established.  
88. 
As mentioned in earlier sections of this assessment, it is uncertain at the moment 
whether executing entities will seek to convert part of the GHG emission reduction achieved by 
the SRMI facility into carbon credits to be sold at international market. In the absence of an 
agreed attribution methodology and GCF policy, it was agreed that in the event that an 
executing entity seeks to convert, prior consent by GCF is needed.  
89. 
The logical framework is aligned with the GCF results management framework (RMF) 
and performance measurement frameworks (PMF). The appropriate indicators have been 
selected and targets have been set up accordingly.  
90. 
Project performance indicators have been designed to clearly capture the results of the 
project and tests the linkages in the Theory of Change, as well as allow to measure whether the 
project is on track to deliver results.  
91. 
As this is a multi-country project covering seven countries, Annex 17 has been 
developed and the breakdown of impact per country has been provided. However, the lifetime 
emission estimates are different from those in the logframe.  
92. 
The project activities and sub-activities have also been clearly articulated. It is 
noteworthy, however, that a large share of the impact will be generated by activities that are 
enabled by the project, but not directly financed by it. Measures and additional conditions to 
guarantee the realization of impact are currently being discussed with the AE. 
93. 
Annex 11, M&E plan has also been completed but monitoring activities that are linked to 
project indicators are not clearly budgeted for.  
4.5.2. 
Theory of change 
94. 
The theory of change has been provided and there are clear linkages between the 
various elements of the theory of change and the recognition of certain assumptions with 
respect to the project. The barriers and how the project helps overcome those barriers are 
clearly articulated. 
4.5.3. 
Logical framework 
95. 
The Fund-level impacts and outcomes sections (section E.3 and E.4, respectively) 
include baselines, mid-term and final targets and are compliant with the GCF results 
management framework/performance measurement framework. Additionally, the assumptions 
on the different indicators are clearly provided.

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 108 
 
 
96. 
Section E.5 has also been completed and contains relevant indicators to monitor project 
performance and results.  
97. 
Section E.6 may benefit from further elaboration of some of the activities.  
98. 
Section E.7 is clearly elaborated and describes the monitoring and evaluation activities 
to be undertaken by the funded activity.  
4.5.4. 
Implementation timetable  
99. 
The current version of Annex 5 – implementation timetable, is not fully compliant with 
GCF requirements due to the lack of sufficient data prior to FP approval. However, the AE has 
agreed to elaborate on the deliverables and key milestones for each activity at the stage when 
these are available and provide them as part of the APR.  
4.6 
Legal assessment 
100. 
The accreditation master agreement was signed with the AE on 13 November 2017 (the 
“AMA”), and it became effective on 1 February 2019.  
101. 
The AE has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and that it has the capacity and authority to implement the programme.  
102. 
The proposed programme will be implemented in seven countries: Botswana, 
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Mali, Namibia and 
Uzbekistan.   
103. 
GCF has signed a bilateral agreement on privileges and immunities with Namibia.   
104. 
GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities in the six other countries. This 
means that, among other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in such 
countries, the risks of which need to be further assessed.  
(a) 
With respect to Botswana, the discussion on the privileges and immunities agreement 
with the Government of Botswana has not yet started.  
(b) 
With respect to the Central African Republic, the discussion on the privileges and 
immunities agreement with the Government of the Central African Republic has not yet 
started.   
(c) 
With respect to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Secretariat submitted a draft 
privileges and immunities agreement to the Government of the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo on 9 October 2018 and a bilingual version on 1 March 2019. The agreement is 
currently under review by the Government.   
(d) 
With respect to Kenya, the Secretariat submitted a first draft privileges and immunities 
agreement to the Government of Kenya on 30 September 2015. Following several 
rounds of negotiations, the Government responded that the revised draft privileges and 
immunities agreement required further review. The agreement is currently under 
review by the Government.  
(e) 
With respect to Mali, the Secretariat submitted a first draft privileges and immunities 
agreement to the Government of Mali on 7 December 2015 and a bilingual revised 
version on 21 December 2017. A meeting was held at the GCF Global NDA Conference on 
9 October 2018. The agreement is currently under review by the Government.  
(f) 
With respect to Uzbekistan, the Secretariat submitted a draft privileges and immunities 
agreement to the Government of Uzbekistan on 10 December 2018. The agreement is 
currently under review by the Government.

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 109 
 
 
105. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and the Independent Integrity Unit 
have both expressed the view that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF be 
made only after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in 
the countries, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
106. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board be 
made subject to the following conditions:   
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the  
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date on which the 
AE has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all final 
internal approvals, whichever is later; and  
(b) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 110 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP163 
Proposal name: 
Sustainable Renewables Risk Mitigation Initiative (SRMI) 
Facility 
Accredited entity: 
World Bank 
Country/(ies): 
Botswana, Central African Republic (CAR), Democratic Republic 
of the Congo (DRC), Kenya, Mali, Namibia, and Uzbekistan  
Project/programme size:  
Large  
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
                                           Scale: High 
1. 
In 2015, 196 Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention for Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) came together under the Paris Agreement to transform their development 
trajectories so that the world can proceed on a path to sustainable development, which aims 
at limiting warming to between 1.5°C to 2°C above pre-industrial levels. One of the components 
of the strategies to achieve this goal is to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The 
Agreement also included establishing clear pathways for financial flows to facilitate low GHG 
emissions, and climate-resilient development. Nationally determined contributions (NDCs) are 
prepared and submitted to the UNFCCC by all the signatory countries. The strategies that each 
country will utilize to reduce national emissions and adapt to the impacts of climate change are 
stipulated in their NDC. The developing countries included in this proposed World Bank (WB) 
intervention have submitted their NDCs to the UNFCCC.  
2. 
The NDC of each country is expected to clearly spell out domestic measures that 
countries will take to achieve the objective of the proposed contributions. The contributions of 
the 196 Parties are expected to provide metrics that can be progressively checked to determine 
whether the long-term goals of the Paris Agreement are achieved and greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions are limited. This is expected to be followed by rapid reductions thereafter, to achieve 
a balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of GHGs in the 
second half of this century. The Paris Agreement also recognize that financial barriers can limit 
developing and least developing countries (DCs and LDCs) from achieving these targets. These 
countries were therefore expected to present their contribution in two forms: those that are 
conditional to having international financial support; and those that they can implement 
themselves (not conditional to having international funding). All seven countries that are 
covered by the proposed interventions of the sustainable renewables risk mitigation initiative 
(SRMI) have submitted their NDC to the UNFCCC. The proposed countries include: Botswana, 
Central African Republic (CAR), Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Kenya, Mali, Namibia and 
Uzbekistan. The SRMI Facility aims to be scaled up by adding countries, namely Indonesia and 
Vietnam (Phase 2), that would have projects following the agreed upon eligibility criteria, as per 
the term sheet and the present funding proposal.  
3. 
The seven countries submitted an NDC to the UNFCCC that covered conditional and 
unconditional measures, while Botswana’s NDC states that only unconditional measures will be 
implemented to meet its stated mitigation objective. While unconditional interventions 
contained in a country’s NDC will be affected by the availability of public and private

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 111 
 
 
investment, it can also be argued that conditional measures, which will heavily depend on the 
availability of international financial support, may also require some level of public funding that 
will be needed as counterpart funding. According to implicit information derived from the 
funding proposal, most of the nations that will be covered by SRMI were already gearing up for 
the NDC projects through allocation of public funding prior to the shutdown of economies 
caused by COVID-19. The losses suffered by these nations as a result of the pandemic are likely 
to have limited the availability of funds for NDC intervention thus making it almost impossible 
to maintain the low carbon pathway that would have resulted from implementation of NDCs. 
Renewable energy systems (RES) include: solar and wind – together referred to as variable 
renewable energy (VRE); biomass and waste-to-energy; geothermal; marine; and small hydro, 
many of which are zero carbon or low carbon energy generation facilities. These RES facilities 
are suitable to deliver a low carbon future and can enable the project countries to contribute 
their quota for global GHG mitigation plans to achieve the long-term goals of the Paris 
Agreement. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, many countries, including the developing 
countries, submitted NDCs which described their actions to contribute to global GHG mitigation. 
These NDC documents clearly stipulated actions that will be implemented by the countries with 
funding from national public and private sources, and actions that will be implemented within 
the country but will be conditional on having, international support in place to fund low carbon 
projects.    
4. 
Another pertinent observation made in the funding proposal is the fact that a significant 
proportion of the energy sectors of these seven countries is currently supplied by coal, with 
plans for capacity expansion in the future. According to information presented in the funding 
proposal, total installed coal capacity in the seven countries, is expected to increase from 0.5 
GW to 7 GW between now and 2030. As per their current plans, by 2030, 8.5 GW of solar and 
wind generation will be built out of a total of 60 GW installed capacity – representing 14 per 
cent of total mix. When this share is estimated using GWh energy production, the solar and wind 
share would drop to between 5–6 per cent. The funding proposal also states that according to 
the International Energy Agency and estimations by the World Bank, around 20 GW and 45 GW 
of renewable energy (RE) (including large hydropower), will need to be deployed in the seven 
countries by 2025 and 2030 respectively, as part of their electricity mix according to their NDCs 
and to achieve universal access. This will call for an investment of around USD 15 billion for new 
solar and wind generation alone by 2025.  
5. 
While the implementation of RES has been recognized as an important strategy for 
achieving the targets set in each of the seven country’s NDCs, real barriers exist, impeding 
implementation of low carbon systems. The limited installed capacity of cost-competitive solar 
and wind powered energy in many developing countries, including the project countries, is the 
result of financial, regulatory, structural and technical constraints. The financial constraints 
include the scarcity of public funds to finance continuous debottlenecking of power 
transmission and distribution infrastructure, which are usually nationally owned. For example, 
the existing infrastructure usually requires continuous maintenance and technical 
strengthening to enable the integration of variable renewable energy (VRE) into power grids. 
Without such interventions it is difficult to develop grid connected VRE systems. The above 
constraints together represent serious obstacles to the flow of private sector investors to the 
development of large RES systems in the project countries and may be compounded by the 
COVID-19 crisis.  
6. 
Currently these countries are prioritizing the immediate emergency response to manage 
the current COVID-19 crisis and public investments are being channelled to address the impacts 
of the crisis. The funding proposal concludes that the need for economic recovery post COVID-
19 will become crucial in shaping the long-term pathways for emissions and determining 
whether the NDC targets can be achieved. If governments do not roll out low carbon 
development strategies and policies in response to the coming economic crisis, emissions could 
rebound and even overshoot the previously projected levels by 2030, despite lower economic

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 112 
 
 
growth in the same period. Stated in another way, although the seven countries have ambitious 
GHG emissions reduction objectives as part of their NDCs, their current energy policies, the 
planned deployment of coal and the COVID-19 crisis may inhibit these NDC achievements.  
7. 
To tackle exacerbation by the pandemic of existing risks, the World Bank (the accredited 
entity/AE for this submission) developed the SRMI facility and has applied for GCF funding to 
support the initiative in Botswana, Central African Republic (CAR), Democratic Republic of 
Congo (DRC), Kenya, Mali, Namibia, and Uzbekistan. The underlying concept of the proposed 
programme is described above and the proposal was reviewed by the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel. According to the information provided in the funding proposal and related 
annexes, the project has been developed around four major components, summarized as 
follows: 
Component 1: Technical assistance 
8. 
The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) review of the funding proposal and its 
annexes indicated that this component will focus on the following: 
(a) 
Comprehensive and integrated planning support to develop least-cost generation plans 
combined with VRE integration analysis and dispatch and capacity-building for 
planning; 
(b) 
Capacity-building for the legal, financial and procurement aspects and transaction 
advisory support to implement competitive and transparent tendering of privately-
financed RE projects; and  
(c) 
Technical and environmental and social studies to prepare solar and wind parks for 
future tenders.  
Component 2: Public investments 
9. 
This component will concentrate on public investment for: 
(a) 
Solar and/or wind park common/shared infrastructure;  
(b) 
VRE integration grid upgrades (including publicly owned battery storage) and 
enhancing grid resilience to climate change; and  
(c) 
Electrification to increase the resilience of populations.  
Component 3: Risk mitigation instruments 
10. 
Activities at this component level will concentrate on providing risk mitigation 
instruments to private investors for grid-connected and off-grid renewable energy/storage 
projects. The risk mitigation instruments that will be employed under this component will focus 
on the residual risks for private investors aiming to ensure sustainable leveraging of private 
investments in grid-connected and off-grid RE projects in the seven countries. 
Component 4: Project Management  
11. 
 This component will concentrate on the management of the projects and coordination 
and implementation of their activities, in compliance with the executing entities’ (EEs) and 
programme implementing entities’ (PIEs) contractual obligations included or referred to in the 
legal agreements entered into with the accredited entities (AEs). 
12. 
The subcomponent activities to be carried out within the four components described 
above, and the funds earmarked for them, in each of the seven countries, are summarized in 
Table 1.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 113 
 
 
Table 1:  Project components and activities (indicative financing in million USD)1 
 
Abbreviations: CAR = Central African Republic, DRC = Democratic Republic of Congo, PPP = public-
private partnership, RE = renewable energy, VRE = variable renewable energy 
13. 
The total financing requested (GCF financing plus co-financing) for this project is USD 
1,563 million. This is expected to be contributed as follows: 
(a) 
GCF: USD 280 million made up of: 
(i) 
Senior Loan: USD 176 million with 40 years tenor, 10 years grace period, and 
0.25 per cent annual interest rate; 
(ii) 
Guarantee: USD 20 million with a tenor of 25 years; 
(iii) 
Reimbursable grants:2 USD 30 million with a tenor of 15 years; and 
(iv) 
Grant: USD 54 million. 
(b) 
Co-financing: USD 1,283 million sourced as follows: 
(i) 
The World Bank – Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme (ESMAP) 
Grant: USD 18 million; 
(ii) 
The World Bank – International Development Association (IDA) Grant: USD 65 
million; 
 
1 All the financing amounts presented in Table 1 are estimates based on the current scope of the projects. These are 
indicative and subject to approval by the World Bank Board and agreements with the EEs. 
2 The reimbursable grant will be used as a risk mitigation instrument.  
Sub-Component 1.1 Generation plans with VRE 
integration and Capacity Building (technical)
0.5
1
1
1
1
0.5
Sub-Component 1.2 Transaction Advisory and 
Capacity Building (procurement, legal)
1.5
1
1
1
1
1
1.5
Sub-Component 1.3 RE Park Infrastructure studies
1.5
0.5
1
1
2.5
1.5
1.5
Component 1 indicative budget per country (all)
22.5
3.5
1.5
3
3
4.5
3.5
3.5
Component 1 indicative budget (GCF)
20
3.5
3
3
4
3
3.5
Sub-Component 2.1 Public investments in solar 
and wind park infrastructure 
30
20
25
21
50
Sub-Component 2.2 Public investments for VRE 
integration grid upgrades and grid resilience
68
10
75
46
40
250
Sub-Component 2.3 Public investments for 
electrification (PPP mini-grids, grid extension)
49
60
500
125
62
35
Component 2 indicative budget per country (all)
1466
147
90
500
200
133
96
300
Component 2 indicative budget (GCF)
206
30
30
45
38
20
43
Sub-Component 3.1 Risk mitigation instrument for 
grid-connected RE
Reimbursable 
Grants 
30
Sub-Component  3.2 Risk mitigation instrument 
for mini-grids
Guarantees
10
10
Component 3 indicative budget per country (all)
50
10
30
10
Component 3 indicative budget (GCF)
50
10
30
10
Component 4 indicative budget per country (all)
24.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
3.5
Component 4 indicative budget (GCF)
4
0.5
0
1
0.5
1
0.5
0.5
Total indicative budget per country
1563
164
95
536.5
206.5
141
113
307
Component 3: Risk Mitigation Instruments
Component 4: Project Management (Grants)
Component 1: Technical Assistance
Grants
Component 2: Public Investments
Loans (with the 
exception of CAR 
which is grant)
Kenya 
Mali 
Namibia 
Uzbekistan
Botswana 
CAR
DRC
Components 
Total Financing 
Instrument

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 114 
 
 
(iii) 
The World Bank – International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(IBRD) Senior Loan: USD 450 million with a tenor of 20 years and an annual 
interest rate of 3.4 per cent; and  
(iv) 
The World Bank – International Development Association (IDA) Senior Loan: 
USD 750 million with a tenor of 30–40 years, a grace period of 5–10 years and an 
annual interest rate of 0.75 per cent. 
14. 
The expected potential outcomes that will be delivered by this project as estimated and 
presented in the funding proposal and the annexes submitted for this review have been 
evaluated by the independent TAP as conservative estimates. These are summarized below:3 
(a) 
It has been estimated that about 2.1 GW of VRE installed capacity will be delivered 
directly by the project in the seven countries that will be covered by the SRMI. These are 
expected to be built during the lifetime of the SRMI programme;  
(b) 
It has also been estimated and presented in the funding proposal that the SRMI will 
result in the preparation of an implementation plan for 400 MW of VRE, which are 
expected to be built after the end of the SRMI programme;  
(c) 
The SRMI Facility will also enable the integration of another 1.9 GW of RE. The 
integration of other projects will be enabled through the VRE integration analysis that 
will be conducted under subcomponent 1.1 and subcomponent 2.2 under which core 
grid infrastructure will be financed;  
(d) 
The SRMI Facility, through the projects described above, will unlock USD 3.3 billion of 
private investments, including USD 3 billion for the 2.1 GW that will be built during the 
lifetime of the projects and USD 300 million for the 0.4 GW that will be built after the 
end of the projects. These private investments are expected to be leveraged by the 
activities of subcomponent 1.2 that will deliver transaction advisory and bankable 
project support. It is expected that this will be provided through the general SRMI 
support of technical assistance to governments under Component 1. In addition to this, 
the critical infrastructure under Component 2 and guarantees and risk mitigation 
instruments under Component 3 are expected to leverage private sector investment in 
VRE in seven countries; and 
(e) 
The independent TAP reviewed the methodologies used in the calculation of GHG 
emission reductions expected to be delivered by these SRMI components. The 
methodological approach in all the calculations presented in the submission were 
judged to be sound and the tools used are expected to deliver reliable and conservative 
estimates of GHG emission reductions. The total mitigation potential of the SRMI 
measures when implemented has been reliably estimated to be about 97.93 million 
metric tCO2eq made up of: 
(i) 
88.98 million metric tCO2eq reduction for the 2.1 GW RE that will be built under 
the projects; and  
(ii) 
8.95 million metric tCO2eq for the 0.4 GW of RE projects that will be prepared 
under the projects but not built during their lifetime.4   
15. 
In addition to the project mitigation benefits reported above, the project will provide 
access to clean low-emission electricity to 4.2 million people through the electrification 
investments that will be engendered by the SRMI interventions.  
 
3 See details for each of the seven countries in Table 3 of the funding proposal. 
4 GHG emissions calculations were made following the World Bank standards: the official combined margin grid 
emission factor per country was used.

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 115 
 
 
16. 
Other benefits that are expected to be delivered by the SRMI in the target countries will 
include: 
(a) 
Strengthening institutional and regulatory systems for planning and development; and 
(b) 
Reduction of lock-in long-lived, climate-vulnerable infrastructure by increasing 
resilience of grid infrastructure. 
17. 
The independent TAP concludes that this project intervention will deliver a high climate 
impact potential. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High  
1.2.1. 
Comprehensiveness 
18. 
In the absence of this SRMI intervention, the following baseline conditions will continue 
to hold in all the countries covered:  
(a) 
The inability of the existing grid to take electricity from VRE will continue, thus the 
development of VRE systems will be very constrained. The implication of this is that 
most of the solar and wind power systems that many of the seven countries relied on in 
their NDCs to deliver deep GHG emissions reduction may not materialize; 
(b) 
A important outcome of the situation described in (a) above is that in many of the seven 
countries covered by the SRMI, especially those with baseline coal power plants and 
good access to coal, use of coal-based systems to deliver necessary power generation 
will be ramped up with strong negative consequences for the ability of countries to meet 
the target for low carbon emissions included in their NDCs. If they cannot meet these 
targets, the intended goal of these countries to contribute to limiting global warming to 
between 1.5°C and 2°C above pre-industrial levels will be thwarted; 
(c) 
In the absence of the SRMI investment, public funding will be scarce and consequently 
investments in power capacity additions and the preparation of national grids for VRE 
will not take place; and  
(d) 
The in-country capacity to carry out renewable power transactions, plan capacity 
expansion, regulate and create an enabling market environment for power systems’ 
capacity expansion will remain undeveloped, particularly as regards uptake of RE.   
19. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has severely affected the world economy and exacerbated the 
situations of the seven project countries. The availability of public funding has been further 
constrained, making the SRMI intervention even more necessary to support the countries in 
achieving their intended NDCs and making enhanced energy access a reality. 
20. 
During the assessment the independent TAP discussed project risks with the AE. The AE 
explained why these risks will not constrain the comprehensiveness of the SRMI interventions 
as summarized below: 
(a) 
The independent TAP noted that a number of international (bilateral and multilateral) 
agencies, including the World Bank, are already working in each of the seven nations on 
issues similar to the proposed SRMI interventions (strengthening of existing grid to take 
VRE capacities by supporting the public sector, identifying and implementing solar and 
wind projects, etc.). The AE pointed out that the risk of double counting will be 
eliminated through the establishment of a multi-stakeholder group – as an informal 
high-level platform – to discuss SRMI core principles and hence share each other’s vision 
and programme. This will ensure that overlaps in the programme are avoided but 
synergies are enhanced. The AE also pointed out that the individual projects to be

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 116 
 
 
funded under the SRMI programme will be selected according to GCF project metrics 
and criteria thereby ensuring that there is no duplication; 
(b) 
A second type of risk raised during the independent TAP discussions with the AE is lack 
of the necessary public and private investment for VRE in each of these countries as a 
result of the impact of COVID-19. The pandemic will limit public investments for grid 
infrastructure as public financing is being diverted to meet the needs of critical health 
and jobs investment during this crisis. In addition, utilities are facing challenges with 
payment issues from consumers, for example, reduced demand, leading to an increased 
risk perception on the part of private sector investors. In turn this will increase the 
premium on the cost of capital and increase the power purchase agreement (PPA) price. 
The World Bank maintains this risk will be mitigated as summarized in (c) below;   
(c) 
The SRMI has been designed to support first the governments of the seven countries to 
leverage private investments in optimized conditions, while maximizing socioeconomic 
benefits. Private investments are a means to deploy VRE – that are capital expenditure 
intensive – without impacting public finances. The main constraint with having private 
investments is that in general, the cost of capital is higher than if it were fully publicly 
financed. However, to ensure that the trade-off between public financing (that is limited 
and could be used better) and private financing (that may be more expensive) is fair for 
the society. SRMI aims to do everything possible to reduce the cost of privately owned 
generation through an integrated risk mitigation framework leveraging climate finance 
by reducing the risk premium embedded in the tariff and the cost of financing. The 
World Bank proposed to minimize public investment to those critical assets that will be 
publicly owned, such as the grid, while ensuring that any new project is inscribed in a 
medium-term evidence-based plan and independent power producers (IPPs) are 
selected in a competitive and robust, as well as transparent, manner with risk mitigation 
instruments available to reduce further the residual risks (political, utility payments, 
etc.); and  
(d) 
The independent TAP identified a further residual risk in the possibility of not having an 
adequate number of IPPs to bring in private investment for VRE in some of the 
countries. The success of the SRMI will hinge on: effective public investment that will be 
utilized to debottleneck existing power grids to facilitate the uptake of renewable power 
investment from private investors; availability of guarantees as tools for risk mitigation 
to the private investors who will fund VRE power plants; capacity-building and technical 
support for public sector stakeholders in the power sector of each of the nine countries 
for planning, regulation and sound policies that can drive activities of the sector. If the 
SRMI cannot attract good and financially capable IPPs in some of the seven countries, 
then the goals of the intervention, namely adding tangible VRE capacities to the national 
grids, will not be realized. In its response to the issue of IPP investments, the AE pointed 
out that the main goal of the SRMI is to unlock affordable power purchase agreements. 
In order to deliver comprehensive outcomes, competition among IPPs must be 
engendered. This will call for competitive bidding, open to all IPPs, that will attract low-
cost capital and reduced costs from equipment providers. This could only happen if the 
IPP engagement process is open and competitive. The World Bank expects an open and 
competitive bidding process, attracting IPPs from various locations, including those that 
are already on ground. To ensure that the IPP acquisition process is followed, the World 
Bank informed the independent TAP that it will refine the analysis presented in the 
Feasibility Study (annex A2), which presented the status in each of the seven countries 
regarding deployment of renewable energy projects by the private sector. In its reaction 
to the independent TAP on this residual risk, the AE promised to refine this analysis at 
the project stage to inform the planned activities.

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 117 
 
 
21. 
The independent TAP believes that the structure of the SRMI as described in the funding 
proposal and annexes, is sufficiently comprehensive to deliver significant solar and wind power 
capacity additions during and after the project period. This will be facilitated by the availability 
of concessional loans that will provide public investment to adapt the grids of these countries to 
solar and wind power at scale, compared to the status quo ante. This will also remove some of 
the existing barriers to private sector investment in renewable power development. The 
provision of guarantees for private sector investments in renewable power capacity will also 
mitigate barriers and facilitate the flow of funding to develop renewable power projects in these 
countries. The independent TAP also concurs with the AE that if the process of acquisition by 
IPPs in each country is open and competitive, then they will be able to participate in the SRMI 
without any hindrance. To ensure that this is achieved, the AE must refine the analysis 
regarding deployment of renewable power projects by the private sector in each of the seven 
countries.  
1.2.2. 
Innovation 
22. 
Innovation is partially delivered through changes to the status quo that result in value 
creation, reform and renovation of failing systems (inability to deliver sound VRE projects), and 
ensuring sustainability of the process. The SRMI programme can deliver such results. The 
development of renewable energy in general and VRE in particular is hampered by various 
barriers in the seven countries. The proposed SRMI intervention is expected to mitigate these 
barriers and deliver a low carbon power sector in the selected countries. The strategy to achieve 
this was presented convincingly in the funding proposal and annexes. Although the technologies 
(solar, wind, storage batteries, etc.) that are likely to be used by the SRMI in all the countries 
may not entirely reflect innovation, the SRMI process itself can be considered as innovative as 
its development will increase the penetration of renewable power systems in project countries.  
1.2.3. 
Creation of an enabling environment/sustainability of outcomes 
23. 
The SRMI process as described above is highly likely to deliver sound outcomes. 
Activities that will sustain and deliver sound outcomes can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
Technical assistance to the public sector of the seven countries to enable them to:  
(i) 
Support the public institutions in each country to carry out comprehensive and 
integrated planning to expand the capacity of the energy supply using least-cost 
generation tools, which will take into consideration, among other things, the 
integration of VRE into the grid and dispatch analysis. The technical assistance is 
also expected to build the capacity of key personnel of the relevant public 
institutions to carry out these planning exercises once the SRMI intervention 
ends; 
(ii) 
The technical assistance will also build the capacity of relevant professionals in 
public sector agencies in the legal, financial and procurement areas, by providing 
transaction advisory support to implement competitive and transparent 
tendering of privately-financed RE projects. Local personnel will therefore be 
capable of managing these activities once the SRMI expires; and 
(iii) 
The technical support will also deliver technical, environmental, and social 
studies for solar and wind parks for future tenders, with robust local capacity-
building; 
(b) 
Public Investments through very concessional loans from the SRMI process, which will 
deliver those facilities, which would have been met with public financing, if private 
investment in renewable power and especially VRE systems are to become a reality. Key 
activities that will be covered by this investment will include:

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 118 
 
 
(i) 
Solar and/or wind park common/shared infrastructure; 
(ii) 
VRE integration grid upgrades (including publicly-owned battery storage);  
(iii) 
Enhancing grid resilience to climate change;  
(iv) 
Electrification to increase population resilience; and 
(v) 
An enabling environment and sustainability of SRMI outcomes will be created by 
the above activities as follows: a common shared infrastructure will be built and 
will serve the solar and wind power plants delivered through the SRMI 
intervention; the RE capacity developed will continue beyond the programme 
lifetime; upgrading and adding battery storage capacities to the national grids 
will facilitate integration of variable solar and wind renewable power plants; 
resilience of grids to climate change will be enhanced beyond the SRMI time 
period; and ongoing plans to install coal power plants in some countries may be 
scaled down thereby delivering tangible and measurable GHG emission 
reductions; 
(c) 
The Project Management component of the SRMI is also expected to deliver an enabling 
environment as local personnel will benefit from the knowledge and skills of 
international experts. The Project Management component has been conceptualized to 
manage all programme interventions as well as the coordination and implementation of 
all activities; and   
(d) 
The SRMI also provides risk mitigation instruments to private investors for grid-
connected and off-grid renewable energy/storage projects. The risk mitigation 
instruments will be focused on reducing and, where possible, eliminating the residual 
risks for private investors inherent in the present power system. This will enable the 
SRMI process to crowd in private sector investment and establish a robust tradition of 
private sector investments in renewable power plant infrastructure in the electricity 
sector of each of the seven countries.      
24. 
The ability to sustain the sound outcomes of this SRMI programme will only be 
engendered if the project itself is designed to deliver an enabling environment to do so. In 
reviewing the funding proposal and related annexes, the independent TAP specifically studied 
the documentation to identify the enabling attributes of the project. The independent TAP is of 
the opinion that the activities of the SRMI as presented in this submission are capable of 
delivering an enabling environment and sustainability of the expected outcomes, even beyond 
the project lifetime. 
1.2.4. 
Potential for scaling up and replication 
25. 
A key objective of the SRMI is to scale up the global performance of renewable energy 
power projects in developing countries. According to information available in annex A2 of the 
submissions reviewed by the independent TAP in 2018, renewable energy plants represented 
76 per cent of the net power capacity additions globally, while the share of new fossil fuel power 
plants was 24 per cent.5 While countries like Denmark and Iceland achieved over 40 per cent of 
RE in their power generation mix by 2018, most countries in Africa and other developing 
countries were well below 5 per cent.6 Inadequate regulatory frameworks, limited planning, 
inadequate procurement planning and implementation capacity, limited financial viability of off-
takers and VRE grid integration challenges were among the key barriers that have been 
identified as limiting the deployment of RE power infrastructure in many developing countries. 
The need to mitigate these barriers prompted the World Bank, in partnership with the Agence 
 
5 UNEP, 2019, Global Trends in Renewable Energy Investment 2019.   
6 African Energy, 2018, African Energy Atlas.

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 119 
 
 
Française de Développement (AFD), the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and 
the International Solar Alliance (ISA), to develop a new risk mitigation concept that proposes a 
comprehensive and integrated approach to renewable energy deployment – the SRMI. The SRMI 
was launched at the Conference of the Parties (COP) 24 (December 2018) by the World Bank 
and its partners listed above as an integrated approach to RE deployment that will leverage 
private sector investments, bilateral and multilateral development finance, and concessional 
climate finance in developing countries.  
26. 
In terms of the potential for scaling up and replication, should the launch of this 
initiative be successful, the approach will prove to be convincing, thus encouraging scale-up and 
replication in other countries during and after the programme. There are still a few questions 
on this initiative but these can only be answered after the programme commences. The 
independent TAP is therefore of the opinion that implementation of the initiative will lead to 
scale-up of the deployment of REs and VREs. However, the extent cannot be clearly estimated 
until the performance of the SRMI demonstrates whether the level and extent of the guarantees 
included in the initiative will deliver the critical number of IPPs to each country. We believe the 
answer to this question will depend on the baseline power sector markets in each country. 
However, the countries where IPP presence has not been outstanding can be monitored as part 
of this current intervention, thus providing answers that will improve the replication and 
scalability of the SRMI programme in other countries and regions.   
1.2.5. 
Potential for knowledge-sharing and learning 
27. 
The design and implementation plan of the SRMI include various strategies for 
knowledge-sharing and learning. Some are described below to illustrate the potential for 
knowledge-sharing and learning built into the SRMI process: 
(a) 
The use of financing and transaction advisors for the first round of the RE programme is 
expected to build the skills needed by in-country personnel, who will work with 
advisors under a "learning by doing" process to gain much needed hands on experience. 
This is expected to create cadres of trained local experts within the relevant institutional 
and regulatory frameworks, who will have the skills to replicate the projects, and fully 
integrate the changes in their energy systems as SRMI is implemented into countries’ 
long-term strategies; 
(b) 
The funding proposal section on capacity-building and technology 
development/transfer states categorically that the strategic analysis included in a 
component of the SRMI was designed to identify the roles and responsibilities of key 
stakeholders and to assess the potential of local industries in relation to their position in 
the value chain. This analysis is expected to define a concrete action plan which will 
develop the skills of key stakeholders and improve their chances of benefitting from 
their own RE projects. Furthermore, the plan will benefit from the support of 
transaction advisors, financed under the SRMI, who will support countries through a 
"learning by doing" approach for pre-identified stakeholders; and 
(c) 
The funding proposal also states that capacity-building will be mainstreamed 
throughout the RE projects in order to strengthen the countries’ frameworks and 
develop the skills needed (including through "learning by doing" with the support of 
transaction advisors). This approach will enable the seven countries to replicate the 
projects efficiently.   
28. 
The proposed project will deliver comprehensive and innovative attributes that the 
independent TAP believes will contribute strongly to a high paradigm shift potential. It will also 
deliver an enabling environment that will make the tangible outcomes of the intervention 
sustainable, while also enhancing replicability of the proof of concept to relevant stakeholders. 
The development of the knowledge management and training platform under the "learning by

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 120 
 
 
doing" approach, will enhance delivery of robust knowledge-sharing and learning attributes 
that are essential for the scalability and replication of the project. In the light of these 
observations, the independent TAP concludes that the paradigm shift potential is high. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
                    Scale: High 
1.3.1. 
Alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals  
29. 
The independent TAP reviewed the funding proposal’s claims that successful delivery of 
the project would be aligned with specific Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The 
independent TAP agrees with the notion that if the project is successfully implemented, it will 
directly contribute to the achievement of the following SDGs: 
(a) 
SDG 7 (Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all): the 
sustainable development benefits that the project will deliver under SDG 7 include 
facilitating access to cleaner and lower-carbon electricity to grid connected and off-grid 
customers in the seven countries. It has been estimated that the SRMI programme will 
provide access to clean, low-emission electricity to 4.2 million people through the 
investments that will be engendered by the SRMI interventions; and 
(b) 
SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts): the sustainable 
development benefits that the project will deliver under SDG 13 include implementing 
NDC actions at scale and reducing GHG emissions owing to the increased ability of grids 
to integrate RE infrastructure provided by implementation of the SRMI programme. In 
addition, it is expected that coal power capacity additions to the grid will be displaced 
and electricity access to rural populations will be improved, reducing their dependence 
on higher carbon supply options.  
1.3.2. 
Economic co-benefits  
30. 
The systems planning aspects of SRMI will enhance the planning of RE infrastructure 
facilitating investment by private IPP investors and providing guarantees that mitigate their 
perceived risks. In the countries with substantial coal power generation and coal resources or 
traditional access to coal resources, SRMI will harness domestic solar and wind resources. This 
will reduce the need for fuel imports and the potential economic impact of fuel cost fluctuations 
thereby delivering economic co-benefits to the implementing country. Over time, as a result of 
the diversification of the energy mix, the country’s economy will be protected from the negative 
impacts of fossil fuel fluctuations. The funding proposal also states that the SRMI process will 
develop a tariff that is long-term (about 25 years), thus mitigating price volatility, which usually 
affects net fossil fuel imports and delivering further economic co-benefits. 
31. 
 COVID-19 has resulted in the diversion of a sizeable proportion of public funds available 
in most countries. With available public finance targeted at critical COVID-19 challenges in the 
project countries, the implementation of SRMI will reduce the economic losses that will arise 
due to non-implementation of the NDC targets.  
32. 
By leveraging private investments at scale, the SRMI will spare limited public sector 
finance for the countries, which could be directed to other sectors in need such as healthcare 
and post-COVID-19 strategies for other needy sectors such as education, infrastructure, welfare 
and so on. These are co-benefits that will be delivered by a successful implementation of the 
SRMI programme. 
1.3.3. 
Social and health co-benefits

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 121 
 
 
33. 
At national levels, the significant penetration of RE power infrastructures will deliver 
social and health co-benefits. By displacing fossil fuel power generation in almost all the 
countries, emissions of obnoxious gases and particulates will be reduced. This will deliver 
tangible health and social co-benefits for people living near the displaced fossil fuelled power 
plants. The independent TAP concluded that a successfully implemented SRMI programme will 
deliver tangible social and health co-benefits in each of the seven target countries.  
1.3.4. 
Environmental co-benefits  
34. 
The independent TAP agrees with the view presented in the funding proposal that the 
project is capable of delivering environmental co-benefits through the increased penetration of 
RE power infrastructures in the target countries. The RE systems will displace high carbon 
power generation systems that have potential for expansion, thus yielding the biggest 
environmental co-benefits. Key environmental co-benefits will include reduction in the release 
of obnoxious gases and particulates with significant GHG emissions. In the opinion of the 
independent TAP, the success of the SRMI will deliver tangible penetration of RE power 
infrastructure that will translate to the above environmental co-benefits.  
1.3.5. 
Gender-related co-benefits  
35. 
The gender co-benefits of the proposed SRMI were well articulated in the funding 
proposal and in annex A8 (Gender Assessment and Action Plan). It was stated that the SRMI 
intervention has been planned to enhance female economic participation in the energy sector 
and to create income-generating opportunities for women in the project countries, in line with 
the World Bank Group Gender Strategy (2016–2021). Annex A8 details the strategic approach 
that will be adopted by the SRMI Facility to effectively address identified gender challenges and 
ensure the investment projects contribute to promoting female development, for instance 
through employment in the energy sector, while enhancing the livelihoods of women and men 
in affected communities. The two key ways in which gender actions will be implemented were 
discussed in annex A8 as follows:  
(a) 
At the facility level – a systematic approach will be followed, which will include:    
(i) 
Support for the projects with a focus on data collection, generating knowledge 
and providing training and capacity-building activities; 
(ii) 
Utilization of the Gender and Energy Program of the World Bank Energy Sector 
Management Assistance Program (ESMAP), at every stage of the project cycle, to 
provide technical assistance to the project team and the client country, 
especially on gender mainstreaming; 
(iii) 
At the facility level, recruitment of a balanced female-to-male employment ratio 
will be encouraged within the Project Management Unit team to the extent 
possible; and 
(iv) 
Key stakeholders’ buy-in will be encouraged to ensure that the promotion of 
women’s employment and enhanced livelihoods are effectively provided with 
measurable outcomes; and 
(b) 
At the project-specific level – the following approach would be followed: 
(i) 
Data collection to document the baseline situation and identify gaps: this will be 
implemented through the collection of baseline data to set targets and measure 
progress during implementation, with a focus on countries where existing 
baseline sex-disaggregated data are weak;

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 122 
 
 
(ii) 
Identifying and implementing relevant actions: based on the initial diagnosis and 
inclusive stakeholder consultations, targeted activities will be identified to 
address key gender gaps; 
(iii) 
Monitoring gender issues: the World Bank Group strengthened monitoring 
system related to gender, which focuses on results and outcomes, will be 
implemented at the project level; and 
(iv) 
Strengthening female participation and voice during stakeholder consultations: 
consultations and public meetings with stakeholders will be conducted 
throughout the project cycle in a participatory manner and with a special focus 
on engaging women. 
36. 
In view of the above-mentioned contributions to various elements of sustainable 
development, the independent TAP concludes that the project will generate significant 
sustainable development potential and is capable of delivering all the benefits discussed in 
Section 1.3 above. Therefore, the independent TAP concludes that the sustainable development 
potential of this proposed project is high. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.4.1. 
Needs of the country 
37. 
Each of the seven countries is susceptible to climate change. As such, they have 
subscribed to taking actions in their countries to contribute to the central aim of the Paris 
Agreement limiting global temperature rise to below 2oC. A key sector where the greatest 
contribution can be made to this global goal in-country is the energy sector, which leads all 
other sectors in terms of GHG emissions. As stated in many of the important climate change and 
national planning documents (e,g. NDCs) of the project countries, implementation of renewable 
energy power generation will yield tangible results that will enhance their energy access and 
energy security and enable them to contribute to the global goal of limiting temperature 
increase.    
38. 
Even without the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy, in most 
developing countries (including the seven SRMI countries), barriers exist making the 
deployment of RE power infrastructure very difficult, despite the fact that the specific cost of 
generating power (USD/kWe) from these clean resources has become competitive with the 
costs of traditional fossil fuel alternatives. The emergence of COVID-19 has made it even more 
difficult to deploy RE systems in these countries as their governments are prioritizing the use of 
public financing to tackle critical health and employment challenges, The public funding needed 
to unlock private investments is therefore no longer available.  
39. 
Furthermore, utilities in these countries are facing tremendous challenges as a result of 
the ongoing pandemic. Missed payments and lower demand for power are both affecting their 
revenues and therefore their financial ratings. Private investors, who are expected to bring in 
funds for the deployment of RE, are discouraged by poor financial ratings of utilities, which are 
then perceived as riskier as the premium on the cost of capital may increase, leading to a rise in 
the price of electricity. Clearly, in the absence of the SRMI intervention, these barriers will 
become entrenched and RE systems will not be built at the level envisaged in the countries’ 
NDCs.  
40. 
The SRMI has been designed to address these barriers. It is expected to: provide funds to 
meet the funding responsibilities of the seven governments to provide public financing for 
strengthening common facilities in the electricity sector industry; provide funds for stakeholder 
engagement, which will develop their relevant skill sets for planning energy systems and 
preparing and implementing robust bid evaluations to select IPPs; strengthen existing

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 123 
 
 
institutional infrastructure in the electricity sector (e.g. regulatory and policy framework); 
provide guarantees to IPPs to reduce their perception of recidual risks, among others. These 
actions will assist SMRI participants to achieve their primary goals of reducing GHG emissions 
(particularly the power sector) and improving eletricity access and sector diversification.   
1.4.2. 
Economic and financial needs of the country  
41. 
The economic standing of the participating countries varies and the level to which they 
will fulfil economic and financial needs will depend on their baseline economic levels. According 
to the information contained in the funding proposal and some of the annexes, their economic 
standing can be summarized as follows:  
(a) 
GDP per capita below USD 1,000: CAR, DRC and Mali; 
(b) 
GDP per capita between USD 1,000 and 2,500: Kenya and Uzbekistan; and  
(c) 
GDP per capita > USD 5,000: Botswana and Namibia. 
GDP growth in each of the seven countries is on average quite strong with the exception of 
Namibia which was hit with droughts in recent years. 
42. 
The economic impact of COVID-19 on the economy of each of the seven nations can be 
described as significant, therefore the concessional debt that will flow into the countries 
through the SRMI process, is likely to have a positive impact on the performance of each 
economy especially in the area of funding RE needs of the countries, with some tangible 
multiplication effects. The kind of very concessional debt that will flow into the economy of 
these nations would not have happened in the absence of the SRMI process.  
43. 
The concessional loan from GCF is expected to crowd in financing from World Bank 
sources. In addition, grant funding from GCF and World Bank sources will fund various 
components of the SRMI. Strengthening of the financial market will be essential to change the 
baseline situation in which RE projects have not received funding. As stated in the funding 
proposal, government financing to strengthen power grids is constrained by the need to channel 
funds towards mitigating the health impacts of COVID-19. The continuing scarcity of public 
funding will also constrain post-COVID-19 recovery. Public funding needed to catalyse a low 
carbon future will therefore be unavailable in the absence of the SRMI.  
1.4.3. 
Institutional needs  
44. 
Institutional needs will be served in each country using grant funding to implement 
some of the SRMI activities. Specifically, the baseline of relevant public institutions in the power 
sector of these countries can be described as follows: very low capacity to carry out generation 
expansion capacity planning; very low capability to carry out technical analysis for determining 
how VRE can be integrated into the grids of their country; low capacity to organize competitive 
bidding for the selection of IPPs, which requires experience in transaction advisory experiences; 
and low capacity to plan the development of RE Park infrastructure. These weaknesses will be 
resolved in participating countries by the SRMI programme which will provide a transaction 
advisory team in each country to lead local national teams in carrying out these duties. As stated 
in the funding proposal and in many of the annexes reviewed by the independent TAP, the work 
of these transaction advisory teams will involve building the capacity of the local teams through 
a "learning by doing" approach. This will deliver some level of local capacity before the end of 
the SRMI programme, which may then redress the institutional weaknesses in the baseline.   
45. 
The various institutional needs, including those that will benefit the country as a whole 
and those that will benefit directly or indirectly key stakeholders of the project, will be 
positively affected by the success of the project, as discussed above. In addition, successful 
implementation and replication after the end of the intervention, will be enhanced as the

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 124 
 
 
enabling environment for planning, implementing and managing RE programmes will be built 
into the country systems. This indicates that the needs of the recipient country, its people and 
institutions, will be adequately met by the project. As a result, the independent TAP concludes 
that the proposed project has a high potential to meet the needs of the country and its people. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
1.5.1. 
Evidence of country ownership through participation of relevant stakeholders  
46. 
Country ownership is strongly related to national stakeholder engagement. Annex A7 of 
the funding proposal provides information on the approach to stakeholder engagement adopted 
by the AE in development of the SRMI concept. According to information available in annex A7,7 
the AE will use a two-tier approach to stakeholder engagement: at facility level and at the 
project level. The first (facility) tier is expected to engage key stakeholders in each of the seven 
countries in a comprehensive discussion of the objectives, the components and  the important 
elements of the SRMI programme.  
47. 
As stated in Annex A7, as part of the facility-level stakeholder engagement, preliminary 
stakeholder engagements were held in the seven countries with discussions during these 
engagements related to the deployment of renewables and in particular 
presentations/engagements on the core objectives and steps of SRMI, and details on the 
technical assistance that will be provided to countries that are now enabling the development of 
those new projects. This facility-level stakeholder engagement will be continued as soon as GCF 
funding is approved. The facility-level stakeholder engagement will be finalized after the 
funding proposal is approved, as part of each country’s project design and implementation as 
presented in each project SEP, and will cover tasks, including stakeholder identification, 
analysis, information dissemination, consultation and engagement. The independent TAP noted 
the strength of prior engagement of the World Bank in these seven nations, and considers that 
familiarity of the AE with the institutional structure in each of the seven country is adequate to 
enhance the participation of relevant stakeholders in the SRMI programme. 
48. 
The second (project) tier stakeholder interactions will be carried out after each project 
activity has commenced. A full stakeholder analysis and identification exercise will be 
conducted for each project. According to the SRMI Stakeholders’ Engagement Approach (SEA)  
(annex A7), the analysis for stakeholder identification will be informed by the level of potential 
risks and impacts affecting them and will be carried out for all project components. The findings 
of this exercise will be documented in the project Stakeholders’ Engagement Plan (SEP). The 
independent TAP is of the opinion that the outcomes of the second tier stakeholder engagement 
should be regularly monitored and reported throughout the SRMI programme duration. 
49. 
Evidence of country ownership is also represented by the availability of a no-objection 
letter (NOL) from each participating country. All seven countries, namely Botswana, CAR, DRC, 
Kenya, Mali, Namibia and Uzbekistan, submitted NOLs as part of the SRMI programme 
submission.  
1.5.2. 
Alignment of the project with relevant national strategies  
50. 
The SRMI programme aims to deliver a much higher level of RE capacity than that 
shown in the baseline. This plan aligns with each country’s NDC, relevant national plans, and/or 
enabling policies and institutional frameworks. To illustrate this alignment, we present a 
summary of key commitments in the national documents of each country: 
 
7 SRMI Stakeholders Engagement Approach, June 2020.

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 125 
 
 
(a) 
Botswana – The country intends to achieve an overall emissions reduction of 15 per cent 
by 2030, taking 2010 as the base year. The emission reduction target was estimated 
based on the baseline inventory for the three GHGs being CO2, methane (CH4) and 
nitrous oxide (N2O). The reductions will be realized from the energy sources which are 
categorized as stationary and mobile. The country is still working on developing 
initiatives for emission reductions in terms of a long-term low carbon strategy.  
(b) 
Central African Republic (CAR) –CAR aspires to reduce its emissions by 5 per cent and 25 
per cent for the 2030 and 2050 horizons respectively, in comparison to its reference 
business as usual emissions and to increase its sequestration potential. 
(c) 
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) – DRC has committed to reduce its GHG emissions 
by 17 per cent by 2030, focusing specifically on three sectors – energy, agriculture and 
land use, land use change, and forestry (LULUCF) – which collectively produce nearly 98 
per cent of its GHG emissions.  
(d) 
Kenya – Climate Fund to be a financing mechanism for priority climate change actions 
and interventions approved by the high-level National Climate Change Council chaired 
by the President. In addressing climate change issues, public entities are required to 
undertake public awareness and consultations, and ensure a focus on gender, in line 
with the Constitution and the Climate Change Act (2016). 
(e) 
Mali – The Ministry of Environment is responsible for adoption of NDC targets. There is 
no stakeholder involvement or multisector commission for the development of NDC 
targets. Currently, the country has no climate policies in place to mitigate climate 
change. However, Mali has requested technology transfer to provide the means of 
implementation.   
(f) 
Namibia – Namibia aims at a reduction of about 89 per cent of its GHG emissions at the 
2030 time horizon compared to the business as usual scenario. 
(g) 
Uzbekistan – In the long-term perspective up to 2030, Uzbekistan intends to strengthen 
measures and actions to combat climate change, in order to achieve the mitigation 
objectives by decreasing specific emissions of greenhouse gases per unit of GDP by 10 
per cent by 2030 from the 2010 level. Achievement of the INDC long-term objective 
envisages support from international organizations and financial institutions, ensuring 
access to advanced energy saving and environmentally sound technologies, and 
resources for climate financing. 
51. 
It is the opinion of the independent TAP that the SRMI as proposed is in alignment with 
the climate change mitigation objectives of these seven countries, given that GHG emissions are 
targeted for reduction and the fact that the leading contribution to national GHG emissions 
inventories in most of these countries, is represented by their energy sectors.    
1.5.3. 
 Executing capacity of the executing entity  
52. 
As stated in the funding proposal, the executing entity (EE) has been carefully chosen to 
combine the public entity responsible for managing external fund inflows in the country (e.g. 
the Ministry of Finance) and the public entity responsible for overall energy matters in the 
country (e.g. the Ministry of Energy). In five of the countries, the national utility was also 
included in the function of EE together with the supervising Ministry of Energy. It was stated in 
the funding proposal that for the purposes of the loans and grants, the EEs would be the 
borrowers/recipients of the loans/grants (e.g. for Botswana, the Ministry of Finance, acting 
through the Ministry of Energy and the state utility, the Botswana Power Corporation. For the 
purposes of the guarantees contemplated under Component 3.2, the EEs would be the private 
sector RE project companies.

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 126 
 
 
53. 
The Ministries of Finance (in CAR, the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Cooperation; 
in Kenya, the National Treasury) are responsible for the management of funds from 
international institutions on behalf of the Government and ensuring that they are correctly 
disbursed and managed. The ministries in the seven countries have lengthy experience and are 
capable of serving in the capacity of EE. The Ministries of Energy in the participating countries  
have statutory responsibility for all activities in the national energy sector, including the power 
sector. They are thus fit for the role in the SRMI programme. In CAR, DRC, Kenya and Uzbekistan 
the national power utility has not been included in the EE arrangement presented in the funding 
proposal but the Ministries of Energy are likely to seek their participation. The utility companies 
have power development experience but in many of the countries, limited RE power experience. 
This is not likely to hamper the success of the SRMI programme as the transaction advisors will 
train country stakeholders through "learning by doing", which will provide them with skills not 
only to participate in the projects, but continue to apply their skills in replication projects, post 
SRMI.  
54. 
Based on the analysis presented in 1.5.1, 1.5.2 and 1.5.3 above, the independent TAP 
considers that the country ownership of this SRMI project submission can be ranked as high.   
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
1.6.1. 
Financial strucure 
55. 
The proposed project is requesting grant and debt financing from GCF and other co-
financing from World Bank sources to the amount of USD 1,563 million. The GCF contribution is 
a total of USD 280 million made up of: grant – USD 54 million; reimbursable grant – USD 30 
million; guarantee – USD 20 million; and senior loan – USD 176 million. The complementary 
World Bank co-financing will total USD 1,283 million that will be sourced as follows: grant from 
the World Bank ESMAP – USD 18 million; grant from the World Bank IDA – USD 65 million; and 
senior loan from the World Bank IBRD – USD 450 million and another senior loan from the 
World Bank IDA – USD 750 million. The appropriation and terms of these funds were discussed 
in an earlier section of this report (see table 1 and section 1.1, para. 13 on pages 6 and 7).  
56. 
The breakdown of the funding contribution from these sources, the types of fund and 
the total that will be provided for the project, is presented in table 2. 
Table 2: Breakdown of project funding 
S/N 
Source 
Type of fund 
Amount (USD million) 
1. 
GCF Financing 
 
 
a. 
GCF 
Grant 
     54 
b. 
GCF 
Reimbursable grant 
     30 
c. 
GCF 
Guarantee 
     20 
d.  
GCF 
Senior loan 
   176 
Subtotal GCF      
  280 
2. 
Co-financing 
 
 
a. 
World Bank - ESMAP 
Grant 
     18 
b. 
World Bank - IDA 
Grant 
     65  
c. 
World Bank - IBRD 
Senior loan 
    450 
d. 
World Bank - IDA 
Senior loan 
    750 
Subtotal co-financing 
1,283 
Project total funding 
1,563

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 127 
 
 
Abbreviations: ESMAP = Energy Sector Management Assistance Program, IDA = International 
Development Association, IBRD = International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 
57. 
The total fund requested from GCF is about 17.9 per cent of total fund required for 
implementation of the programme. As a percentage of total SRMI programme funding for the 
seven countries, GCF requested contributions can be summarized as follows:  
(a) 
Grant funding is 3.45 per cent;  
(b) 
Reimbursable grant funding is 1.9 per cent;  
(c) 
Guarantee is 1.3 per cent; and 
(d) 
The senior loan is 11.3 per cent. 
58. 
The grant funding from GCF has been earmarked as follows:  
(a) 
About 37 per cent of the GCF grant funding will be spent to support each of the activities 
of Component 1. Activities under this component will cover preparation of the 
generation plan with VRE integration and capacity-building in the nine countries. 
(b) 
About 55.6 per cent of GCF grant will be spent on the activities of Component 2 only in 
CAR. Activities of this component will focus on public investment in solar and wind park 
common infrastructure, VRE integration upgrades and grid resilience. These activities in 
the remaining six countries will be financed by loans.  
(c) 
 The balance of 7.4 per cent of GCF grant has been earmarked for project management 
costs. 
59. 
Reimbursable grant, guarantees and senior loan requested from GCF will be utilized as 
follows: 
(a) 
The entire USD 176 million senior loan from GCF is planned to be utilized for funding 
activities of Component 2 in five countries namely: Botswana, Kenya, Mali, Namibia and 
Uzbekistan;  
(b) 
Activities of Component 2 in CAR (the sixth country) will be financed by grant from GCF; 
(c) 
The reimbursable grant of USD 30 million has been entirely earmarked to provide a risk 
mitigation instrument for grid connected RE in DRC; and 
(d) 
The USD 20 million guarantee funding from GCF will be spent in equal proportion to 
provide risk mitigation instruments for mini-grids in Botswana and Namibia.    
1.6.2. 
Co-financing, leveraging and mobilizing long-term investment 
60. 
The USD 280 million requested from GCF will be complemented by about USD 1,283 
million from the World Bank. The GCF fund as well as the complementary World Bank fund are 
expected to be public investments in the electricity sectors of the countries, which will enable 
leverage of private investment for the countries to build RE power plants. Successful 
implementation of these public investments is expected to leverage around USD 3 billion in 
private investments into the seven countries. This will yield an indicative leveraging between 
public investments (World Bank and GCF financing) and private investments of about 1 to 2.4. 
This can be considered an effective and efficient use of funds for the SRMI programme. As stated 
in the funding proposal, the leveraged private investment will only occur if the public 
investment is successful as laid out in the project components. Therefore, the leveraged USD 3 
billion estimate is not considered part of the co-financing for this programme.     
61. 
The independent TAP is of the opinion that this financial leveraging ratio indicates 
sound cost-effectiveness of the project when compared with benchmarks of similar projects 
recently funded by GCF.

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 128 
 
 
1.6.3. 
Cost efficiency 
62. 
The project is expected to deliver about 16.1 MtCO2eq of GHG emission reductions over 
a 20-year period. The efficiency metrics that will be delivered by this project intervention were 
estimated as follows: 
(a) 
Total project financing  
 
= USD 1,563 million 
(b) 
Requested GCF amount 
 
= USD 280 million 
(c) 
Expected lifetime GHG emissions 
= 88,978,000 tCO2eq 
(d) 
Estimated cost per tCO2eq (a/c) 
= USD 17.57/tCO2eq 
(e) 
Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq (b/c) = USD 3.15/tCO2eq 
63. 
The independent TAP agrees with the conclusion in the funding proposal that the 
estimated GCF mitigation cost of USD 3.1/tCO2eq, as presented above, when added to the 
project’s additional benefits (better electricity access, resilience of power infrastructure, etc.) 
represents excellent value for money. This conclusion will hold when the GHG emissions 
reduction cost is compared to estimations for other similar energy projects already approved 
and funded by GCF. 
1.6.4. 
Economic and financial rate of return of the investment 
64. 
The independent TAP reviewed the economic and financial analysis carried out for the 
programme implementation in each of the seven countries submitted by the AE to the GCF 
Secretariat (see annex A3 – SRMI Economic and Financial – 30 November 2020) and came to the 
following conclusions: 
(a) 
Results for all the countries analysed showed that GCF financing increased the financial 
internal rate of return (IRR) by an average of about 2 per cent. The concessional GCF 
financing is therefore critical to achieve a feasible SRMI programme in these countries; 
and 
(b) 
The financial analysis conducted for five of the countries, namely Botswana, Kenya, Mali, 
Namibia, and Uzbekistan for activities under Components 1 and 2, yielded financial IRR 
of 13 per cent,18 per cent, 27 per cent, 12 per cent and 14 per cent respectively. The 
concessionality of the GCF loan can therefore be said to be instrumental to achieving an 
acceptable IRR for investment in those countries.  
65. 
The independent TAP therefore concludes that the efficiency and effectiveness of 
implementation of this proposed project will be moderately high.  
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
66. 
The independent TAP recommends that the Board approve the SRMI.  
67. 
The independent TAP further recommends that, should the funding proposal be 
approved, the AE shall agree to the inclusion of the following reporting requirements in the 
funded activity agreement to be signed between GCF and the AE: 
(a) 
Provide under each APR a programme monitoring report at the Facility level, also 
covering Project-level activities information, as and when available, at the minimum 
covering the following:  
(i) 
report detailing the success and challenges of the gender mainstreaming process 
presented in the Gender Action Plan;

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 129 
 
 
(ii) 
report of the lessons learned, and successes and challenges, of stakeholder 
engagement at Project level as well as reflecting process and measures 
undertaken or to be undertaken in the future ensure that pitfalls are corrected in 
a timely way; and 
(iii) 
the GHG emission reductions achieved using the monitoring protocol of the 
emission reduction estimation method adopted, and covering, at the minimum: 
(1) 
Project parameters monitored by name, value and confidence interval; 
(2) 
Emission reduction calculation methodologies utilized; 
(3) 
The procedure used to develop the database; and  
(4) 
The quality assurance/quality control methods used in preparing and 
reporting the data and the emission reduction calculations.

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 130 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent 
Technical Advisory Panel's assessment (FP 163)
Proposal name: 
Sustainable Renewables Risk Mitigation Initiative (SRMI) Facility 
Accredited entity: 
The World Bank 
Country/(ies): 
Botswana, CAR, DRC, Kenya, Mali, Namibia and Uzbekistan 
Project/programme size: 
Large 
Impact potential 
Thank you for the assessment. The SRMI Facility aims to be scaled up by adding new countries. 
We want to take this opportunity to thank the GCF Secretariat that worked with us very hard 
on making this program impactful, implementable and replicable. In the context of COVID-19, 
we strongly believe that this Facility is critical in supporting countries in their energy 
transition. 
Paradigm shift potential 
Thank you for the assessment. As agreed with iTAP, the World Bank team will adapt its support 
to each country based on the status of solar/wind independent power producer (IPP) 
deployment (i.e., if it had existing bilateral deals, feed-in-tariff or already existing tenders). At 
the project stage, a more thorough analysis of the status will be performed, and the support of 
the transaction advisors under SRMI will be critical in promoting a sustainable and bankable 
transaction.  
We agree that the need for risk mitigation instruments/credit enhancements (under Sub-
Component 3.2) will have to be evaluated at a project level with the support of the transaction 
advisors and when developing the tenders. We fully agree with iTAP that the need for such 
support depends on the baseline power sector markets in each country. It is for that reason 
that SRMI aims to be an integrated approach that tackles all key risks from a country, sector 
and project perspective (as a comprehensive and articulated risk mitigation framework). Not 
only by implementing SRMI’s methodology, countries will be able to unlock private 
investments but they are also ensuring that they are on the right track to improve their sector 
bankability – via the right plans reducing the average generation costs, and via upgrades on the 
grid to reduce losses. 
Sustainable development potential 
Thank you for the assessment. 
Needs of the recipient 
Thank you for the assessment.

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.10 
Page 131 
Country ownership 
Thank you for the assessment. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
Thank you for the assessment. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
The WB team appreciates ITAP’s review and assessment outcomes and notes with thanks the 
positive recommendation from iTAP to the GCF Board, in particular that the Board approve 
the SRMI.

=== PAGE 132 ===
1
SRMI FACILITY  
GENDER ASSESSMENT AND 
ACTION PLAN 
November 2020 
Disclaimer: The gender profiles were prepared, using publicly available sources. The World Bank does not 
guarantee the accuracy or completeness of the information provided in the present document. To the extent that 
it reflects opinions, they are the opinions of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
World Bank, its staff or Directors. Nothing in this summary should be taken as legal advice.  
Gender documentation for FP163

=== PAGE 133 ===
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................................3 
2. 
COUNTRY BACKGROUND ........................................................................................................................4 
2.1 
Botswana Profile .........................................................................................................................................5 
2.2 
Central African Republic Profile..................................................................................................................7 
2.3 
Democratic Republic of Congo Profile ........................................................................................................9 
2.4 
Kenya Profile ............................................................................................................................................ 11 
2.5 
Mali Profile .............................................................................................................................................. 14 
2.6 
Namibia Profile ........................................................................................................................................ 17 
2.7 
Uzbekistan Profile .................................................................................................................................... 19 
3. 
KEY GENDER GAPS ................................................................................................................................ 21 
3.1 
Botswana Gender Gap ............................................................................................................................. 21 
3.2 
CAR Gender Gap ...................................................................................................................................... 25 
3.3 
DRC Gender Gap ...................................................................................................................................... 29 
3.4 
Kenya Gender Gap ................................................................................................................................... 33 
3.5 
Mali Gender Gap ..................................................................................................................................... 37 
3.6 
Namibia Gender Gap ............................................................................................................................... 39 
3.7 
Uzbekistan Gender Gap ........................................................................................................................... 43 
4. 
PROPOSED ENTRY POINTS .................................................................................................................... 49 
5. 
STRATEGIC APPROACH.......................................................................................................................... 53 
5.1 
Facility Level ............................................................................................................................................ 53 
5.2 
Project level ............................................................................................................................................. 54 
6. 
GENDER ACTION PLAN .......................................................................................................................... 56

=== PAGE 134 ===
3
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The Sustainable Renewables Risk Mitigation Initiative (SRMI) Facility aims to support developing countries in 
advancing sustainable solar and wind programs and attracting private investments. The proposed Facility’s 
objective is to enable seven countries to unlock GWs of solar and wind generation in the medium-term with 
financial support from the Green Climate Fund (GCF). Targeted countries are Botswana, Central African Republic 
(CAR), Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Kenya, Mali, Namibia and Uzbekistan. The SRMI Facility will deploy 
its support through three components, namely (i) Technical Assistance, (ii) Public Investments and (iii) Risk 
Mitigation Instruments. 
 
The present Gender Assessment and Action Plan provides an overview of issues affecting men and women 
related to the Facility’s implementation in the seven countries. It details the strategic approach that will be 
adopted by the SRMI Facility to effectively address these challenges and ensure the investment projects 
contribute to promoting female development, for instance through employment in the energy sector, while 
enhancing women and men’s livelihoods in affected communities. Planned interventions under the present 
Gender Action Plan (GAP) are aligned with the GCF third policy objective to “contribute to reducing the gender 
gap of climate change-exacerbated social, economic, environmental vulnerabilities and exclusions through GCF 
climate investments that mainstream gender equality issues.” 
 
The Facility’s activities will also directly support the World Bank Group 2016-2023 Gender Strategy and its four 
pillars of action1. Projects will include, to the extent possible and subject to funding availability, interventions to 
facilitate women’s access to energy services which has the potential to enhance maternal outcomes and safety 
(Pillar I); promote proactive policies to increase female employment along the energy value chain (Pillar II); create 
income-generating opportunities through access to grants or access to micro-finance for women living in the areas 
of implementation of the Renewable Energy (RE) projects (Pillar III) promote women’s engagement in 
stakeholders’ consultations; and implement rigorous mechanisms to prevent and respond to gender-based 
violence (GBV) in project areas, thus enhancing women’s voice and agency (Pillar IV). 
 
 
 
 
1 The WBG Gender Strategy has four objectives: (i) Improving Human Endowments, (ii) Removing Constraints for More and 
Better jobs, (iii) Removing Barriers to Women’s Ownership and Control of Assets and (iv) Enhancing Women’s Voice and 
Agency and Engaging Men and Boys.

=== PAGE 135 ===
4
2. COUNTRY BACKGROUND 
 
Despite varying economic and social development levels, the seven countries targeted by the SRMI Facility face 
similar gender gaps and energy challenges. Relations between men and women and levels of inequality vary 
considerably across areas: the 2020 World Economic Forum’s Gender Gap Index ranks Namibia 12th out of 153 
countries, while Mali and the DRC are respectively ranked 139th and149th. Nonetheless, all countries suffer from 
social norms that confine women to unpaid household and care work resulting in lower education, occupational 
sex-segregation and limited political participation. 
 
In low to middle income countries where access to energy is limited, women suffer most from insufficient access 
to electricity and clean cooking facilities as they are mostly responsible for household chores1 . In Sub-Saharan 
Africa electrification rate stands at less than 48 percent, leaving nearly 600 million people without access to 
electricity2. This issue negatively impacts female economic empowerment, agency, education and health 
outcomes. For instance, every year, 4.3 million people – mainly women and children – die as a result of indoor air 
pollution3. 
 
Women have limited employment opportunities in the formal sector, including in the energy industry, due to 
limited education, qualifications and skills. They are therefore more likely to occupy lower-paid, lower-quality 
jobs in family or home-based businesses, such as farming and handicrafts. Men predominate in Science, 
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields and are disproportionately active in the construction and 
information technology industries. For instance, in Kenya, 11 percent of employees in STEM fields are female, 
against 21 percent for men. This education gap is reflected in energy infrastructure projects where female 
employment is lower due to a lack of technical construction and professional engineering skills4. Worldwide, the 
RE industry employs only about 32 percent of women, while it is estimated that the number of available jobs in 
the sector will increase from 10.3 million in 2017 to 29 million in 20505. Female access to new employment 
opportunities created by RE projects is further constrained by cultural norms that limit women’s choice and access 
to non-traditional fields. Employment opportunities created by women in large-scale power projects are therefore 
usually in traditionally feminine sectors such as restauration and hospitality or administrative support6. 
 
Women’s limited political agency and representation in political institutions translates into lower female access 
and participation in energy-related decision-making. With the exception of Namibia where the share of seats 
held by women in national parliament reaches 46 percent, none of the targeted countries has more than 30 
percent of female parliamentarians. In DRC, CAR, Mali and Botswana, the rate of female in Parliament does not 
 
1 Resurrección and B.Boyland,M. 2017. Gender Equality in renewable energy in the Lower Mekong: assessment and 
opportunities – USAID clean power Asia. 
2 World Bank Data. 2018. 
3 The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2016. Gender, Climate Change and Food Security.  
4 United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 2016. Engendering Utilities: Improving Gender Diversity in 
Power Sector Utilities. 
5 International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA).2019. Renewable Energy: a gender perspective.  
6 The World Bank Group. Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP). 2018. Getting to Gender Equality in Energy 
Infrastructure.

=== PAGE 136 ===
5
exceed 10 percent. Women’s representation and participation in the energy sector, including the RE sector, is 
therefore limited because women are not thought of as key stakeholders. 
 
Although more data is needed to assess the prevalence of gender-based violence, studies indicate that women 
and girls routinely experience high levels of sexual harassment and intimate partner violence in target countries. 
This phenomenon is reinforced by social norms normalizing violence against women. For instance, and although 
Namibia is recognized for its progress towards equality between men and women, 33 percent of ever-married 
women aged 15-49 have experienced intimate partner violence, and 28 percent of women aged 15-49 approve 
the practice of husbands beating their wives to discipline them (Namibia Demographic Health Survey, 2013). The 
influx of migrant workers created during the realization of large-scale RE projects may increase GBV risks and 
should receive specific attention throughout the projects-cycle. 
 
At the national level, most countries are signatories of international and regional gender equality agreements 
(e.g. the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women or CEDAW, the Beijing 
Declaration and Platform for action). Most countries have also adopted national strategies and mechanisms to 
address inequality between men and women. During project implementation, national and international legal 
frameworks may therefore be used to strengthen stakeholders’ commitments to promote women’s economic 
empowerment and agency, as it is often aligned with governmental priorities. 
 
2.1 Botswana Profile 
Botswana is a small, landlocked country located in the heart of Southern Africa. With a density population of 
less than 4 people per sq. km and a population estimated at 2.3 million, Batswana are highly dispersed across the 
country. Three major ethnic groups coexist in the country, namely the Tswana (80 percent), Kalanga (11 percent), 
and the Sarwa (3 percent).  More than 70 percent of the country’s territory is covered by desert lands, making 
agricultural conditions difficult. Botswana is rich in natural resources with abundant supply of diamonds, silver, 
copper, nickel etc. The country’s economy is heavily reliant on diamond, making it highly vulnerable to the 
market’s price volatility.  
 
Botswana is a stable, peaceful country that has experienced one of the world’s fastest economic growth in the 
past 50 years. It is regularly quoted as an example of good governance and responsible resource management 
with significant socio-economic gains. Botswana is classified as an upper middle-income country: between 2003 
and 2010 poverty went down from 30.6 percent to 19.4 percent. The country has also experienced high rates of 
urbanization in recent years: in 1990, only 40 percent of Batswana lived in urban areas while this was the case for 
more than 69 percent of the population in 2018. 
 
Despite high national investments in the delivery of social services and infrastructure, human development 
outcomes remain low by global standards. The country continues to grapple with unequal distribution of wealth, 
high levels of poverty and unemployment, as well as HIV. Botswana’s national Gini coefficient is estimated at 55.3 
(2015) making it one of the most unequal societies in the world. The country’s extremely low population density 
is a key barrier to effective service delivery. Only 60 percent of national households in Botswana have access to 
electricity, with significant disparities in access between urban and rural households and across the income

=== PAGE 137 ===
6
distribution. In rural areas, only 42 percent of households have access to proper sanitation and 22 percent to 
electricity. 
 
With the exception of the African Charter on Elections and Governance (ACDEG) and the Maputo protocol, 
Botswana is signatory of key international and regional agreements related to women’s rights. The Government 
of Botswana has ratified the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention on equal pay for work of equal 
value, the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Protocol to the African 
Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (1989), adopted the Beijing Platform of 
Action in 1995, signed the Southern African Development Community Declaration on Gender and Development 
(1997) as well as its addendum on the Prevention and Eradication of Violence Against Women and Children. 
At the national level, Botswana has adopted a comprehensive legal framework to protect women’s rights and 
promote gender equality. The Constitution guarantees equality for all persons irrespective of gender. The 
country’s main reforms on women’s rights are chronologically listed below: 
- 
The 1993 amendment to the Tribal Land Act allows any citizen, including women, to apply for any Botswana 
land; 
- 
The 1996 Mines and Quarries Act removes restrictions placed on women working underground in the mines; 
- 
The 1996 Employment Act guarantees equal remuneration for work of equal value;  
- 
The 1998 Penal Code Act stepped up penalties for sexual offences and criminalized the intentional spread of 
HIV; 
- 
The 2001 Marriage Act prohibits child marriage; 
- 
The 2003 amendment of the Citizenship Act allows women married to foreign nationals to pass citizenship 
on to their children; 
- 
The 2004 amendment to the Penal Code introduces a minimum sentence of ten years for rape; 
- 
The 2004 Abolition of Marital Power Act provides equal power for men and women within common law 
marriages excluding customary and religious marriages; 
- 
The 2008 Domestic Violence Act provides protection to survivors of domestic violence. However, it does not 
acknowledge marital rape.  
 
Several national plans were adopted by the government in recent years to advance women’s rights, while 
gender issues have been embedded across sectoral policies. Following the ratification of CEDAW in 1981, the 
government established a Women’s Affairs Unit. In 1995, Botswana developed its first Policy on Women and 
Development, followed by a Development Plan (2010-2016) targeting women and marginalized groups who 
engage in small-scale agriculture. The National Gender-Based Violence Strategy 2015-2020 aims to support design 
and implementation of integrated actions to eliminate gender-based violence.  
Like many other Sub-Saharan nations, Botswana continues to operate under a dual legal system, Common Law 
and Customary Law, with the effect of preserving some discriminations against women in practices. For 
instance, the Abolition of Marital Power Act exempts customary laws. However, the judicial system has recognized 
the principle of equality between men and women within the household in its decisions and has protected 
women’s right to own and inherit property. This indicate progressive trends in the society that have yet to be 
codified.

=== PAGE 138 ===
7
 
2.2 Central African Republic Profile 
The Central African Republic is a landlocked country with important natural resources and an estimated 
population of 4.9 million. The country is rich in natural resources including diamond, gold, copper, forestry and 
agricultural land. CAR has one of the lowest density population in the region, with 8.3 people per square kilometer, 
making delivery of basic public services difficult. The country’s economy relies mostly on the agriculture and 
livestock sectors that employ nearly 80 percent of the active population. The majority of the Central African 
population (60 percent) lives in rural areas. 
 
Since 2012, the country is facing the most complex and important conflict in its history due to its intensity, 
duration and territorial scope. According to UN estimates, the conflict caused more than 6000 death. The 
Government of CAR has authority over less than 40 percent of the territory while the rest of the country is under 
the control of various armed groups. The political crisis turned into a humanitarian crisis, causing population 
displacement, the disruption of economic activity and the destruction of social infrastructure (health, education). 
At the national level, more than one quarter of households have been displaced. This conflict led to a 58 percent 
decline in crop production, increased food prices, and an elevated risk of malnutrition. The democratic and 
peaceful election of a new President in 2016 raised hope for stabilization, soon dashed following the resurgence 
of armed clashes in 2017. A new Peace Agreement was concluded between the authorities and 14 armed groups 
in February 2019.  
 
CAR is one of the poorest countries in the world and was ranked second to last out of 188 countries on the 
United Nations 2019 Human Development Index (HDI). Repeated conflicts in recent years worsened living 
conditions for the population, in a country that was already plagued by high-levels of poverty, inequality, 
unemployment and low access to basic services. The majority of the population lives below the international 
poverty line and is food insecure, especially in rural areas. Life expectancy is among the lowest in the world (52 
years), low even by Sub-Saharan standards. Government and institutional capacity and presence across the 
territory is scant; the population heavily relies on the UN peacekeeping mission MINUSCO for security and on 
international actors for the provision of health and education services.

=== PAGE 139 ===
8
Figure 1: HDI trends for Central African Republic, Uganda and Gambia, 1990-2018 
Source: 2019 UNDP Human Development Report 
 
The collapse of state institutions caused by the insecurity and poor governance has resulted in extremely limited 
supply of basic services and infrastructure, even in the capital city of Bangui. Only about 8 percent of the 
population has access to electricity which is far below the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. Outside of Bangui, 
access to electricity is practically non-existent (under 2 percent). Access to clean water and sanitation is a 
challenge across the country; 70 percent of households are without access to drinking water and 80 percent live 
without latrines. In areas outside of Government authority, armed groups compete for control over land and 
resources, hampering the provision of social services and humanitarian support to the population.  
Although the Central African Republic has ratified most international and regional human rights instruments 
and adopted some laws and policies in favor of gender equality, legal texts remain largely unapplied and 
unknown to the general population. CAR ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples in 1986, the 
Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1991, the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child in 1992, signed the Beijing Declaration and Platform for action in 1995, signed the Protocol to the 
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the Rights of Women in 2008 (without ratification), and 
committed to the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution in 2014 through the adoption of a National 
Action Plan.  
Despite some progress in recent years, the national legal framework remains insufficient to protect women’s 
rights and is weakened by lack of respect for the rule of law. The country’s major milestones in the field of gender 
equality are listed below:  
- 
Ordinance No. 66/16 of 1966 prohibits the practice of female genital mutilation (excision);  
- 
Ordinance No. 66/26 of 1966 promotes the advancement of girls and their continuation in the education 
system until the age of 21 years;  
- 
Act No. 97/013 of 1997 on the Family Code requires the consent of both spouses for a marriage to be lawful, 
bans early marriage and provides that divorce may be granted at the request of either spouse. The Code

=== PAGE 140 ===
9
guarantees women’s capacity to inherit. However, many discriminatory provisions persist. Article 254 and 255 
state that the husband is the head of the family and chooses the marital home. Polygamy is authorized and a 
prosecutor may authorize individuals under the age of 18 to marry; 
- 
Act No. 06.030 of 2006 establishing the rights of people living with HIV infection/AIDS upholds the principle 
of non-discrimination against people living with HIV infection/AIDS;  
- 
Act No. 06/032 of 2006 protecting women against violence in the Central African Republic prohibits rape 
(excluding marital rape) and provides a definition of gender-based violence. However, there is no minimum 
sentence for rape; 
- 
Act No. 06.005 of 2006 on reproductive health protects women’s access to health services so that they can 
have a healthy pregnancy and delivery. Abortion remains prohibited with some exceptions;  
- 
Act No. 09.004 of 2009 establishing the Labour Code guarantees that all workers, regardless of origin and 
gender, receive an equal wage for equal work, qualifications and output; 
- 
Act No. 06.005 of 2016 on parity requires 35 percent of elected and nominated women in decision-making 
bodies; and 
- 
In 2016, a new Constitution was promulgated. It prohibits discrimination based on gender (Article 6), requires 
that political parties respect the principle of representation of gender (Article 131) and upholds the principle 
of equality between men and women (Article 148).  
At the policy level, the country has adopted several national strategies to promote women’s rights in 20051, 20072 
and 20113 but has failed to translate its commitments within sector-specific policies. Furthermore, customary law 
remains widely implemented resulting in systematic discrimination against women and girls. 
2.3 Democratic Republic of Congo Profile 
 
DRC is the largest country in Sub-Saharan Africa, with an estimated population of 84 million in 2018, the third 
largest in the continent after Nigeria and Ethiopia. DRC’s population is diverse: while the majority belongs to the 
Bantu ethnicity, more than 200 ethnic groups have been identified. The country’s natural resources are among 
the richest and the most diverse in the world (copper, cobalt coltan, gold, diamonds, oil, etc.). DRC accounts for 
about 16 percent of the world ‘s total production of diamonds and is the largest copper producer in the continent. 
The Congolese population is young and mostly rural; 33 percent of the population is under 15 years old while 70 
percent of the population lives in rural areas. Central DRC where both Kasai provinces are located (and where the 
SRMI Facility project will focus) is the center of the diamond trade and has the largest accumulation of industrial 
diamonds in the world.  
Despite its natural resource wealth, DRC is one of the poorest countries in the world and is not on track to 
achieve any of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030.  The country’s Human 
Development Index value for 2018 is 0.459 which puts it in the low human development category. DRC is ranked 
179 out of 189 countries and territories by the 2019 Human Development Report. About two-thirds of the 
 
1 Government of DRC. 2005. Politique Nationale de Promotion de l’Egalité et de l’Equité. 
2 Government of DRC. 2007. Plan d’Action de la Politique Nationale de Promotion de l’Egalité et de l’Equité. 
3 Government of DRC. 2011. Stratégie Sectorielle Egalité de Genre et Réduction de la Pauvreté.

=== PAGE 141 ===
10
population lives below the poverty line. The proportion of poor people has only declined slightly in past decades, 
with disparities across regions. For instance, in both provinces of Kasaïs, poverty incidence increased between 
2005 and 20121. DRC’s population is growing at a very fast pace, resulting in an increased absolute number of 
poor people in recent years. Gender gaps are observed in the distribution of poverty: widows and female-headed 
households are more likely to be poor due to lower access to assets and resources.  
Between 1996 to 2003, DRC endured two wars that have generated massive flows of internally displaced people 
and refugees and killed millions of people. In the eastern region and Kasaï province, the country continues to 
suffer from conflict and instability fueled by ethnic tension, disputes over land ownership and resources as well 
as foreign interventions. According to the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center, nearly 1.7 million new 
displacements were recorded in 2019. Félix Tshisekedi was elected president in January 2019, following an 
electoral process that marked the first peaceful transition of power since the country’s independence in 1960.  
 
The country’s socio-economic development is hindered by poor infrastructure coverage, affecting the 
Congolese’s population access to electricity, improved water resources and road transport. Only half of DRC’s 
territory is accessible by road or rail transport and the country’s electricity access rate is far below the regional 
average. Only 15 percent of the population has access to electricity and an estimated 90 percent rely on fuelwood 
and charcoal for energy. Lack of infrastructure particularly affect women who are responsible for water and fuel 
collection and are more likely than men to die from respiratory diseases and accidents caused by the low quality 
of cooking appliances.  
In recent years, DRC has introduced a number of reforms that have removed some legal barriers to gender 
equality. However, discriminatory provisions remain in the Family Code as well as significant gaps with regards to 
gender-based violence, economic and political participation. For instance, to this date, the Congolese legal 
framework does not contain a specific law on domestic violence. Furthermore, a 2015 revision of the electoral law 
removed the requirement for a 30 percent quota of female candidates during national elections, which is 
considered a setback for women’s political participation.  
DRC has ratified most international and regional human rights instruments. They include the SADC 
Memorandum of Understanding on Gender and Development in 2008; the Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination Against Women (1986); the Maputo Protocol (The Protocol to the African Charter on 
Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa) in 2009; the UN Convention on the Rights of the 
Child (1990); the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; and the UN Security Council Resolution on Women, Peace 
and Security (2010). 
However, at the national level, implementation of international commitments remains weak. Customary law 
continues to be widely implemented across the country, especially in rural areas, even though its discriminatory 
provisions contradict positive law. Early marriage remains a reality for many girls, and women don’t have equal 
access to inheritance due to the application of traditional practices. The main reforms towards gender equality 
adopted in the past decades are listed below: 
 
1 World Bank Group. 2018. Democratic Republic of Congo Systematic Country Diagnostic.

=== PAGE 142 ===
11
- 
The 2002 Labor Code prohibits sexual or psychological harassment in the workplace (Article 73); 
- 
The Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Congo promulgated in 2006, establishes that all human beings 
are equal under the law (Article 11), specifically bans discrimination against women (Article 14) and prohibits 
sexual violence (Article 15); 
- 
The Sexual violence laws of 2006 expands the definition of rape and defines the rights of survivors; 
- 
The 2015 Parity Act guarantees the right of women to entrepreneurship and promotes access to savings, 
credit, and new technologies without discrimination on the basis of gender;  
- 
In 2016, the Labor Code was amended to allow women to work at night in the mining, manufacturing and 
construction industries. The revised Code also establishes the principle of non-discrimination in employment. 
 
A New Family Code was promulgated in July 2016, introducing several improvements with respect to women’s 
rights: early marriage was banned, and equal rights recognized for husbands and wives in the household. Wives 
can now work without asking for their husband’s authorization and their right to ownership and inheritance is 
recognized. The new legislation on nationality also enables women to pass their Congolese nationality on to their 
children.  At the policy level, DRC developed a National Gender Strategy for the period 2017-2021 to promote 
gender equality and women’s empowerment with five strategic axes1. The Ministry of Gender, Family and Children 
is responsible for overseeing the Strategy’s implementation, and a gender focal point has been appointed in each 
line ministry.  
2.4 Kenya Profile 
With a fertility rate estimated at 3.5 births per woman and a population of 51 million people, Kenya is among 
the world’s 33 countries projected to see their populations increase five-fold or more by 21002. Despite rapid 
rate of urbanization, nearly 73 percent of the Kenyan population continues to live in rural areas.  Only 20 percent 
of the country’s land is arable, with the rest of the territory being classified as arid or semi-arid. Kenya achieved 
lower-middle-income status in 2012. The country’s economy is driven by the agriculture and tourism sector.  
Although Kenya has experienced sustained economic growth, social development and political gains over the 
past decade, high levels of poverty and inequality persist. In 2015, 36 percent of the population lived below the 
national poverty line and 56 percent of the urban population lived in slums. With a Gini coefficient of 40.8, Kenya 
remain an unequal society with wide regional disparities between arable and arid regions. In the latter areas 
where 20 percent of the population lives, provision of basic social services remain a challenge due to low 
population density, infrastructure deficits and insecurity.   
 
1 These are : (i) consolidation of gender equality and women’s empowerment (ii) strengthening the role and place of women 
and girls in the economy and employment; (iii) increased access of women and girls to decision-making spheres; (iv) fight 
against forms of sexual violence; and (v) strengthening the institutional mechanism for implementation of the National 
Gender Policy. 
2 The United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA).2017.

=== PAGE 143 ===
12
Figure 2: Percentage of country under Poverty Line, Rural and Urban (percentage) 
Source: Population Reference Bureau and EACREE report, 2018 
With an agriculture sector accounting for more than a fourth of the country’s gross domestic product, Kenya is 
highly vulnerable to climate change. In recent years, the frequency of droughts has increased and exacerbated 
the vulnerability of the population living in arid and semi-arid areas. In the remaining 30 percent of the territory, 
climate change has intensified pressure on existing natural resources, especially forest and soil. The tourism 
industry is also likely to be impacted by the anticipated loss of bio-diversity. The country will experience increased 
flooding, particularly affecting urban areas through the destruction of infrastructure and homes and the 
development of water borne diseases.  
Kenya has achieved rapid progress in electrification and is the only country in East Africa on track for meeting 
the Sustainable Development Goal of universal electricity access by 2030. In less than a decade, Kenya more 
than tripled electricity access in the country. In 2017, about 64 percent of the population had access to electricity 
compared to 19.2 percent in 2010. However, 17 million people remain without access to electricity, especially in 
rural areas, owing to high electricity fees and geographical inaccessibility. Traditional use of biomass for cooking 
(wood fuel, dung, charcoal, and agricultural waste) continues to predominate across the country with negative 
impact on health incomes. 34 million people do not have access to clean cooking in Kenya1.  
Figure 3: Access to electricity in Eastern African Countries 
Country 
Total 
population 
(Millions) 
Access to 
electricity (% 
of population) 
Access to electricity, 
rural (% of rural 
population) 
Access to electricity, 
urban (% of urban 
population) 
Burundi 
11.1 
11.0 
3.4 
61.6 
Kenya 
51.3 
75.0 
71.6 
83.9 
 
1 East African Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (EACREEE). 2018. Situation Analysis of Gender and 
Sustainable Energy in the East African Community.

=== PAGE 144 ===
13
Rwanda 
12.3 
34.7 
23.4 
89.0 
South Sudan 
10.9 
28.2 
23.6 
46.8 
Tanzania 
56.3 
35.5 
18.8 
68.3 
Uganda 
42.7 
42.6 
38.0 
57.5 
 
       Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2018 
 
Kenya has ratified most international, regional Treaties and Agreements related to gender equality and enacted 
a progressive Constitution in 2010 that protects women’s rights. The Government of Kenya has ratified the 
Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Protocol to the African 
Charter on Human and People's Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (Maputo Protocol) and has joined the 
1995 Beijing Platform for Action.  
 
The new Constitution adopted by Kenya in 2010 recognizes women’s rights as human rights, while removing 
several discriminatory provisions towards women. Article 27 guarantees equality and freedom from 
discrimination. It states that every person is equal before the law and has the right to equal protection and equal 
benefit of the law. The Constitution promotes equality in marriage, employment, access to education and 
guarantees women’s rights to inheritance and own land. Articles 97 and 98 introduce quota in the National 
Assembly and the Senate. The Constitution also calls for a 30 percent government procurement preference for 
youth, women and persons with disabilities and requires both public and private entities to comply with gender 
equality principles. Furthermore, all discriminatory customary practices are prohibited.  
 
At the legislative level, Kenya has adopted a progressive normative framework to promote women’s rights 
(excluding the Marriage Act of 2014):  
- 
The Married Women’s Property Act of 1882 provides married women equal rights to own property. It applies 
to all systems of marriage recognized under Kenyan law; 
- 
The Sexual Offense Act of 2006 provides a definition of sexual offences excluding marital rape and protects 
all persons from unlawful sexual acts; 
- 
The Anti-FGM Act of 2011 prohibits Female Genital Mutilation and imposes tough penalties on perpetrators; 
- 
The National Gender and Equality Commission Act of 2011 promotes gender equality and freedom from 
discrimination in accordance with Article 27 of the Constitution. This applies to both public and private 
sectors; 
- 
The Election Act of 2011 promotes women’s participation in political and public life; 
- 
The Land Act of 2012 grants all citizens the right to own land and promotes gender equality in land 
distribution; 
- 
The Matrimonial Property Act of 2013 guarantees equality between spouses in matrimonial property; 
- 
The Marriage Act of 2014 allows the customary practice of polygamy; and

=== PAGE 145 ===
14
- 
The Protection Against Domestic Violence Bill of 2015 outlines specific types of domestic violence including 
physical abuse, forced and child marriage, female genital mutilation (FGM), sexual violence, economic and 
inheritance abuse, emotional abuse, harassment, etc. it also provides for protection measures for victims. 
 
At the policy level, Kenya has regularly enacted National Strategies and sectoral policies to promote gender 
equality. For instance, the Government of Kenya adopted a National Policy on Gender and Development in 2000 
and a National Policy on Prevention and Response to gender-based violence in 2014. The country’s national 
strategy Kenya Vision 2030 (2013-2017) includes a social pillar dedicated to ending discrimination of women in 
economic and social sectors and empowering them to actively participate in economic, social, and political 
activities. In the energy sector, the Ministry of Energy not only produced an audit of its energy policies in 2007 but 
also developed a gender policy in 2019.  
However, the adoption of the Marriage Act in 2014 that allows polygamy indicates that discriminatory 
customary practices are still widely tolerated in the Kenyan society. Customary law systems are based on 
patriarchal traditions in which the principal decision-making power is allocated to men, and men inherit and 
control land and property. 
 
Figure 4: Broad Principles of Customary Laws in Kenya 
Source: Human Rights Watch, 2003 and World Bank report, 2007 
 
2.5 Mali Profile 
 
Mali is a large landlocked country with a population estimated at 19 million in 2018.With two-third of the 
country’s land area being arid or semi-arid, economic activity is confined to the Niger River area mainly in the 
agriculture sector. Mali has been experiencing high demographic growth in the past decade: in 2017, the country’s

=== PAGE 146 ===
15
average fertility rate was still at 5.9 children per woman.The population is unevenly distributed between rural and 
urban areas. More than 70 percent of Malians live in rural areas while the urban population is concentrated in the 
regional capitals and in the capital city of Bamako (4 million inhabitants)1. 
 
Mali is among the poorest countries in the world, with important regional disparities in wealth distribution. The 
country is ranked 184 out of 189 nations in the 2019 Human Development Index. The country’s main drivers of 
poverty include increasing food insecurity due to demographic pressure, lack of education and employment 
opportunities as well as political instability : 49 percent of the population lives below the extreme poverty line. 
Poverty is concentrated in the rural areas of southern Mali (90 percent of poor people) where the population 
density is the highest.  
 
In 2012, a coup d’état in Bamako along with attacks from extremist groups in the northern and central part of 
the country provoked prolonged insecurity and political instability. Despite a peace agreement signed in 2015, 
insecurity persists and has weakened the authorities’ ability to provide basic services to the population, especially 
in areas that remain outside of its control. This political and security crisis has increased the population’s 
vulnerability to poverty, especially affecting the 218 534 internally displaced persons (IDPs)2 from the conflict. 
 
Mali’s economy is highly vulnerable to climate change, with the agriculture, health and energy sector classified 
most at risk in the country’s National Adaptation Programme of Action. Almost three-quarters of the Malian 
labor force is engaged in agriculture. Desertification, high variability in rainfall, silting of the Niger river and rapid 
deforestation around large urban centers are among Mali’s main environmental challenges. This climate stress 
can lead to increased food insecurity and poverty, particularly in rural areas where Malians are mostly engaged in 
subsistence agriculture.  
 
Access to energy in the country is low and unreliable, with wide disparities between rural and urban areas. 
Despite significant progress over the last decades, the country’s electrification rate does not exceed 49 percent 
(less than 1 percent in 1995) 3. Urban households are more than twice as likely as rural households to have 
electricity (85 percent versus 38 percent). This disparity is partly due to the high cost of electricity in remote areas 
that are not connected to the main grid or isolated centres, where tariffs range between USD 0.25/kWh and USD 
0.51/kW4. In rural households, low availability of energy supply means that most households rely on biomass and 
kerosene lamps for cooking and lighting. This increases women’s burden as they are traditionaly responsible for 
fuel collection and cooking.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Water, Sanitation and Electricity in Mali by Residence 
 
1 Government of Mali. 2018. Mali Demographic and Health Survey or EDSM-VI. 
2 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Data.2020. 
3 Government of Mali. 2018. Mali Demographic and Health Survey or EDSM-VI. 
4 International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA).2019. Renewable Energy: a gender perspective.

=== PAGE 147 ===
16
 
 
Source: EDSM-VI and UNICEF report,2018 
 
Despite having ratified most international treaties and convention, Mali’s national legal framework on gender 
equality remains weak. Several gaps persist notably with respect to gender-based violence, early marriage as well 
as ownership and property rights. At the international level, Mali has ratified (i) the Convention on the Elimination 
of all forms of Dicrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1986, (ii) the Convention on Children’s rights in 1990, (iii) 
the Maputo Protocol to the African charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights in 2004 and (iv) the 2008 Protocol on 
the Statute of the African Court of Justice and Human Rights. In 2018, the said court found the Government of 
Mali in violation with the Maputo protocol, for condoning child marriage and discriminating against women in the 
Malian Family Code1. 
At the national level, the normative framework is poorly harmonized with international and regional 
instruments and Mali has yet to enact key legislation. Legal loopholes persist especially with regards to gender-
based violence, and some legal provisions are directly discriminatory against women. Furthermore, customary law 
is routinely applied at the expense of positive law and to women’s disadvantage, especially in the field of 
inheritance on rural land tenure.  
In 2009, the Government of Mali attempted to reform the 1962 Family Code, to improve equality between men 
and women. The revised version of the code included provision to forbid child marriage, improve women’s 
inheritance and property rights and increase women’s agency in the household. However, the adoption of the 
Code was blocked by wide-scale protests led by conservative groups. The new ‘Code du Mariage et de la Tutelle’ 
adopted in 2011 did not include rights previously granted in the draft version. Despite this significant setback, the 
country has made some progress in the promotion of gender equality: 
- 
Article 2 of the Constitution enshrines the principle of equality between men and women; 
- 
The 2006 agricultural orientation law protects women’s property rights; 
- 
In 2010, Mali adopted a National Policy for the Permanent Eradication of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM); 
 
1 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). 2019. A Study of Insecurity and Gender in Mali.

=== PAGE 148 ===
17
- 
Since 2011, Mali has a National Policy for Gender Equality based on six strategic directions1; 
- 
Since 2015, the Law2 requires a 30 percent quota for female appointments to national institutions and on 
electoral list; and 
- 
A 2017 Law3 allocates 15 percent of arable governmental law for the use of women and young people.  
2.6 Namibia Profile 
 
With an estimated population of about 2,4 million (2018) and a surface area of 825,615 km2 , Namibia is one of 
the least densely populated countries worldwide. Most inhabitants are located in the north, where six of the 
most populous regions of Namibia can be found. Rural to urban migration is a growing trend across the country : 
in 2018 nearly half of the population lived in urban areas (49.9 percent) from 42.8 percent in 2011. Namibia is rich 
with natural resources and political stability as well as sound economic management has allowed it to reach the 
upper-middle-income development level.  
 
While Namibia has achieved signifant reduction of poverty since its independence in 1990, it remains one of 
the most unequal countries in the world. Between 1993/94 and 2015/16, the proportion of Namibians living 
below the national poverty line went from 69.3 percent to 17.4 percent. Poverty remains a challenge, exacerbated 
by extreme socio-economic inequalities inherited from the apartheid period, as well as high unemployment rate 
(34 percent). Female-headed households (FHH), ethnic minorities and subsistence farmers are particuarly 
vulnerable to poverty. 
 
Namibia’s vulnerability to climate change is extremely high. 92 percent of the land area is defined as arid or 
semi-arid.The country is expected to experience increased occurence of drought, desertification, land and water 
resource degradation and loss of biodiversity. Agriculture, fisheries and water have been identified as the most 
vulnerable sectors to climate change, in a country where subsistence farming is widespread. In the past 5 years, 
Namibia has experienced the worst drought in a century, with devastating impact on the farming community. As 
a result, more than 500,000 people suffered from increased food insecurity and water shortages. 
 
Only half of the Namibian population has access to electricity, with wide disparities between urban and rural 
areas. In 2013, 72 percent of urban households had access to energy services, compared to 21 percent of rural 
households4. The country’s large land mass and low population density make it harder for the government of 
Namibia to provide basic services, including access to electricity, to its rural communities. An estimated half of the 
Namibian population uses traditional sources of energy such as firewood for cooking, with negative impact on 
health outcomes. Women and girls are particularly affected as they are traditionaly responsible for the collection 
of water and firewood. 
 
1 Those are: (1) equal rights for women and men, (2) development of human capital (for women and men), (3) the integration 
of women into productive channels, (4) equal participation of women and men in the spheres of decision, (5) establishing the 
values and egalitarian behavior in Malian society, and (6) the inclusion of man-woman equality as a guiding principle of good 
governance. 
2 Loi n°2015-052/PRM du 18 décembre 2015. 
3 Loi N°2017- 001/ du 11 avril 2017 portant sur le foncier agricole. 
4 Government of Namibia.2016. Namibia Inter-Censal Demographic Survey.

=== PAGE 149 ===
18
 
Namibia has a comprehensive legal framework to protect equality between men and women, and is regularly 
adopting national policies and strategies to further the gender equality agenda. The Namibian government is 
signatory of the main international and regional agreements and conventions. The country has ratified the 
Convention on the Elimination of All forms Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1992, the Protocol to the 
African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of women in Africa in 2004 and is a signatory of the 
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action (1995) and the SADC Protocol on Gender and Developpment (2008). 
At the national level, Namibia has one of the continent’s most progressive legal framework on gender equality:  
 
- 
The Namibian constitution establishes the principle of equality before the law without discrimination based 
on sex (Article 10), and authorises affirmative action to encourage women to participate in the “political, 
social, economic and cultural life of the nation“ (Article 23); 
- 
The Married Persons Equality Act 1 of 1996 abolishes the marital powers of the husbands, and puts wives 
and husbands on equal footing within civil marriage; 
- 
The Affirmative Action (Employment) Act 29 of 1998 establishes an Employment Equity Commission and 
authorizes affirmative action measures to promote equal opportunity in employment for women; 
- 
The Combating of Rape Act 8 adopted in 2000 criminalizes marital rape; 
- 
The Communal Land Reform Act of 2002 protects the rights of rural widows to remain on land allocated to 
their deceased husbands. The widow’s right to remain on the land is not affected by re-marriage; 
- 
The Combating of Domestic Violence Act 4 of 2003 provides a broad definition of domestic violence including 
physical, sexual, psychological, economic abuse and intimidation. This act makes domestic violence a specific 
crime; 
- 
The Children’s Status Act of 2006 provides for equal guardianships and custody for unmarried parents; 
- 
The Labour Act 11 of 2007 prohibits sexual harassment in the workplace and forbids direct or indirect 
discrimination in any employment decision based on sex, marital status, family responsibilities, or pregnancy; 
- 
The National Policy on Sexual, Reproductive and Child Health adopted in 2013 includes specific measures to 
provide equitable, accessible and affordable health and nutrition information and services to the population; 
- 
The Child Care and Protection Act 3 of 2015 requires a minimum age of 18 for marriage. 
 
At the policy level, Namibia has regularly enforced strategies and policies to promote gender equality. The 
National Land Policy adopted in 1998 promotes women’s rights to maintain their lands after their husband’s 
death. The country’s  first National Gender Policy was adopted in 1997 and its revised version in 2010 for the 
period 2010-20201. The 2010 Education Sector Policy on the Prevention and Management of Learner Pregnancy 
is a key policy that provides measures to encourage mothers and fathers to complete their education. In 2012, 
the country adopted a National Plan of Action on gender-based violence to coordinate and guide interventions, 
programmes and projects on violence against women in Namibia. 
 
 
 
1 The National Gender Policy 2010-2020 can be accessed here: 
 http://www.africanchildforum.org/clr/policypercent20perpercent20country/namibia/namibia_gender_2010-2020_en.pdf

=== PAGE 150 ===
19
2.7 Uzbekistan Profile 
 
Uzbekistan is a Central Asian landlocked country sharing border with five Asian countries1, with an estimated 
population of 32.1 million people in 2017. The country is rich in natural resources, notably copper, gold, oil, 
natural gas and uranium. Since the election of the president Mirzioiev in 2016, the government of Uzbekistan 
committed to a radical transition from a state-controlled to a market-oriented economy. Although the country is 
experiencing increased urbanization, nearly half of the population (49.4 percent) still lives in rural areas.  
 
Uzbekistan is a lower-middle-income country whose poverty levels have declined significantly in the past 
decades, going from 27.5 percent in 2001 to 11.4 percent in 2018. Uzbekistan is ranked 108 out of 189 countries 
in the United Nations 2018 Human and Development report, and is included in the high human development 
category. However, large regional disparities remain, causing increased labor migration within and outside the 
country.  
 
As one of the most water-dependent countries in the world, Uzbekistan is highly vulnerable to climate change. 
The country is located in one of Central Asia’s driest regions and is prone to natural disasters such as floods and 
drought, whose occurrence may increase with climate change. The Aral Sea has been gradually shrinking, loosing 
90 percent of its volume in less than 60 years. More than 80 percent of the country’s renewable water resources 
originate in neighboring countries. 
 
Uzbekistan is the second most energy-intensive country worldwide and has achieved near universal electricity 
access. However, gaps in power supply are common due to inadequate maintenance of infrastructure, especially 
in rural areas, resulting in frequent interruptions and poor power quality. As women are mostly responsible for 
household chores, they are more affected by the unreliability of power supply and the inability to use time-saving 
energy appliances.  
Uzbekistan is signatory of the main international conventions related to the promotion of women’s rights: in 
1995 the government ratified the United Nations Convention on the elimination of all Forms of discrimination 
against Women and joined the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. The government of Uzbekistan also 
ratified key International Labour Organization conventions (ILO) related to gender equality, and incorporated 
them in its national legislations.  
At the national level, despite important progress in the most recent years, significant gaps remain in the 
legislation. The Constitution of the Republic of Uzbekistan guarantees equal rights without discrimination based 
on sex. This principle is reflected in national law; both the criminal code and the labor code contain provisions 
against discrimination on the basis of sex. Relevant milestones (laws, national policies, strategic documents) in 
advancing the normative framework for gender equality are chronologically listed below: 
- 
Creation of the Women’s Committee (WCU), 1991: the WCU was established to develop and implement state 
policy on women’s rights. It has branches in every administrative territorial body; 
 
1 Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan.

=== PAGE 151 ===
20
- 
National Action Plan for improving the status of women in Uzbekistan and improving their status in society, 
1995: this is a strategic document drafted in the context of the Beijing Platform for Action; 
- 
The Elections Act of the Oliy Majlis, 2004: this act was key in increasing female political participation in the 
National Assembly. It requires that the number of women nominated by political parties for parliament should 
be no less than 30 percent of the total number of candidates;  
- 
First National Action Plan for the Implementation of the Concluding Observations of the CEDAW 
Committee, 2006; 
- 
Second National Action Plan for the Implementation of the Concluding Observations of the CEDAW 
Committee, 2010; and 
- 
National Development Strategy for 2017–2021 adopted by presidential decree in 2017: the document 
outlines 5 priority areas and includes objectives to “increase the social and political activity of women”. 
 
In September 2019 and for the first time in the country’s history, the President of Uzbekistan signed a law on 
gender equality. The law on “Guarantees of Equal Rights and Opportunities for Women and Men” guarantees 
equal access to property and material resources and bans sexual harassment. This is an important milestone in a 
country that was one of the few nations in the world without legislation on gender-based violence.

=== PAGE 152 ===
21
3. KEY GENDER GAPS 
The following section identifies key issues that may impact projects under the SRMI facility. Preliminary gender 
assessments for each of the seven countries under the SRMI facility highlighted the following gaps and their 
potential mitigation actions which will be explored during project design. 
3.1 Botswana Gender Gap 
Botswana is a patriarchal society ranked 73 out of 153 countries by the World Economic Forum 2020 Global 
Gender Gap.  Men are traditionally heads of households, while women are mostly responsible for cooking food, 
collecting water and caring for the sick and elderly. Yet, unlike most countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, Botswana is 
at an advanced stage of demographic transition with a fertility rate estimated at 2.9 births per woman in 2017. 
This indicates progress in women’s development driven by i) effective family planning, ii) better child survival, iii) 
increased age at first birth, iv) increased female education attainment and v) improved women’s participation in 
the labor force1.  Despite these better outcomes, several gaps remain and will be explored below. 
 
Education. Together with Lesotho and Namibia, Botswana is one of the three Sub-Saharan countries to have 
already achieved parity in education2. In the past decades, the government significantly increased public 
investment in education to ensure equal access for all, including girls and women. As a result, the enrolment 
of girls in education is higher than the enrolment of boys at all levels. 88.7 percent of women are literate 
compared to 86.7 percent of men. However, many girls continue to drop out of school because of early 
pregnancies or marriage (allowed under customary law). To mitigate the consequences of girls dropping out 
of school, Botswana has adopted policies to promote school re-entry for student mothers. 
 
Figure 7: Botswana’s Educational Attainment (percentage) 
 
BOTSWANA’S EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT (percentage) 
 
Women 
Men 
Enrolment in primary education 
88.1 
87.3 
Enrolment in secondary education 
63.8 
55.8 
Enrolment in tertiary education 
29.2 
20.5 
Source: Based on Data from the World Economic Forum 2020 Global Gender Index 
 
1 The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2018. Opportunities and Policy Actions to Maximize the Demographic 
Dividend in Botswana. 
2 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index.

=== PAGE 153 ===
22
Educational sex-segregation remains a reality in the country, affecting women’s participation in STEM fields. 
For instance, female students only account for 21 percent of all students in engineering and technology 
subjects at the University of Botswana1. 
 
Health. Heavy public investments have allowed Botswana to significantly improve health outcomes, but 
maternal mortality rates remain at high levels compared with other middle-income countries. Despite low 
population density, 84 percent of the population is within 5 km of a health facility and nearly 99 percent of 
birth in the country are attended by skilled birth personnel. However, the country continues to grapple with 
high mortality rates at 144 per 100,000 live births, putting Botswana off track in the achievement of the third 
Sustainable Development Goal (Good Health and Well Being).  
Figure 8: Comparing Botswana’s Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) with those of selected countries (2015) 
Source: Statistics Botswana, 2017, World Population Prospects, the 2015 Revision and UNFPA report 2017 
Botswana has one of the highest prevalence of HIV in the world, with a major impact on women’s health 
outcomes. Almost twice as many women aged 15-24 (8.9 percent) than men (4.9 percent) are infected with 
HIV. Key factors of women and girls’ increased vulnerability to HIV include their inability to negotiate safe 
sex with their partners and their increased likelihood to engage in transactional sex2.Women are not only 
more vulnerable to the HIV infection than men, they also shoulder the responsibility of caring for sick 
relatives.  
 
1 The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2018. Opportunities and Policy Actions to Maximise the Demographic 
Dividend in Botswana. 
2 United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 2016. Botswana PEPFAR Gender Analysis.

=== PAGE 154 ===
23
Figure 9: HIV prevalence in Botswana by age cohort and gender, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data source: BAIS IV Survey, Statistics Botswana (2014)  
 
 
Gender-Based Violence. GBV is a widespread phenomenon in Botswana, with 67 percent of women having 
experienced some form of GBV. As in many other countries, strong patriarchal norms and social tolerance 
towards violence against women discourages victims from reporting incidents due to shame and fear of 
reprisal. As a result, in the overwhelming proportion of cases, GBV is not reported to authorities. Only 1.2 
percent of women have reported violence to the police. The most common type of gender-based violence 
observed in Botswana is intimate partner violence: domestic violence makes up 62 percent of GBV cases in 
the country1. Key drivers behind domestic violence include alcohol abuse as well as women’s ignorance of 
the law. Indeed, 54 percent of women are not aware of Botswana’s protective legislative framework against 
domestic violence2.  
 
 
1 United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 2014. MSH Fact Sheet Botswana GBV. 
2 Ibid.

=== PAGE 155 ===
24
Figure 10: Forms of violence experienced by women in a lifetime in Botswana 
 
Source: Botswana Relationship Study, 2017 and UNFPA report 2019 
 
 
 
Women’s agency and political participation. Botswana women remain under-represented in key decision-
making institutions and their level of participation in politics has declined in the past year. During the 2019 
general election, only 5 percent of parliamentary candidates were women, while they accounted for about 
9 percent of candidates in 2014. No woman ran for the Presidency. Since the 2019 election, women make 
up 9.5 percent of members of Parliament and hold 15.8 percent of ministerial seats. These figures are far 
below the commitment to achieve at least a 30 percent quota for women in political and decision-making 
structures, made by the Government of Botswana when it signed the SADC Declaration on Gender and 
Development in 1997. Key barriers preventing women to participate in politics include patriarchal beliefs 
that women are not as capable as men in political affairs as well as legal gaps (there is no quota law). Despite 
being highly visible during grassroots campaigns in support of male candidates, women too often lack the 
opportunity to get involved in decision-making processes. 
 
 
Female employment and access to decent work. In Botswana, the labor market continues to reflect 
substantial barriers to women’s economic participation. Men’s labor force participation rate is 11.1 
percentage points higher than female participation (80.2 percent versus 69.1 percent) and their 
unemployment rate is 7 percentage points lower (15.3 percent versus 22.3 percent1). Occupational sex-
segregation remains a key characteristic of the country’s economy. Women are over-represented in the 
 
1 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index.

=== PAGE 156 ===
25
agricultural and informal sectors where most low paying, low-skill jobs can be found. They are 58 percent 
more likely than men to be unpaid family workers1. When women are paid, they earn 29 percent less than 
men on average2. While women are under-represented in the private sector across all skill levels, they 
predominate in the public sector: more than 70 percent of college-educated Botswana women work for the 
government. One of the main factors contributing to these disparities is the fact that women continue to 
play a reproductive role in the household. They remain mostly responsible for childbearing and domestic 
tasks and are the ones caring for sick relatives and the elderly, negatively impacting their presence and 
participation in the labor market. These barriers are reflected in women’s access to entrepreneurship: only 
8.9 percent of firms have female majority ownership3. 
 
 
Female-Headed Household access to ownership and finance. Female-headed households are significantly 
more likely to be poor than male-headed households. In Botswana, 58 percent of poor households are 
headed by females4; 33 percent of female-headed households live below the poverty line while this is the 
case for 27 percent of men-headed households5. A combination of factors contributes to this disparity: FHH 
are characterized by lower levels of education, salaries as well as lower access or control of resources. They 
are more dependent on unreliable sources of income for subsistence such as remittances, maintenance, and 
destitute allowance6. In rural areas, female-headed households have poor access to livestock and land which 
hinders their capacity to invest in sustainable livelihood. While the positive law protects women’s right to 
ownership, the Tswana tradition prohibits women from inheriting property such as land, housing, and cattle. 
75 percent of female-headed households do not own livestock7. Because levels of poverty are highest among 
FHH, especially in rural areas, they also have lower access to energy services resulting in low electricity 
connection rates8. 
 
 
3.2 CAR Gender Gap 
Gender inequality in the Central African Republic is one of the highest in the world and has increased over the 
past decades, owing to repeated conflicts and poverty. The country is ranked 159 out of 162 countries by the 
United Nations’ 2019 Gender Inequality Index (GII). Gender gaps are observed at all levels with respect to women’s 
participation and presence in political, economic, social and cultural life. The Central African society is patrilinear, 
 
1 The African Development Bank Group (AfDB). 2011. Profil Genre de la République Centrafricaine. 
2 The World Bank Group. 2015. CAR Systematic Country Diagnosis. 
3 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index. 
4 Ibid. 
5 World Food Programme (WPF). 2019. Evaluation thématique sur les questions de genre dans les interventions du PAM en 
République centrafricaine 2014-2018. 
6 Lesetedi, N. 2018. A Theoretical Perspective on Women and Poverty in Botswana. Journal of International Women’s studies. 
7 Ibid. 
8 Energia. Botswana Power Corporation. 2011. Gender Mainstreaming in the Botswana Power Corporation.

=== PAGE 157 ===
26
authority is essentially held and exercised by men. Women are traditionally confined to the role of housewives 
and mothers, and their social value heavily depends on their marital status1.  
 
Education. CAR’s educational gender gap is significant, the enrolment rate of girls in school is consistently 
lower than the one of boys. While the whole population has been affected by the destruction of school 
facilities and materials during the conflict, the educational system is characterized by significant gender 
disparities. Only 28.7 percent of women are literate, compared with 47.8 percent of men. More than half of 
girls do not complete primary school compared to 30 percent of boys. Most schools do not have water supply 
or latrines, particularly affecting girls’ attendance during menstruation periods. Only 26 percent of girls reach 
higher education and among them the rate of women who specialize in STEM fields is even lower. In 2011, 
only 8 percent of female medical students completed their degree at the University of Bangui and 2 percent 
of female sciences students2. This disparity may be explained by the fact that technical subjects (carpentry, 
masonry, mechanics, electricity, refrigeration, etc.) are traditionally regarded as male fields3. Girl’s access to 
education is further constrained by the prevalent practice of early marriage and early childbearing. 29 
percent of girls are married by age 15 and 68 percent by age 184. Early marriage and high fertility rates are 
linked to low educational attainment, but also take a heavy toll on women and girls’ health outcomes due 
to higher maternal and infant mortality rates. 
Figure 11: Educational attainment by gender and age group 
Source: ENMC, ICASEES 2017 and World Bank CAR Systematic Country Diagnosis, 2019 
 
 
Health. In CAR women’s health outcomes are extremely low: with 829 deaths per 1000,000 live births, the 
maternal mortality rate is among the highest in the world. Conflicts have caused the destruction of health 
facilities and limited women’s mobility, thereby exacerbating structural deficiencies and impacting provision 
of gynecological and post-partum care. The maternal mortality rate increased by 29 percent and the risk of 
child marriage by 9 percent in the past 30 years5. Traditionally, the decision to use family planning methods 
 
1 The African Development Bank Group (AfDB). 2011. Profil Genre de la République Centrafricaine. 
2 Ibid. 
3 Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). 2012. Consideration of reports submitted by 
States parties under Article 18 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. 
4 United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). 2016. Multi-country real time evaluation of UNICEF Gender-based violence in 
emergencies programme. 
5 Government of CAR. 2019. Rapport National Volontaire de suivi de mise en œuvre des ODD.

=== PAGE 158 ===
27
is taken by the husband, at the expense of women’s agency and right to choose what is best for their health 
and well-being. In 2017, women had on average 4.8 children. Women are also more affected than men by 
epidemics such as HIV/AIDS, with disastrous consequences on their social life and survival as they face 
stigmatization and exclusion. In 2018, female accounted for 56.2 percent of the population aged 15 living 
with HIV. 
 
 
Gender-Based Violence. Although data on the prevalence of GBV are lacking, studies report high-level of 
sexual and gender-based violence across the country. Human Rights Watch reported in 2017 widespread 
and systematic use of rape as a tactic of war during the conflict, particularly affecting women and girls and 
to a lesser extent men and boys. In addition to sexual violence, many women have been abducted by armed 
groups and forced to collect water, cook and wash clothes. Most women did not report the incidents, nor 
did they receive medical care or other support. Many suffered from social stigma within their community 
and households, following the events.  GBV is exacerbated by high levels of social tolerance towards violence 
against women. According to the 2010 CAR Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 80 percent of men and women 
believe wife beating is justified. Furthermore, some harmful traditional practices are still widespread in some 
areas, such as female circumcision and widowhood rites (confiscation of property, levirate). Nearly 25 
percent of women have suffered from Female Genital Mutilation.  
 
 
Women’s agency and political participation. Women’s political presence and participation in CAR’s 
decision-making institutions is extremely low due to traditional norms and lack of education. Yet, from 2014 
to 2016 and for the first time in the country’s history, one woman served as interim President of the Central 
African Republic. Women hold 8.6 percent of seats in National Parliament and 18.2 of ministerial positions, 
well below the 35 percent quota required by the law. Women’s higher illiteracy and lack of political 
instruction is a major obstacle to their participation in public life. Central African Women also lack time to 
dedicate to political affairs, as they are mostly responsible for household duties, as well as the care of 
children and sick people in their community. When women exercise their right to vote, they usually choose 
male over female candidates, due to internalized prejudice towards female politicians1.  
 
 
Female employment and access to decent work. The Central African Republic’s economy is characterized 
by high levels of occupational sex-segregation and employment gap. When they are employed, Central 
African women predominantly work in informal sectors, in inferior position and with lower income. 
Employed women are far more likely than men to work without pay at all, mostly as unpaid agricultural 
laborers in their own households. Women’s labor force participation rate reaches 65 percent compared to 
80 percent for men. More than 7 percent of women are unemployed, while this is the case for only 5.9 
percent of men.  
 
 
1 Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). 2012. Consideration of reports submitted by 
States parties under Article 18 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.

=== PAGE 159 ===
28
Figure 12: Average unemployment, 2000-15 (percentage) 
Source: OCDE report 2018 
 
Female employment is concentrated in agriculture (75 percent), in sectors where productivity and 
profitability are lower. On average, female farmers have limited access to production factors and exploit 
smaller lands. Women are under-represented among salaried workers; only 2.4 percent of women are 
salaried workers compared with 8 percent of men. When women manage to enter the formal sector, their 
wages are lower. The average salary for women employed in the public administration is 357.66 FCFA/h 
compared to 602.63 FCFA/h for men1. Working conditions are particularly precarious in the artisanal 
mining sector, characterized by lower wages and higher risks of sexual exploitation and gender-based 
violence. 
 
 
Entrepreneurship and access to ownership and finance. Although the law does not discriminate against 
women in inheritance and property rights, women’s access to ownership and finance is constrained by 
traditional practices and patriarchal norms. Traditionally, women in male-headed households have no 
control over their personal earned income. In the agriculture sector, key gaps include land access and 
cattle ownership.  Only 19 percent of female-headed household own heads of livestock compared to 27 
percent of male-headed households2. In a country where cattle ownership is seen as a form of saving, this 
disparity makes access to finance even more difficult for women. 63 percent of FHH have access to a plot 
of land, while this is the case for 69 percent of male-headed households3. Female-headed households are 
also less likely to own household and transport equipment such as a bike, car, radio, TV and mobile 
phone4. In rural areas, widows often experience economic and social discrimination. They often struggle 
to exercise their succession rights, due to customary practices and ignorance of the law. Gender gaps in 
access to assets and financial literacy make it more difficult for women to access credit.  Female 
entrepreneurs in the Central African Republic are mostly active in the informal sector and are limited to 
 
1 Government of CAR. 2019. Rapport National Volontaire de suivi de mise en œuvre des ODD.  
2 Government of CAR.2017. Enquête Nationale de Sécurité Alimentaire (ENSA) en RCA. 
3 World Food Programme (WPF). 2019. Evaluation thématique sur les questions de genre dans les interventions du PAM en 
République centrafricaine 2014-2018. 
4 The World Bank. 2012. Etude Diagnostique sur la Situation du Genre en Republique Centrafricaine.

=== PAGE 160 ===
29
low-income subsistence activities. In many cases, they cannot provide collateral. Furthermore, female 
entrepreneurs are more likely to be risk-adverse than men and do not submit as many credit applications1.  
Figure 13: Credit applications in CAR, by sex 
 
Source: Crédit Mutuel de Centrafrique (CMCA), 2009 and CEDAW report, 2012 
 
 
Figure 14: Percentage of Women with access to Banking Services, 2017 
 
Source: FINDEX report, 2017 and International Monetary Fund, 2018  
 
3.3 DRC Gender Gap 
DRC has some of the highest gender gaps in the world. Women are discriminated against with respect to 
education, health care, economic opportunities, access to ownership and political representation. The World 
Economic Forum 2020 Global Gender Gap Index ranked DRC 149 out of 153 countries, last in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
 
1 Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). 2012. Consideration of reports submitted by 
States parties under Article 18 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.

=== PAGE 161 ===
30
Despite a diversity of norms and traditional practices, the patriarchal model of family is predominant and has been 
imposed, including in matrilineal regions, since colonization.  Religious and customary institutions are norms 
maker in the country and have been thought to play a key role in promoting gender inequalities1. Their influence 
is exacerbated by a lack of governance and poor rule of law at the State level.  
 
Education. DRC has yet to close 40 percent of its educational gender gap and the enrolment rate of girls 
in school is consistently lower than the one of boys. Only 66 percent of women are literate, compared 
with 88 percent of men; 61 percent of boys are enrolled in secondary education while this is the case for 
only 38 percent of the girls. The gap keeps widening as the level of education increases: almost twice as 
many men (8.5 percent) as women (4.7 percent) are enrolled in tertiary education2. Although the 
Constitution stipulates free mandatory education and promotes the eradication of illiteracy, primary 
education is not free of charge3. Families will often give preference to the education of boys, especially in 
rural areas, as they cannot afford to send all their children to school. In addition, girls often drop out of 
school due to early marriage and pregnancy or sexual and gender-based violence committed by teachers.  
 
 
Health. The country’s healthcare infrastructure often lacks the capacity to offer the most basic services, 
particularly affecting women’s maternal mortality in a country that has one of the highest fertility rates 
worldwide (6 children per woman on average in 2017). Many pregnancies are occurring too early due to 
the persistence of child marriage and poor access to sexual and reproductive health services, especially 
among indigenous women. Abortion is criminalized under the Penal Code and the prevalence of unsafe 
abortion remains high4. Many women do not have access to basic emergency obstetric and neonatal care. 
As a result, for every 100,000 live births, 693 women die from pregnancy related causes5. Malnutrition is 
another health challenge impacting women, particularly widows who have been found to have significant 
nutritional disadvantage6. Women are also more affected than men by epidemics such as HIV/AIDS and 
Ebola, with disastrous consequences on their social life and survival as they face stigmatization and 
exclusion. Health care facilities consistently lack properly trained staff, equipment, and supplies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA). 2009. The DRC Country Gender Profile. 
2 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index. 
3 Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). 2019.Concluding observations on the eighth 
periodic report of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.  
4 Ibid.  
5 The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2019. Briefing note for the Democratic Republic of Congo on the 
2019 Human Development Report. 
6 Djuikom, Marie Albertine and Dominique van de Walle. 2018. Marital Shocks and Women’s Welfare in Africa.

=== PAGE 162 ===
31
Figure 15: Percentage of health facilities per province with regular access to electricity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16: Percentage of health facilities per province with access to sanitary latrines for outpatients’ services 
 
Source: Evaluation des prestations des services de soins de santé - EPSS 2017-2018 
 
 
Gender-Based Violence. High levels of Sexual and gender-based violence have been documented in DRC, 
with lasting impact on women’s capacity to fully engage in social and economic life. GBV was used as a 
weapon of war during the conflicts and perpetrated by both militia groups and governmental forces. It 
has spread into a wider social phenomenon, threatening women’s safety in schools, the workplace, their 
households and in the streets. According to the 2014 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), 52 percent 
of women aged 15-49 have experienced physical violence while 27 percent have experienced sexual 
violence. Rates of intimate partner violence are even higher: 57 percent of married women have

=== PAGE 163 ===
32
experienced domestic violence. GBV rates vary across provinces; they are particularly high in Kasai 
Occidental and Kasai Oriental where the prevalence of physical and sexual violence is respectively of 30.5 
percent and 57.4 percent1. The main drivers of GBV include social tolerance to violence against women, 
poverty and the lack of a protective legal framework. DRC has the highest level of acceptance of intimate 
partner violence in the region: 74.8 percent of women and 59.5 percent of men aged 15-49 approve the 
practice of husbands beating their wives to discipline them2.  Sexual trafficking of women and girls is also 
widespread in DRC, particularly affecting the most vulnerable such as IDPs and mine workers. While 
Congolese women are often unaware of their rights, the Government of DRC lacks capacities and funds 
to enforce legal provisions against GBV. For instance, domestic violence cases are often judged by 
community and religious leaders who usually follow patriarchal norms, often at the expense of women’s 
right to access justice.  
 
 
Women’s agency and political participation. Women’s presence and participation in decision-making 
institutions is weak at every level due to traditional norms, lack of education and limited economic 
opportunities. Women only account for 10 percent of members of Parliament and hold 17 percent of 
ministerial seats. In 2015, the electoral law was amended to remove a 30 percent quota for women’s 
representation at the national level, thus weakening women’s opportunities to access male-dominated 
power structures. Women’s lack of visibility and influence in the political life reflects their lower decision-
making power in the household. According to the 2014 DHS Survey, 53 percent of women do not 
participate in key household decisions. Although women are traditionally responsible for household 
chores and care for their family, many married women do not have control over their income.  
 
 
Female employment and access to decent work. Congolese women face unequal treatment with respect 
to labor force participation and have lower access to skilled higher-income jobs. They are mostly confined 
to subsistence agriculture and small business in the informal sector. Female labor force participation rate 
is 61.7 percent, compared with 66.5 percent for men. The gap is even wider with respect to access to 
skilled jobs; women only account for 24.4 percent of professional and technical workers (75.6 percent are 
men)3. Agriculture is the largest sector in terms of employment, with more than 70 percent of the 
population dependent on farming for their livelihoods. Women account for 70 percent of labor in 
agricultural production and make up 60 percent of workers in the informal sector. Only 2.8 percent of 
salaried workers are women. When they are paid, women earn lower salaries than men; on average USD 
15 per month versus USD 20 per month for men4. Working conditions are particularly precarious in the 
artisanal mining sector, an industry that attracts many migrant women with poor education and lack of 
other employment opportunities. Female employment in the mining sector is characterized by lower 
wages and higher risks of sexual exploitation and gender-based violence5. 
 
 
1  The World Bank. 2018. Democratic Republic of Congo Systematic Country Diagnostic. 
2 Government of DRC.2014. Demographic and Health Survey (DHS). 
3 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index. 
4  Embassy of Sweden. 2014. Profil du pays en matière d’égalité de genre. 
5 Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). 2019.Concluding observations on the eighth 
periodic report of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

=== PAGE 164 ===
33
 
Entrepreneurship and access to ownership and finance. Women in DRC are discriminated against with 
respect to land tenure, property ownership, and face legal barriers and social stereotypes in 
entrepreneurship. Although women’s right to inherit land is legally guaranteed, customary law continues 
to be applied across the country. In many cases, women are prohibited to own land by tradition and assets 
obtained within marriage are registered under the husband’s name. Widows are particularly vulnerable 
to land predation after their husband’s death, putting them at increased risk of poverty. In DRC, 61.5 
percent of female-headed households are under the poverty line compared with 54.3 percent of male-
headed households1. Lack of access to land and financial resources limit the ability of female 
entrepreneurs to invest in new technologies and productive assets. More than 95 percent of the 
Congolese population is unbanked and there is no significant gap in account ownership. However, female 
financial inclusion is lower than men’s and they face more challenges in accessing domestic credit due to 
lower financial literacy and limited access to professional networks. In 2013, only 3.6 percent of female-
headed firms had a bank loan, compared to 10.2 of male-led companies2.  
Figure 17: Access to Financial Services in the Democratic Republic of Congo 
Source: DRC Survey, START Center - March 2017 
 
3.4 Kenya Gender Gap 
Although Kenya has made great progress in closing gaps across all sectors, significant inequalities between men 
and women remain in education attainment, health outcomes, political empowerment and participation in the 
labor market. Kenya is ranked 109 out of 153 countries in the World Economic Forum 2020 Global Gender Gap 
Index.  
 
Education. Following the adoption of free primary education in Kenya in 2003, near parity has been 
achieved in enrolment at the primary level. 81.2 percent of girls are enrolled in primary school while this 
is the case for 78.3 percent of boys3. However, educational outcomes remain unequal because girls are 
more likely than boys to drop out of school. 78.2 percent of women are literate compared with 85 percent 
 
1 Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). 2017.Country Gender Profile Democratic Republic of The Congo Final Report. 
2 World Bank Group. 2014. Entreprise Survey. 
3 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index.

=== PAGE 165 ===
34
of men. Significant disparities persist in secondary and university education. Only 45.8 percent of women 
reach secondary education (versus 49 percent of men); 9.7 percent enroll in tertiary education while this 
is the case for 13.2 percent of men. Key drivers behind the gap in educational outcomes include unequal 
household responsibilities, high cost of education and early marriage1. Girls are often asked to help their 
mothers with household chores and care of relatives, with negative impact on their school attendance. 
Poorer households, especially in rural areas, tend to give preference to the education of boys at higher 
levels when costs increase. Teenage pregnancies and early marriage also contribute to lower female 
enrolment rates. 13.2 of girls between the age of 15 and 19 are married2.In addition, insecure learning 
environments in some areas disproportionately affect girls, who are more vulnerable to sexual abuse. 
When they reach higher levels, women are less likely to pursue STEM studies. Only 11.1 percent of female 
students are enroled in STEM fields, while this is the case for 20.8 percent of male students3.   
 
 
Health. Despite significant improvement in health outcomes in recent years, women continue to suffer 
from high maternal mortality rates especially among underserved communities. Maternal mortality is at 
342 deaths per 100,000 live births and 61.8 percent of birth are attended by skilled personnel, with wide 
regional disparities. A study produced by UNFPA in 2014 indicates that 15 out of 47 counties accounted 
for 98.7 percent of the total maternal deaths in Kenya. Women and girls are also disproportionately 
affected by indoor pollution due to lack of access to clean cooking. Across the country,more than half (54 
percent) of households use wood as their main source of cooking fuel, more than 84 percent of 
households in rural areas. Women and girls are the main consumers of electricity at the household level 
due to traditional gender roles; they collect at least 60 percent of all firewood supplies in Kenya4. Their 
chronic exposure to hazardous air pollutants (HAP) has been linked to increased prevalence of respiratory 
infections and injuries such as burn5.  
 
Figure 18: Indoor air pollution death in the East African Community 
 
Source: World Health Organization, 2012 and EACREE 2018 
 
1 Malonza, R. Fedha, ML. 2015. An Assessment of Gender and Energy in Kenya: The Underlying Issue. 
2 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index. 
3 Ibid. 
4 United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 2016. Gender Analysis Report. 
5Government of Kenya, Ministry of Energy. 2019. Gender Policy in Energy.

=== PAGE 166 ===
35
 
 
Gender-Based Violence. GBV is a widespread phenomenon in Kenya, commonly affecting women and 
girls. This is a major human rights and public health issue reinforced by social acceptance of violence 
against women and high levels of impunity. Under customary law, domestic violence can be justified as 
an acceptable way of reacting to women’s refusal to obey her husband. The 2014 Kenya Demographic 
Health Survey (KDHS) indicates that 39 percent of ever-married women and 9 percent of men aged 15-49 
report having experienced domestic physical or sexual violence. 45 percent of women between the age 
of 15 and 49 have experienced physical violence. Women living in internally displaced persons camps are 
even more vulnerable to GBV1.  Kenyan girls are particularly vulnerable to harmful traditional practices 
and early marriage. 21 percent of Kenyan girls have been subjected to FGM, mostly in the Somali, 
Samburu, Kisii, and Masaai communities. In the energy sector, several organization have introduced 
policies to prevent gender-based violence. For example, the Kenya Power and Light Company (KPLC) has 
introduced a Sexual Harassment Policy2.   
 
 
Women’s agency and political participation. Since the introduction of a gender quota in the 2010 
Constitution, women’s participation in political institutions has slowly improved. Following the 2013 
general elections, female representation in Parliament increased from 22 to 86 representatives, while 96 
women were elected as members of country assembly. However, women continue to be under-
represented in political positions at all levels. Since the 2017 General Election, women account for 21.8 
percent of members of Parliament and hold 25 percent of ministerial seats3. At the county level, women 
represent 34 percent of Members of the County Assembly (MCAs). Of that number, only 13 percent were 
elected, the remaining female members were appointed4. 
 
 
Female employment and access to decent work. Kenyan women continue to be under-represented in 
the labor market and are more likely to work in the informal sector in lower-quality, lower-paid jobs. 
Women’s participation rate in the labor force reaches 64.1 percent (versus 69.6 percent for men), while 
44.2 percent of women are employed part-time compared to 28.9 percent of men5. Gender gaps in 
outcomes are significant: men’s estimated earned income is $3,600 compared to $2,500 for women. A 
2019 study of 60 Kenyan companies shows wide gender disparities in access to higher-level positions in 
the private sector. Key barriers affecting women’s career development include gender bias and 
stereotypes, lack of mentor, limited informal networks, sexual harassment as well as issues maintaining 
work-life balance6. However, Kenya does outperform global averages on female employment in 
companies per Figure 5 below.  
 
1 United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 2016. Gender Analysis Report. 
2 Clancy, Nthabiseng and Mohlakoana, 2020. Gender audits: An approach to engendering energy policy in Nepal, Kenya and 
Senegal. 
3 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index. 
4 United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 2020. Kenya Gender Equality and Female Empowerment. 
5 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index. 
6 United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 2016. Engendering Utilities: Improving Gender Diversity in 
Power Sector Utilities.

=== PAGE 167 ===
36
Figure 19: Female employees by company level (in percentage) 
Source: Equileap, 2019 
Women’s access to economic opportunities is hampered by gender roles that confine them to domestic 
tasks, especially in rural areas. As a result, women have less time than men to dedicate to economic 
activities. For instance, Kenyan women usually spend more than 5 hours a day near a fire, whereas men 
will spend less than an hour1.  The labor market is segregated by sex according to gender roles, resulting 
in women lower representation in the energy sector. Female employment is largely concentrated in the 
service (mostly in education) and agriculture industries. In the agricultural sector, most women are 
subsistence farmers providing unpaid labor. Only 1.8 percent of women work in engineering, 
manufacturing and construction while this is the case for 6.2 percent of men. The state-utility KPLC started 
embedding gender in its corporate policies in 2008, to achieve greater balance among its workforce. In 
2015, less than 20 percent of its employees were women.  
Figure 20: Percentage of women employees within selected utilities 
 
Source: USAID report, 2016 
 
Entrepreneurship and access to ownership and finance. Although women own 48 percent of businesses 
in Kenya, female entrepreneurs face more challenges than male entrepreneur in their professional 
 
1 Ibid.

=== PAGE 168 ===
37
development. Female-owned businesses are smaller in size and are most likely to be operating from 
home. These businesses include activities such as roadside stands selling vegetables or clothes and retail 
businesses. Due to lack of access to collaterals and limited land ownership, only 7 percent of female 
business owners have access to formal credit. Women are also less likely to have bank accounts than men, 
particularly due to the lack of bank branches in rural areas1. In addition, female entrepreneurs face greater 
discrimination in access to electricity, experiencing delays in obtaining connections and the expectation 
that they will pay bribes to get them2.  
Female-headed households are particularly vulnerable to the lack of access to ownership and finance and 
experience higher poverty levels than men-headed households. They also have lower access to electricity, 
often because of high connection/subscription fees to the grid.  According to Kenya’s 2018 Multi-Tier 
Framework (MTF) survey, 50.4 percent of FHHs in rural areas have no access to electricity compared to 
45.3 percent of male-headed households. In urban areas, 16.3 percent of FHHs have no electricity versus 
9.3 percent of male-headed households3.  
3.5 Mali Gender Gap 
While Mali has made notable gains in gender equality in recent years, significant gaps remain in health 
outcomes, education, economic and political participation. Mali is among the top five most-improved countries 
in the 2020 World Economic Forum Global Gender Index, next to Ethiopia, Spain, Albania and Mexico. However, 
the WEF Index ranks Mali 139 out of 153 countries, as women and girls continue to suffer from harmful cultural 
norms and practices such as FGM and early marriage, educational gaps, unequal division of domestic labor and 
occupational sex-segregation. 
 
Education and health. Despite progress in overall enrolment levels and government efforts to decrease 
the disparity between males and females, Mali has yet to close more than 20 percent of its educational 
gender gap. Women’s literacy rate in the country does not exceed 25 percent, while more than 46 percent 
of men are literate. At every level, women’s enrolment is lower than men, with more than twice as many 
men than women reaching tertiary education. 
 
Figure 21: Mali’s Educational Attainment 
 
MALI’S EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT (percent) 
 
Women 
Men 
Enrolment in primary education 
55.8 
62.0 
Enrolment in secondary education 
26.8 
33.0 
Enrolment in tertiary education 
3.2 
7.7 
 
1 International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA).2019. Renewable Energy: a gender perspective  
2 Ibid. 
3 Government of Kenya. 2019. Gender Strategy in the Energy Sector.

=== PAGE 169 ===
38
Source: Based on data from the World Economic Forum 2020 Global Gender Index 
Girl’s access to education is constrained by the prevalent practice of early marriage and early childbearing, 
particularly in rural areas. Mali has one of the ten highest child marriage prevalence in Africa: more than 10 
times as many women as men are married by age 18 (53 percent versus 4 percent) and 15 percent of girls 
are married before age 151. Early marriage and high fertility rates are correlated to low educational 
attainment, but also take a heavy toll on women and girls’ health outcomes due to higher maternal and 
infant mortality rates. In 2018, women neonatal mortality reached 33 percent and post-neonatal mortality 
22 percent.  
 
Gender-Based Violence. FGM is a widespread practice in Mali affecting 89 percent of women aged 15-49. 
Wide regional disparities have been found, varying from less than 2 percent in the areas of Gao and Kidal, 
to more than 95 percent in Koulikoro and Sikasso regions. Unlike neighborhood countries, Mali has not 
yet legislated on the prohibition of FGM. This practice is reinforced by cultural norms around female 
circumcision: nearly 70 percent of men and women aged 15-49 believe that FGM is a religious 
requirement2. In addition to FGM, other forms of violence against women are widely accepted and 
practiced in the Malian society. For instance, more than 2 in 5 women aged 15-49 have experienced 
physical violence in their lifetime, and a majority of women (79 percent) and nearly half of men (47 
percent) find justification in domestic violence3. Polygamous relationships have been associated with 
higher rates of intimate partner violence towards women than monogamous marriage4.  Although 
polygamy has been slowly declining in the Malian society, 37 percent of women aged 15-49 and 19 percent 
of men were still in polygamous unions in 2018.  
 
 
Women’s political participation. Malian women have extremely limited access to political institutions and 
are widely under-represented in decision-making structures. In 2018, women held 9.5 percent of women 
seats in the National Assembly, 34 percent of ministerial positions, less than 2 percent of mayoral posts 
and 1 governor position5. New legislative and municipal elections were originally scheduled in 2018, but 
where postponed to March/April 2020 due to political incidents and intensifying violence in the central 
and northern part of the country. At the time of writing, sex-segregated election results are not known. 
Women’s low political participation indicates that the Malian society continues to predominantly perceive 
men as the main decision-makers, starting in the household. According to the 2018 Mali Demographic 
and Health Survey, 63 percent of women do not participate in key household decisions such as visiting 
their family or relatives, major households purchase or decisions about their own healthcare. Women’s 
lack of agency in the household has spill-over effects in the labor market which is characterized by 
occupational sex-segregation, and employment gaps.  
 
 
1 Government of Mali. 2018. Mali Demographic and Health Survey or EDSM-VI. 
2 Ibid. 
3 Ibid. 
4 Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere (CARE). 2013. Men, Gender Equality and Gender Relations in Mali. 
5 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). 2019. A Study of Insecurity and Gender in Mali.

=== PAGE 170 ===
39
 
Female employment and access to decent work. When Malian women are employed, they 
predominantly work in the informal sector with poor level of qualifications, in inferior positions and with 
lower, if any, income. Most of women’s participation in the labour market (95 percent) is concentrated in 
agriculture, livestock farming, fishing, trade, processing activities, household activities as well as hotels, 
restaurants and catering services. Employed women are far more likely than men to work without pay at 
all, mostly as unpaid agricultural laborers in their own households : 77 percent of women farmers declared 
in a government survey that they have never received wages for their labor1. When women are paid, 
whether in the formal or informal sector, their income is on average less than half the amount of what 
men receive. Women’s participation in the labor market is further hindered by social norms making them 
responsible for domestic work, especially in rural areas. In addition to the time spent on farming, rural 
women dedicate on average 7 to 8 hours each day to domestic chores2. This translates into a significant 
employment gap with only 63.4 percent of women participating in the labour force compared to 82.7 
percent of men3. This employment gap is reflected in the energy sector, where women are under-
represented and are not allocated the same career opportunities as men. In 2018, the state-owned utility 
Energie du Mali (EDM) only had 446 female employees out of 2234 staff, and only 15 percent of total 
trainings were allocated to women.   
 
 
Entrepreneurship and access to ownership and finance. Women play a major role in agricultural 
production but their access and ownership of ressources remain extremely limited. Mali’s customary law 
excludes women from land ownership and continues to be widely applied in rural areas, despite the 
adoption of the 2006 agricultural orientation law protecting women’s property rights. Although all lands 
in Mali are State property by law, the allocation of lands is often managed by village chiefs and customary 
chiefs. Women’s access to entrepreneurship is further hampered by lack of access to technology and 
credit, preventing women farmers from purchasing necessary inputs and services. In 2012, only 12 
percent of total credit was allocated to women4. Women’s limited access to entrepreneurship is 
compounded by legal barriers: according to article 38 of the Family Code women who wish to undertake 
a commercial business need their husband’s authorization.  
 
3.6 Namibia Gender Gap 
The government of Namibia’s efforts to promote equality between men and women has resulted in continued 
reduction of gender gaps in recent years. Namibia is today one of the most advanced countries worldwide with 
regards to gender equality. The country is ranked 12th out of 153 countries by the World Economic Forum Global 
Gender Index, second in Sub-Saharan Africa (behind Rwanda). Yet, significant disparities remain, especially in the 
fields of women economic participation and opportunities and gender-based violence. Key gender gaps that may 
impact the implementation of the RE project in Namibia are explored below:   
 
1 United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 2012. Mali Gender Assessment. 
2 Ibid. 
3 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index. 
4 United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 2012. Mali Gender Assessment.

=== PAGE 171 ===
40
 
Education and Health. Alongside Botswana and Lesotho, Namibia is among three Sub-Saharan African 
countries to have already achieved parity in education. Namibian women have higher rates of enrolment 
in primary and secondary education, and are twice as many in tertiary education (30.3 percent versus 15.3 
percent for men)1. This is the result of a proactive policy from the Government of Namibia to make 
education accessible to all boys and girls, in both primary and secondary schools. Primary education in 
government schools became free in 2013, followed by secondary schools in 2016. Despite these significant 
progress, two challenges remain: i) persisting educational gap between rural and urban areas, and ii) 
occupational sex-segregation.  
Figure 22: School enrolment of the school going population aged 6-24 years by sex 
Source: Namibia Inter-Censal Demographic Survey (2016)  
Gender gap in STEM remains high, with almost three times as many men as women enroled in STEM fields (21 
percent versus 7.71 percent for women)2. For instance, the University of Namibia’s 2015 annual report indicates 
that the faculty for engineering and IT has the lowest percentage of female enrolment rate (23 percent). The 
scarcity of female graduates in STEM fields translates into lower female participation in the energy sector.  
Although the government of Namibia has improved health outcomes for both men and women in recent years, 
maternal mortality remains high with an estimated 385 deaths per 100,000 live birth3. Underlying causes include 
limited accessibility of health facilities, lack of skilled personnel and delays in seeking care. In 2013, 21 percent of 
the population lived more than 10 kilometers away from a health facility, making access to emergency obstetric 
care extremely difficult.On the other hand, the combination of increased knowledge about sexual and 
reproductive health, high educational attainment and increased female participation in the labour force has 
resulted in a significant drop in fertility rate. In 2017, Namibian women had on average 3.4 children compared to 
6.1 children in 1991. Namibian women of all ages remain particularly vulnerable to HIV, which is a major public 
 
1 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index. 
2 Ibid. 
3 Government of Namibia.2013. Namibia Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS).

=== PAGE 172 ===
41
health issue in a country where the HIV prevalence rate is one of the highest in the world. In 2018 the rate of 
women aged 15 to 49 with HIV reached 14.1 percent compared to 9.3 percent among men of the same age.  
 
Gender-Based Violence. In Namibia, women and girls continue to experience high levels of sexual and 
GBV, exacerbated by substance abuse and harmful traditional practices. Harmful practices include genital 
stretching, testing of girls’ sexual readiness by male relatives and widow cleansing,1 especially in rural 
areas. The 2013 Namibian Demographic and Health Survey indicates that 32 percent of women aged 15-
49 have experienced physical violence. Furthermore, more women than men feel insecure in the public 
space: 48 percent of women compared to 37 percent of men reported feeling unsafe walking in their 
neighborhoods. Although social tolerance to intimate partner violence has decreased over the years 
following legal reforms, 28 percent of women and 22 percent of men continued to justify domestic 
violence in 2013 (compared with 41 percent of men and 35 percent of women in 2006)2.  
 
 
Women’s agency and political participation. Namibia has one of the highest level of women’s political 
participation in the continent. Since the November 2019 election, the rate of female members of 
Parliament reaches 46 percent, a 6 percent increase from last term. The election also resulted in increased 
female participation at ministerial levels:  38 percent of cabinet positions are held by women, a 28 percent 
increase, including in traditionaly male-dominated ministries such as foreign relations, trade and justice. 
These progress indicate increasing acceptance of women’s leadership in the political arena, although 
parity has not been achieved.  A survey conducted in 2014/2015 by Afrobarometer revealed that 80 
percent of men and women agreed with the statement that women should have equal opportunities to 
be elected to political office, while this was the case for only 67 percent of respondents in 2005/2006. 
However, women continue to report lower interest in politics and participation in politics than men : 63 
percent versus 70 percent for men.  
 
 
Female employment and access to decent work. Although women are increasingly more present in the 
labor market, gaps remain with respect to earned income, vulnerable employment, and unemployment. 
Namibian women are indeed less likely to be employed: in 2018 unemployment rate was higher among 
female (34.3 percent) than among male (32.5 percent). Latest figures indicate that women’s labour force 
participation rate reaches 58.7 percent, compared with 67.4 percent for men3. They are also more likely 
to earn a lower income and occupy informal employment: 61.2 percent of employed women are in the 
informal sector, compared to 54.1 percent of men4. In 2013, at least 60 percent of women earned less 
than their husbands and more than one-third of women and girls who engaged in agriculture work 
received no pay for it5. Rural women are particularly vulnerable to unemployment and vulnerable 
employment. In 2016, about 44 percent of the female rural labour force was unemployed, compared to 
 
1 Legal Assistance Centre. Delegation of the European Union to Namibia. 2017. Namibia Gender Analysis. 
2 Ibid. 
3 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index. 
4 Government of Namibia.2013. Namibia Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS). 
5 Ibid.

=== PAGE 173 ===
42
34 percent in urban areas1. In rural regions, most active women are engaged in the agriculture, forestry 
and fishing sector as subsistence farmers or communal farm workers. They are therefore more exposed 
to the consequences of climate change  and are likely to suffer disproportionate effects with the declining 
availability of water and other resources. For instance, in times of droughts, many women remain in the 
household while men seek work in urban areas. In 2016, 46 percent of Namibian households were headed 
by women (48 percent in rural areas and 41 percent in urban areas)2. Research indicates that FHH are 
more likely to be affected by poverty than men-headed households. Occupational sex-segregation is 
highly present in the country, affecting women’s participation in the energy sector as employees and 
entrepreneurs. Men predominate in the construction, transportation, wholesale and retail trade 
industries, while women are more likely to be found in the education, accommodation and food services 
sectors. For instance, in 2018, 8.9 percent of men in the labor market were employed as occupation plant 
and machine operators while this was the case for 0.4 percent of employed female3.  
Figure 23: Employed persons by industry and sex (percentage) 
Employed persons by industry and sex (percent) 
INDUSTRY 
MALE 
FEMALE 
Manufacturing 
7.8 percent 
4.6 percent 
Electricity, gas, steam and air condition 
0.7 percent 
0.2 percent 
Construction 
11.6 percent 
0.9 percent 
Accommodation and food service activities 
5.3 percent 
17.5 percent 
Education 
4 percent 
9 percent 
Human health and social work activities 
1.5 percent 
3.9 percent 
Activities of households as employers 
5.7 percent 
14.2 percent 
Source: Namibia Labor Survey 2018 
 
Entrepreneurship and access to ownership and finance. Although women’s right to access and own land 
is protected by land reforms and laws, traditional customary law is still applied in some rural areas, 
affecting women’s inheritance and property rights. Men and women enjoy relatively equal access to bank 
account ownership4. However, significant gaps remain when it comes to access to formal credit and 
entrepreneurship. Figures from the Agricultural Bank of Namibia (Agribank) indicates that in 2017, women 
accounted for 22 percent of all loans but only 10 percent of total loan amounts5. Poor financial skills, 
reliance on informal credit and lack of collateral are among the key barriers to accessing bank loans. In 
2014/2015, only 26 percent of businesses had majority female ownership while 41 percent had female 
participation in ownership6.  
 
1 Legal Assistance Centre. Delegation of the European Union to Namibia. 2017. Namibia Gender Analysis. 
2 Government of Namibia.2016. Namibia Inter-Censal Demographic Survey.  
3 Government of Namibia. 2018. Namibia Labour Survey, 2018. 
4 The World Bank Goup. 2017. Global Findex. 
5 Legal Assistance Centre. Delegation of the European Union to Namibia. 2017. Namibia Gender Analysis. 
6 The World Bank Group. 2014. World Bank Group, Enterprise Surveys, Namibia.

=== PAGE 174 ===
43
 
 
 
3.7 Uzbekistan Gender Gap 
While Uzbekistan has significantly increased women’s education and health outcomes in the past decades, 
women continue to have limited access to economic and political opportunities. Following Uzbekistan’s 
independence in 1991, traditional values and patriarchal social norms have gained traction, affecting women’s 
presence and participation in the political and economic arena1. Uzbekistan is ranked 64 out of 162 by the 2018 
UN Gender Inequality Index (GII), and 108 out of 182 in the Gender Development Index, lagging behind 
Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Armenia and Georgia. The GII measures gender inequalities in reproductive health, 
empowerment and economic status, while the Gender Development Index measures disparities between women 
and men in health, knowledge, and livings standards. 
Figure 26: Gender Index 
Sources: 
United 
Nations, 
Human 
Development 
Report 
2017; 
and 
IMF 
report 
2019 
Note: CCA = Caucasus and Central Asia; EMDA = emerging and developing Asia; EMDE = emerging and developing 
Europe.  
 
Health and Education. The Government of Uzbekistan has enacted policies to improve reproductive 
health indicators resulting in substantial decrease of maternal and infant mortality rates in past decades. 
The maternal mortality rate went from 41 per 100,000 live births in 2000 to 29 per 100,000 live births in 
20172. Some barriers to accessing quality health care remain, especially in rural areas, owing to long 
distance to health facilities, and the high cost of care. Access to safe drinking water and sanitation is also 
unreliable in rural areas, particularly affecting women who are primarily responsible for water collection 
and household chores. Uzbekistan has achieved near parity in primary and secondary school enrolment. 
Nonetheless, two educational gap remain: (i) women’s limited access to higher education and (ii) 
 
1 Rano Turaeva. 2017. Gender and changing women’s roles in Uzbekistan: from Soviet workers to post-Soviet entrepreneur. 
2 World Bank Gender Data Portal.

=== PAGE 175 ===
44
educational sex-segregation. The Constitution of Uzbekistan guarantees equal access to education and 
near parity is observed in primary and secondary enrolment. In 2018, the female gross enrolment ratio in 
primary education was of 103.4 percent (105 percent for men) and 92.7 percent in secondary education 
(93.9 percent for men)1. However, women’s enrolment rates in higher education are significantly lower’s 
than men’s. In 2018, only 8.2 percent of women were enrolled in tertiary education, compared with 11.8 
percent of men2. Key drivers behind women’s lower tertiary education rates include social norms that 
encourage women to marry after completing secondary school and financial barriers such as the cost of 
tuition fees, accomodation and transportation to a higher educational institution. This particularly affect 
poorer households in rural areas who might prioritize the education of boys for economic reasons. In 
higher education, women and men’s educational path is often determined by gender roles and 
stereotypes. Men are more likely to enroll in technical fields for instance in transport, communication, 
construction and agriculture, whereas women predominate in traditionally female fields of study such as 
education and healthcare. Educational sex-segregation directly affect women’s economic opportunities 
because male-dominated fields generally lead to better-quality jobs with higher incomes. It also impedes 
women’s presence and participation in the energy sector.  
 
Figure 27 : Share of tertiary graduates by area of study (percentage), 2011 
 
Source: World Bank Gender Statistics, 2015. 
 
 
Women’s political participation. Since the adoption of a quota law in 2004 requiring at least 30 percent 
of female candidates in political party lists, the number of elected women in the National Assembly has 
consistently increased. However, women’s political participation remain extremely low at the national 
and local level: women make up only 16 percent of the legislative chamber (9.4 percent in 2014) whereas 
few women hold leadership positions in local government. The local leaders, hokim, are traditionaly male. 
 
1 UNESCO Database of Resources on Education. 
2 Ibid.

=== PAGE 176 ===
45
Women’s presence and participation in the political arena is further hampered by gender stereotypes 
confining them to the household and reducing their free time. Women are estimated to spend three times 
more time than men in unpaid work (cooking, housekeeping etc.)1.  
 
 
Female employment and access to decent work. Although Uzbekistan has a relatively high rate of female 
participation in the labour market, they remain under-representated, have limited access to formal 
employment and are concentrated in lower-income sectors. In 2019, 55.8 percent of women aged 15-64 
participated in the labor force, compared with 81.7 percent of men2. Women’s share in formal 
employment (45.7 percent) is also lower than that of men (54.3 percent)3. One of the main drivers behind 
this gender imbalance is the prevalent social norm attributing responsibility for unpaid care work to 
women. According to a recent International Monetary Fund (IMF) survey, a majority of respondents (60 
percent) agreed that men should be given preference over women in the job market when jobs are scarce. 
This indicates adherence to the patriarchal family model in which women’s main responsibility lies with 
the household and children.  
 
Figure 28: When jobs are scarce, men should have more right to a job than women (percent of respondents) 
 
Source: IMF value Survey, 2019 Note: EMDE = emerging and developing Europe 
Women are more likely to earn income through informal and family-based employment, for instance in farming 
or handicrafts, therefore increasing their vulnerability and dependency due to lower access to social benefits. 
Women’s limited access to economic opportunities is exacerbated by occupational sex-segregation: female 
employment is concentrated in the public service sector (education, health care, social security) where salaries 
are inferior, while men predominate in technical fields such as construction, transport and communication. As 
a result, the gender wage gap between men and women is estimated between 60 percent and 53 percent4. 
 
1 Asian Development Bank. 2018. Uzbekistan Country Gender Assessment Update. 
2 World Bank Data Bank. 
3 Asian Development Bank. 2018. Uzbekistan Gender Assessment. 
4 Ibid.

=== PAGE 177 ===
46
Only 8 percent of workers in construction and 11.3 percent in transport and communications are women, while 
men only account for 18.4 percent of all employees in health care. This is reinforced by legal restrictions on 
women’s entry to technical industries. Article 225 of the Labor code of Uzbekistan limits women’s employment 
in several fields including transport, construction, natural resources extraction, manufacturing and industry. 
 
 
 
Figure 29 : Sex-Disaggregation of the Employed, by Sector, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Official statistics and Asian Development Bank Uzbekistan Gender Assessment, 2018 
 
 
Female employment in the Energy industry. Occupational sex-segregation translates into lower female 
presence and participation in the energy industry. Women are under-represented in this sector, especially 
in technical fields and in management positions, and are more likely to perform administrative tasks. Only 
17 percent of all employees from the state-owned energy company Uzbekenergo are women. Women’s 
under-representation in the energy sector can also be explained by limited opportunities for skills 
development and lack of awareness of employment opportunities in the sector.

=== PAGE 178 ===
47
Figure 30: Sex-Disaggregation of Uzbekenergo staff (percent) 
Source: Asian Development Bank Uzbekistan Gender Assessment, 2018 
 
 
Entrepreneurship and access to finance. While the private sector has been taking more space in the 
country’s economy, the Government of Uzbekistan has enacted policies to promote women’s 
entrepreneurship. Women represent around 38 percent of individual entrepreneurs in Uzbekistan, and 
are mostly working in handicrafts or food production in rural areas1. Several constraints affect women’s 
capacity to create and expand businesses: women are more likely to own small-scale businesses and have 
limited access to finance due to insufficient collaterals, as well as limited financial skills and knowledge 
about loan application processes. Women only own 22.3 percent of the total value of property officially 
registered2and only 33 percent of female entrepreneurs resort to bank loans for start-up capital3. 
Women’s lack of access to entrepreneurship is compounded by psychological barriers affecting 
confidence and limiting risk-taking behaviors. Furthermore, occupational sex-segregation is reflected in 
entrepreneurship and women are under-represented in traditionaly male sectors such as construction 
and design. 
 
 
1 Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO).2019. Gender, agriculture and rural development in Uzbekistan. 
2 Asian Development Bank. 2018. Uzbekistan Country Gender Assessment Update. 
3 Business Forum of Uzbekistan.2014.

=== PAGE 179 ===
48
Figure 31: Male and Female Individual Entrepreneurs by Sector (percent) 
 
Source: State Committee of the Republic of Uzbekistan on Statistics, 2012 and Asian Development Bank 
Uzbekistan Gender Assessment, 2018 
 
 
Gender-Based Violence. Reliable data are still lacking to assess the prevalence of GBV in Uzbekistan, but 
attitudinal surveys show high levels of tolerance towards violence against women. One of the most 
common cause of domestic violence is the perception that women are challenging their submissive role 
in the household1. The president signed a Law on the Protection of Women from Harassment and Violence 
in September 2019, yet services for victims continue to be scarce.  
 
 
 
1 Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO).2018. Uzbekistan Gender Assessment.

=== PAGE 180 ===
49
4. PROPOSED ENTRY POINTS 
 
Building upon this preliminary assessment of key gender gaps in the seven targeted countries, four main areas of 
interventions have been identified, namely: i) Female employment and skill gaps in the energy sector, ii) Female 
employment and livelihoods in the areas of implementation of RE projects, iii) Gender-based violence and iv) 
women access to services as energy consumers. Potential mitigations actions for each area are highlighted below 
and will be explored during project design: 
a. Female employment and skill gaps in the energy sector: the main barriers to women participation in the 
energy sector, as employees and entrepreneurs, include social norms that confine women to unpaid 
household and care work, occupational sex-segregation, limited capacities and skills, as well as 
discriminatory work environments. In some countries, legislation may also prevent women from entering 
certain industries, affecting their employment in the energy sector. Without a proactive policy to promote 
female economic participation, men may disproportionately benefit from new employment opportunities 
across the RE value chain, particularly in construction, operation and maintenance. Women may already 
enjoy indirect employment opportunities in ancillary industries such as health, social services and 
catering. Increasing female employment in non-traditional fields can contribute to challenging social 
norms and stereotypes, ultimately enhancing women’s voice and agency. 
Entry points for addressing this issue include the promotion of women’s participation in the realization 
of renewable energy projects, in energy generation, transmission and distribution, and the promotion 
of female-friendly infrastructure and services: 
- 
Vocational trainings and capacity-building to increase women’s technical skills (including 
programs for women to gain hands-on experience in the energy sector) and focus on reforms in 
the public utilities managing RE projects; 
- 
Partnerships with educational and technical training institutes to enhance female school-to-work 
transition in non-traditional fields;  
- 
During the procurement phase, technical support would be provided to national stakeholders to 
ensure a transparent and equitable process. Procuring entities would be encouraged to the extent 
possible to include non-price factors at relevant stage of the procurement process, to enhance 
female employment and the participation of women-owned businesses; 
- 
The adoption of equal opportunities practices at the corporate level would be encouraged 
through policy dialogue and capacity-building activities; and 
- 
Outreach initiatives to allow local players to be informed of the program’s business opportunities. 
Special attention would be paid to the extent possible to the promotion of women-run businesses 
along the project development cycle. 
b. Female employment and livelihoods in the areas of implementation of RE projects: RE projects are 
frequently located in remote areas with good solar/wind resources and large plots of lands, but where 
living standards are below the country average. Local communities often face numerous challenges 
hindering their development. Women, if employed, are more exposed to lower-paid, lower-quality

=== PAGE 181 ===
50
employment in the informal sector (e.g. textile, crafts, food processing, small-scale farming and retail 
trading). They also have limited access to ownership of key inputs or assets. As a result, women may face 
more difficulties with regards to access to entrepreneurship and ownership of micro, small, and medium-
sized enterprises.  
 
The socio-economic needs of the local communities will be assessed, and actions empowering women 
will be prioritized to the extent possible along the electrification program. Those may include:  
 
- 
Providing women and girls with sources of low-risk income and entrepreneurship opportunities 
while ensuring that community needs are accommodated. The activities to support would be 
selected after assessing the needs of the local communities and putting in place a scorecard to 
prioritize projects benefiting women. Actions may cover health services (such as mobile clinics), 
infrastructures to open-up a village or education and skills-building activities, for instance in 
traditional home-based activities such as handicrafts, or in agricultural activities. Particular 
attention would be paid to illiterate women when relevant. Support may be provided through 
grants, or as a requirement under local bids and/or part of private sector Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) aspects;  
- 
Ongoing support would be offered to support female entrepreneurship notably through the 
creation of peer groups, in partnership with local NGOs. 
 
c. Gender-based violence: women routinely experience sexual harassment and intimate partner violence in 
target countries and the risk of violence against women can increase during the deployment of solar and 
wind projects, due to the presence of migrant workers on construction sites. Large-scale energy projects 
may also increase rates of gender-based violence in surrounding areas, according to studies. For instance, 
households with a rise in income due to employment in construction sites can see increased expenditures 
on alcohol, a known driver of GBV1.  
 
The risk of increased GBV, sex trafficking, and child abuse during the realization of large-scale 
infrastructure projects will be mitigated through adopting the following actions, required by the World 
Bank procedures and outlined in the WBG GBV Good Practice Note (2018):  
 
- 
Assessment of GBV risks by the World Bank task team using the World Bank GBV risk assessment 
tools; 
- 
Assessment of GBV risks by the client country during project preparation and particularly during 
community consultations. GBV considerations will be included in Safeguard documents 
(Environmental and Social Assessment ESA, Environmental and Social Management Plan); 
- 
Development of a GBV Action Plan; 
- 
Assessment of the project capacity to provide access to safe and ethical services for survivors; 
 
1 Kuriakose, A. and de Boer, F. 2015. Gender and Renewable Energy: A Literature Review.

=== PAGE 182 ===
51
- 
Establishment of GBV Risk and Mitigation Response Measures such as including specific 
requirements during procurement process based on ESA findings, and providing GBV trainings to 
contractors, consultants and clients; 
- 
Monitoring and reporting of GBV activities; 
- 
Responding to GBV incidents in cooperation with GBV service providers. 
 
Figure 32: WBG mandatory requirements in Major Civil Works 
 
            Source: WBG GBV Good Practice Note (2018) 
 
d. Women access to services as energy consumers: Among project countries with lower electrification rates 
such as DRC and CAR, women suffer from time-poverty and a health-burden, as they shoulder the 
responsibility of food preparation, as well as fuel and water collection. In target countries, the main barrier 
to women accessing energy services from renewable energy may include high cost of connecting to the 
electrical grid, resulting in possible certain households being left behind. Women may resort to biomass 
fuels for cooking and heating purposes increasing their time poverty and limiting their ability to create 
income-generating opportunities.  A study conducted by the Botswana Power Corporation found out that 
female-headed households were most affected by lack of access to modern energy, whereas these 
households had a high-demand for income-generating opportunities1. Furthermore, women-headed 
businesses routinely face more constraints than men in accessing grid electricity, such as delays in 
obtaining electrical connections and the expectations that they will pay bribes for these services2. 
Improving access to electricity services can therefore reduce the time and labor burden of women, 
 
1 Energia. Botswana Power Corporation. 2011. Gender Mainstreaming in the Botswana Power Corporation  
2 The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2016. Gender, Climate Change and Food Security.

=== PAGE 183 ===
52
generate health and education benefits, increase female labor participation and incomes. Research shows 
that in rural areas, energy access is correlated with 59 percent higher wages1 . 
               The following interventions would be promoted to increase women’s access to electricity: 
- 
Conduct household surveys as a tool to assess affordability of services and willingness to pay, in 
order to better target financial support; 
- 
Inclusion of women and men’s differentiated needs in the design of electrification programs, 
including by promoting women's engagement during stakeholders’ consultations; 
- 
Targeted subsidies or credit schemes to the extent possible to provide electricity to some of the 
poorest and most under-developed regions, especially in countries where mini-grid projects will 
be deployed (DRC, CAR); 
- 
Micro-financing schemes to the extent possible to help women-owned businesses overcome the 
initial cost of connection. Partnerships with local NGOs could be considered to manage loans. 
 
 
 
 
1 O’Dell, K., Peters, S., & Wharton, K. 2014. Women, Energy and Economic Empowerment; applying a Gender Lens to amplify   
the impact of energy access.

=== PAGE 184 ===
53
5. STRATEGIC APPROACH  
 
5.1 Facility Level 
 
The Facility will follow a systematic approach and provide support to the projects with a focus on data 
collection, generating knowledge and providing training and capacity-building activities. At every step of the 
project cycle, the Gender and Energy program of the World Bank Energy Sector Management Assistance Program 
(ESMAP) will be available to provide technical assistance to the project team and the client country. Kenya, Mali, 
Uzbekistan and DRC have already benefited from ESMAP Gender and energy regional programs that aim to 
strengthen women’s role in the energy sector as consumers, employees and entrepreneurs. 
 
The Facility will encourage the recruitment of a balanced female-to-male employment ratio within the Project 
Management Unit (PMU) team to the extent possible. The standard World Bank implementation process will 
indeed be put in place and include a PMU in each country, responsible for developing, implementing and 
monitoring each project. If needed, staff members including the Project Manager and the Environment and Social 
Protection Specialists may receive capacity-building trainings. This will ensure that identified gaps as well as sexual 
harassment and GBV risks are considered throughout the project cycle. 
 
Obtaining stakeholders buy-in will be key in ensuring that interventions to promote women’s employment and 
enhance their livelihood are effectively implemented with measurable outcomes. Institutional and behavioral 
change are a long-time process that will require sustained support of all relevant stakeholders (local councils, 
national energy policymakers, energy ministries and energy companies) throughout the program cycle. Countries 
adherence to international agreements and national legal frameworks on gender -equality, are a good starting 
point to strengthen government’s support for gender-interventions. The following strategy will be followed to 
increase stakeholders’ commitments, to the extent possible: 
 
- 
Engage in policy-dialogue with client countries through dedicated meetings, to build awareness and 
sensitivity about the benefits of promoting women’s economic empowerment and agency and remove 
legal and regulatory barriers to female employment in the energy sector; 
 
- 
Closely align proposed activities with each country’s national priorities and Gender Strategies, such as 
community development or female employment; 
 
- 
Identify an institutional gender-focal point to serve as interlocutor during project implementation, if 
appropriate; 
 
- 
Offer technical support to help utilities invest in workforce diversification, building on existing internal 
gender strategies when available. This support may take the form of workshops on gender-related 
concepts with senior management, or a review of training plans to better integrate female employees.

=== PAGE 185 ===
54
In the private sector, companies are increasingly adopting a focus on gender equality in CSR policies. Indeed, a 
growing body of research shows that mitigating risks for women and empowering them as consumers, employees 
and entrepreneurs can lead to increased firm productivity and better performance. During projects design, the 
private sector can be involved in financing interventions to i) create income-generating opportunities for women 
in affected areas, ii) implement mechanisms to prevent and respond to GBV incidents, iii) increase connection 
rates among female-headed households, for instance through capacity-building workshop on maintaining and 
developing energy services. 
 
5.2 Project level  
 
At the project level, the following approach would be followed: 
 
a. Data collection to document the baseline situation and identify gaps. Baseline data will be collected to 
set targets and measure progress during implementation, with a focus on countries where existing 
baseline sex-disaggregated data are weak. Research will build upon existing country gender diagnostics 
and action plan when available, to ensure national priorities are understood and considered. To support 
project design and implementation, stakeholders’ consultations will involve female participants, to 
understand men and women differentiated needs. In addition, initial assessments will include an analysis 
of the differentiated impact of the SRMI project on men and women, through the involvement of gender 
and energy experts (Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, Resettlement Action Plans etc.). 
 
b. Identifying and implementing relevant actions. Based on the initial diagnosis and inclusive stakeholders’ 
consultations, targeted activities will be identified to address key gender gaps. These may include (i) 
actions to promote female employment in the renewables sector (including capacity building and 
programs for women to gain hands-on experience in the energy sector such as support for school-to-work 
transition), (ii) financing local communities projects empowering women in the area of implementation 
of the RE projects (such as activities generating revenues), (iii) implementation of prevention measures to 
mitigate GBV in the area of implementation of the RE projects and (iv) facilitating energy access for FHH 
(including capacity-building workshops to maintain and develop energy services).  
 
c. M&E and Knowledge management. Since 2017, the World Bank Group strengthened its monitoring 
system with regards to gender, focusing on results and outcomes. A gender-tag was launched to identify 
projects who effectively promote equality between men and women and are aligned with the WBG 
gender strategy. The SRMI facility will adopt a gender perspective and aim to close key gaps in its sub-
projects. Results will be monitored throughout the project and be used for real-time adjustments during 
implementation. To expand the knowledge base, projects will build on lessons learnt from prior projects 
as well as regional and country base knowledge production and exchange learning opportunities. 
 
d. Strengthening female participation and voice during Stakeholders Consultations. Consultations and 
public meetings with stakeholders will be conducted throughout the project cycle in a participatory 
manner and with a special focus on engaging women. This will help gaining knowledge about community

=== PAGE 186 ===
55
concerns during project preparation and help monitor impact and undertake real-time correction during 
implementation. Special attention will be paid to using local dialect when relevant and including women 
from minority ethnic groups and other socially vulnerable groups.   
 
Building on prior experiences, consultations will be organized at a convenient time for women, taking into 
account their household and childcare responsibilities. Female facilitators and local female leaders will be 
identified to ensure that women’s voice is heard during consultations. Women-only discussion groups 
may also be organized if appropriate. The participation of female representatives from utilities and local 
authorities will be encouraged. To ensure the project’s sustainability, partnerships will be created to the 
extent possible with women’s groups and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs).

=== PAGE 187 ===
56
6. GENDER ACTION PLAN 
 
The Gender Action Plan proposed below is indicative at this stage and may be further amended and adapted according to knowledge gathered during the project 
inception phase, to reflect local context: 
 
 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Impact Statement: The program will follow a systematic approach and provide cross-support to sub-projects interventions to narrow gender gaps with a focus 
on policy dialogue, data collection, training and capacity-building activities. The expected impact includes enhanced female economic participation in the 
energy sector, increased access to electricity and the creation of income-generating opportunities for women in affected communities.  
 
Outcome Statement 1:  
The SRMI facility will focus on the following four key areas: i) sector-specific and country-level gender knowledge to support the design and implementation of 
projects is generated, ii) an enabling policy and legal environment for women’s economic participation is promoted through policy dialogue activities, iii) 
tailored project and program interventions to address identified gender gaps are designed and implemented iv) Knowledge and learning opportunities are 
enhanced. 
 
Output 1 Sector specific and country-level gender knowledge is generated and shared to support the design and implementation of projects

=== PAGE 188 ===
57
 
 
1.1 Undertake sector gender assessments to identify key 
gender gaps 
 
1.2. Organize multi-stakeholders workshops at country level to 
present key findings from the assessments 
 
1.3. Conduct Gender need assessment of institutional partners 
(utilities)  
 
1.4. Hold consultations with key stakeholders to gather 
knowledge on men and women differentiated needs with 
enhanced women’s participation  
 
 
1.1Number of gender assessment developed 
       Target: 7 
  
1.2.Number of multi-stakeholder workshops 
focused on gender equality  
       Target: 7 
 
1.3.Number of gender need assessments of 
institutional partners conducted 
      Target: 3 
  
1.4.Percentage 
of 
female 
participants 
in 
community consultations 
       Target: 30 percent 
 
At 
the 
time of 
project 
design 
 
 
Borrowers 
with 
the 
support of the WB team 
 
Output 2 An enabling policy and legal environment for encouraging gender equality is promoted through policy dialogue activities 
 
 
2.1 Organize dedicated meetings with client countries on 
women’s economic empowerment and legal and regulatory 
barriers to female employment in the energy sector 
 
2.2 Organize community and multi-stakeholder dialogue 
including with the Ministry of Women’s affairs, private 
sector, NGOs, women’s groups and Civil Society 
Organizations as applicable 
 
2.3 Strengthen capacities of institutional stakeholders on the 
planning and design of gender-sensitive energy policies 
 
2.1 Number of  meeting organized with client countries 
on women’s economic empowerment in the energy 
sector  
      Target: 3 
 
2.2 Number of community and multi-stakeholder 
dialogue organized with the Ministry of Women’s 
Affairs and private sector 
Target: 7 
 
2.3Number of capacity-building workshop organized 
with institutional stakeholders 
        Target: 2 
 
By 
the 
Facility’s 
end 
date 
 
Borrowers with support 
of the WB team

=== PAGE 189 ===
58
 
2.4 Strengthen capacities of Project Management Unit staff on 
gender and energy issues. 
 
2.4Number of capacity-building workshops organized 
with PMU staff 
                Target: 3 
Output 3 Tailored project and program interventions are implemented to promote gender equality 
 
At the project and program level, the following approach would be 
adopted and tailored according to each sub-project context. Examples 
of interventions to e.g. promote female employment and enhance 
women’s livelihood are listed below and classified by area of 
intervention. Final decisions will be made at project design: 
 
3.1 Overarching the projects under this Facility will focus on 
meeting the Gender Tag per corporate target of the World Bank.  
 
Female employment and skill gaps in the energy sector:  
3.2 Provide vocational trainings and capacity-building to 
increase women’s technical skills (including programs for 
women to gain hands-on experience in the energy sector) 
 
3.3 Build Partnerships with educational and technical training 
institutes to enhance female school-to-work transition in 
non-traditional fields 
 
3.4 Launch outreach initiatives to allow local players to be 
informed of the program’s business opportunities. Special 
attention would be paid, to the extent possible, to the 
promotion of women-run businesses along the project 
development cycle 
 
 
3.1 Number of projects that fall under tag 
requirements that will meet the Gender Tag 
Target: 55 percent 
Female employment and skill gaps in the energy sector:  
 
3.2 Number 
of 
capacity-building 
programs 
to 
increase women’s technical skills designed and 
supported in RE projects  
       Target: 3 
 
3.3 Number of partnerships formed with training 
centers/schools 
Target: 3 
 
3.4 Number of outreach initiatives to inform local 
players of the program’s business opportunities 
  Target: 3 
 
Female employment and livelihoods in the areas of 
implementation of RE projects: 
 
3.5 
Number of programs fostering local socio-
economic development (focused on women’s 
empowerment) 
          Target: 3 
 
 
During 
the 
project 
cycle 
 
Borrowers with support 
of the WB team

=== PAGE 190 ===
59
Female 
employment 
and 
livelihoods 
in 
the 
areas 
of 
implementation of RE projects: 
 
3.5 Provide women and girls with sources of low-risk income 
and entrepreneurship opportunities while ensuring that 
community needs are accommodated 
 
3.6 Organize meetings with female-led firms to share 
information on contracts/tenders opportunities brought by 
the RE projects 
 
Gender-based violence (GBV): 
 
3.7 Assessment of GBV risks at project sites as per the World 
Bank Group GBV mandatory requirements 
 
3.8 Development of GBV Action Plans as per the World Bank 
Group GBV mandatory requirements 
 
Women access to services as energy consumers: 
3.9 Hold information sessions with local communities on 
connection procedures, costs, safety aspects and benefits 
of energy services (health, time-poverty) 
 
3.10 
Develop targeted subsidies or credit schemes to the 
extent possible to increase FHH connection to the grid 
 
3.11Develop micro-financing schemes to the extent possible to help 
women-owned businesses overcome the initial cost of connection.  
 
3.6 Number of information sessions held with 
female-led firms  
         Target: country dependent 
 
Gender-based violence (GBV): 
 
3.7 Number of assessments of GBV risks at 
project sites.  
   Target: 7 
 
3.8 Number of GBV Action Plan produced:  
Target: 7 
 
Women access to services as energy consumers: 
 
3.9 Percentage of female participants who  
attend information sessions 
 Target: 30 percent 
 
3.10Number of FHH households connected to the 
grid.  
Target: country dependent 
  
3.11Number of women-owned businesses who 
benefit from micro-financing schemes to access 
electricity 
Target: country dependent

=== PAGE 191 ===
60
Output 4 Enhanced knowledge and learning opportunities 
4.1Production of case studies showcasing best practices and 
findings  
4.2Organization of Forums focused on gender through the 
Facility 
with 
the 
participation 
of 
targeted 
country 
representatives 
4.3Undertake knowledge-sharing with local women’s 
organizations and NGOs 
4.1Number of case studies produced by the 
facility 
Target: 2 
4.2Number of events with a focus on gender held 
through the facility  
Target: 3 
4.3Number of events held with local NGOs 
through the facility  
Target: 3 
On 
a 
rolling 
basis 
World Bank 
________________________
