=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.1.20135
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.1.20135
creationDate: D:20210223114258+09'00'
modDate: D:20210223160159+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
16 – 19 March 2021 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 14 
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
23 February 2021 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum VIII 
Funding proposal package for FP161 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Building Regional Resilience through Strengthened 
Meteorological, Hydrological and Climate Services in the Indian Ocean Commission 
(IOC) Member Countries"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
123 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
128 
Secretariat’s assessment 
131 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
146 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
157 
Gender documentation 
161

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Building Regional Resilience through Strengthened 
Meteorological, Hydrological and Climate Services in the 
Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) Member Countries 
Country(ies): 
Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles 
Accredited Entity: 
French Development Agency (AFD)  
Date of first submission: 
[2020/04/29]  
Date of current submission  
[2021/01/25]  
Version number 
[V.11]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 0 OF 119 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 2 OF 119 
 
2 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or private 
sector 
Public 
 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
Not applicable  
 
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
 
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation:   
 
☐ 
Low-emission transport:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:  
 
☐ 
Forestry and land use:   
 
 
 
 
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
 
  
☒ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security: 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution:  
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
 
 
 
50% 
50% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  
Not applicable 
A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  
19,453,286 direct 
beneficiaries (67% of the total 
population in the 4 countries);  
9,788,191 indirect 
beneficiaries (33%), i.e. 
reaching a total of 100% of 
the total population 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  
71 386 086 USD 
A.9. Project size 
Medium (Upto USD 250 
million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
52 767 986 USD 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒ Grant 
52 767 986 USD 
 
☐ Loan 
Enter number 
☐ Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐ Equity  
 
Enter number 
☐ Results-based  
 
     payment 
 
Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
5 years  
A.12. Total lifespan 
15 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
Approved in 18th of June 
2020 
A.14. ESS category  
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐       No ☒

=== PAGE 6 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 119 
 
3 
 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme? 
Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
Regional Executing Entity (EE) – Indian Ocean Commission, intergovernmental 
organization created in 1984 with the Victoria Agreement. Headquarters agreement 
signed with Mauritius. 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
The Global Risk Report (2019)1 indicates that extreme weather events are amongst the risks with highest impact of the 
global risk landscape. Among these extreme events, meteorological and hydrological hazards jointly cause more 
economic damages and loss of life than other disasters2. Within this region, floods induced by rainfalls from tropical 
cyclones and non-tropical cyclones are the most frequent catastrophic hazard, followed by droughts. From 1950 to June 
2020, the Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles experienced a total of 113 natural disasters due to 
hydrometeorological hazards, of which 88 were due to storms (including tropical and non-tropical cyclones), 14 floods 
and 11 droughts. The number of affected people (including depths) – estimated at 18.3 million (62% of the total 
population of the four countries) for the 1950–June 2020 period – and the physical damages associated to climate-
related hazards in Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles – estimated at USD 3.2 billion over the same period. 
Table 1 below provides the number of hazardous events and related impacts per country3. These are expected to 
increase in the context of climate change. The IPCC AR5 (2014) indicates with high confidence that current and future 
climate-related drivers of risks for small islands – including Comoros, Mauritius and Seychelles – during the 21st century 
include sea level rise, tropical and extratropical cyclones, increasing air and sea surface temperatures, and changing 
rainfall patterns4. Likewise, climate change in Madagascar induces more frequent droughts and floods, sea level rise and 
increasing temperature, which also have increasing impacts on livelihood, food security, economic development and 
infrastructure5.  
Table 1. Number of disasters and related impacts in the SWIO region per country, from 1950 to June 20204 
Country 
Number of Disasters 
Affected Population (including depths) 
Damages (million USD) 
Comoros 
12 
538,384 (64%) 
48 
Madagascar 
76 
16,640,305 (62%) 
2,343 
Mauritius 
21 
1,059,426 (81%) 
803 
Seychelles 
5 
15,477 (16%) 
11 
Total (4 countries) 
113 
18,253,592 (62%) 
3,206 
 
Despite a long tradition of coping with weather, climate, and hydrological variability, and extreme events, countries in the 
SWIO region continue to face serious challenges in managing the risk of disasters. The baseline status of the NMHSs 
with respect to climate services implementation is detailed in the FS (Annex 2, Chapter 3), and summarized in Table 2 
below, according to the GFCS categorization6. Noting that, in general, Comoros and Madagascar have low capacity not 
even being at the “Basic” level, and Mauritius and Seychelles being at the “Basic” level, there is a need to shift the 
paradigm towards improved weather, climate, and hydrological services (“Hydromet services”) in the SWIO region to 
increase weather and climate resilience. The proposed project will support this paradigm shift in the target region where 
the Hydromet value chain7 is not well developed and the National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHSs) 
are facing serious challenges in responding to increasing societal and economic demands, in particular as climate-
 
 
1http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Global_Risks_Report_2019.pdf  
2 https://www.gfdrr.org/en/power-of-partnership  
3 EM-DAT: The Emergency Events Database—Université catholique de Louvain (UCL), CRED, D. Guha-Sapir—www.emdat.be, Brussels, 
Belgium.  
4 WGI AR5 Chapter 14; Table 29-1 
5 https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2015/12/04/building-madagascars-climate-resiliency-to-ensure-food-security-and-preserve-
livelihoods 
6 https://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/ccl/mg/mgccl17/documents/CCl-MG-1-2018_Item3_Checklist_Climate_Services_Implementation.pdf 
7 https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=3314

=== PAGE 7 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 119 
 
4 
 
induced risks and impacts shift with climate change. In particular, the proposed Hydromet project will raise the capacity 
of the NMHSs of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles to a higher category (see Table 2 below) in all GFCS 
components, with significant investments in three major components, namely “observations and monitoring”; “climate 
services information system”; and “user interface platform”.  
Table 2. GFCS categorization for the baseline status and after the proposed Hydromet project interventions7 
GFCS Component 
Comoros 
Madagascar 
Mauritius 
Seychelles 
Baseline 
Hydromet 
project 
Baseline 
Hydromet 
project 
Baseline 
Hydromet 
project 
Baseline 
Hydromet 
project 
Observations and Monitoring 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
4 
1 
4 
Research, Modelling and 
Predictions 
< 1 
1 
< 1 
1 
< 1 
2 
< 1 
2 
Climate Services Information 
System 
< 1 
3 
< 1 
3 
1 
4 
1 
4 
User Interface Platform 
< 1 
4 
< 1 
4 
2 
4 
2 
4 
Capacity Development 
< 1 
1 
< 1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
2 
Note: GFCS Categorization: < 1 – Lower than Basic (partially achieved); 1 – Basic; 2 – Essential; 3 – Full; and 4 – Advanced.  
Specifically, the project will support the production of high-quality (i.e. more accurate, increased lead time, location-
specific and user-tailored) impact-based climate-related products and services (CP-CS), including early warning systems 
(EWS), at the regional and national levels. This will be possible through both (1) the use of recent scientific and 
technological developments, including innovative and cost-effective solutions to ensure sustainability (e.g. by using 
products from advanced centers at very high-resolution8 (e.g. as those generated within the framework of the 
Copernicus programme9), and downscaling and calibrating them to the target countries exploiting newly developments 
such as artificial intelligence10 in combination with the expanded surface observation network); and (2) jointly developing 
target CP-CS with specific user groups.  
CP-CS, like EWS, support the reduction of climate-induced risks and vulnerability by equipping decision-makers, 
climate-sensitive sectors and communities with essential information to prevent, mitigate and adapt to the impacts of 
climate extremes, climate variability and climate change. For example, the latest IPCC report (SROCC 201911) indicates 
with high confidence that EWS are often low cost and highly cost-efficient when it comes to coastal zones and tackling 
sea level rise. However, CP-CS in Africa are not well developed and the wider region “has the least developed weather, 
climate and hydrology observation network, with only 1/8 of the required density and less than 300 weather stations that 
meet the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) observation standards”12. In particular, the Hydromet project will 
support the implementation of an optimum composite surface observation network and associated ICT systems for the 
SWIO region aligned with the Global Basic Observing Network (GBON) requirements, which defines a minimal set of 
surface land-based and upper-air observing stations13 for which international exchange of observational data is 
mandatory in support of global Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) and climate analysis that will translate in improved 
climate services for everyone. Initial support (equality distributed to the four target countries) will be provided by the 
proposed project for the implementation of this optimum composite surface observation network and associated ICT 
systems; however, this support will not be sufficient to cover all investments required, especially for a large country with 
multiple climatic zones like Madagascar; therefore, a O&M Plan (see Annex 21) has been developed for leveraging 
funds, inter alia, from the newly GBON Systematic Observations Financing Facility (SOFF) to complement and support 
O&M beyond the livetime of the project.  
The proposed Hydromet project will also have a strong component related to service delivery and engagement with 
users/stakeholders and end-users, including last mile communities, to ensure that users (including the DRM institutions) 
 
 
8 https://www.ecmwf.int/en/about/media-centre/science-blog/2020/baseline-global-weather-and-climate-simulations-1-
km?fbclid=IwAR0AV9mKH1gIIXyToXYGgPko5RtXmd8mDlu2ErKCQzUU30pAEzfEDSNfnMQ 
9 https://climate.copernicus.eu  
10 https://journals.ametsoc.org/bams/article/98/10/2073/70032/Using-Artificial-Intelligence-to-Improve-Real-Time 
11 https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/ 
12 https://www.worldbank.org/en/region/afr/brief/hydromet-in-africa 
13 GBON expected obligations: Surface land-based observations – WMO Members must operate surface land observing stations measuring 
atmospheric pressure, air temperature, humidity, horizontal wind, precipitation and snow depth, at a horizontal resolution of 200 km or 
better, and data must be reported hourly; Upper air stations – WMO Members must operate a set of upper air stations over land that 
observe temperature, humidity and horizontal wind profiles, with a vertical resolution of 100 m or higher, twice a day or better, up to a level 
of 30 hPa or higher, with a horizontal resolution of 500 km or better.

=== PAGE 8 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 5 OF 119 
 
5 
 
work closely with the NMHSs in the development, testing and validation of the multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and 
early warning services (MH-IBF-EWS), so that the MH-IBF-EWS are available and accessible in a more meaningful and 
actionable manner. This would include the establishment of a web-based knowledge and decision support system 
wherein color-coded risk-based warnings (regional “meteoalarm”14/”vigilance”1516-type platform that would also 
contribute to the WMO Global Multi-hazard Alert System – GMAS17) can underpin early actions at the regional, national 
and district levels.  
The proposed Hydromet project is primarily focused on preparedness; hence designed to bolster climate resilience 
among communities by reinforcing NMHSs, through strengthening national and regional institutional frameworks, 
fostering regional cooperation and expanding climate knowledge sharing. In addition, the proposed project will support 
improving national and local capacities in implementing a people-centered MH-IBF-EWS through coordination and 
collaboration with PIROI (the Indian Ocean Regional Intervention Platform, who has confirmed its full support to the 
implementation of the project, backed by IFRC)18 and its national counterparts (i.e. national Rec Cross and Red 
Crescent in each country) for piloting the development, testing, and validation of the MH-IBF-EWS in pilot sites in each 
country, which will then be expanded and rolled out nationwide using scenarios, and through the dissemination of 
knowledge products and outreach materials with the assistance of NGOs, in order to reach the leaders of the 
communities in the four countries.  
The regional approach is key to underpin improvements in the production and dissemination of CP-CS, as the four target 
countries are vulnerable to similar climate-related hazards and face identical problems, challenges and needs – not 
leaving anybody behind. As shown in Table 2, proposed project investments would close the gap between the NMHSs of 
Comoros and Madagascar, and the NMHSs of Mauritius and Seychelles, by sharing expertise and tools to reach a 
similar level. This regional approach would ensure robust interoperability, efficiencies, and optimization of infrastructure 
costs, together with a higher level of harmonization, integration, and complementarity within the region. Table 5 (see 
section B1. below) provides an intercomparison between current and proposed technologies/interventions (a few 
examples) that would provide increased benefits from taking a regional approach. The proposed 
interventions/technologies follow the WMO Guidelines on Emerging Data Issues (WMO-No. 1239)19. 
Given the current and expected future impacts of climate-related hazards on countries in the SWIO region, the Indian 
Ocean Commission (IOC) has a critical role in fostering and boosting up this approach, as it is the unique regional 
institution covering Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles, to enable enhanced regional cooperation and 
knowledge sharing among these countries, with a view to reduce climate-related vulnerability. The IOC launched the 
design process of the proposed Hydromet project through various consultations with the beneficiary countries to define 
the project’s outline, and to validate all project interventions with relevant national stakeholders. The project will deliver: 
- 
Enhanced institutional capacities and regional cooperation to produce high-quality CP-CS, and will 
explore the public-private engagement: both national and regional improvements will be achieved through 
appropriate frameworks and enabling environments. Regional and National Frameworks for Climate Services 
(R/NFCS) will be developed. A Regional Climate Centre Network (RCC-Network) strategy, alongside with an 
operating and action plan for implementation with definition of roles, responsibilities and functions, will be 
defined by the IOC and its member states; whose operationalization will be done though building the capacity of 
each RCC-Network node (i.e. each NMHS in the SWIO region) in their particular functions, which will be 
demonstrated and tested throughout a period prior to the submission to WMO for official designation as part of 
the WMO Global Data-processing and Forecasting System (GDPFS)20. The establishment of the RCC-Network 
will support synergies, complementarities, regional integration and cost-efficiency gains in the production of CP-
CS in the SWIO region. At the same time, the RCC-Network strategy will also include business plans for the 
engagement of the relevant private sectors in the SWIO region (e.g., shipping, large scale fisheries, insurance, 
 
 
14 http://www.meteoalarm.eu 
15 https://vigilance.meteofrance.fr/fr 
16 http://www.meteofrance.re/vigilance-reunion 
17 https://www.wmo.int/gmas/ 
18 https://piroi.croix-rouge.fr/?lang=en  
19 https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=10124 
20 https://public.wmo.int/en/programmes/global-data-processing-and-forecasting-system

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 6 OF 119 
 
6 
 
tourism, etc.), developed based on market surveys in target countries. These business plans will be 
implemented through consultations and engagement with the private sectors for presentation and trial the use of 
the newly developed CP-CS with the intention of developing and employing new business models for cost 
recovery that would support investments in the climate information and early warning services (CIEWS). This will 
enable improved forecasting of climate-related hazards, and enhanced risk and climate change impact 
assessments and management at regional and national levels. At the national level, NMHSs’ staff will receive 
core trainings in climate risk management; the operational structure and financial efficiency of their institutions 
will be enhanced. As part of improving national institutional capacities, two main activities will be put in place: (1) 
the development and implementation of capacity development plans and carreer paths for retaining the trained 
and talent staff; and (2) the revision of the hydromet laws to define roles and responsabilities of public and 
private sectors, as well as the establishment of Trust Funds (hereafter refered to Climate Information and Early 
Warning System (CIEWS) Funds) to support O&M (see Annex 21 for the O&M Plan and Annex 2C for the 
description of the CIEWS). 
- 
High-quality climate-related data, improved multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and EWS, and climate 
risk assessments: the technical expertise of NMHSs’ staff on observations and monitoring, data management, 
ICT, modelling, and weather forecasting and climate prediction will be enhanced through a “learning by doing” 
process, including training, experience and exposure. Moreover, hydro-meteorological data collection 
infrastructure, management and information systems will be modernised, with a view to improve climate-related 
prediction and risk assessment among the four target countries – this will be done through data integration and 
establishment of data centers at regional and national levels (exploring/evaluating physical and cloud-service 
solutions). Quality Management Principles will be introduced following the WMO Guidelines on Quality 
Management in Climate Services21, so that well-established standardized processes are in place. Training and 
capacity building to downscale climate change projections in each country will be implemented to enhance 
understanding of climate change impacts on development processes and key economic sectors for the four 
target countries. Given the countries’ exposure to floods, specific training in hydrology will be provided; likewise, 
given the significance of agriculture, fisheries and tourism sectors for the four target countries, training to provide 
specific user-centered impact-based weather advisories for these sectors will be provided. Multi-hazard impact-
based forecasting and early warning system/services capability22 will be built through shifting from deterministic 
to probabilistic forecast techniques that highlight not only the most likely impact, but also reasonable worst-case 
scenarios, which are often the cause of avoidable disasters. Extreme value analysis will be done for establishing 
threshold values that will cause flooding and other climate-related hazards. By working with the DRM authorities 
and the various sectors, (1) undertake risk analysis incorporating hazard, exposure and vulnerability, and assess 
potential impacts from extreme weather- and climate-related events by making use of the risk matrix; and (2) 
develop target messages to sector-specific. Improved climate-related data quality, and increased their variety 
and frequency will enable downscaling and calibration, thus more accurate hydro-meteorological forecasts and 
warnings, as well as climate change impact assessments on key sectors through the production of hazard and 
vulnerability maps thus supporting climate change adaptation planning. 
Figure 1 – Diagram with the various elements supported by the proposed project in the “hydromet value chain” 
 
 
21 https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=5174 
22 https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/world-meteorological-day/wmd-2018/multi-hazard

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 7 OF 119 
 
7 
 
 
- 
Enhanced accessibility and use of climate services for climate change adaptation, and improved 
capabilities implementing a people-centered MH-IBF-EWS for disaster risk reduction: CP-CS – including 
daily weather forecasts and EWS, downscaled agrometeorological advisories, and risk management and climate 
change adaptation plans– will be co-developed, based on the enhanced expertise and high-quality data 
supported by the project, and in a participatory way between producers and users of CP-CS. These services will 
especially target key sectors underpinning the economy of the four target countries, namely agriculture, fisheries 
and tourism. These sectors are highly vulnerable to climate change impacts, but key to support the livelihoods of 
the vast majority of the population in the SWIO region. Producers and users of climate services will work 
together to develop high-quality products to ensure they are packaged according to end-user needs and use the 
most efficient channels for dissemination to end-users. User feedback mechanism will be put in place to improve 
communication processes and support product development. A web-based knowledge and decision support 
system with multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and color-coded risk-based warnings (regional 
“meteoalarm”23/”vigilance”2425-type platform that would also contribute to the WMO Global Multi-hazard Alert 
System – GMAS26) will be jointly develop with stakeholders to support early actions by the regional, national and 
local DRM authorities. Regional, national and local capacities in implementing a people-centered MH-IBF-EWS 
will be improved through coordination and collaboration with PIROI (the Indian Ocean Regional Intervention 
Platform)27 and its national counterparts (i.e. national Rec Cross and Red Crescent in each country) for piloting 
the development, testing, and validation of the MH-IBF-EWS in pilot sites in each country, which will then be 
expanded and rolled out nationwide using scenarios, and through the dissemination of knowledge products and 
outreach materials with the assistance of NGOs, in order to reach the leaders of the communities in the four 
countries. Collaboration and collaboration will also be in place to follow PIROI’s plans, in coordination with the 
German Red Cross and the IFRC, for the implementation of the Forecast-based Action / Financing (FbA/FbF) 
models in the SWIO region, in order to align the science-based developments supported by the proposed 
Hydromet project. 
 
Noting that DRM institutions in the SWIO region have been benefiting from the support of the Indian Ocean Regional 
Intervention Platform (PIROI), the weakest link in EWS in the SWIO region lies in the ability to detect, monitor, forecast, 
 
 
23 http://www.meteoalarm.eu 
24 https://vigilance.meteofrance.fr/fr 
25 http://www.meteofrance.re/vigilance-reunion 
26 https://www.wmo.int/gmas/ 
27 https://piroi.croix-rouge.fr/?lang=en

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 8 OF 119 
 
8 
 
and generate and disseminate meaningful and actionable warnings (see Annex 2 – FS, for further details on the SWOT 
analysis and case studies). Hence, the proposed Hydromet interventions have been designed to support a cost-effective 
and locally-appropriate modernisation of NMHSs, including infrastructure, tools and services; as well as the uptake of 
improved CP-CS products and services, including MH-IBF-EWS, by users/stakeholders (e.g. DRM authorities and 
relevant socioeconomic sectors) and end-users, including local communities. Through coordination and collaboration 
with PIROI and national counterparts, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and early action protocols will need to be 
developed and/or revised accordingly for each hazard at certain impact levels. Key sectors have been selected based on 
in-country consultations (namely, agriculture, fisheries and tourism), and relevance in terms of reducing vulnerability to 
climate change. Engagement with the private sector (e.g., shipping, large scale fisheries, insurance, tourism, etc.) will be 
sought for exploring the establishment of a ring-fenced CIEWS funding mechanism at regional and national levels for 
sustainability of the investments beyond the lifetime of the project. Climate change impacts will be mainstreamed into 
CP-CS not only to reduce impacts of climate-related risks, but also to ensure enhanced climate change resilience of 
67%the total population in Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles. The proposed project will also enable 
sustained economic growth in key sectors. Through sector-target interventions, 67%28 of the population in the four 
countries (about 19,354 million people) will benefit directly from the project. 
The executing entity (EE) will be the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC), which will manage the project in close 
collaboration with AFD, the accredited entity (AE). The IOC will support four National Project Coordinators (NPCs) based 
in the NMHSs of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles. PIROI and its national counterparts and their network 
of NGOs will serve as partners in the development, testing, and validation of the MH-IBF-EWS, as well as in the 
dissemination of knowledge products and outreach materials in order to reach the leaders of the communities in the four 
countries. The government of these four countries, as well as users and end-users of CP-CS such as sectoral ministries, 
private sector and local communities, have been consulted during the process of preparing this proposal.  
The project was endorsed at the political level by the IOC council of ministries; is well aligned, and supports several 
policies and strategies currently implemented at IOC level and in the four countries, especially their NDCs. The 
Hydromet project follows the WMO technical regulations29 that define the standards, and is aligned with the GFCS30, and 
the World Hydrological Cycle Observing System31 (WHYCOS). Finally, the project is fully compliant with the Global 
Alliance for Hydromet32 (GAH) endorsed by the GCF during COP25, and thus aim to be one of the pioneer projects to be 
implemented under this new initiative. The Hydromet project is designed to enable Sendai Framework33 targets for 
Disaster Risk Reduction (SF-DRR) and to support risk informed sustainable development.  
The project will scale up current initiatives and national ongoing projects financed by climate facilities, development 
partners and implemented by beneficiary countries. AFD, with the support of IOC and NMHSs/NDAs, will take the 
necessary steps to ensure coordination and leadership with development partners to integrate and build synergies with 
current and future initiatives and projects on hydromet services and disaster risk reduction at national and regional 
levels.  
The cost of GCF Hydromet Project will amount to USD71,386,086 million comprised of USD 52,767,986 million applied 
from the GCF, USD 5,504 million in co-financing contributions by French Development Agency( AFD); USD 6,172 
million from EU Intra APC Climate Services Program and USD 6,941 million from beneficiary countries contributions. 
 
 
28 Refer to Feasibility Study Annexes for the beneficiary calculations 
29 WMO-No. 49, WMO Technical Regulations, https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/standards-technical-regulations#standards 
30 https://gfcs.wmo.int/what-are-climate-services  
31 https://hydrohub.wmo.int/en/world-hydrological-cycle-observing-system-whycos 
32 https://public.wmo.int/en/media/press-release/alliance-hydromet-development-launched  
33 https://www.undrr.org/implementing-sendai-framework/what-sf

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 9 OF 119 
 
9 
 
 
 
34 https://gfcs.wmo.int/sites/default/files/MF-DIROI_ClimateDrivers_SWIO.pdf 
35 https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2010JD015303  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
 Regional climate overview 
The regional climate of the South-west Indian Ocean (SWIO) is influenced by the following atmospheric features: (a) 
the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), responsible for the convergence of the Monsoon and trade winds 
(privileged zone for cyclone genesis, and convective precipitations), (b) sub-tropical Highs, responsible for the trade 
winds; and (c) the high level jets (i.e. the subtropical western jet and the near tropical eastern jet)34 (Figure 2). SWIO 
regional climate in terms of season is mainly driven by the Monsoon annual cycle. These features represent 
expansive bands of large-scale wind convergence and high rainfall, which strongly influence intra-annual and inter-
annual variability in rainfall, winds, and tropical cyclone tracks. The interplay between these climate drivers causes 
dramatic changes in weather in the SWIO countries, most obviously during El Niño and La Niña events, and their 
connection with the Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD)37.  
Figure 2 – SWIO atmospheric features.37 
 
State of the climate  
 
Vincent et al (2011)35 produced an analysis of climate trends for the countries of the SWIO (i.e. the four target 
countries – Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles – plus La Réunion), including those targeted in this 
proposed Hydromet project. The analysis of the temperature and precipitation indices for 1961-2008 reveals some 
consistent changes in means and extremes during these 48 years in the countries of the western Indian Ocean. 
However, observed changes in temperature indices have a better spatial coherence than in precipitation indices, and 
this is mainly due to higher spatial and temporal variability in precipitation as compared to temperature. Table 3 
presents the regional trends per decade for 1961–2008 and 1975–2008 for each of the chosen indices. 
 
Temperature 
 
Warming is observed in the SWIO countries. Regional average series indicate significant trends of 0.19 and 0.21°C 
per decade from 1961 to 2008 for TXMean and TNMean, respectively (Table 3), and the regional series show a 
gradual increase for these 48 years (Figure 3). At a majority of the stations, an increase of 0.15 to 0.25°C per decade 
is observed over 1961–2008 in their daytime and night-time temperatures and trends are significant at most stations 
(Figure 4). No spatial coherent change is observed in the diurnal temperature range (Figure 4); the regional average 
series suggests a small and insignificant decrease of 0.03°C per decade for these 48 years (Table 3 and Figure 4). 
The results for 1975–2008 are very similar for these three temperature indices.

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 10 OF 119 
 
10 
 
Summer days (SU25) and tropical nights (TR20) occur very often in the SWIO. Regional trends suggest 4.72 more 
summer days and 5.14 more tropical nights per decade for 1961–2008, but less pronounced over 1975–2008 (Table 
3).  
 
Table 3. Trends per Decade for the SWIO38 (values for trends significant at the 5% level are shown in boldface) 
 
 
Figure 3 – Regional average of station’s anomalies for TXMean, TNMean and DTR. The linear trend for 1961-2008 is 
represented by the dashed line.38 
 
Figure 4 – Trends in TXMean, TNMean, and DTR for 1961–2008. Upward (black) and downward (grey) pointing 
triangles indicate positive and negative trends, respectively. Solid triangles correspond to trends significant at the 5% 
level. The size of the triangle is proportional to the magnitude of the trend.38 
 
 
 
As for the extreme temperatures, changes are spatially coherent across the region, even though changes are more 
significant in the extreme highs than the extreme lows.

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 11 OF 119 
 
11 
 
 
The regional average series indicate that the warm days (TX90P) and warm nights (TN90P) have significantly 
increased by 3.75 and 3.83% per decade, respectively (Table 3 and Figure 5). Significant increasing trends ranging 
from 2 to 6% were also found at most stations (Figure 6). Observed changes in cold extremes are smaller than in 
warm extremes; with an insignificant decrease of 1.28% per decade in the percentage of cold days (TX10P) while a 
significant decrease of 1.03% per decade is found in the percentage of cold nights (TN10P) (Table 3 and Figure 5). 
Most stations show a coherent pattern of decreasing trends ranging from −1 to −3% per decade (Figure 6). The 
analysis of the annual highest and lowest daily maximum and minimum temperatures confirm the previous results. 
The regional average series suggest significant increases of 0.23 and 0.21°C per decade in the annual high 
maximum (TXx) and minimum (TNx) temperatures, respectively, while significant increases of 0.09 and 0.25°C per 
decade are observed in the annual low maximum (TXn) and minimum (TNn) temperatures.  
Figure 5 – Regional average of the station’s anomalies for TX10P, TX90P, TN10P, and TN90P. The linear trend for 
1961–2008 is represented as a dashed line.38 
 
Figure 6 – Trends in TX10P, TX90P, TN10P, and TN90P for 1961–2008. Upward (black) and downward (grey) 
pointing triangles indicate positive and negative trends, respectively. Solid triangles correspond to trends significant at 
the 5% level. The size of the triangle is proportional to the magnitude of the trend.38 
 
 
 
Precipitation

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 12 OF 119 
 
12 
 
 
The results for the precipitation indices show less evidence of changes and spatial agreement compared to the 
temperature indices. The regional average series indicate a significant decrease in the annual total precipitation 
amount (PRCPTOT) of 2.63% per decade (Table 3 and Figure 7). Most stations show decreasing trends ranging from 
−2 to −6% per decade (Figure 8). Some weak increasing trends were also found at some stations in Madagascar and 
Seychelles. The annual precipitation intensity (SDII) shows very little change with an insignificant regional trend of 
−0.09 mm per decade (Table 3 and Figure 7). Individual stations indicate either an insignificant positive or negative 
trend across the region (Figure 8). Consecutive dry days (CDD) have increased by 1.94 days per decade but the 
trend is not significant (Table 3 and Figure 7). Consecutive dry days have mainly increased over land primarily in 
Madagascar (Figure 8).  
 
Figure 7 – Regional average of the station’s anomalies for PRCPTOT, SDII, and CDD. Linear trend for 1961–2008 is 
represented in dashed line.38 
 
 
Overall, the results show small and insignificant decreases in precipitation extremes. Regional average series 
indicates fewer days with rain above 10 and 20 mm (R10mm and R20mm); however, trends are not significant at the 
5% level (Table 3 and Figure 9). Most individual stations show a decrease of 1 to 3 days in R10mm and R20mm and 
several significant decreasing trends are found across the region (Figure 10). A decrease is also observed in the 
regional series of the annual highest daily precipitation (RX1day) and the highest 5 consecutive days of precipitation 
(RX5day); however, these trends are not significant (Table 3 and Figure 9). Stations show both increasing and 
decreasing insignificant trends across the region although more decreasing trends are observed (Figure 10).  
 
Figure 8 – Trends in PRCPTOT, SDII, and CDD for 1961–2008. Upward (black) and downward (grey) pointing 
triangles indicate positive and negative trends, respectively. Solid triangles correspond to trends significant at the 5% 
level. The size of the triangle is proportional to the magnitude of the trend.38 
 
 
Correlation with the Sea Surface Temperature (SST) 
 
Vincent et al (2011)38 also demonstrated that there is a correlation between the changes in temperature and 
precipitation indices and the SST, by  comparing each regional averaged index with the SST of the area. Results are 
presented in Table 4. Sea surface temperatures for the western Indian Ocean show an increase of 0.12°C per 
decade over 1960–2009 (Figure 11).  
 
 
 
Figure 9 – Regional average of the station’s anomalies for R10mm, R20mm, RX1day, and RX5day. Linear trend for 
1961–2008 is represented in dashed line.38

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 13 OF 119 
 
13 
 
 
 
Figure 10 – Trends in R10mm, R20mm, RX1day, RX5day for 1961–2008. Upward (black) and downward (grey) 
pointing triangles indicate positive and negative trends, respectively. Solid triangles correspond to trends significant at 
the 5% level. The size of the triangle is proportional to the magnitude of the trend.38 
 
 
Figure 11 – Sea surface temperature monthly anomalies averaged for the grid points between 30°E and 70°E and 
between 40°S and the equator.38 
 
Table 4 shows that the annual mean of daily maximum and minimum temperature (TXMean and TNMean) and 
number of summer days and tropical nights (SU25 and TR20) are highly correlated with the annual average of SST

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 14 OF 119 
 
14 
 
 
 
36 https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aabc60 
and correlation coefficients range from 0.85 to 0.87. The correlation between warm and cold extremes (TX90P, 
TX10P, TN90P and TN10P) and SST vary from 0.66 to 0.84 (cold extremes have negative correlations). The highest 
and lowest values of the year (TXx, TXn, TNx and TNn) have lower correlation with SST and their values range from 
0.60 to 0.66. Coefficients of determination (values multiplied by 100 in Table 4) indicate that 75% of the total variation 
in TXMean is explained by SST. Table4 also indicates that there is almost no evidence of linear association between 
precipitation indices and the annual SST.  
 
Table 4. Correlation between each index and the regional average annual anomalies SST computed over the SWIO38 
(percentage of the total variability in each index accounted for by the relation between SST and the index ) 
 
 
 
Projected changes in Tropical Cyclones over the SWIO 
 
On average, the SWIO experiences nine tropical cyclones annually. Muthige et al (2018)36 studied the potential 
changes in tropical cyclone tracks over the SWIO under different extents of global warming (1.5 °C, 2 °C and 3 °C of 
warming with respect to pre-industrial conditions), relative to the present-day baseline period of 1971–2000. Based 
on 6 model simulations (CORDEX) under the RCP8.5 scenario (a low mitigation future), it is projected that the 
number of tropical cyclones making landfalls over southern Africa under global warming will decrease, with 2 °C being 
a critical threshold, after which the rate of cyclone frequency with further temperature increases no longer has a 
diminishing effect. The lower tropical cyclone frequencies across the main tropical cyclone formation region of the 
SWIO is demonstrated (Figure 12) by larger and more intense negative anomalies associated with stronger global 
warming, in particular over the Mozambique Channel, and the north and northeast of Mauritius. While the downward 
trend in simulated tropical cyclone-like vortices is consistent, there is some spread among the models in their 
magnitude of projected change. Associated with the lower frequency of tropical cyclones simulated, there is also a 
decrease ranging between 25% and 50% in landfalls simulated.  
 
 
 
Figure 12 – Simulated change in the frequency of tropical cyclone-like vortices per 2◦ grid point across six 
downscaling’s under 2◦ C of global warming. The area where the changes are significant are indicated by crosses.39

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 15 OF 119 
 
15 
 
 
 
37 X.-T. Zheng, S.-P. Xie, G. A. Vecchi, Q. Liu, J. Hafner, Indian ocean dipole response to global warming: Analysis of ocean–atmospheric 
feedbacks in a coupled model. J. Clim. 23, 1240–1253 (2010). 
38 https://advances.sciencemag.org/content/advances/6/19/eaay7684.full.pdf  
39 LGM - a past climatic interval ∼21,000 years before present when the IO exhibited a similarly altered mean state featuring stronger 
upwelling and an eastward shoaling thermocline. 
 
 
 
 
Climate variability in the Indian Ocean 
 
As shown above, there is a correlation between the SST and temperature and precipitation. Predicting changes in the 
pattern and magnitude of sea surface temperature (SST) fluctuations over the tropical oceans is critical for attributing 
changing climate variability and extreme weather. While considered a minor driver of climate variability as compared 
with the Pacific or the Atlantic oceans, the Indian Ocean is experiencing changes in its mean state that could favour 
stronger SST variations. These long-term changes appear to be forced by increasing greenhouse gas (GHG) 
concentrations; however, models are inconclusive on whether SST variability will increase or not. 37 
 
DiNezio et al (2020)38 analyzed an ensemble of simulations of 21st-century climate performed by 36 models 
participating in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 5 (CMIP5). The simulations indicate that under 
greenhouse warming and Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) conditions39, the Indian Ocean can exhibit increased SST 
variability in the eastern Equatorial Indian Ocean (Figure 13, A and B). This pattern of intensification resembles 
modern variability in the other tropical oceans and represents a pronounced departure from current variability in the 
Indian Ocean, which is minimal along the equator (Figure 14).

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 16 OF 119 
 
16 
 
Figure 13, A and B – Simulated changes in the Indian Ocean climate variability and mean state under glacial 
conditions (A) and greenhouse warming (B) – SST variability.41  
 
Figure 14 – Modern climate of the tropical oceans – SST variability.41  
 
 
DiNezio et al (2020)41 concludes that the emergence of the equatorial mode could drive rainfall variability with 
stronger amplitude and altered patterns over the Indian Ocean and surrounding land masses relative to currently 
experienced. Warm events, with their positive SST anomalies spanning much of the equatorial Indian Ocean, could 
drive rainfall deficits over the western Indian Ocean, in addition to increased rainfall over the eastern Indian Ocean 
(Figure 15C). Rainfall anomalies with such patterns and magnitudes have not been observed during the historical 
period because warm Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) events are extremely weak and their rainfall impacts are restricted 
to the south-eastern Indian Ocean (Figure 15A). On the other hand, cold events associated with the equatorial mode 
could drive rainfall anomalies with a similar spatial pattern and magnitude as the warm events, but with opposite 
polarity and subtle, yet important differences for terrestrial precipitation (Figure 15D).  
 
The emergence of the equatorial mode could make these high-amplitude SST anomalies a common occurrence by 
the second half of the 21st century when CMIP5 models predict two to four events (warm or cold) per decade (range 
was estimated from the subset of models with mode activation). Over the western Indian Ocean, the associated 
rainfall fluctuations could represent a surplus (or deficit) of current seasonal rainfall. Thus, predicting and attributing 
changing distributions of future extremes in a warming climate must consider these dynamical changes in rainfall 
variability alongside with thermodynamic effects.  
 
Figure 15 – Modern climate of the tropical oceans – SST variability.41

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 17 OF 119 
 
17 
 
 
 
40 World Bank, 2017. ‘South West Indian – Risk RAFI https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/116342-WP-PUBLIC-52p-SWIO-
RAFI-Summary-Report-2017-Publish-Version.pdf   
41 WGI AR5 Chapter 14; Table 29-1; Nematchoua et al. (2018). A detailed study of climate change and some vulnerabilities in the Indian 
Ocean: A case of Madagascar island. Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 41, pp.886-898 
42 AIR Worldwide, South West Indian Ocean Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (SWIO-RAFI), Final Report Submitted to the WBG,  
43 https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/116342-WP-PUBLIC-52p-SWIO-RAFI-Summary-Report-2017-Publish-Version.pdf 
 
 
 Regional climate vulnerabilities and impacts 
Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles, located in the SWIO region, are extremely vulnerable to natural 
hazards and climate change40, especially tropical cyclones and heavy rainfalls, leading to floods, flash floods and 
landslides, droughts, increased temperatures, and sea level rise41. Tropical cyclones (TC) are the most frequent 
catastrophic hazards in the SWIO region and have been responsible for significant historical economic losses and 
casualties42. Three of SWIO countries - Comoros, Mauritius and Seychelles - are Small Island Developing States 
(SIDS) because of their own idiosyncratic vulnerabilities and characteristics, including ‘their small size, remoteness, 
narrow resource and export base, and exposure to global environmental challenges and external economic shocks, 
including to a large range of impacts from climate change and potentially more frequent and intense natural disasters. 
Two - Comoros, Madagascar - are Least Developed Countries (LDCs), recognized as some of the most vulnerable 
countries in the world to climate change and the least able to recover from their impacts. Each year, Comoros, 
Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles face up collectively to USD 251.45 million losses due to natural hazards.  
According to the SWIO-RAFI analysis43 (Table 3), in Comoros, a 100-year return period tropical cyclone event could 
produce direct losses of USD 43 million, equivalent to 75% of the 2014 GDP, and require approximately USD 9.9 
million in emergency costs. In Madagascar, the study suggests that a 100-year return period tropical cyclone event 
could produce direct losses of USD 813 million, equivalent to 8% of the 2015 GDP, and require approximately USD 
187 million in emergency costs. In Mauritius, the losses would be of USD 1.9 billion, equivalent to 16% of the 2015 
GDP, and require approximately USD 430 million in emergency costs. Finally, in Seychelles, a 100-year return period 
could produce direct losses of USD 16 million, equivalent to 1% of the 2015 GDP, and require approximately USD 4.3 
million in emergency costs. Related threats to livelihoods and economic growth in these island countries are 
increasing, exacerbating the baseline situation as detailed in Annex 2.  
Table 3. Average annual losses (all hazards) per country40 
 
Comoros 
Madagascar 
Mauritius 
Seychelles

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 18 OF 119 
 
18 
 
 
 
44 IMF, Union of the Comoros: At a Glance. 
45 World Bank, Comoros Country StatistiCP-CS. 
46 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/comoros/publication/latest-report-on-poverty-in-the-comoros 
47 IMF, Republic of Madagascar: At a Glance. 
48 BBC, Madagascar country profile. 
49 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/madagascar/overview 
50 IMF, Mauritius: At a Glance. 
51 OECD, DAC List of ODA Recipients and History of DAC Lists of aid recipient countries. 
52 The total number of tourists visiting Mauritius in 2017 was 1 341 860 people and gross earnings from tourism are estimated to 60.2 billion 
Rs by the Bank of Mauritius (Handbook of statistical data on tourism, 2017, according to Bank of Mauritius) 
53 Encyclopaedia Britannica, Mauritius: Economy. 
Average Annual Losses (all disasters) in US $ (2017) 
5,700,000 
101,900,000 
113,200,000 
2,800,000 
%GDP loss for a 100-year return period tropical 
cyclone  
75% 
(2014 
GDP) 
8% 
(2015 GDP) 
16% 
(2015 GDP) 
1%  
(2015 GDP) 
 
Comoros Comoros is a 2,235 km2 group of islands, including Anjouan, Grande Comore and Moheli, with a total 
population of 872,000 in 201944. Comoros is classified as a LDC by the World Bank45 and a SIDS; approximately 
45% of the Comorian population live below the poverty line46.  
Comoros is very vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, due to an economy largely based on subsistence 
agriculture and fisheries. These two key economic sectors (see Annex 3a, Economic Analysis, for details) are already 
severely impacted by climate change and related hazards. Agriculture – which engages about 55% of the population – 
is highly dependent on the rainfall regime and therefore sensitive to changes in temperatures and rainfall patterns, 
more frequent extreme events and sea level rise. The impacts of climate-related hazards, including water stress, soil 
and coastal erosion, soil salinization, and flooding, particularly affect staple crops and cash crops. It should be noted 
that women in Comoros are particularly vulnerable to climate change as 67% of them are employed in the agricultural 
sector. Fisheries, which also play an important role in the country's food security is facing a modification and reduction 
of marine habitats, as well as the proliferation of toxic algae and the disappearance of nursery areas for marine wildlife, 
including corals and mangroves. Finally, fishermen are vulnerable to storms (including tropical cyclones), which 
threaten fishing trips and safety at sea, as well as boats and equipment.  
 
Madagascar 
Madagascar is a 587,041 km2 island with an estimated population of 27 million (as of 2019)47. Madagascar is classified 
as a least developed country by the World Bank48. 75% of Malagasy lived below the global poverty in 201849. The 
population is predominantly rural, and agriculture is the main economic activity in Madagascar. 
Climate change is particularly harmful to two key sectors for the country, agriculture and water management; in fact, 
climate-related hazards have already been threatening the country’s food and water security. For example, the 2014 
and 2015 cyclones devastated more than 40,000 hectares of rice fields, destroyed two water reservoirs and carried 
large volumes of sediment into the fields.  
 
Mauritius 
The Republic of Mauritius is an island nation with an estimated population of 1.3 million in 2019 50. Mauritius is 
considered an upper middle-income country51. The country has developed a mixed economy based on manufactured 
exports, agriculture, tourism, and financial services. 
Climate change impacts on coastal development are a significant threat for the tourism industry, which accounts for 
8% of GDP and 10% of total employment in 2017 and is one of the main drivers of the economy of the country.52 The 
sector is seen as a driver for future economic development by the government.  Most hotels and tourism infrastructure 
are located on the coastline, and thus directly exposed to coastal inundation, sea level rise, beach erosion and tropical 
cyclones. Sea-level rise and more frequent extreme events and heavy rainfalls will accelerate coastal erosion and 
cause increasing damages and losses of key infrastructure supporting tourism activities, including water reservoirs, 
overhead cables for electricity supply, roads, buildings and hotels. Agriculture, which also drives the economic 
development of Mauritius in particular through the sugar production53, is also sensitive to shifts in temperatures, rainfall 
patterns, and extreme events, like tropical cyclones. The resulting decrease in food-crop production could have serious 
impacts on nutrition and health in the country.

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 19 OF 119 
 
19 
 
 
 
54 IMF, Republic of Seychelles: At a Glance. 
55 World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal, Country Profile: Seychelles. 
56 World Bank DataBank, Seychelles GDP Statistics; UN Economic Commission for Africa, Country Profile 2017: Seychelles, at page 1. 
57 IOC Climate Change Portal. ‘Document cadre pour la stratégie régionale d’adaptation au changement climatique des pays membres de 
la Commission de l’océan Indien 2012-2020’. Accessed 18th August 2019.: https://prodigious-lab.com/coi/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/DR-
Document-cadre-pour-la-strate%CC%81gie-re%CC%81gionale-d_adaptation-au-changement-climatique-des-pays-membres-de-la-COI.pdf  
58 http://regionalclimate-change.sc/en/ 
Seychelles 
Seychelles is a 455 km2, 115-island archipelago, with an estimated population of 96,000 as of 2019.54 In addition to its 
resident population, Seychelles hosts large numbers of visitors – over 300,000 in 201655. With a 2018 GDP of USD 1.6 
billion, and per capita GDP of USD 16,434, Seychelles is considered as a high-income country.56  
Seychelles’ high-income status is particularly threatened by climate change, due to its small island status and economic 
reliance on tourism - employing 26% and accounting for more than 55% of GDP – followed by fisheries (particularly 
tuna). Over half of the climate hazards-related damages are caused to the residential sector, followed by the 
commercial sector which includes hotels and other tourism-related infrastructure. This is because many buildings and 
infrastructure of the residential and tourism sector (90% of them) are located in risk-prone areas – essentially along the 
coastline. The tourism sector is not only affected by the direct impacts of climate change e.g. in terms of damages to 
infrastructure, but also by its indirect impacts, such as the deterioration of the natural environment – biodiversity and 
landscape. With regards to the fisheries sector, which is key to food security, climate change particularly affects 
artisanal fisheries as the degradation of coral reef and mangrove habitat generates a reduction in fish stock. This sector 
is also extremely vulnerable to extreme rainfall events, having experienced the greatest economic losses due to 
extreme rainfalls events in the periods 1997-1998 and 1998-2000, amounting 45% of the total estimated losses.  
 Regional and National Climate Change Adaptation Strategies  
Governments of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles countries are committed to initiate and support 
climate-resilient interventions to reduce the vulnerability of their countries and population to climate change impacts. 
This commitment is reflected in several policies, strategies, programmes and projects pertaining to climate change 
adaptation and climate services. 
All four countries have adopted the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs); and Comoros and Madagascar 
have submitted their National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPA). All countries, except Seychelles, are in the 
process of developing their National Adaptation Plan (NAPs). Other relevant domestic policies include Comoros’ 
National Strategic Plan 2017-202057, Madagascar’s National Climate Change Management Policy (NCCMP, 2012), 
Mauritius’ National Climate Change Adaptation Policy Framework (2012), and Seychelles’ National Climate Change 
Strategy (2009) and the Climate Change Policy58 (currently under development). See Annex 2 for details on existing 
policies.  
The proposed Hydromet project will contribute to achieve the objectives of the SAMOA pathway, in particular goals (i) 
gaining access to technical assistance and financing for early warning systems, disaster risk reduction and post-
disaster response and recovery, risk assessment and data, land use and planning, observation equipment, disaster 
preparedness and recovery education programmes and disaster risk management; (ii) promoting cooperation and 
investment in disaster risk management in the public and private sectors; (iii) strengthening and supporting 
contingency planning and provisions for disaster preparedness and response; (v) harmonizing national and regional 
reporting systems; and (vii) increasing participation in international and regional disaster risk reduction initiatives. 
Through Hydromet, investments will be made to improve the technical capacity of NMHSs, as well as the production, 
dissemination and uptake of CP-CS, including early warnings, by users/stakeholders and end-users, including last 
mile communities. The project will harmonize climate forecast and monitoring processes in the IOC region, as well as 
risk management by establishing a WMO-designated RCC-Network and related protocols. Disaster preparedness 
and emergency response interventions will be enhanced, through coordination and collaboration with PIROI and its 
national counterparts, and directly involving the local organisations and communities (last mile partners) at the 
forefront of risk management. Finally, the project will contribute to increase participation of the target countries in 
international and regional risk reduction initiatives, including, inter alia, (1) the RCC-Network contribution to the 
WMO’s Global Data-processing and Forecasting System (GDPFS); and (b) the web-based knowledge and decision 
support system with multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and color-coded risk-based warnings (regional

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 20 OF 119 
 
20 
 
 
 
59 http://www.meteoalarm.eu 
60 https://vigilance.meteofrance.fr/fr 
61 http://www.meteofrance.re/vigilance-reunion 
62 https://www.wmo.int/gmas/ 
63 https://gfcs.wmo.int/sites/default/files/Intsiful_SADC%20CIS%20Vic%20Falls%20Presentation.pdf 
“meteoalarm”59/”vigilance”6061-type platform) contribution to the WMO Global Multi-hazard Alert System – GMAS62; 
and (2) GBON compliance with the mandatory requirements. 
The proposed Hydromet project will contribute to sustainable economic growth and development in the target 
countries, as promoted by the blue economy approach and the African Union’s Agenda 2063. Through the proposed 
interventions, it is expected that impacts of climate-related hazards on economic sectors, especially agriculture, 
fisheries, and tourism, will be reduced; allowing for increased economic gains and reduced losses in the target 
countries (see Annex 3, economic analysis). Improving food security, e.g. through developing seasonal forecasts and 
agricultural advisories for farmers, generating hazard and risk alerts for fishermen, and ensuring an appropriate 
dissemination and uptake of multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and early warnings to key economic sectors in 
each target country, will also contribute to implement sectoral frameworks of the Agenda 2063, in particular the 
Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Programme. 
Because of the regional nature of climate extremes (such as tropical cyclones), of their shared vulnerability to climate 
change and climate-related hazards (such as floods and landslides), and of their recognition for the need to 
strengthen forecasting and climate adaptation in their respective countries, Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and 
Seychelles have adopted the IOC strategy: « Document cadre pour la stratégie régionale d’adaptation au 
changement climatique des pays membres de la Commission de l’océan Indien 2012-2020 ». This strategy, 
coordinated by IOC, provides the guideline to foster climate change adaptation in the SWIO region. In particular, it 
recommends enhancing regional coordination, hydrometeorological forecasting and risk assessment, and knowledge 
exchange for climate change resilience. The IOC also takes the lead in organising the SWIO Climate Outlook Forums 
(SWIOCOF), and in disseminating seasonal outlooks through a Regional Climate Portal. Hence, the IOC is the 
unique institution in the SWIO region in position (i) to initiate and/or enhance synergies, cooperation, collaboration, 
and harmonization of efforts for climate-related hazard monitoring, modeling, forecasting, and service delivery; and 
(ii) to support the development and implementation of risk adaptation and mitigation strategies in the SWIO region. 
 Scaling up on past and ongoing initiatives and projects  
The regional Hydromet project will build on, scale up, and complement past and ongoing regional and national 
initiatives and projects. To ensure complementarity and identify synergies with existing and planned projects, several 
meetings were conducted in the four target countries with developments partners (such as UNDP, WB, JICA, and 
EU), which are strongly involved in the region, specifically in developing Hydromet projects. The most relevant 
projects per country are described in Table 4 below, alongside with an analysis of the synergies with the proposed 
Hydromet project; while the full list of projects is discussed in Annex 2 (section 2.2.3). In addition, the proposed 
Hydromet project will also build on the ClimDev-Africa Initiative – Result Area I63, especially those aspects target to 
the small islands, including the inventory of operational solutions for the detailed design and technical specifications 
of the investments supported by the proposed project. 
Table 4. List and description of relevant projects, alongside with the synergies with the proposed Hydromet 
project 
Project Details 
Description: purpose, key activities (relating to Hydromet) 
and location  
Complementarity with 
Hydromet

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 21 OF 119 
 
21 
 
 
 
64 SeyCCAT. Ongoing Projects. Accessed 26 September 2019. Available at: https://seyccat.org/projects/#on-going 
65 https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/africa_hydromet_program  
COMOROS 
“Ensuring climate 
resilient water supplies 
in the Comoros Islands” 
(FP094) 
2018-2026 
Funding entities: UNDP, 
GCF 
Budget: US$ 60.8m 
Contributions to improving water resource data management 
through installation of 10 hydrological (surface water) 
gauging stations in Anjouan and Mohéli and 30 groundwater 
piezometers on Grande Comore and 13 across Anjouan and 
Mohéli. All water related monitoring stations will be coupled 
with the existing synoptic stations (4), automatic weather 
stations (10) or with the 90 rain gauges already installed. 
Technicians will be trained on monitoring system operation 
and management. Data will be captured, processed, and 
shared by the Directorate of Meteorology. A simple flood 
alert early warning system using total rainfall and rainfall 
intensity from selected automated rainfall gauges will be 
developed to provide a flood risk warning system for each 
island. This will be connected to the mobile phone system 
and provide SMS flood warning messages. 
The equipment installed for 
water monitoring will be 
completed by additional 
hydrological stations through 
the proposed project Activity 
2.1.1; training provided, and 
data and climate services 
developed by this project, 
will be complemented by the 
proposed project Activity 
2.1.2 to upscale impacts in 
terms of improved flood risk 
management and resilience 
in Comoros. 
MADAGASCAR 
« Adaptation des 
chaînes de valeur 
agricoles au changement 
climatique (PrAda) »  
(Adaptation of 
agricultural value chains 
to climate change) 
2017-2022 
Funding entity: GIZ 
 
Under this project, agricultural value chain players will benefit 
from better access to agrometeorological and agricultural 
advisory services, which allows them to adapt production to 
climate change. In addition, the project also aims to improve 
structural framework conditions. These include the 
development of a quality agricultural policy, the organisation 
of actors and cooperation between them. Access to 
operating resources is simplified and production techniques 
are adapted. Finally, the project supports the establishment 
of climate risk insurance. DAPV is working with GIZ on 
PRADA project which aims at translating climate information 
into agrometeorological advisories and disseminate them at 
the local level using mobile phones. 
The agriculture-related data 
and climate services 
developed by this project will 
be complemented and 
upscaled in other regions, for 
other crop varieties and 
using different 
communication means to 
increase outreach through 
the proposed Hydromet 
project. Note that agriculture 
was selected as one of the 
key sectors for Madagascar. 
MAURITIUS 
“Land Drainage Master 
Plan” 
Planned to start late 
2019 for 15 months 
Funding Entity: AFD 
Budget: EUR 1,5 million 
The LDMP will include a: a) detailed inventory of the 
infrastructure and hydraulic diagnosis on the island drainage 
infrastructure and mapping of all flooded and vulnerable 
areas on the basis of field surveys; b) technical and 
economic comparison between different levels of protection 
scenarios and recommendations for optimal design drainage 
network frequency and c) studies will be produced in the 
most critical sites using an integrated ridge-to-reef approach. 
At the national scale, a detailed map of vulnerable areas will 
be produced. A set of specific structural and non-structural 
measures in each of the local critical sites. 
The flood forecasting and 
flood hazard maps produced 
through this project will be 
complemented by the 
proposed Hydromet project, 
which will build on data and 
training in hydrology 
conducted by this initiative.  
SEYCHELLES 
“SeyCCAT (Seychelles’ 
Conservation and 
Climate Adaptation 
Trust)”, 2015-present, 
NatureVest (the 
conservation impact 
investing unit of The 
Nature Conservancy) 
and the Government of 
Seychelles 
Budget: funded by a 
sovereign US$15m Blue 
Bond 
SeyCCAT is an independent, nationally based, public-private 
trust fund, established through the Conservation and Climate 
Adaptation Trust of Seychelles Act of 2015. It “strategically 
invests in ocean stakeholders to generate new learning, bold 
action and sustainable blue prosperity in Seychelles.” On-
going projects include Blue Grants Fund #1: empower the 
fisheries sector with robust science and knowhow to improve 
governance, sustainability, value and market options.64 
Information and climate 
services generated by 
Hydromet can be used to 
support these efforts to 
empower the fisheries sector 
with robust science, by 
providing the necessary 
information on which to base 
decisions and further 
innovation. Fisheries were 
indeed selected as a key 
climate-sensitive sector in 
Seychelles for the 
development of tailored CS. 
 
AFD, the accredited entity for the proposed project, is also taking part in the Africa Hydromet program65 and is in 
continuous liaison with World Bank team and other development partners. Moreover, the improvements to the 
observation network in target countries (proposed in the Hydromet project) are designed in line with the commitments

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 22 OF 119 
 
22 
 
 
 
66 https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/bulletin/alliance-hydromet-development  
67 https://hydrohub.wmo.int/en/world-hydrological-cycle-observing-system-whycos  
68 https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=10124 
of the Global Alliance for Hydromet Development66 (GAHD), endorsed by the GCF during COP25. In particular, the 
proposed Hydromet project supports the implementation of an optimum composite surface observation network and 
associated ICT systems for the SWIO region aligned with the Global Basic Observing Network (GBON) requirements, 
and finances a minimum set of stations so that the target countries be able to achieve full compliance with the GBON 
by 2025, in terms of type, number and location of the stations, as well as the exchange of their data internationally for 
improved NWP and climate analysis. Thus, arrangementas are being done between the four target countries and the 
WMO for securing the GBON Systematic Observations Financing Facility (SOFF) support beyond the project lifetime. 
Moreover, WMO was involved during the feasibility study drafting and approval by beneficiary countries. As a result of 
this fruitful coordination, the regional component of the WHYCOS67 program, developed in 2019 by WMO, is included 
as part of the proposed project to avoid duplication.  
 Addressing current gaps and barriers  
It is globally recognized that to improve delivery of national CP-CS, it is critical to pursue regional hydromet strategies 
(as the once adopted by IOC – see Section B.1., item 2. above), as well as effective regional cooperation, 
collaboration, and harmonization of efforts. This approach in turn will help enable appropriate adaptation and 
mitigation measures to be developed and implemented. Integration of the region’s hydromet systems provides 
opportunities to lower required investment while increasing accuracy of forecasts. Observed data from the hydromet 
monitoring networks needs to be shared with other NMHSs through regional data exchange in order to improve 
monitoring of hazardous hydromet conditions, numerical modelling, and forecasting. The optimum regional 
composites for each of the subsystems—hydromet observational networks, modelling, forecasting, and service 
delivery that meet the existing and future needs of societies due to climate change— would ensure robust 
interoperability, efficiencies, and optimization of infrastructure costs, together with a higher level of harmonization, 
integration, and complementarity within the region. Following the WMO Guidelines on Emerging Data Issues (WMO-
No. 1239)68, the technical specifications for the various hydromet subsystems will explore the use of innovative 
technologies (such as those described in Table 5), cost sharing and, due to the limited staff in individual NMHSs, the 
development of a regional pool of experts that would work together towards common objectives and results, for 
sustainability of investments. The installation of new stations may impact the environment, and therefore careful 
consideration need to be taken in site selection – this includes avoiding contributing to noise, contaminated land, 
water quality, river bank erosion, among other Ambiental environmental aspects. Physical cultural heritage and 
landscape, as well as protected environmental areas and areas with protected species will also be avoided. There 
might be a need for vegetation clearing, and any possible impacts must be assessed together with the local 
authorities. In relation to potential social impacts, any future installations will require the engagement of local 
communities, in order to assess the risks and take appropriate mitigation measures. With the engagement of the local 
communities, there will also an opportunity for raising awareness of weather and climate-related risks. 
The regional approach is key to underpin improvements in the production and dissemination of CP-CS. As shown in 
Table 2 above, proposed project investments would close the gap between the NMHSs of Comoros and Madagascar, 
and the NMHSs of Mauritius and Seychelles, by sharing expertise and tools to reach a similar GFCS category. Table 
5 below provides an intercomparison between current and proposed technologies/interventions (a few examples) that 
would provide increased benefits from taking a regional approach.  
Table 5. Examples of current and proposed interventions/technologies, and associated benefits 
GSCF Component 
Current situation 
Proposed interventions 
Technical Benefits 
Observations and Monitoring 
• National design of the 
networks not aligned with 
the GBON mandatory 
requirements 
• Observation network with 
various technical 
specifications 
• National design of the 
networks not aligned with 
the GBON mandatory 
requirements 
• Expanded networks at the 
national level with common 
technical specifications 
• Alignment to GBON 
mandatory requirements, 
promoting complementarity 
for improved forecasting 
• Common technical 
specifications facilitate 
O&M, and calibration as

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 23 OF 119 
 
23 
 
• No capacity to calibrate 
sensors and need to send 
equipment to Continental 
Africa 
 
• Regional calibration 
laboratory 
 
staff of NMHSs would be 
specialized and would 
perform based on regional 
knowledge 
• Explore innovative 
technologies such as IoT for 
data transmission and 
wireless private network 
• Cost-effectiveness, and cost 
savings 
• Sustainability 
 
Research, Modelling and 
Predictions 
• Limited human and 
infrastructure capacity 
individually in each country 
• Some NWP experiments 
 
• Use a regional platform 
(through cloud-services) for 
improving modeling and 
predictions 
• Establish a verification 
system over the four target 
countries and feedback 
mechanism to global 
centers 
• Carry out jointly research on 
downscaling and calibration 
of models over the SWIO 
countries, using the most 
up-to-date science and 
technologies (e.g. artificial 
intelligence) 
 
• Build a pool of capable 
experts 
• Harmonization of 
approaches 
• Explore innovative 
technologies such as cloud-
services to establish a 
platform for regional NWP 
developments with 
contributions from all target 
countries 
• Improved regional modeling 
and forecasting capabilities 
• Cost savings 
• Sustainability 
• Ownership 
 
Climate Services Information 
System 
• Limited human and 
infrastructure capacity 
individually in each country 
• Participation at Regional 
Climate Outlook Forums 
(RCOFs), which are not 
carried out regularly 
 
• Establish a Regional 
Climate Center (RCC) 
Network, wherein each 
country will serve as a 
Node that will carry out 
different and 
complementary functions 
• Develop regional CS-CP 
taking into account the 
region’s characteristics 
• Implement regular RCOFs 
• Apply common downscaling 
techniques in support of 
National Climate Outlook 
Forums (NCOFs) 
 
• Build a pool of capable 
experts 
• Harmonization of 
approaches 
• Improved climate services 
capabilities 
• Cost savings 
• Sustainability 
• Ownership 
 
User Interface Platform 
• Weather forecast bulletins 
• No multi-hazard impact-
based forecasts and early 
warning systems/services 
• Limited or no interactions 
with users, including DRM 
authorities 
• Climate Portal with regional 
and national CP-CS 
• Web-based knowledge and 
decision support system/tool 
at regional, national and 
district levels, with multi-
hazard impact-based 
forecasts and early warning 
systems/services 
• Well-established 
interactions with users, 
including DRM authorities 
 
• Underpin actions at 
regional, national and 
district levels 
• Explore innovative 
technologies such as cloud-
services to establish a user 
interface platform providing 
regional, national and sub-
national information 
• Improved relationship 
between NMHSs in the 
SWIO region and users, 
including DRM authorities 
 
Capacity Development 
• Staff trained oversees, in 
most cases in advanced 
NMHSs, with different 
environment conditions than 
those in the SWIO region’s 
NMHSs (disconnect 
• Establishment of a training 
center at the regional level, 
wherein training programs 
will be designed based on 
the requirements of the 4 
target countries, using 
• Improved capabilities and 
performance of the staff 
with quicker and more 
effective results

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 24 OF 119 
 
24 
 
 
 
69 https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2010JD015303 
70 https://www.sajs.co.za/article/view/5887  
between the training 
provided and applicability at 
the SWIO region’s NMHSs) 
hands-on training with 
similar environment 
conditions as in individual 
countries 
 
The livelihoods and economies of the SWIO countries depend heavily on the ocean and climate-sensitive sectors 
such as agriculture, fisheries, and tourism. Changes in temperature and precipitation69 are already having 
devastating effects on the availability of fresh water and agricultural yields. Fisheries are under threat, as well as the 
fishing-tourism with the so-called ‘sardine-run’ and the progressive delays in the timing of the sardine migration in the 
SWIO70, which coincides with a poleward shift in the position of the 21°C mean annual SST isotherm – the threshold 
temperature for sardine populations – the strength of the run is strongly associated with ENSO conditions. Lives, 
livelihoods, assets and infrastructure are threatened by several climate-related hazards. Current forecasts issued by 
the NMHSs in the SWIO region are not sufficiently reliable and downscaled for use in disaster risk management 
(DRM) and socio-economic sectors (such as agriculture, fisheries and tourism). Essential services provided by 
NMHSs underpin economic growth and sustainable development and yet they cannot be consistently provided across 
the region. Their weather, climate, water and ocean information services are critical to the safety and livelihoods of 
SWIO island populations, but communication of the information is not reliably reaching the people who need it. These 
services are crucial to enhancing resilience and reducing vulnerability of SWIO people to climate-related hazards and 
the effects of climate change. Governments in the four target countries in the SWIO need support in integrating 
climate information from their NMHSs into their planning and management processes.  
 
The proposed Hydromet project will address constraints including gaps in geographical coverage (e.g. of ocean 
areas); lack of capacity to deal with multiple aspects of climate-related risks and hazards; lack of end-to-end climate 
and ocean information services, from data collection, monitoring, modelling, forecasting, to service delivery and 
response of users; inadequate communication and outreach systems, especially to communities on remote areas 
(such as the case in Madagascar which is a large country, and disperse small islands in the other three countries in 
the SWIO region) ; and a lack of comprehensive and people-centred multi-hazard impact-based forecast and early 
warning systems for DRM, and specialized CP-CS to socio-economic sectors. 
  
The common vulnerabilities, climate change impacts and capacity challenges in the four target countries (outlined 
above) limit the ability of these countries to provide reliable, timely advisory and early warning on their local weather, 
climate and ocean environments; as well as science-based information that would feed the adaptation planning for 
longer term climate change impacts. This restricts their capability to safeguard vulnerable island populations and 
assets against multiple and compounding climate-related hazards.  
 
A “business as usual” scenario is likely to continue (characterised by the poorly coordinated use of insufficient CP-
CS) if no action is taken. NMHSs in the SWIO region will continue to generate basic weather forecasts and seasonal 
predictions but their information will be based on deficient and incomplete data (particularly for ocean areas) and it 
will not always reach its intended audiences in timely and useful manner. Communities will find traditional forecasting 
systems less and less reliable as CP-CS rarely reach them, and at times that they are received, they are not well-
understood due to the technical jargon, thereby, in most of the cases, are not used. So, loss of lives, assets and 
livelihoods will continue and may escalate as extreme events become more common and less predictable.  
The preferred solution is to implement integrated climate and ocean information services, multi-hazard impact-based 
forecast and EWS, and CP-CS across the SWIO region, simultaneously addressing the major barriers to coherent 
systems. While the ongoing projects and initiatives are often focused on one specific sector, a country and/or a 
limited area of intervention within a country, the Hydromet project proposes such a regional integrated approach, 
while supporting national investments.  
This will address the common vulnerabilities of the target four countries’ populations, their livelihoods and assets to 
climate change impacts and climate-related hazards. As they confront common challenges and vulnerabilities, these 
four countries have indicated interest in adopting demand-driven solutions that establish sustainable climate 
information and multi-hazard impact-based forecast and early warning systems in the same timeframe and in a 
harmonized approach. If NMHSs in the SWIO region are equipped with improved hydromet infrastructure and tools 
(as those highlighted in Table 5 above), and work closely with socio-economic sectors, DRM and communities, then 
the four target countries in the SWIO region will become more resilient to climate change, because they will be able

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 25 OF 119 
 
25 
 
 
 
71 http://rcc.cimh.edu.bb/ 
to produce and make use of more accurate, timely and reliable CP-CS including MH-IBF-EWS, target to the users 
(which are the socio-economic sectors and communities). This will be achieved through:  
 
 Strengthened institutional capacities and regional cooperation through improved governance 
mechanisms; 
 Strengthened capacities and capabilities for detection and monitoring climate-related hazards; 
 Improved quality of forecasts and warnings, which in turn will be integrated in the decision-making 
processes; 
 Enhanced preparedness and response capability with improved gender and vulnerable people 
inclusiveness across the EWS value chain.  
 
The proposed Hydromet project will ensure that: (a) governments in the four target countries implement policies, 
plans, and early actions based on more accurate, timely and reliable CP-CS and MH-IBF-EWS, underpin on 
investments in infrastructure and tools (as those described in table 5 above); (b) integrated CP-CS including MH-IBF-
EWS are in place in Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles, and sustained in response to continued 
demand, in recognition of the added- and practical value; and (c) communities and socio-economic sectors adopt 
new climate-resilient livelihood practices by using improved CS-CP, risk knowledge and MH-IBF-EWS, through co-
production of CS-CP, and test, validation and demonstration of the benefits of MH-IBF-EWS. 
The IOC, as the executing entity for the Hydromet project, is the unique institution in the SWIO region in position (i) to 
initiate and/or enhance synergies, cooperation, collaboration, and harmonization of efforts in climate-related hazard 
monitoring, modeling, forecasting, and service delivery; and (ii) to support the development and implementation of 
climate change adaptation and risk mitigation strategies in the SWIO region. This will result in cost savings and 
promote efficiency and effectiveness in the systems, while contributing to improved monitoring and increased 
accuracy of forecasts, as well as underpins successful, cost-efficient climate risk mitigation and climate change 
adaptation in the SWIO region; over the longer term, it can increase savings and sustainability of the investments. By 
adopting a regional approach to risk reduction and adaptation, by targeting various sectors – from agriculture, 
fisheries, and tourism – and building upon or scaling up other projects and initiatives, the Hydromet project will trial an 
innovative regional approach to improve climate resilience in the SWIO region; the success of a regional approach to 
monitor and manage climate variability and change, thereby improving the region’s socio-economic development, 
which has been demonstrated in other regions of the world, i.e. the Caribbean region71 and in the Southwest Pacific 
region. 
In this context, the proposed Hydromet project investments will focus on harmonization of approaches and join efforts 
for the generation of science-based multi-hazard weather and climate risk information by adopting multi-hazard 
impact-based forecasting and early warning systems/services (MH-IBF-EWS). This will include shifting from 
deterministic to probabilistic forecast techniques that highlight not only the most likely impact, but also reasonable 
worst-case scenarios, which are often the cause of avoidable disasters. Extreme value analysis will be done for 
establishing threshold values that will cause flooding and other climate-related hazards. Throughout the project 
implementation, the NMHSs will work with the DRM authorities and the various sectors, (1) to undertake risk analysis 
incorporating hazard, exposure and vulnerability, and assess potential impacts from extreme weather- and climate-
related events by making use of the risk matrices; and (2) develop target messages to sector-specific. Training of 
NMHSs and stakeholders is critical for the successful uptake, and will be an important component of the proposed 
Hydromet project. Improved climate-related data quality, and increased their variety and frequency will enable 
downscaling and calibration, thus more accurate hydro-meteorological forecasts and warnings, as well as climate 
change impact assessments on key sectors through the production of hazard and vulnerability maps thus also 
supporting climate change adaptation planning.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 26 OF 119 
 
26 
 
 
 
72 http://www.meteoalarm.eu 
73 https://vigilance.meteofrance.fr/fr 
74 http://www.meteofrance.re/vigilance-reunion 
75 https://www.wmo.int/gmas/ 
76 https://piroi.croix-rouge.fr/?lang=en  
77 http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/wcdmp/CDM_2.php 
Annex 2 – FS, SWOT analysis and case studies demonstrate that DRM institutions in the SWIO region have been 
supported by the Indian Ocean Regional Intervention Platform (PIROI) in coordination with IFRC, and therefore, 
identified priority investments in support climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction include activities that 
will improve the ability to generate, disseminate and uptake meaningful and actionable warnings. These aspects 
require strong collaboration and partnership between NMHSs and DRM institutions. Hence, in addition to the support 
for the generation of science-based multi-hazard weather and climate risk information (described in the above 
paragraph), the proposed Hydromet project will support the development and implementation of a web-based 
knowledge and decision support system with multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and color-coded risk-based 
warnings (regional “meteoalarm”72/”vigilance”7374-type platform that would also contribute to the WMO Global Multi-
hazard Alert System – GMAS75), that will be jointly develop with stakeholders to support early actions at regional, 
national and local levels. Regional, national and local capacities in implementing a people-centered MH-IBF-EWS will 
be improved through coordination and collaboration with PIROI (the Indian Ocean Regional Intervention Platform)76 
and its national counterparts (i.e. national Rec Cross and Red Crescent in each country) for piloting the development, 
testing, and validation of the MH-IBF-EWS in pilot sites in each country, which will then be expanded and rolled out 
nationwide using scenarios, and through the dissemination of knowledge products and outreach materials with the 
assistance of NGOs, in order to reach community leaders in the four countries. Collaboration and collaboration will 
also be in place to follow PIROI’s plans, in coordination with the German Red Cross and the IFRC, for the 
implementation of the Forecast-based Action / Financing (FbA/FbF) models in the SWIO region, in order to align the 
science-based developments supported by the proposed Hydromet project. In addition, the proposed Hydromet 
project will support consultations and engagement with key sectors in the four countries for development of target 
products. Private sector in these sectors (e.g., shipping, large scale fisheries, insurance, tourism, etc.) will also be 
involved with a view of exploring the possibility of establishing ring-fenced CIEWS funding mechanisms at national 
levels for sustainability of the investments beyond the lifetime of the project (see Annex 2C  on the pathway to 
establish CIEWS Funds).  
 
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) 
Through GCF support, the proposed project will overcome key barriers to increasing the climate change resilience of 
communities by bridging and front-loading the investment gaps on the hydromet services in the region. Business-as-
usual Hydromet projects (small-scale, without user-centered approaches) do not allow full resilience and risk-
informed sustainable development and economic growth. Without the leverage of the GCF, Comoros, Madagascar, 
Mauritius and Seychelles will be and remain increasingly hampered by climate-related risks and changes; community 
livelihoods will be continuously threatened by changes in temperature and rainfall patterns, as well as the increased 
frequency and intensity of climate extremes, such as tropical cyclones.  
To overcome the barriers to provide timely, accurate, reliable and user-friendly climate services, interventions with the 
most transformative impact on reducing disaster risk and will foster adaptation to climate change, have been 
identified based on extensive in-country consultations in the four target countries. These interventions (see section 
B.3) will support the strengthening of NMHSs to produce target impact-based forecasts (IBF), and the timely 
dissemination of accurate and high-quality CP-CS, including multi-hazard early warnings (MHEW). The activities will 
also enhance regional cooperation, harmonization, and knowledge sharing between Comoros, Madagascar, 
Mauritius and Seychelles, facilitated by the IOC acting as the executing entity for this project. IOC’s historical role in 
the SWIO region (created 36 years ago by SWIO region countries) and core experience in climate monitoring for the 
region (supporting several projects such as BRIO and Indian Ocean Data Rescue Project77) makes the commission 
the most appropriate institution to gather the SWIO countries within the proposed Hydromet project, and coordinate 
its activities to ensure harmonization of efforts in climate-related hazard monitoring, modeling, forecasting, and

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 27 OF 119 
 
27 
 
service delivery. See Section B.1., item 4. Above for further details on the regional approach and IOC’s role.The 
Hydromet project is built around three components to be implemented at both regional and national levels.  
Component 1: Capacity building, institutional development, regional cooperation and public-private engagement 
Component 2: High-quality climate-related data, improved multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and EWS (MH-IBF-
EWS), and climate risk assessments 
Component 3: Enhanced accessibility and use of climate services for climate change adaptation, and improved 
capabilities in implementing a people-centered MH-IBF-EWS for disaster risk reduction 
 
Figure 1: Theory of Change for the Hydromet project 
 
The Baseline problems and climate change issues are developed under Section B.1.  
 
Barriers in the value chain of Hydromet Services to climate change adaptation 
At the regional level, IOC and its member countries do not have a regional framework and facilities to harmonise 
hazard monitoring and forecasting processes, collaborate and synergise efforts for climate risk assessment, 
downscale climate change impacts from the regional to the national level, and share risk-related information and risk 
management experience.  
At national level, the NMHSs of these four countries have limited institutional, financial and technical capacities to 
monitor climate and weather and to produce location-specific forecasts to inform decision-making processes (see 
Annex 2). This is particularly the case in Comoros and Madagascar due to the limited number of stations and 
appropriate tools for forecasting. Institutional weaknesses have also been noted in the NMHSs of the four countries 
along with limited staffing, as indicated in Annex 2. There is also limited interactions between the NMHSs and the

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 28 OF 119 
 
28 
 
DRM institutions in the four countries; and there is no regional hydrometeorological counterpart (except the link with 
the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for Tropical Cyclone Forecasting in La Réunion) to work with PIROI 
on MH-IBF-EWS. As a result, there is limited production and timely dissemination of user-centered climate services 
including the implementation of people-centered MH-IBF-EWS at regional, national and local levels that can help 
reduce risk exposure and vulnerability among communities and economic sectors; this is further exacerbated by the 
lack of updated climate change projections downscaled at the level of each country to support climate change 
adaptation and risk mitigation strategies at the national level. Throughout the implementation of the proposed 
Hydromet project, relationships between NMHSs and national DRM institutions will be strengthened, as well as the 
between the RCC-Network (to be established under the project) and PIROI. This is particular important for 
strengthening regional early warning / early action, and for developing, testing, and validating the MH-IBF-EWS in the 
four countries. While noting that the implementation of the Forecast-based Action / Financing (FbA/FbF) models in 
the SWIO region is not directly supported by the proposed Hydromet project, coordination and collaboration will be in 
place to ensure that the science-based developments supported by the project are aligned with the PIROI’s plans on 
these aspects, which are supported by the German Red Cross and the IFRC, under other initiatives and projects.  
Finally, there are limited interactions between the producers and users of weather and climate services, and therefore 
limited feedback mechanisms to ensure the effective production and delivery of relevant, high-quality and accurate 
climate services. The financial resources to overcome these barriers are also not sufficient or not available within the 
IOC and its member states, because of their LDC/SIDS status and climate change-related threats on their economy, 
highly dependent on climate-sensitive sectors. In this context, the proposed Hydromet project will support market 
surveys and the review of the hydromet regulatory materials in target countries to help establishing or strengthening 
existing national funds for climate information and early warning services (CIEWS). 
 Project activities to overcome barriers and catalyse transformational change 
The three components are designed to achieve the paradigm shift of improved monitoring and management of 
climate, weather and hydrological risks in the short-, medium-, and long-term, that will facilitate growth in key climate 
sensitive target sectors (agriculture, fisheries and tourism), and enable resilience and adaptation to climate change 
impacts. 
This project provides an opportunity for countries to leverage each other’s strengths, deploy complementary fields of 
expertise and risk management capacity, and capitalise on successful regional and national initiatives. The regional 
scope of this project, fostered by IOC, underpins its success to improve climate risk assessment, and promote 
climate-resilient socio-economic growth in the long-term. The IOC is the only regional institution created and financed 
by island states of the South-West Indian Ocean Region; it already leads regional initiatives for climate risk 
management (see Section B. 1). Through its regional status, IOC will champion increased collaboration among the 
target countries for climate-related hazard monitoring, modelling, forecasting and service delivery. Increased regional 
cooperation, collaboration and harmonization of efforts will also be fostered with the design of optimum regional 
composites for each of the subsystems—hydromet observational networks, modeling, forecasting, and service 
delivery that meet the existing and future needs of societies; data and warning sharing; the establishment of the 
RCC-Network; strengthening regional training and calibration facilities; and using of a regional communication 
platform (such as the UIP) for dissemination of CP-CS and MH-IBF-EWS, and the regional discussion forums (i.e. the 
SWIOCOF).Thought collaboration with PIROI, these investments will be a major contribution to strengthen regional 
early warning / early action. 
The proposed project impact will be achieved through a mutually-reinforcing integrated approach. 
Improvement of climate services delivery (Component 3) can only be achieved if supported by appropriate 
institutional strengthening and regional collaboration and experience exchange (Component 1) and 
acquisition of specialised equipment and expertise (Component 2). 
- 
Through Component 1, regional cooperation will be strengthened through establishing an RCC-Network, 
whose mandate, organisation and facilities will be shared among IOC member countries. RFCS and NFCS will 
be prepared to enable the development and delivery of climate services at the regional and national levels. 
Institutional strengthening, including the development of nationally-appropriate business models/plans for the 
National Meteorological Services – will also be implemented in the four target countries to support robust NMHS

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 29 OF 119 
 
29 
 
 
 
78 https://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/www/IMOP/instrument-reg-centres.html 
79 https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/world-meteorological-day/wmd-2018/multi-hazard  
80 http://www.meteoalarm.eu 
81 https://vigilance.meteofrance.fr/fr 
82 http://www.meteofrance.re/vigilance-reunion 
83 https://www.wmo.int/gmas/ 
institutions, ensure financial returns and retain skilled staff. Hydromet regulatory material for each of the four 
target countries will be reviewed, alongside with market surveys, to explore opportunities to establish or 
strengthen existing national funds for CIEWS. 
- 
Through Component 2, hydro-meteorological systems and equipment will be modernised to support enhanced 
monitoring of weather, climate and hydrological hazards, and to increase understanding of climate change 
impacts on the region/countries. While expanding surface land-based observation networks in compliance with 
the GBON requirements for improved NWP and climate analysis, radar and satellite technologies will also be 
put in place to monitor both tropical cyclones and the rapid onset climate-related hazards. The maintenance 
and calibration of this equipment will be facilitated and optimized by establishing a regional maintenance and 
calibration laboratory (WMO Regional Instrument Centre78), attached to the RCC-Network, while training and 
activities to better understand and forecast climate-related hazards, assess the risks, and develop MH-IBF will 
be organised within the regional facilities. Innovative solutions (e.g. IoT, Big data analytics, cloud-services), will 
be considered, as detailed in Table 5 above. Data and systems’ integration will be pursued through the 
establishment of data centers at regional and national levels (exploring/evaluating physical and cloud-service 
solutions). Quality Management Systems (QMS) will be put in place to ensure streamlining the processes. 
Multi-hazard impact-based forecasting and early warning system/services capability 79 will be built through 
shifting from deterministic to probabilistic forecast techniques. Extreme value analysis will be done for 
establishing threshold values that will cause flooding and other climate-related hazards. By working with the 
DRM authorities and the various sectors, undertake risk analysis incorporating hazard, exposure and 
vulnerability, and assess potential impacts from extreme weather- and climate-related events by making use 
of the risk matrices.   
- 
Finally, through Component 3, the co-production of accurate CP-CS with their users in vulnerable sectors and 
end-user communities, including MH-IBF-EWS, and their timely dissemination using appropriate 
communication means will be fostered; communication between users and producers of CP-CS – including a 
feedback mechanism from users to producers on the CP-CS – will also be enhanced and sustained through 
the User Interface Platform (UIP) and the SWIOCOF. The UIP will include a web-based knowledge and decision 
support system with MH-IBF and color-coded risk-based warnings (regional “meteoalarm”80/”vigilance”8182-type 
platform that would also contribute to the WMO Global Multi-hazard Alert System – GMAS83), that will be jointly 
develop with stakeholders to support early warnings / early actions at regional, national and local levels. 
Regional, national and local capacities in implementing a people-centered MH-IBF-EWS will be implemented 
through coordination and collaboration with PIROI and its national counterparts (i.e. national Rec Cross and 
Red Crescent in each country) for developing, testing, and validating MH-IBF-EWS in pilot (most vulnerable) 
sites in each country, which will then be expanded and rolled out nationwide using scenarios, and through the 
dissemination of knowledge products and outreach materials with the assistance of NGOs and through the 
community leaders, in order to reach all population in the four countries.  The implementation of the Forecast-
based Action / Financing (FbA/FbF) models in the SWIO region will not be directly supported, but coordination 
will be in place with PIROI, who is leading these developments in the region with the support of the German 
Red Cross and the IFRC (e.g. in Mozambique), to ensure that the science-based developments supported by 
the proposed Hydromet project are aligned. In addition, the proposed Hydromet project will support 
consultations and engagement with key sectors in the four countries for development of target products. 
Taking advantage of these improvements in the production and dissemination of CP-CS, the four NMHSs will more 
systematically and efficiently consider needs of CP-CS users and end-users to develop target products for an 
increasing number of sectors. In addition, through collaboration between NMHSs and DRM institutions, there will be 
improved capacities in implementing people-centered MH-IBF-EWS. This will: i) promote the generation and use of

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 30 OF 119 
 
30 
 
 
 
84 Bapon S.H.M. Fakhruddin and Lauren Schick, 2019, “Benefits of economic assessment of cyclone early warning systems - A case study 
on Cyclone Evan in Samoa”, in Progress in Disaster Science 
85 https://www.gweforum.org/category/webinars/  
86 https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.04830 
climate information in decision making; ii) strengthen adaptive capacity and reduce exposure to climate-related risks; 
and iii) strengthen awareness of climate threats and risk reduction processes within the SWIO region.  
As a result, these components will support the paradigm shift towards resilient states, institutions, 
economies, populations and livelihoods to climate-related hazards and to achieve risk-informed sustainable 
development. Please refer to Annex 2 for details on the project components and their alignment with the GFCS led 
by WMO. 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) 
 Project development objective and contribution to climate change adaptation 
The project objective is to strengthen adaptive capacity and climate resilience of the vulnerable communities and 
economic sectors of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles. This will be achieved through (1) institutional 
strengthening and reforms, and capacity building at regional and national levels, and public-private engagement; (2) 
improvement and modernisation of hydro-meteorological systems and services, which will equip users with timely, 
reliable, and accurate information to prevent, mitigate and adapt to climate-related hazards and climate change; and 
(3) enhancing the use of climate services, establishing MH-IBF-EWS supported by knowledge and decision support 
system, and improving the capabilities to implement a people-centered MH-IBF-EWS. These investments will 
contribute to climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction84. Indeed, these services enable risk prevention 
and preparedness, emergency response and adaptation planning; by providing decision-makers in climate-sensitive 
sectors with the needed and required information (see Annex 2). As such, the benefits of the proposed project will 
support the implementation of NDCs, national adaptation and disaster risk reduction plans, and the achievement of 
Sendai targets. 
The proposed interventions will contribute to achieve the GCF fund-level impact A1.0 Increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions and A2.0 Increased resilience of health 
and well-being, and food and water security. For example, more accurate and location-specific weather forecasts, 
produced under the proposed project, will facilitate agricultural planning and adjustment to agriculture calendars; 
weather forecasts will also facilitate risk prevention measures; and timely early warnings will enable the protection of 
lives, buildings, fisheries, tourism or agricultural equipment and harvests, among other assets.  
The four case studies and SWOT analysis of NMHS and DRM institutions, presented as part of the project Feasibility 
Study (see Annex 2, Chapter 4), demonstrated the need and demand for improved climate services in Comoros, 
Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles. To illustrate, there are many shortcomings to effective, reliable CP-CS in the 
four target countries at present: 
• 
In Comoros and Madagascar, a key weakness is the limited number of functional weather stations for 
weather/climate observation and monitoring, the lack of upper air station and doppler radar, and lack of human 
and technological capacities within the NMHS. As a result, there is a small range of forecast products (e.g. 
weather or seasonal forecasts, timely alerts for fishermen) available.  
• 
Mauritius needs to improve the density of upper air station in order to monitor atmospheric instability and to 
produce more accurate, locally-relevant forecasts and seasonal outlooks. Both Mauritius and Seychelles lack 
adequate staffing capacity with relevant specializations to produce more diverse and/or localised CP-CS that 
respond to the needs of users in all climate-sensitive sectors, e.g. in agriculture, fisheries and tourism sectors.  
• 
The 4 countries rely on deterministic numerical weather prediction (NWP) products, publicly available on the 
Internet, for forecasting. These NWP models will always produce the same single outcome for the sole initial 
condition or state. Given the uncertainty in the initial state of the atmosphere, which cannot be perfectly 
observed and the approximations in the numerical representation of processes in the models, the outcome is 
intrinsically probabilistic – meaning that small changes in the initial state of the atmosphere and the processes 
in the model that cannot be directly predicted (model parameterizations) lead to a range of plausible forecast 
results, whereas a deterministic forecast, which produces a single outcome may inevitably lead to significant 
mistakes – many false forecasts. Therefore, and aligned with the vision for NWP in 20308586, there is an 
absolute requirement to shift towards using ensemble prediction systems (EPS) and probabilistic forecasts.

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 119 
 
31 
 
 
 
87 https://climate.copernicus.eu  
88 Personal communication with DAPV, Direction de l’agriculture en appui à la production végétale 
The proposed project will support the access and use of high-resolution EPS and probabilistic forecasts with 
full data assimilation, which are generated from reliable sources, such as those working within the framework 
of the Copernicus programme87. The proposed project will also support downscaling and calibration of the 
model outputs to the SWIO region and countries, using innovative techniques such as Artificial Intelligence and 
by utilizing the observations from the expanded network also supported by the project; which will also contribute 
to improvements in global NWP/EPS through the GBON commitment to share internationally these data 
through the WMO Information System/Global Telecommunication System. 
Dissemination and communication and engagement with the users of CP-CS to produce timely, high-quality services 
is also limited in the four target countries. Overall, there is a lack of procedures in place to co-produce climate 
information with users, collect their feedback and improve the range of CP-CS. For example: 
• 
There is no operational service dedicated to agriculture which relates to precipitation forecasting, temperature 
and humidity in Comoros. Concerning fisheries, there is no efficient marine weather service to alert fishing 
communities in the event of strong winds or swells.  
• 
In Madagascar, the hydrological monitoring is weak while floods are a predominant risk. Though crops 
calendars for the rainy season for each type of culture and for each region are made available to farmers, their 
accuracy is limited due to a lack of downscaled forecasts and climate data at district level88.  
• 
In Mauritius, Emergency Operations Procedures (EOP) are in place for all the major hazards like tropical 
cyclones, however, there is a lack of resources and capacities at local scale (local authorities) to implement 
them.  
• 
With regards to fisheries, Seychelles’ NMHS delivers marine forecast to fishermen on harbour, but they do not 
have relevant equipment to warn fishermen on sea. Finally, no river hydrology monitoring is available for settling 
relevant flood alert system with high water thresholds referring to water catchment hydraulic behaviour. 
• 
None of the target countries have the capacity for MH-IBF-EWS; and therefore, the proposed project has a 
strong component on building such capacity. 
 
The four countries are committed to address these shortcomings by improving the production and delivery of timely, 
accurate CP-CS; this can be illustrated through their engagement within the Sendai Agreement as well as other 
strategies and plans like the NAP and NDC. Moreover, consultations conducted during the project development phase 
indicated that sector users, including the departments of agriculture, fisheries and tourism (see details in section D.5 
and in Annex 07), are in need of better CP-CS, including timely alerts for cyclones, floods, and storms, accurate daily 
forecasts, and seasonal weather advisories. It is likely that the project will create new demands for CP-CS, based on 
further consultations and engagement with stakeholders and end-users.  
 
Several GCF outcomes for adaptation will also be achieved through the proposed project, namely: 
- 
A5.0 Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and development 
- 
A6.0 Increased generation and use of climate information in decision-making 
- 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks 
- 
A8.0 Strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes 
 Scope of the project and description 
The proposed Hydromet project is designed to scale up current initiatives supporting climate services in Comoros, 
Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles. This will be achieved by building on investments to:  
i) 
Improve weather and climate monitoring techniques and downscale climate change projections, while 
complementing existing weather observation network or planned hydrological networks,  
ii) Enhance the production and dissemination of climate services by scaling up existing initiatives in the 
production of agrometeorological advisories and early warnings for tropical cyclones, develop new services 
for the fisheries and tourism sectors, disseminate timely, reliable and accurate MH-IBF-EWS, and produce or 
update risk management and adaptation plans,

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 119 
 
32 
 
 
 
89 WMO Manual on the Global Data-processing and Forecasting System, 2019 edition:  
https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=10164  
iii) Foster collaboration and knowledge exchanging for hazard monitoring and risk management through 
sustaining and strengthening of the SWIOCOF and the UIP, 
iv) Improve capabilities in implementing a people-centered MH-IBF-EWS through collaboration between NMHSs 
and DRM institutions at regional, national and local levels. 
All supported by regional collaboration and national institutional development, including capacity building. The 
proposed interventions have been developed with the end-users of CP-CS in mind to provide improved CP-CS 
addressing their needs. Users will be engaged in project interventions to better understand the risks and vulnerability 
associated to climate-related hazards, and to ensure that information is packaged to inform decision-making 
processes at the local level, using the best communication channels for each specific group of users.  
Component 1:  Capacity building, institutional development, regional cooperation and public-private 
engagement 
This Component will set up the basis for a regional approach and collaboration for weather and climate monitoring 
and risk reduction. It will support the adoption of a Regional Climate Services Framework (RFCS) that will contribute 
to developing a common risk culture among IOC member states that reinforces weather data and information sharing 
in order to better understand, monitor and prevent hydro-meteorological hazards in the region (i.e. tropical cyclones, 
storms with strong winds and heavy rainfall). The establishment of an RCC-Network under the aegis of IOC and as a 
formal designated centre by WMO, will provide the following services and facilities to IOC member states (mandatory 
functions) (i) operational activities for long-range forecasting (LRF); (ii) operational activities for climate monitoring; 
(iii) operational climate data services; and (iv) training in the use of operational RCC products and services. Additional 
functions, not mandatory but highly recommended by WMO, for the RCC-Network will also be implemented. These 
include: (a) climate prediction and climate projection (beyond 2 years’ timeframe); (b) research and development; (c) 
non-operational data services; and (d) coordination functions – IOC would have a clear role in the implementation of 
the last two. Attached to the RCC-Network, there will be the establishment of a WMO Regional Instrument Centre, for 
the calibration and maintenance services for the hydro-meteorological equipment, and of a regional center for 
specialized training and capacity building, to complement the existing training in the region; and the development of a 
UIP for the dissemination of the RCC-Network products and tools within SWIO region. This platform will also be used 
for experience and knowledge sharing for adaptation and disaster risk reduction (complementing the SWIOCOF), and 
for dissemination of MH-IBF-EWS and the SWIO climate outlooks. 
The modalities under which the RCC-Network will be hosted and run will be determined in the RCC-Network strategy 
and operating plan. Once the RCC-Network strategy and operating plan, including the roles and responsibilities of 
each ‘RCC-Network node’, is endorsed by the WMO Regional Association I (Africa) and approved by IOC Member 
States, multi-lateral agreements between member countries and the IOC will be prepared, following WMO 
recommendations89.  
The DRM institutions in the SWIO region have been benefiting from the support of the Indian Ocean Regional 
Intervention Platform (PIROI). In addition, the SWOT analysis done of the NMHS and DRM institutions in the four 
countries has demonstrated that the weakest link in EWS lies in the ability to generate, disseminate and uptake 
meaningful and actionable warnings. These aspects require strong collaboration and partnership between NMHSs 
and DRM institutions. This component will then support strengthening this partnership at regional and national levels, 
and building the capacity of stakeholders to ensure effective uptake of the new CP-CS. 
The SWIOCOF will be convened by IOC, in coordination with the RCC-Network and the NMHSs. To support the long-
term production of regional services, the multi-lateral agreements will provide details of how each Member State will 
financially contribute to the running costs of the RCC-Network and attached facilities beyond the project’s lifetime – 
e.g. finance for the maintenance and calibration laboratory, the specialized training center, the UIP and the 
SWIOCOF.

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 119 
 
33 
 
A regional business model/plan will also be developed to identify additional sources of funding for the RCC-Network 
from public and private sectors, e.g. through commercialisation of regional CP-CS (see Annexes 3a and 21). 
Capacity development plans will be developed to support ‘organisational change’ required to support the ‘digital 
transformation’ of the NMHSs, as well as to establish career paths that would support retaining the trained, skilled 
and talent staff (see Annex 2D). 
The NMHSs of the target countries in the SWIO region are not Agencies; and therefore a mechanism needs to be 
sought to ensure that they are able to manage revenues and incomes from their commercial services and cost-
recovery that would support O&M. Therefore, the Hydromet legal and regulatory material for each of the four target 
countries will be reviewed to either transform the NMHS in an Agency with financial autonomy for managing funds 
from commercial services and cost-recovery, or establishment of a CIEWS Fund to manage such funds, that is 
managed by a Central Committee chaired by the related Ministry and membership from the stakeholders (see 
Annex2C). Market surveys will also be carried out to explore opportunities to establish or strengthen existing national 
funds for CIEWS.  
A baseline study on how CP-CS and MH-IBF-EWS for hydrometeorological hazards are used in each beneficiary 
country, and on user requirements for improving such services will be carried out in order to reconfirm the sector 
needs basis and take into consideration any new conditions (such as those arise from the COVID-19 pandemic) for 
fine-tuning the design of the hydromet observation, modeling, forecasting and service delivery systems. In general, 
users want more accurate, reliable, timely and location-specific forecasts, provided with a user-friendly terminology. 
However, for products and services be target to specific user sectors, this general statement is not sufficient. For 
instance, for the development of target products for the agriculture sector, detailed user requirements are needed, 
inter alia: (a) the time and frequency this sector needs the agromet advisory; (b) the user’s preferable channel to 
receive the information; (c) the required content of the agromet advisories (i.e. variables, locations, observations, 
forecasts for various timescales). With these information, it will be possible to: (a) fine-tune the design of the agromet 
network to provide the data for the required locations and variables; (b) use the agromet data to calibrate forecast 
data from NWP; (c) define the channels for dissemination of the agromet advisories; (d) etc. 
In addition, noting that the proposed Hydromet project will partly support the optimum composite surface observation 
network and associated ICT systems for the SWIO region aligned with the Global Basic Observing Network (GBON) 
concept, at the initial phase of the project, options will be explored for leveraging funds from the newly GBON 
Systematic Observations Financing Facility (SOFF) for the completion of the implementation of the network. 
Component 1 will also strengthen institutional and financial status of NMHSs with particular attention given to 
retaining skilled staff, which underpins the long-term generation of timely, high-quality climate information products 
and services; provide core training to NMHS’ staff members and ensure the harmonization of climate-related products 
and services across countries, based on international good practices and WMO technical regulations that defined the 
standards. 
While the level of the NMHSs of the 4 countries is different (please see Table 2 in section A.21), they all face similar 
institutional and capacity problems and therefore, regional collaboration is critical. In this sense, the activities under 
Component 1 will be implemented equality across the four countries. 
The following Outcomes, Expected Results, Outputs and Activities (summary below and detailed description provided 
in section E.6.) are planned under Component 1: 
Outcome 1: Strengthened institutional capacities and regional cooperation through improved governance mechanisms 
Expected Result 1: Generation, dissemination and uptake of climate-related information supported by effective 
organizational and institutional capacities, regional cooperation, and enabling environment 
- 
Output 1.1 A Regional Climate Centre Network (RCC-Network) and frameworks for CS established 
 
Activity 1.1.1 Develop regional and national frameworks for climate services (RFCS & NFCS)

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 119 
 
34 
 
 
 
90 WMO, 2018. Step-by-step Guidelines for Establishing a National Framework for Climate Services 
 
 
Under this activity, each country will develop a National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS) to 
coordinate, facilitate and strengthen collaboration among national institutions for enhanced use of CP-
CS and to facilitate a long-term sustainable business model for national climate services.90 
At a same time, under the leadership of IOC, a Regional Framework for Climate Services (RFCS) will be 
developed to coordinate, facilitate and strengthen collaboration among regional institutions (e.g. PIROI) 
for enhanced use of CP-CS; and at the same time to introduce an harmonized approach across the 
region and input to the NFCS. 
 
Activity 1.1.2 Establish the legal, institutional, financial and organisational model for the establishment of 
the RCC-Network; define a strategy and develop an operating plan for setting up and operationalize it; 
reach formal designation by WMO  
This activity includes the development of a legal, institutional, financial and organizational model for the 
establishment of the RCC-Network. This will be done through regional meetings and workshops led by 
IOC, with the participation of the four countries.  
As each country will have, a particular function(s) in the RCC-Network, this need to be discussed and 
agreed at the national level with the relevant authorities, and therefore, NMHSs of the four countries will 
be responsible for coordinating the inputs and organize the relevant consultative meetings and 
workshops at the national level. 
 
Activity 1.1.3 Define strategies and develop operating plans for the establishment of (i) a regional 
laboratory for maintenance and annual calibration of equipment as a WMO Regional Instrument Centre; 
and (ii) a regional centre for specialized training (centre/lab will be set up under Output 2.2) 
At the regional level, led by IOC, there will be regional workshops with the participation of the four 
countries to refine the requirements and develop strategies for the establishment of a regional laboratory 
in Seychelles and a regional training for specialized training in Mauritius. 
At the national level, there will be initial meetings for development of the operating plans, and follow up 
meetings/field visits to assess progress in the establishment of a regional laboratory in Seychelles (led 
by the NMHS of Seychelles) and a regional training for specialized training in Mauritius (led by the 
NMHS of Mauritius). 
 
Activity 1.1.4 Prepare a strategy to improve Regional Numerical Weather and Climate Prediction 
(NWP/NCP) 
The development of the Regional Numerical Weather and Climate Prediction strategy will be done at the 
regional level. Led by IOC, there will be consultative workshops with the participation of the four 
countries and partners, including the relevant WMO global and regional centers. 
 
- 
Output 1.2 Institutional arrangements for NMHS operation strengthened and hydromet laws prepared with 
potential CIEWS funds established 
 
Activity 1.2.1 Strengthen the institutional, operating and financial strategy of NMHSs for each target 
country 
Under this activity, each country will review existing arrangements and will develop institutional, 
operating and financial strategies of their NMHSs.

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 119 
 
35 
 
 
 
91 https://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/dra/etrp/documents/1083_Manual_on_ETS_en_rev.pdf 
 
Activity 1.2.2 Develop the transition plan support required for each NMHS, DRM institutions and relevant 
sectoral ministries (Capacity Development plans) 
Under this activity, each country will develop capacity development plans (see Annex 2D ) to support 
‘organisational change’ required to support the ‘digital transformation’ of the NMHSs, as well as to 
establish career paths that would support retaining the trained, skilled and talent staff . 
 
Activity 1.2.3 Review and/or strengthen legal and regulatory materials, including the establishment of a 
CIEWS fund 
Under this activity, each country will review their legal and regulatory materials; and review and evaluate 
all possible mechanisms to establish a CIEWS fund. Based on this analysis, each country will revise / 
strengthen their respective legal and regulatory materials. This activity relates to procuring the technical 
assistance for the review of the possible mechanisms and preparation of the required documentation for 
the establishment of the CIEWS fund (see Annex 2C). 
 
- 
Output 1.3 Improved staffing capacity and capability of the RCC-Network, NMHSs and other relevant institutions 
 
Activity 1.3.1 Recruit new staff members for the RCC-Network and NMHSs 
Under this activity, each country will access its NMHS needs in terms of human resources to carry out 
both its national responsibilities and its functions as part of its RCC-Network node. Based on the result 
of the assessments, there will be recruitment of staff in each country. GCF proceeds will not be used to 
support this activity. 
 
Activity 1.3.2 Train new and retrain existing staff, in accordance with the WMO Standards for Education 
and Training in Meteorology and Hydrology91 (Basic Instruction Packages for meteorologists and 
meteorological technicians; and for hydrologists and hydrological technicians) 
Under this activity, in each country, new and existing staff will be trained/retrained at national/regional 
universities and research institutions. Twinning arrangements with WMO global and regional centers will 
also be considered. 
 
- 
Output 1.4 Fine tune the design to develop technical specification, system integration and tendering process of 
Project Activities prepared and implemented 
 
Activity 1.4.1 Conduct baseline study on how CP-CS and MH-IBF-EWS for hydrometeorological hazards 
are used in each beneficiary country, and on user requirements for improving such services 
Under this activity, each country will conduct studies to reconfirm the access to, and use, of CP-CS, as 
well as the status of the EWS at the baseline level, and take into consideration any new conditions (such 
as those arise from the COVID-19 pandemic); these will be re-assessed at project mid- and end-term to 
demonstrate progress/achievements throughout project implementation. 
 
Activity 1.4.2 Fine tune the design of the hydromet observational networks, modelling, forecasting, and 
service delivery systems, for each NMHS, taking a regional harmonized approach  
 
Under this activity, each country will develop the detailed/fine-tuned systems technical specifications, 
while the tender process will be carried out by IOC. The detailed list of equipment and information 
systems per country is provided under Activities 2.1.1 and 2.1.2, respectively. Activity 1.4.3 Ensure full 
system integration from observation stations to delivery of CP-CS to end-user  
This activity includes the development of step-by-step practices and procedures for system integration 
and coordination of project activities in each country. Various networks and even the same type of 
network but from different manufacturers use different datalogger software which collect data in different

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 119 
 
36 
 
 
 
92 https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/world-meteorological-day/wmd-2018/multi-hazard  
93 https://www.ecmwf.int/en/about/media-centre/science-blog/2020/baseline-global-weather-and-climate-simulations-1-
km?fbclid=IwAR0AV9mKH1gIIXyToXYGgPko5RtXmd8mDlu2ErKCQzUU30pAEzfEDSNfnMQ 
94 https://climate.copernicus.eu  
95 https://journals.ametsoc.org/bams/article/98/10/2073/70032/Using-Artificial-Intelligence-to-Improve-Real-Time 
formats. Their associated data management systems only allow the display of the data coming from the 
same network and same manufacturer. This activity will therefore support the development of a data 
integration “architecture” where the all data from the various networks and within the same network from 
different manufacturer be transmitted to a centralized Datacenter (to be established under the proposed 
project) and converted in the WMO standard formats. All these standardized data will then be integrated 
and displayed in a single data management system (rather than those individual systems provided by 
the different manufacturers/suppliers) – the standardized WMO Climate Data Management System 
(please see https://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/wcdmp/CDM_3.php). As part of this activity, a detailed 
study of the various networks and types of equipment, data formats and transmission will be study with 
the intend to develop the data integration “architecture” and implement/develop the various scripts 
required to ensure the transmission, conversion, standardization, as well as automation of the data 
management. 
 
Component 2: High-quality climate-related data, improved multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and EWS 
(MH-IBF-EWS), and climate risk assessments 
Under Component 2, equipment for observation and monitoring networks, and information systems will be 
modernised in the project target countries, following the WMO technical regulations / standards. Moreover, the 
technical capacities and expertise of NMHS’ staff members will be improved through specialized and hands-on 
training aligned with the NMHSs competencies, and Research & Development (R&D) activities and their 
operationalization. Stakeholders and other users will also be trained under this component. 
To facilitate hydro-meteorological equipment maintenance and organisation of trainings, a regional specialized 
training and a regional maintenance and calibration centre (WMO Regional Instrument Centre) will be set up and/or 
refurbished and run attached to the RCC-Network. These activities will also enhance regional collaboration, enable 
cost saving and support the long-term production of effective CP-CS, which require high-quality, well-maintained 
equipment (e.g. sensors).  
To further support CP-CS, understanding of climate-related risks on economic sectors and communities will be 
improved through trainings and the production of hazard and vulnerability maps. Such maps will be developed taking 
into account climate change impacts on return periods/intensity of selected hazards; moreover, they will be produced 
using participatory approaches with NMHSs, DRM institutions, local authorities of hazard-prone areas, and public and 
private sectors representing agriculture/fisheries, tourism, water resource management sectors and communities at-
risk.  
The purpose will be to identify main assets at stake and most vulnerable people affected by the selected hazards 
from a local point of view, based on how people/assets were affected during past events. By indicating the location, 
frequency, intensity and impacts of hazards, these maps will be useful to develop risk prevention plans, under 
Component 3. 
Multi-hazard impact-based forecasting and early warning system/services capability92 will be built through shifting 
from deterministic to probabilistic forecast techniques. NMHSs will make use of recent scientific and technological 
developments, including innovative and cost-effective solutions to ensure sustainability by using ensemble prediction 
system products from advanced centers at very high-resolution93 (e.g. as those generated within the framework of the 
Copernicus programme94), and will carry out downscaling and calibration of these products to the target countries 
exploiting newly developments such as artificial intelligence95. This will result in more accurate forecasts of the 
likelihood and severity of the events, which will lead to increasing confidence of end-users in using such forecasts 
and warnings in their decision-making processes. Thresholds values for issuing warnings will be determined based

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 119 
 
37 
 
 
 
96 The proposed interventions are based on missions in the four beneficiary countries; they also take into account the recommendations of 
HYCOS feasibility study which was conducted in June-September 2019.  
on extreme value analysis and review of historical hydrometeorological events. By working with the DRM institutions 
and the various sectors, risk analysis will be undertaken, incorporating hazard, exposure and vulnerability data, and 
assess potential impacts from extreme weather- and climate-related events. The implementation of MH-IBF-EWS will 
be done under component 3.  
Climate change projections, downscaled to specific sectors, and maps produced under this Component will be 
shared with stakeholders in climate-sensitive sectors through the UIP, run in association with the RCC-Network, and 
strengthened under Component 3.  
As none of the target countries have the capacity for end-to-end MH-IBF-EWS; and the Component 2 of the proposed 
project has a strong focus on building such capacity, from detection and monitoring the hazardous hydromet events, 
making use of advanced modelling techniques and downscaling to the country/district levels for improved forecasting, 
production of target products to user sectors, and proper dissemination of forecasts and warnings. Aligned with the 
GFCS components, Table 2 in section A.21 describes the GFCS categorization for the baseline status and after the 
proposed Hydromet project interventions. In general, all activities under Component 2 are to be implemented by the 4 
countries, however the level of which the NMHSs will be reaching is quite different, especially in the “Observations 
and Monitoring” component of GFCS, where investments in Madagascar and Comoros are on the critical and 
absolutely required networks, i.e. categorized as “Essential” under GFCS (those that the NMHS will be able to 
operate and maintain in order to be sustainable); while Mauritius and Seychelles will be able to operate and maintain 
an advanced observation and monitoring, in a sustainable way (Output 2.1). As the observational data generated by 
the new networks supported by the proposed project under this Component will be shared within the SWIO region, all 
countries will benefit, even if there are different levels of investment. 
Significant investments are also in the GFCS Component “Climate Services Information System (CSIS)“, which the 
current baseline for the 4 countries is at the “Basic” level, so interventions will be done equally across all countries, to 
reach “Full” in the GFCS categorization for Comoros and Madagascar, and “Advanced” in Mauritius and Seychelles – 
this difference relates to the fact that these countries will be hosting the “regional calibration lab” and the “regional 
training center” (Output 2.2). Activities under the Output 2.3 will be equally implemented in all four countries, none of 
these countries have been applying innovative and cost-effective techniques to generate science-based hydromet 
information. 
The following Outcomes, Expected Results, Outputs and Activities (summary below and detailed description provided 
in section E.6.) are planned under Component 2: 
Outcome 2: Strengthened capacities and capabilities for detection and monitoring climate-related hazards 
Expected result 2: Upgraded obs. &  monitoring, and information systems capacities secure reliable capacity to monitor 
climate-related hazards & assess trends 
- 
Output 2.1 Enhanced hydro-meteorological observation and monitoring, by making use of innovative technologies 
for cost-effectiveness 
 
Activity 2.1.1 Modernise/upgrade climate-related observation and monitoring network96 
Under this activity, the networks will be modernised in each country based on the detailed plan and 
specifications produced under output 1.4. 
In Comoros: Rehabilitation/extension of the building where the National Meteorological Service is based, 
upgrade the national synoptic networks (meteorological stations following the Feasibility Study 
recommendations – Annex 2; and hydrologic stations following HYCOS recommendation), sub-synoptic 
rainfall network in flood-prone  areas, agrometeorological observing network, AWOS and ASOS, meteo-
oceanographic buoys, Upper air radiosounding system, Doppler radar, Tower for radar. 
In Madagascar: Upgrade national synoptic networks (meteorological stations following the Feasibility 
Study recommendations – Annex 2; and hydrological stations following HYCOS recommendations), sub-
synoptic rainfall network in flood-prone areas, agrometeorological observing network, Upper air 
radiosounding system, Doppler radar, Tower for radar.

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 119 
 
38 
 
 
 
97 For WMO Global Campus, see https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/meteoworld/wmo-global-campus 
In Mauritius: Upgrade national synoptic networks (AWS and hydrological stations following HYCOS 
recommendation), sub-synoptic rain network in flood-prone areas (Port-Louis), Wave radar for North 
Mauritius, Rodrigues and Agalega, Maregraph for North Mauritius, Rodrigues and Agalega and 
Brandon, Lightning detection network station at Rodrigues, Upper air radiosounding system for Agalega, 
Saint Brandon and Rodrigues, Doppler radar for Rodrigues, Tower for radar. 
In Seychelles: Upgrade national synoptic networks (AWS and hydrological stations following HYCOS 
recommendations), sub-synoptic rainfall network in flood-prone areas (Mahé, Praslin and La Digue), 
Wave radar for Mahé, Praslin and La Digue, Tide gauge for Mahé, Praslin and La Digue, Lightning 
detection network stations for Mahé, Praslin and La Digue, Doppler radar for Mahé, Tower for radar. 
 
 
Activity 2.1.2 Modernise/upgrade the information and communication technology systems  
In each of the four countries, the following systems will be upgraded and/or set-up: 
- Data collecting system 
- Automatic Meteorological Switching System 
- Data center  
- Storage and archive of national data 
- Forecaster workstation 
- Climatological Database Management System 
- Service delivery platform (i.e. end user production system) 
 
- 
Output 2.2 Regional facilities for maintenance and training established  
 
Activity 2.2.1 Establish a maintenance and calibration laboratory (WMO Regional Instrument Centre) 
A regional maintenance laboratory (WMO Regional Instrument Centre) will be built and equipped in 
Seychelles to do support maintenance work and calibration of the existing and new acquired hydromet 
equipment for the four countries in the region, following the strategy developed under Activity 1.1.3. 
 
Activity 2.2.2 Equip the specialized training centre for the region, hosted by Mauritius NMHS (which will 
contribute to the WMO Global Campus97 by making available training materials at the center to all WMO 
Members) 
A specialized training center for the region will be equipped in Mauritius to support training in the region, 
for the four countries and also contribute to the WMO Global Campus by making available the training 
materials developed by this training center, following the strategy developed under Activity 1.1.3. 
 
Outcome 3: Quality of forecasts and warnings improved and integrated in the decision-making processes 
Expected result 3:  Generation of science-based multi-hazard weather, climate and water risk info improve the quality 
of forecasts and warning, and impact-based  decision-making 
- 
Output 2.3 Science-based multi-hazard weather and climate risk information generated 
 
Activity 2.3.1 Downscale and calibrate meteorological forecasts by making use of numerical weather 
prediction/ensemble prediction systems (NWP/EPS) and applying modern techniques such as artificial 
intelligence – these developments will be done at a regional platform (in a cloud) with contribution of 
experts from the four NMHSs 
Aligned with the strategy to improve Regional Numerical Weather and Climate Prediction developed 
under Activity 1.1.4, staff from the four NMHSs will be on hands-on training at the regional center in 
Mauritius. This activity will be coordinated by IOC, and includes the participation of international experts 
as lecturers, for the common training sessions for the four countries. This activity also includes individual 
tasks such as forecast verification and downscaling to national level for each of the four countries.

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 119 
 
39 
 
 
Activity 2.3.2 Establish threshold values for issuing warnings based on extreme value analysis and 
review of historical hydrometeorological events 
This is an activity carried out at the national level in each country, with workshops with NMHSs and 
DRM institutions and other stakeholders (including NGOSs) to agree on national threshold values for 
issuing warnings based on extreme value analysis and review of historical hydrometeorological events 
in each country.  
 
There will be also regional workshops led by IOC, with the participation of the four NMHSs and of PIROI, 
for harmonization of threshold warnings across the region to facilitate integration of warning information 
into the regional “meteo-alarm” type dissemination.  
 
Activity 2.3.3 Develop hazard maps  
This is an activity carried out at the national and local levels in each country, with workshops with 
NMHSs and DRM institutions and other stakeholders (including NGOSs) to understand he frequency 
and intensity of selected hazards, and develop or update the hazard maps using the monitoring 
equipment established under Activity 2.1.1 and based on return period of the hazards. 
 
 
Activity 2.3.4 Develop vulnerability maps  
This is an activity carried out at the national and local levels in each country. Based on the hazard maps 
produced under Activity 2.3.3, a mapping exercise for climate-risk vulnerability – of people and assets – will 
be conducted in a participative way with the NMHS, local authorities of hazardous-prone areas, public and 
private sectors representing agriculture/fisheries, tourism, health, water sectors and at-risk communities. 
There will also be workshops at national and local levels to raise awareness of climate-related vulnerability 
and shifts in the context of climate change.  
 
Activity 2.3.5 Undertake risk analysis incorporating hazard, exposure and vulnerability to identify 
potential impacts from extreme events 
This is an activity carried out at the national and local levels in each country. This activity will involve 
compilation of various datasets available for characterizing hazard, vulnerability and exposure to develop a 
tool in quantifying risks, i.e. potential impacts. This tool will therefore be used to analyse exposure and 
determine potential physical, environment, social and economic impacts in the four countries due to their 
respective hazards. This risk analysis tool or methodology will be used in generating multi-hazard impact-
based forecasts and early warnings and visualization maps through the knowledge and decision support 
system that will be developed in Output 3.2. 
 
Activity 2.3.6 Carry out downscaling of global and regional seasonal forecasts to national level, and use 
them to produce agrometeorological products 
Aligned with the strategy to improve Regional Numerical Weather and Climate Prediction developed 
under Activity 1.1.4, staff from the four NMHSs will be on hands-on training at the regional center in 
Mauritius. This activity will be coordinated by IOC, and includes the participation of international experts 
as lecturers, for the common training sessions for the four countries. This activity also includes individual 
tasks such as downscaling of global and regional seasonal forecasts to national level and production of 
agrometeorological products for each of the four countries.  
 
Activity 2.3.7 Build the capacity to downscale climate models for national purposes 
Aligned with the strategy to improve Regional Numerical Weather and Climate Prediction developed 
under Activity 1.1.4, staff from the four NMHSs will be on hands-on training at the regional center in 
Mauritius. This activity will be coordinated by IOC, and includes the participation of international experts 
as lecturers, for the common training sessions for the four countries. This activity also includes individual 
tasks such as downscaling of climate models to national purposes in each of the four countries.  
 
Activity 2.3.8 Build the capacity for hydrological modelling for flood forecasting (i.e. flood propagation 
model) 
Under this activity, staff from the four NMHSs will be on hands-on training at the regional center in 
Mauritius. This activity will be coordinated by IOC, and includes the participation of international experts

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 119 
 
40 
 
as lecturers, for the common training sessions for the four countries. This activity also includes individual 
tasks such as hydrological modelling for flood forecasting in each of the four countries.  
 
Component 3: Enhanced accessibility and use of climate services for climate change adaptation, and 
improved capabilities in implementing a people-centered MH-IBF-EWS for disaster risk reduction 
As regional cooperation for climate risk monitoring is strengthened (under Component 1) and equipment, expertise 
and understanding of climate-related risks and impacts are enhanced (Component 2), the NMHSs will be able to 
improve the range and quality of their climate-related information, products and services, based on user feedback. 
The dissemination of CP-CS towards vulnerable socio-economic groups will also be supported, as well as user 
capacity to use them as decision-making tools. Component 3 particularly aims at equipping decision-makers and 
communities with adequate tools to prepare for climate-related hazards and to adapt to short- to long-term climate 
variability and change.  The update of the long term climate change adaptation plans will be limited to sections that 
related to the new results for the climate change projections supported under Component 2. Component 3 will also 
strengthen existing communication platforms for the producers and users on CP-CS (such as the UIP) and discussion 
forums (i.e. the SWIOCOF), which run in association with the RCC-Network. These will ensure a continuous 
interaction among all stakeholders, collection of user feedback on CP-CS, and production of CP-CS based on user 
needs. A funding strategy to maintain the UIP and SWIOCOF beyond this proposed project will be developed in 
association with the RCC-Network strategy and operating plan, under Activity 1.1.2.A national framework for MH-IBF-
EWS for each country will be developed and harmonized at the regional level. This framework will guide the 
implementation of MH-IBF-EWS at the local level. This involves collaboration among NMHS, PIROI and the national 
DRM institutions, and other stakeholders, the development risk matrices for each hazard with agreed risk levels and 
colour-codes, and description of related impacts and response/actions (i.e. general impact table and general 
response table for each hazard). Selected vulnerability sites in each country (at least one per country in the coastal 
areas) will be selected to use such risk matrices and associated information for testing and validating MH-IBF-EWS, 
with the assistance of local government, PIROI and its national counterparts and associated NGOs. This will be 
followed by the development/update early warning protocols from hazard to impact-based for issuance, 
communication and dissemination for each hazard in the identified project sites – this will be done through a 
collaborative approach among the NMHSs, the National DRM agencies, the local Government, and stakeholder in the 
identified project sites.  
Testing and validating the impact and response tables on early warning in project sites will be done in a collaborative 
and participatory manner. The above-mentioned impact and response tables will be then localized for the project 
sites by making use of the vulnerability of specific sites and tailored to the needs of those at risk (i.e. last-mile 
communities, including indigenous), as well as the local decision-makers, including local government, UN agencies 
and humanitarian actors, and local NGOs operating on the ground. Committees at the project sites will be established 
to ensure coordination and collaboration throughout the testing and validation, as well as for the operationalization of 
the MH-IBF-EWS. 
The shift to impact-based forecasting and warning will imply a (re-)design of EWSs – these would need to clearly 
incorporates both decision-making aspects and the perceptions in terms of risk of vulnerable communities. The latter, 
as end-users of the last-mile of EWS, will be engaged and consulted throughout the process to ensure that the re-
design of the EWS will be optimal for use and relevance. Aspects related to the content of warning messages (which 
needs to respond to the needs to the vulnerable communities; be effective and actionable), appropriate channels for 
timely delivery and dissemination of these warnings, and the provisions of end-user feedback mechanisms will be 
part of the design of the EWS – all using technology with which the end-users are familiar. These developments are 
done through meetings, workshops and capacity building/training activities. 
These developments and testing at the local level will be done in the first three years of the proposed project, and 
then expanded and rolled out nationwide in the last two years of the project.   The promotion of MH-IBF-EWS in the 
whole country (in the 4 countries) will be undertaken using a scenario approach. Knowledge products and 
information, education and communication materials will be disseminated to all local government authorities, NGOs 
on the ground and community leaders, in order to reach all population in the 4 countries. Dissemination and outreach 
activities will take advantage of regular advocacy activities of the government, UN and other agencies, NGOs, among 
others; use of traditional media (such as local radio programs), and social media (such as Twitter and Facebook) and 
other communication channels. Technical workshops to share evidence-based best practices and challenges will also 
be supported by the proposed project, and by working with other UN and other agencies on the ground (e.g. FAO, 
WFP, UNDRR). At the same time, a web-based knowledge and decision support system (DSS) that aggregate 
information from the four target countries, with MH-IBF and color-coded risk-based warnings (regional

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 119 
 
41 
 
 
 
98 http://www.meteoalarm.eu 
99 https://vigilance.meteofrance.fr/fr 
100 http://www.meteofrance.re/vigilance-reunion 
101 https://www.wmo.int/gmas/ 
102 https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=7901 
“meteoalarm”98/”vigilance”99100-type platform that would also contribute to the WMO Global Multi-hazard Alert System 
– GMAS101) will be jointly develop to support early warnings / early actions at regional, national and local levels. While 
this DSS is primarily to support DRM operations, it is intended to also address impacts to the relevant socioeconomic 
sectors in the country (i.e. agriculture, fisheries and tourism). 
 
Source: WMO Guidelines on impact-based forecast and warning services.102 
Under Component 3, significant investments are done in association with the GFCS Component “User Interface 
Platform”, to reach an “Advanced” level in the GFCS categorization in all countries by taking a regional and harmonized 
approach (please see Table 2 in section A.21). While noting that Mauritius and Seychelles are already at an “Essential 
“ level, there are still a lot of activities that need to be done to ensure that users can benefit. The proposed Hydromet 
project takes a regional approach to facilitate sharing of expertise and experiences among the countries, so that those 
less advanced be able to benefit from those that have a higher level. In relation to be able to generate impact-based 
forecasts and risk-based warnings, including the last mile connectivity and engagement of vulnerable communities and 
socio-economic sectors, all 4 countries have limited experience and therefore investments will be done equality across 
the 4 countries. 
The following Outcomes, Expected Results, Outputs and Activities (summary below and detailed description provided 
in section E.6.) are planned under Component 3: 
Outcome 4: Enhanced preparedness and response capability with improved gender and vulnerable people 
inclusiveness across the EWS value chain 
Expected result 4:  Improved community resilience through the implementation of people-centered MH-IBF-EWS at 
regional, national and local levels and improved/prepared preparedness & adaptation plans 
- 
Output 3.1 Production, dissemination and uptake of CP-CS, including MH-IBF-EWS, improved at regional and 
national level 
 
Activity 3.1.1 Set up/update protocols (standard operating procedures) to produce and deliver improved 
daily weather bulletins, multi-hazard impact-based forecasts, seasonal forecasts and agrometeorological 
advisories at national level  
Under this activity, there will be a consultative process to improve the production and delivery of weather 
forecasts and agrometeorological advisories in each country. In each country, Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) will be established for processes of co-production of products between the NMHS 
and relevant stakeholders, and of delivery of forecasts, advisories and warnings. Specific 
agrometeorological bulletins will be developed in each countries.

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 119 
 
42 
 
At the regional level, there will be coordination workshops for consolidation, harmonization and 
dissemination of the weather and climate bulletins at the regional User Interface Platform (UIP). PIROI 
and other relevant regional entities will be part of this consultative process at the regional level. 
 
Activity 3.1.2 Set up protocols (standard operating procedures) to strengthen MH-IBF-EWS dissemination 
for and uptake by key sectors and among the general public 
Under this activity, there will be a consultative process to improve the production and delivery of MH-
IBF-EWS in each country. In addition to strengthening the early warning systems for tropical cyclones in 
the four target countries to ensure a wider outreach, the following early warnings will be established or 
strengthened, to target these specific groups: 
- 
in Comoros: EW for farmers and fishermen (using specific communication channels to reach 
these groups) focusing on heavy rainfalls (complementing and building on ‘Ensuring climate 
resilient water supplies in the Comoros islands’ UNDP-GCF project) and storms 
- 
in Madagascar: EW for farmers and fishermen (using specific communication channels to reach 
these groups and building on PrAdA in Madagascar) focusing on heavy rainfalls and storms  
- 
in Mauritius: EW for farmers and stakeholders in the tourism and health (using specific 
communication channels to reach these groups – based on methodologies and outputs from 
project SAWIDRA for health) focusing on heavy rainfalls, heat waves and storms  
- 
in Seychelles: general public and stakeholders in tourism for heavy rainfalls and storms (e.g. 
through mobile phone app); specific warnings for fisheries for storms and algal blooms (building 
on IAEA ‘Monitoring of Algal Bloom’ initiative). 
 
- 
Output 3.2 Short- and long-term risk reduction based on a well-established MH-IBF-EWS in place, and adaptation 
plans improved or prepared using high quality climate-related data, MH-IBF-EWS products, risk/vulnerability 
assessments and climate change projections developed under Outcome 2 
 
Activity 3.2.1 Improve data sharing and coordination with emergency services for on-the-ground 
interventions at national and local levels 
In each country, on a national level, this activity will first review existing emergency response plans and 
communication processes between relevant stakeholders with a view to improve them to guide quick on-
the-ground interventions to mitigate risk impacts. 
Because disaster risk response happens at the local level, the national response plans will be 
downscaled in 2 pilot areas per country selected based on the hazard and vulnerability maps produced 
under Activities 2.3.3 and 2.3.4. At this level, it is not always possible for emergency services to reach 
the populations. Hence, key stakeholders to involve in risk prevention and response at the local level 
(i.e. local volunteers or trusted local stakeholders/leaders who can facilitate emergency responses at the 
local level) will be identified. Their capacity to understand risk warnings and advisories, to provide 
advises on risk prevention and to react during/after a hazardous event will be strengthened through 
trainings. This activity, piloted at the local level in in 2 vulnerable areas in each country, will demonstrate 
how to downscale national emergency response plans at the local level to improve risk prevention, 
mitigation and recovery, in order to be replicated in other vulnerable sites. 
 
Activity 3.2.2 Develop risk matrices for each hazard with agreed risk levels and colour-codes, and 
description of related impacts and response/actions; test and validate them in selected sites in the four 
countries (first 3 years of the project); expand and roll out nationwide 
Aligned with the activity 3.2.1, a national framework for MH-IBF-EWS in each country will be developed 
and harmonized at the regional level. This framework will guide the implementation of MH-IBF-EWS at 
the local level. This involves collaboration among NMHS, PIROI and the national DRM institutions, and 
other stakeholders, the development risk matrices for each hazard with agreed risk levels and colour-
codes, and description of related impacts and response/actions. Selected vulnerability sites in each 
country will be selected to use such risk matrices and associated information for testing and validating 
MH-IBF-EWS, with the assistance of PIROI and its national counterparts and associated NGOs. These 
developments and testing will be done in the first three years of the proposed project, and then 
expanded and rolled out nationwide (in the last two years of the project) using scenarios, and through

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 119 
 
43 
 
 
 
103 http://www.meteoalarm.eu 
104 https://vigilance.meteofrance.fr/fr 
105 http://www.meteofrance.re/vigilance-reunion 
106 https://www.wmo.int/gmas/ 
107 
http://regionalclimate-change.sc/en/ 
the dissemination of knowledge products and outreach materials with the assistance of NGOs and 
through the community leaders, in order to reach all population in the four countries. 
 
Activity 3.2.3 Develop a knowledge and decision support system to support the implementation of MH-
IBF-EWS at regional, national and local levels (to be part of the UIP – Activity 3.3.3) 
A web-based knowledge and decision support system (DSS) that aggregate information from the four 
target countries, with MH-IBF and color-coded risk-based warnings (regional 
“meteoalarm”103/”vigilance”104105-type platform that would also contribute to the WMO Global Multi-hazard 
Alert System – GMAS106) will be developed at regional level (led by IOC), with the participation of 
national and locals authorities and stakeholders. This DSS will support early warnings / early actions at 
regional, national and local levels. While this DSS is primarily to support DRM operations, it is intended to 
also address impacts to the relevant socioeconomic sectors in the country (i.e. agriculture, fisheries and 
tourism). Activity 3.2.4 Update long term climate change adaptation plans responding to the needs of 
each country, to be shared on the UIP (Activity 3.3.3).  
Under this activity, each country will update their NAPs with new climate projections developed under 
Output 2.3. 
- 
Output 3.3 Training for improved dissemination and preparedness involving users and end-users of CP-CS  
 
Activity 3.3.1 Train staff members of NMHS and in the RCC-Network on how to package climate-related 
information in a user-friendly way 
Under this activity, each country will organize workshops with NMHSs and CP-CS users in priority areas 
of the GFCS to ensure better packing of climate-related products prepared by the NMHSs including 
sector-tailored forecasts and EWS. 
Similarly, at the regional level, IOC will organize workshops with the NMHSs CP-CS users in priority 
areas of the four countries for the development of regional climate products to be generated by the 
RCC-Network. 
 
 
Activity 3.3.2 Train knowledge brokers – including NGOs, red crescent/cross, local leaders and extension 
officers – and representatives of sectors in the GFCS areas (public and private organisations) on how to 
interpret and use CP-CS for decision-making  
Under this activity, key knowledge broker institutions for risk prevention and response at the local level 
will be identified in each country. Their capacity to understand hazard warnings and advisories, to 
provide accurate advices on risk prevention and to react during/after a hazardous event will be 
strengthened through trainings. 
At the regional level, there will be workshops with the NMHSs of the four countries, PIROI and its 
national counterparts (DRM institutions in the four countries) to ensure early warning / warning actions at 
regional, national and local levels. 
 
 
Activity 3.3.3 Strengthen the User Interface Platform (UIP) 
The project will strengthen the existing Regional Climate Portal developed by IOC and hosted by 
Seychelles (SMA) since August 2019107. The Portal will be upgraded and will incorporate the new CP-
CS developed under the project, as well as the above-mentioned DSS. 
 
Activity 3.3.4 Support SWIOCOFs to ensure the active participation of climate services users 
SWIOCOF is a yearly event convened by IOC (in September), but with poor representation of climate 
services users. The project will support such users and also improvements in the content and 
organization of the events.

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 119 
 
44 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
The project will be implemented through different entities whose roles and responsibilities are as follow: 
Entity 
Status 
Project responsibilities 
AFD 
GCF Accredited 
Entity (AE) 
AFD will be the Accredited Entity (AE) for the Project and will be responsible for 
overseeing the implementation, financial management, evaluation, reporting and 
closure of the activities under the project. AFD will monitor and supervise the 
execution of the project and ensure the proper management and application of 
GCF Grant Proceeds by the Executing Entity. AFD will have the overall 
responsibility of the Project implementation and will ensure that the Grant 
Proceeds are utilised in accordance with the terms of the Funded Activity (FAA) 
Agreement and the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA). 
IOC 
Executing Entity 
(EE) 
The IOC will be the Executing Entity (EE) as defined in the GCF-AFD signed 
AMA. Thus, the IOC (EE) will assume overall responsibility for the effective 
delivery of project inputs and interventions in order to achieve the expected 
project outputs. To fulfil its role, the EE will set up a Project Management Unit 
(PMU). The IOC will be the only entity mandated to engage, supervise 
procurements processes and to manage the funds. IOC as EE, and the regional 
organization mandated by the member countries to develop the Project and 
submitted to the GCF, will enter into a Project Agreement (PA) with the 
Ministries of Foreign Affair (MoFA) of each concerned country member, which 
are the official representatives. The PA of each country shall (i) designate the 
NMHSs as the lead  national lead implementing entity which shall be nominated 
as National Implementing Partners (NIP), (ii) designate all the beneficiaries 
entities; called in the project as the National Services Providers, (NSP). The PA 
shall details all the activities, sub-activities and objectives to achieve according 
to the Project at both national and regional level. The PA will be subject to AFD 
(AE) approval and shall considered as a precedent conditions.   
NHMSs 
National 
Implementing 
Partner’s (NIP) & 
National Services 
providers 
The National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHSs) of each 
beneficiary country are expected to be designated by their respective 
Government as the lead implementing national entity (NIP). NMHSs, will be 
respectively accountable to IOC (EE) for the project execution at the national 
level. NMHSs, as the NIP and others NSPs, will not be mandated for the use 
and managements of GCF funds and all related procurement process.  
The NMHSs, as national lead implementing entity, will host the national project 
coordinator. The NMHSs, with the support of the EE through the PMU team and 
the NPCs, will be strongly involved in the project objectives achievements at the 
national level and will actively participate to procurement process co-design and 
approval for of equipment’s technical specifications, national strategies, capacity 
building programs and training session, and equipment’s installation and 
operation. NMHs and all beneficiaries entities of the Project will continue to 
involved in the project implementation in active way, as they were involved 
during the feasibility study of the project. The effectiveness of the project 
ownership by each of the four countries will be set at the project onset by 
adopting this approach of consultation, co-design and co-implementation and 
co-monitoring at national level.

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 119 
 
45 
 
Others 
National 
Stakehol
ders and 
benefici
ary 
entities  
National Services 
Providers ( NSPs) 
National Disaster Management Agencies (NDRM), Environmental and Climate 
change and sectoral ministries such us: tourism, agricultures and fishery 
ministries, civil society organizations, Red Cross Red Crescent National 
Societies and other national NGOs involved in early warning and last mile 
connectivity, will be the National Service providers within each beneficiary 
country. Each of the already identified NSPs will be actively participating on the 
fledged national activities and sub activities under the aegis of the NMHs (NIPs).  
 
In order to ensure strong Project ownership, and at the country request, it has been agreed with IOC (EE), the 
country members and AFD (AE) that National Project Coordinators (NPCs) will be co-recruited by the EE and the 
each of beneficiary countries, supported by the PMU and with the involvement of NMHSs ( NIP). The NPCs will be 
part of the PMU and be deployed at national level and hosted by the NMHSs (NIP). Country involvement will be also 
ensured by the designation of a project National Focal Point (NFP), which is expected to be permanent staff member 
of the NMHS to coordinate and liaise with the NPC, as well as with the national DRM institutions and NGOs, which 
are national partners in the project.  
 
Figure 2: Project Organisational structure 
 
Project delivery stakeholder roles, mandates, and governance structure are described and illustrated below: 
AFD: as the AE for the proposed project, has a strong and established experience working in IOC countries. Its 
regional headquarters is based in La Réunion island, while three AFD offices are present in Mauritius (covering 
Mauritius and Seychelles), Comoros and Madagascar. Moreover, AFD has already four projects/programmes 
approved by GCF Board (FP021, 42, 95 and 119). As the AE, AFD will manage the funds for the implementation 
of the project. AFD will have a quality assurance role involving AFD staff in Paris headquarters and at the regional 
level, within AFD agency in Mauritius (where the IOC has its headquarters) and will involve when deemed relevant 
its Madagascar and Comoros offices. This quality assurance role will also be ensured through the Regional Project 
Steering Committee (RPSC) (see below for details) which will contribute to AFD objectives and provide independent

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 119 
 
46 
 
 
 
108 https://www.crews-initiative.org/en  
project oversight and monitoring functions. Together, AFD and the RPSC will ensure that appropriate project 
milestones are managed and completed, for example by reviewing progress against set up targets and providing 
recommendations to set the project back on track if needed. Project quality assurance must be independent of the 
Project Management function; therefore, the RPSC cannot delegate any of its quality assurance responsibilities to 
PMU and to the Regional Project Coordinator (RPC). As an Accredited Entity to the GCF, AFD is required to deliver 
GCF-specific oversight and quality assurance services including oversight of project completion and oversight on 
project reporting.  
IOC will be the EE as the regional organisation under which Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles are 
members. IOC will supervise the execution of project activities with the support of the Project Management Unit 
(PMU) and the national counterparts, amongst them NMHSs as NIP and NSPS. The PMU will be hosted by IOC 
headquarters, within its sustainable environment and climate change department. An IOC Project Manager (PM) 
will be assigned by the Secretary General of the IOC at the project start. The IOC already manages several 
projects with a portfolio of above USD 200 million relating to climate and environment amongst others. The IOC 
has proven experience in project management with different development partners (including the regional EU-
funded ISLANDS and AFD-funded ACCLIMATE multi-year projects); and in coordinating project implementation 
in its member countries. IOC has also undertaken a process to become a GCF Regional Accredited Entity. As 
part of this endeavor, IOC has received financial support from the GCF, as well as technical punctual support 
from AFD’s climate change division, to align its procedures with GCF accredited entity requirements e.g. for 
auditing and procurement. Additionally, IOC is receiving EU support under the INCA (institutional capacity 
building) programme, which is aimed at strengthening the institutional capacity of IOC to plan, identify, implement 
and evaluate projects and programmes to align with the EU 9 pillars. AFD will support IOC in the implementation 
of the organizational actions already identified within the INCA program. 
NMHSs (NIP) will be the lead implementing entity within each of the beneficiary countries will be the co-executing 
entities and will be involved in all the project activities co – design and co-implementation at both regional and 
national level to insure the country ownership. NMHSs will be responsible of national activities implementation 
and results achievements. NSP conducted by NMHSs such as DRM institutions will be strongly involved to co-
design and co-implement the activities related to EWS and last mile connectivity.  
Currently, another initiative involving IOC and dealing with Hydromet and Climate Services is Intra ACP Climate 
Services Project: a large project supported by the EU and the S-ACP involving regional cooperation for the 
improvement of climate services and related applications. The IOC component of this initiative will be directly integrated 
into the regional Hydromet Project (funds delegated to AFD).International partners like WMO, JRC and, EUMESAT 
mobilized through the Intra- ACP CS Project, will be key in the implementation and monitoring of the Hydromet project 
to bring support to mainstream climate services into regional and national policies and programmes, as well to ensure 
ownership at the regional and national levels.  
In addition others implementation partners WMO, GFDRR and UNDRR will facilitate coordination and synergies with 
other ongoing initiatives such as the approved IOC Project supported by CREWS108. The SWIO – EWS program 
structured around seven major outputs: (1) Institutional and human capacities in regional and intergovernmental 
organizations to provide regional climate and weather services to LDCs and SIDS increased (Regional); (2) NMHSs’ 
service delivery improved, including the development of long-term service delivery strategies and development plans 
(National); (3) Risk Information to guide early warning systems and climate and weather service developed and 
accessible (National); (4) Information and Communication Technology, including common alerting protocol, 
strengthened(National); (5) Preparedness and response plans with operational procedures that outline early warning 
dissemination processes developed and accessible(National); (6) Knowledge products and awareness programmes 
on early warnings developed(National); and (7) Gender-sensitive training, capacity building programmes provided 
(National). These components were designed in close collaboration with the AE (AFD) in order to ensure 
complementarity with the proposed Hydromet project. More information about the CREWS initiative is provided in a 
stand-alone document, as part of this project proposal.

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 119 
 
47 
 
Project Management Unit (PMU): a regional PMU will be established by IOC in its headquarters and will work under 
the responsibility of the IOC Project Manager (PM). The PMU, which will be constituted of (i) IOC permanent member 
staff which will be dedicated to the Hydromet Project and by (ii) a technical assistance (TA) constituted by a skilled 
international company or a consortium of skilled companies. The Technical Assistance will be recruited by IOC based 
on an international competitive process. The PMU will be headed by a Regional Project Coordinator (RPC). The PMU 
will support the EE in coordinating the project Accredited Entity, beneficiary countries, and the various partners, as 
well as in overseeing project activity implementation. The following staff members will form the PMU: 
o 
Regional Project Coordinator (RPC): will be a full-time employee of international company hired as the Technical 
Assistance to be part of the PMU. The RPC should have strong technical expertise and capacity in the management 
of large scale, multi-country projects. The RPC will be responsible for the overall project implementation and 
coordination at regional level. Amongst its mandate, the RPC will: i) lead and manage the PMU; ii) liaise with and 
report to IOC PM iii) liaise and coordinate with NPCs specific interventions in each beneficiary country and/or at 
the regional level, iv) provide administrative and technical expertise; v) be responsible for the day-to-day 
implementation and management of the project, and vi) serve as the focal point for interactions between the project 
stakeholders and partner organisations (e.g. government departments, NGOs, civil society groups) and vii) co-chair 
the RPSC. Full-time and part-time Officers will provide the administrative, logistical and financial support/expertise 
to the project and will work under the direct supervision of the RPC. 
o 
National Project Coordinators (NPCs): will be hired directly by the EE and NMHSs with the support of the 
PMU/RPC. Full-time NPCs will be based in each of the four beneficiary countries and are mandated to support 
NMHS Focal Points in achieving project goals and objectives. The NPCs will act under the overall guidance and 
supervision of the RPC. NPCs will be based within National Meteorological Services, namely Comoros 
Meteorological Services, General Directorate of Meteorology in Madagascar, Mauritius Meteorological Services 
and Seychelles Meteorological Authority. The NPC should be able to deliver technical expertise. NPCs should act 
to facilitate daily project execution and follow-up, in close collaboration with NMHS team through a designated 
Focal Point (FP) or a Project Team to be nominated by each NMHS at the start of the project. NPCs’ mandate will 
include inter alia i) to liaise with relevant national implementation partners, for example within sectoral ministries 
and disaster risk management institutions, ii) to organise workshops or meetings with regards to project activity, as 
relevant, iii) and to chair the National Project Steering Committee, organised by the NMHS.  
Additional PMU staff members based at the IOC office will include:  
o 
Hydro-meteorology Expert: A part-time staff member with technical expertise in hydro-meteorology will 
be recruited to develop ToRs and call for tenders for technical activities, review applications, and to 
supervise and advise the RPC on the implementation of technical project activities, 
o 
Environmental and Social Officer: to ensure appropriate application of environmental and social 
safeguards during the project, 
o 
Financial Officer: to ensure proper accountability and transparency of project expenditures  
o 
Procurement Officer: to supervise the procurement process, manage the consultants, and tools and 
equipment acquisition contracts,  
o 
Monitoring and Evaluation Officer: to report on technical and financial project implementation and 
prepare evaluation and monitoring reports,  
o 
Communication Officer: to develop, disseminate and archive communication material related to the 
project, 
o 
Administrative Officer: to support project implementation and conduct daily administrative tasks, 
o 
In addition to the PMU, a pool of experts with diverse skills will be pre-identified and solicited on an ad 
hoc basis by the EE to review and assess application and candidate profiles proposed in the offers 
submitted in response to calls for tenders. The purpose of mobilisation of these experts will be to advise 
IOC on best candidate/service provider to hire for the project execution. 
Provisional PMU staff member profiles are presented in Annex 2, FS. 
Regional project steering committee (RPSC) will be established, coordinated and chaired by IOC. The Committee 
will include as permanent members: the Regional Project Coordinator (RPC); the National Focal Points (FPs), and 
IOC Permanent Liaison Officers (PLOs) from Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles and La Réunion Island

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 119 
 
48 
 
(fifth member of IOC). The RPSC can invite additional participants as observers and advisors among whom: (i) the 
four National Project Coordinators; (ii) the four National Designated Authorities; (iii) a representative from AFD; as 
well as a representative of the EU Commission in Mauritius; and (iv) a representative from WMO and/or 
representatives of advanced NMHSs that could guide the implementation of the project. A gender balance should be 
ensured whenever possible. The mandate of the RPSC will involve providing broad strategic oversight, direction and 
technical advice: i) overseeing project implementation; ii) redefining or readjusting project activities, when necessary; 
and ii) reviewing/validating annual work-plans and project reports. The RPSC will meet at least once a year, with ad 
hoc meetings held as and when necessary. There will also be a platform for sharing lessons learnt and good 
practices among IOC member states. 
National project steering committee (NPSC) will be convened/organised by the NPC and chaired by the National 
Focal Points in the NMHSs. The NPSC will be responsible for coordination and oversight of activities being delivered 
by national involved stakeholders. The NPSC will be held twice a year, in order to take stock of progress 
accomplished during project implementation, identify any issues, and, if need be, raise and address them with the 
PMU. All stakeholders involved in project implementation during the 6-month reporting period will be invited to attend 
the meeting and report progress on specific activities they are involved in. The NDA will also attend the NPSC. If 
deemed necessary, the RPC and the PM could be invited to participate in the NPSC at least to once year. The NPSC 
meeting minutes will be produced by the NPC and shared with the RPC to report lessons learnt, problems and 
successes at the regional level and to enable adjustments in national implementation as needed. Based on NPSC 
decisions, the RPC may be asked to carry out additional in-country missions to address specific requirements. 
While IOC, with support from the PMU, will be responsible for the day-to-day execution of the project, overall 
coordination with other GCF-funded projects and climate change related initiatives will be undertaken by the 
countries’ National Designated Authorities (NDAs) for the GCF in particular through their implication in the NPSC. For 
this purpose, it is proposed that the NDAs also sit on the RPSC (see below) in an advisory capacity and to foster 
country ownership.

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 119 
 
49 
 
Figure 3: Project Organisational structure 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
 
The Hydromet project as proposed with its components and overall budget of USD 71, 386, 086, is the most 
appropriate investment to achieve the desired paradigm shift (see Section D). A EUR 52, 767, 986 grant from GCF is 
sought by IOC and the Governments of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles to invest in climate change 
adaptation and enable a paradigm shift in the production and dissemination of timely, reliable and accurate climate 
services that respond to user needs among the most vulnerable communities and sectors. These countries are 
extremely vulnerable to climate change and climate-related hazards (see FS, and section B1), which are projected to 
increase in intensity and frequency. Neither the governments nor the vulnerable communities and sectors have the 
required financial and technical capacity to improve climate services and early warning systems and effectively 
strengthen risk prevention and mitigation at scale. Comoros and Madagascar, two LDCs, have a large portion of the 
population living below the poverty line. Their national budgets is in significant deficit and, given the socio-economic 
challenges, their governments prioritise the pressing development needs of their country. Despite being middle- and 
high-income countries, Mauritius and Seychelles are characterised by high debt levels and wealth inequality; 
moreover, their economy is highly vulnerable to climate-related shocks. 
Yet, the benefits of the proposed GCF project will essentially be public goods and the financial returns e.g. for 
climate-sensitive sectors – will not be sufficient to service debt payments. New business models will be explored and 
transitional business plans will be prepared for implementation during the lifetime of the project to ensure that 
investments made through the project are sustained.  
Traditionally, most of the revenues of the National Meteorological Services (NMSs) come from the public service 
funding paid by the government. According to WMO, the vast majority of NMSs (over 60% of the world’s NMSs) 
operate as public entities and received most of their funding (about 80 %) in the form of direct government 
appropriations. Given existing financial challenges with government budgets in the target SWIO countries, the 
allocation of significant public funding towards this Project from the four IOC Member States is not sufficient to 
achieve the desired paradigm shift, nor can cover all the operation and maintenance costs associated with the 
required equipment (see Annex 4).  
Nonetheless, the governments of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles are committed to support the 
proposed project. In Comoros, the government will provide USD 1,267,000 in-kind, and in Madagascar, the 
government will provide USD 1,070,000 in-kind, which corresponds to the portion of funds these services receive 
from their respective governments to support current O&M costs. In Mauritius, the government will provide USD 
1,742,000 in cash and kind, and in Seychelles the government will provide USD 2,862,000 in cash and kind (refer to 
Annex 13 for details). These co-financing commitments will serve to finance the construction of new facilities to run 
and store the equipment to be set up under this project and towards O&M costs during the project lifetime. 
Moreover, the AFD and EU have committed to support the proposed project through contributions in grants of 
respectively USD 5,504,183 and USD 6,172,916. The EU is supporting most of the regional activities which are 
aligned with the development goals of the EU Program for Development of Cooperation in the Africa, Caribbean and 
Pacific countries (DEVCO-ACP). These include most of the Component 1, except the capacity building; i.e. it includes 
all activities related to the institutional development and regional cooperation. Under component 2, EU will support 
the development of hazard and vulnerability maps.  
Under Component 1, AFD will complement the support from the EU in the regional cooperation; it also supports the 
recruitment of new staff and their training. Under Component 2, AFD will support the refurbishment of a building in 
Comoros, and co-finance partly the technical assistance for science-based weather and climate product generation, 
primarily on the organization of workshops. Under Component 3, AFD will provide very limited funds to support the 
participation of staff in regional workshops. 
GCF financing will primarily support capacity-building activities. In this sense, under Component 1, GCF will support 
partly Activity 1.3.2 on retraining and education of the staff in accordance with the WMO standards. Under 
Component 2, GCF will support: (i) Activities 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 on modernization of the observation and 
monitoring, forecasting and ICT systems (networks and software); and (ii) partly Activities under output 2.3 on

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 119 
 
50 
 
 
 
109 https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=5298 
110 Agence pour la Sécurité de la Navigation Aérienne en Afrique (ASECNA), https://asecnaonline.asecna.aero/index.php/fr/  
technical assistance for science-based weather and climate product generation. Component 3 is mostly supported by 
GCF and relates to the implementation of the MH-IBF-EWS and last mile connectivity at national level. 
Yet, based on these secured contributions, only a partial improvement of existing hydrometeorological services and 
capacity building would be possible, and the at-scale benefits in terms of avoided costs and in terms of development 
of climate services cannot be realised in the absence of GCF investments (see section D.6 and Annex 3a). After the 
completion of the proposed project, O&M costs will be supported by government funds, cost-recovery from the 
commercialized new CP-CS, leveraging funds from the new GBON/SOFF initiative, coordination with UN and other 
agencies on the ground that manage national funds, and the potential establishment of a ring-fenced CIEWS through 
an Hydromet Law. These aspects and other are elaborated in an O&M plan (see Annex 21). 
Funding from other donors has been identified for climate-related projects (see section B1), however these only cover 
partially the overall regional and national needs. In addition, activities under the 3 components have been designed to 
ensure that this Hydromet funding request does not duplicate work supported by other donors and that opportunities 
for complementarity are identified (see Annex 2 FS). 
Loan financing is also not envisaged under the proposed project. Indeed, climate data, information, forecasts, 
warnings and other products, supported under the proposed project are considered to be “public goods” because of 
their public safety value and cross-cutting socio-economic benefits; hence, it is unlikely that there will be short-term 
significant financial returns on investment to repay loans.  
The regional CP-CS developed through the Project will not be profitable in the medium-term, so that private sector 
financing for the Project is not currently realistic. Commercialisation of regional CP-CS will be sought to generate 
revenues, but it will only partially cover total costs (to 16%, in average, of the NMHS’ budget in the four countries, 
ranging from 10% (Comoros and Seychelles) to 30% (Mauritius), as shown in Annex 3a). By improving service delivery 
to key national and sub-national stakeholders, additional demand will be created thus facilitating increased budget 
support in the long-term. Through the project, business plans will be developed for the transition of current business 
models that are not sustainable to new one following the principles and guidance in the WMO Guide to Aeronautical 
Meteorology Services Cost Recovery (WMO-No. 904)109. The new business models will be based on cost-recovery for 
the relevant sectors in the four countries, e.g. aviation for Mauritius and Seychelles (as aeronautical meteorology 
services in Comoros and Madagascar are provided by ASECNA110), shipping, insurance, tourism, energy, among 
others. In addition, successful partnerships will be sought and built up in agriculture/fisheries, tourism, water resource 
management sectors and other at-risk communities, and are a part of the strategy for ensuring long-term sustainability 
of the Project’s objectives. 
Finally, the IOC, representing the beneficiary countries, will be in charge of project implementation and will be the 
recipient of the funds through AFD financial transfers. By the nature of its status and mandate given by its Member 
States, the IOC is only in capacity to raise funds through grants and cannot go into debt. 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The hydro-meteorological equipment established through the project will be managed, maintained, upgraded and 
replaced as needed by the beneficiary governments during and after the project, or at the regional level by IOC/RCC-
Network. This will be ensured in the long run by: i) transferring skills to the NMHS to ensure equipment operation, 
maintenance and renewal; ii) achieving cost-efficiencies through regional complementarities and synergies on 
monitoring, modelling, forecasting and service delivery; iii) demonstrating the value of CP-CS among users and end-
users (demand-side); iv) where possible, promoting the commercialisation of these services; and v) exploring options 
for leveraging funds from the newly GBON Systematic Observations Financing Facility (SOFF) for the completion of 
the implementation of the network and O&M. This strategic approach (as described in the O&M Plan , Annex 21) will 
ensure that these stakeholders are able to continue co-producing and using climate services (CP-CS) once the 
project funding ceases; and can maintain the required O&M of the hydro-meteorological equipment. The strategic 
approach that underpins long-term development and use of CP-CS in the SWIO region is detailed in Annex 3a and b.

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 119 
 
51 
 
 
 
111 See Annex 3a, Economic analysis and approach for a business plan. 
112 See WMO, 2017. Guidelines on the Role, Operation and Management of National Meteorological and Hydrological Services, 2017 Edition, 
WMO-No. 1195. 
113 https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/environment-
energy/low_emission_climateresilientdevelopment/blending_climatefinancethroughnationalclimatefunds.html 
 Strengthening of NMHS (including financial strategy) 
Under Output 1.3, institutional capacity of the NMHS in each country will be strengthened in order to streamline roles 
and responsibilities, improve their working environment (to retain skilled staff) and, in particular, improve their 
financial efficiency and cash flows. This work will result in a robust institutional strategy for each NMHS, including a 
cost-recovery and business plan that enables the production and delivery of improved CP-CS. Hence, the NMHSs 
will be capacitated to perform strategic and budget planning, and implement effective and efficient management. A 
long-term business plan for the NMHSs will be prepared, to consider opportunities for commercialize CP-CS in each 
target country to generate new income that can be reinvested towards maintenance and update of hydro-
meteorological equipment111. In addition, it is well demonstrated worldwide that an Hydromet Law, which is a national 
legal instrument establishing a National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHS), is an important element 
for its successful operation, as it helps defining its mission and mandate; ensuring clarity in the definition of its 
responsibilities; providing legal authority for certain responsibilities; gaining recognition of its contribution to society; 
and facilitating allocation of adequate resources (WMO, 2017)112, eventually through a potential establishment of a 
ring-fenced fund to support O&M and further developments. Through proposed project, Hydromet Laws will be 
revised or prepared with the possibility of establishing a national fund. Collaboration with UNDP may be pursued to 
explore the possibility of blended finance approaches, such as those implemented in Indonesia, Bangladesh, China, 
Ecuador and Brazil113. The NMHSs will also be strengthened through training and capacity building interventions for 
their staff members including on the operational and maintenance of the hydro-meteorological equipment, and 
through involvement in activities to develop the capacities under Output 2.3. Together with the institutional 
strengthening interventions, this will contribute to bring the NMHS of the four target countries closer to WMO 
Category 3 ‘Full climate services’.  
 A regional approach favouring cost-effectiveness, partnerships and integration within regional hydro-
meteorological initiatives 
As indicated in Section B.1., item 4. integration of the region’s hydromet systems provides opportunities to lower 
required investment while increasing accuracy of forecasts. Cost-effectiveness will be achieved through improved 
collaboration among Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles, under the leadership of IOC. Observed data 
from the existing and new hydromet monitoring networks being established under the proposed project will be shared 
among IOC Member States following regional data exchange protocols, in order to improve monitoring of hazardous 
hydromet conditions, numerical modelling, and forecasting. The design of optimum regional composites for each of 
the subsystems (which is part of the proposed project)—hydromet observational networks, modelling, forecasting, 
and service delivery— would ensure robust interoperability, efficiencies, and optimization of infrastructure costs, 
together with a higher level of harmonization, integration, and complementarity within the SWIO region. This will 
result in cost savings and promote efficiency and effectiveness in the systems, while contributing to improved 
monitoring and increased accuracy of forecasts; over the longer term, it can increase savings and sustainability of the 
investments. 
Collaboration will be secured through the establishment of the RCC-Network under which IOC and the four NMHSs 
will share roles and responsibilities. Attached to the RCC-Network, a regional calibration and maintenance laboratory 
and a specialized training centre will be established. The calibration and maintenance laboratory, in particular, will 
carry out maintenance work and calibration of existing and newly acquired hydro-meteorological equipment. This 
reduces current extra costs of sending sensors and other equipment (with limited lifetime and in need of regular 
maintenance) to overseas for maintenance (currently to Kenya and South Africa). Staff members of the NMHSs will 
also be trained at the regional specialized training center currently established in Mauritius, which will be refurbished 
with relevant equipment and software that can be shared across the region. In addition, all investments in

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 119 
 
52 
 
 
 
114 http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/wcasp/rcc/rcc.php 
115 “user satisfaction index”, which considers communications, perceived accuracy and usefulness for both professional partners and 
vulnerable groups exposed to e.g. floods and droughts.  Note that 72% is considered a good score in middle income countries and only 
leading developed NMHS reach > 90% (WB/GFDRR, 2019. Weathering the Change: How to Improve Hydromet Services in Developing 
Countries, https://www.gfdrr.org/en/publication/weathering-change-how-improve-hydromet-services-developing-countries). 
infrastructure, tools, and ICT will be based on the use of new technologies (such as IoT, cloud, wireless private 
network, etc.) in order to drive down O&M costs. 
The RCC-Network, set up under the proposed project, will be established to become part of WMO Global Data-
processing and Forecasting System114. Coordination among the Member States will be ensured by IOC, which plays 
a key role in the SWIO region. Indeed, IOC is the unique regional institution of the South West Indian Ocean States. 
Funded by its member states in 1984, it has been financially supported by these states since then. Finally, the project 
will ensure the participation of the four beneficiary countries to WMO WHYCOS initiative, by implementing the 
recommendations identified in HYCOS study for the Indian Ocean Region (see Annex 22 HYCOS study).  
 Building demand and understanding of CP-CS that are continuously improved based on user feedback 
The project is designed with end users in mind, thereby placing significant resources on addressing end-user needs. 
The CP-CS produced under this project will be co-developed with users during workshops, consultations and joined 
training events with the NMHSs, DRM institutions, sectoral users and communities. Users will have a greater 
understanding of CP-CS. In addition user feedback on CP-CS will be systematically collected via the UIP (the online 
platform will include a page for users to assess the quality and usefulness of the CP-CS in their sectors, allowing the 
estimation of the “user satisfaction index”115) and during SWIOCOF, as users of CP-CS will be invited to share their 
experience and recommendations for CP-CS improvements. This will ensure the hydro-meteorological services 
continue to evolve as user demands change, which will contribute to long-term sustainability through keeping the 
relevance of hydro-meteorological services and raising demands. In the context of climate change, the demand for 
improved CP-CS will increase, thereby adding value to the production of such services over the long-term. Most of 
the CP-CS generated by the proposed project will be based on open-source tools and formats endorsed by WMO, 
and accessibility will be ensured through the UIP. This will build a community of practice, at the regional level, for 
using and improving CP-CS, coordinated under the RCC-Network and by IOC, through the organisation of the 
SWIOCOF.  
 Strategy for CP-CS commercialisation 
As CP-CS improve, demand from the sectorial private sector for such services is expected to increase. Primary 
commercial beneficiaries / sectors are: agriculture, aviation, marine, and tourism. Preliminary discussions in the 4 
countries with tourism and agribusiness representatives indicate a potential interest in paying for reliable, timely and 
accurate CP-CS. Shipping sector will also be approached, as well as the aviation sector in Mauritius and Seychelles 
where aeronautical meteorological services are provided by NMHSs (in Comoros and Madagascar, these services 
are provided by ASECNA). Annex 3a provides an overview of expected returns on investments through the 
commercialization of CP-CS. This interest will be further investigated under the proposed project. A detailed business 
plan, including a marketing strategy, will be developed for each NMHS to help them promote and commercialize their 
products, designed to respond to the specific demands of users in the private sector (including insurance sector). The 
potential income stream from private sector is estimated to contribute up to 16% (in average) of NMHS budgets, 
ranging from 10% (Comoros and Seychelles) to 30% (Mauritius); this income will be redirected towards equipment 
maintenance, upgrade or renewal, running costs of the RCC-Network and its associated components (including a 
specialized training center and the UIP), and towards the continuous production of high-quality CP-CS.  
Finally, it should be noted that an estimate operation and maintenance budget has been prepared for the proposed 
project. The budget estimates for the five years’ implementation of the project indicate that the O&M budget following 
the equipment installation is about USD 5,941,000 million distributed to four countries. This will partly be covered by 
the governments of Comoros and Madagascar (in-kind) while the governments of Mauritius and Seychelles will take 
full care of their respective O&M budgets. The O&M budget will be updated during project implementation, based on

=== PAGE 56 ===
B 
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 119 
 
53 
 
 
 
116 https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/bulletin/alliance-hydromet-development  
a more detailed examination of current human and financial resources, and fine-tuned estimates of operation and 
maintenance needs for each country.  
As for Mauritius and Seychelles, in order to complement government funding, the strengthening and enabling of the 
institutional framework and policy will be essential to achieve the availability and sustainability of the O&M budget by 
mainstreaming Climate services commercialization and establishing cost recovery of meteorological services, as 
described in the O&M Plan – revenue generation (Annex 21, pages 2 to 6). Such an improvement should also be 
achieved by the project for Comoros and Madagascar (see in particular page 4 of the O&M plan, Annex 21). A 
Commitment Letter from IOC, confirming country commitment post-project implementation period to operate and 
maintain the equipment, is attached in the project package as Annex 0_IOC_Commitement_letters). 
For Comoros and Madagascar, additional agreements with ASECNA (see O&M Plan, Annex 21, page 4) are being 
discussed to ensure that the newly installed equipment can be considered as a new asset that can be operated and 
maintained under the ASECNA umbrella. It is recalled that AFD is a long-standing partner of ASECNA and has 
recently supported ASECNA with a non-souvereign loan of 60 M€. 
At the end of the project, it is considered that the environment is enabled for the NMHSs and DRM institutions to be 
strong enough to allow the Mauritius and Seychelles to leverage sufficient O&M costs and to allow Madagascar and 
Comoros to take over GCF commitment on O&M to be mobilized during the project onset. Description of all activities 
that will be in place during the project to support and create an enabling environment for the sustainability of 
investments are described in the O&M Plan provided as part of the project proposal package (Annex 21). 
 Leverage funds from GBON/SOFF 
AFD, the accredited entity for the proposed project, is supporting the Global Alliance for Hydromet Development116 
(GAHD), which is development the GBON concept and related Systematic Observations Financing Facility (SOFF). 
The proposed Hydromet project’s investments are aligned with the GBON requirements, therefore, in order to ensure 
the sustainability of the system, the project is considering a more secure alternative based on the mobilization of 
funds from the SOFF/GBON in order to support the O&M costs (see O&M Plan, Annex 21, page 9). Noting that 
SOFF/GBON will primarily support SIDS and LDCs, the project target countries are eligible to get such support. Thus, 
a request has already been submitted to the WMO, as a project technical partner, to consider these countries for the 
SOFF implementation, and a letter is expected to be received by the countries and IOC from WMO to be attached to 
the project package. 
 Support from PIROI and IFRC 
The PIROI (Red Cross network in the IO region), which is already involved in the IOC project generally and EW 
actions during extreme events, will play a crucial role as in the implementation of the MH-IBF-EWS and last mile 
connectivity by ensuring that critical early warning information is delivered in a timely and efficient manner. PIROI will 
also assist in bridging with and bringing the support of IFRC who is very active in the region in pursuing the 
implementation of Forecast-based Financing (FbF), which is being currently piloted in the region in Mozambique, but 
expected to be expanded to other countries (not included in this project proposal as this is being supported through 
other mechanisms). PIROI has already expressed its support to the project, and an official letter from IFRC is 
expected to be also received and attached to the project package to confirm PIROI commitement.

=== PAGE 57 ===
C 
C 
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 119 
 
 
 
54 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
52 767 986 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) 
Subordinated loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) 
Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity 
return 
 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) 
Grants 
52 767 986  
 
 
 
(vii) 
Result-based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing information 
Total amount 
Currency 
18,618,099 
million USD ($) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
AFD 
Grant 
5,405 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
U.E. 
Grant 
6,172 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Gov of Comoros 
In kind 
1,267 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Gov of Madagascar 
In kind 
1,070 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Gov of Mauritius 
In kind 
1,742 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Gov of Seychelles 
In kind 
2,862 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
71,386,086 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page) 
Co-financing by the Government will support the O&M (Human Resources and 
Systems) budget estimate for Mauritius and Seychelles; and the O&M (Human 
Resources) for Comoros and Madagascar.  
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative cost 
million USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million USD ($) 
Finan
cial 
Instru
ment 
Amount 
million USD ($) 
Finan
cial 
Instru
ment 
Name of 
Institutio
ns 
Capacity building, 
institutional 
development,  
regional 
cooperation, and 
A Regional 
Climate Centre 
Network and 
frameworks for 
Climate 
Services (CP-
CS) 
$846 500,00 
0 
Grant
s 
$846 500,00  
Grants 
AFD & 
EU

=== PAGE 58 ===
C 
C 
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 119 
 
 
 
55 
 
public-private 
engagement 
 
established in 
the SWIO 
region 
Institutional 
arrangements 
for NMHS 
operation 
strengthened 
and hydromet 
laws prepared 
with potential 
CIEWS funds 
established 
$1 298 603,20 
0 
Grant
s 
$1 298 603,20 
Grants 
AFD & 
EU 
 
Improved 
staffing 
capacity and 
capability of 
the RCC-
Network, 
NMHSs and 
other relevant 
institutions 
$3 999 600,00  
 
 $810 000,00  
 
Grant
s 
$3 189 600,00  
 
Grants 
AFD &EU 
Fine tune the 
design to 
develop 
technical 
specification, 
system 
integration and 
tendering 
process of 
Project 
Activities 
$2 346 790,00 
$696 758,00 
Grant
s 
$1 650 032,00 
Grants 
AFD/EU 
Sub-total 
Component 1 
 
$8 491 493,20 
$1 506 758,00 
  
$6 984 735,20 
  
  
High-quality 
climate-related 
data, improved 
multi-hazard 
impact-based 
forecasts and 
EWS (MH-IBF-
EWS), and climate 
risk assessments 
Enhanced 
hydro-
meteorological 
observation 
and 
monitoring, by 
making use of 
innovative 
technologies 
for cost-
effectiveness 
$23 887 500,00 
 
$22 087 500,00 
 
Grant
s 
$1 800 000,00 
 
Grants 
AFD; EU; 
& gov. 
Click here to enter 
text. 
Regional 
facilities for 
maintenance 
and training 
established 
$1 511 454,86 
$1 511 454,86 
Grant
s 
 
Grants 
AFD &EU  
Click here to enter 
text. 
Science-based 
multi-hazard 
weather and 
climate risk 
information 
generated 
$6 692 893,50 
$5 336 893,80 
Grant
s 
$1 355 999,70 
Grants 
 AFD 
&EU 
Sub-total 
Component 2 
 
$32 091 848,36 
$28 935 848,66 
 
$ 3 155 999,70  
 
 
 
Enhanced 
accessibility and 
use of climate 
Production, 
dissemination 
and uptake of 
$4 984 000,00  
 
$4 853 440,00 
Grant
s 
$130 560,00 
Grants 
AFD & 
EU

=== PAGE 59 ===
C 
C 
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 119 
 
 
 
56 
 
services for 
climate change 
adaptation, and 
improved 
capabilities in 
implementing a 
people-centered 
MH-IBF-EWS for 
disaster risk 
reduction  
CP-CS, 
including MH-
IBF-EWS, 
improved at 
regional and 
national level 
Click here to enter 
text. 
Short- and 
long-term risk 
reduction, 
based on a 
well-
established 
MH-IBF-EWS 
in place, and 
adaptation 
plans 
improved or 
prepared using 
high quality 
climate-related 
data, MH-IBF-
EWS products, 
risk/vulnerabilit
y assessments 
and climate 
change 
projections 
(produced 
under 
Outcome 2)   
$5 240 499,90  
 
$ 5 009 939,90 
Grant
s 
$230 560,00 
Grants 
AFD & 
UE 
Click here to enter 
text. 
Training for 
improved 
dissemination 
and 
preparedness 
involving users 
and end-users 
of CP-CS 
$7 067 999,90 
$    6 947 999,90 
Grant
s 
$120 000,00 
Grants 
AFD & 
UE 
Sub-total 
Components 3 
 
$17 292 499,80 
$16 811 379,80 
 
$481 120,00 
 
 
Sub-total all 
Components 
$ 57 875 841,36   
 
Project 
Management  
PMU 
 $2 949 244,20  
 $2 144 000,00  
Grant
s 
 $    805 244,20  
Grants 
AFD/EU 
Operation 
&Maintenance  
O&M 
 $8 061 000,00  
 $2 120 000,00  
Grant
s 
 $   5 941 000,00  Grants 
Gov.  
Unforeseen & 
Miscellaneous 
U&M  
$ 1 250 000 
 $ 1 250 000 
Grant
s 
 
 
 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
71 386 086   
52 767 986 
18 618 099  
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
Overall, the GCF will be investing USD 8,482,000 to support capacity-building interventions. These include:

=== PAGE 60 ===
C 
C 
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 119 
 
 
 
57 
 
o 
core training on climate services, climate related risks and impacts on communities and sectors for 15 staff 
members of NMHS, DRM institutions and in climate-sensitive sectors, as well as training of trainers (USD 
810,000);  
o 
trainings on science-based product generation (USD 844,000), 
o 
training will be provided as part of the development of hazard, vulnerability and risk maps (USD 1,400,000),  
o 
In addition, people-centered multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and early warning systems will be 
established and training will be carried out for staff of NMHS and DRM institutions and other knowledge 
brokers (USD 5,428,000) 
These capacity building interventions implemented under Components 1 and 2 of the project, will be critical to ensure 
the production of CP-CS that are timely, reliable, accurate and target to the needs of users in climate-sensitive 
sectors. The core trainings under Component 1 (Activity 1.3.2) will enhance understanding of how climate-related 
hazards and climate change can affect key sectors and communities and how CP-CS can help reduce these negative 
impacts; while the technical trainings to be implemented under Component 2 (Activities 2.3.1-2.3.8) will improve the 
capacity of NMHS’ staff members to produce accurate, location-specific short- to long-range forecasts that can serve 
as decision-making tools to reduce climate-related vulnerabilities and risks. Finally, Activities 2.3.3 and 2.3.4 will 
serve to build understanding in the beneficiary countries of areas most impacted by climate-related hazards, and the 
vulnerability of the population to these hazards. This information will also be used by NMHSs in conjunction with 
weather forecasts in order to produce multi-hazard impact-based forecasts, which introduces a paradigm shift from 
the traditional forecasts of “what the weather will be” to modernised techniques that will allow forecasts of “what the 
weather will do”, in accordance with the guidelines provided by WMO117 (Activities 2.3.1-2.3.5; and 3.2.1-3.2.3). 
It should also be noted that the regional aspects of the project that underpin collaboration, harmonization of 
approaches, and knowledge sharing provide an opportunity for countries to leverage each other’s strengths and 
capitalise on successful national initiatives; the regional facilities to be set up attached to the RCC-Network, and 
shared responsibilities for equipment maintenance and calibration, training and R&D, or UIP management will also 
increase the capacity and expertise of each country in specific fields (depending on the regional component they will 
host).  
 
 
 
117 https://library.wmo.int/index.php?lvl=notice_display&id=17257#.XotVly9OpBw

=== PAGE 61 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 119 
 
 
 
58 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The project envisions increasing climate change resilience and reduces loss of life, property, and livelihoods due to 
climate-induced threats in Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles. The potential of the project to contribute 
to the achievement of the GCF’s objectives and result areas is described in Section H1. The project will contribute to 
the GCF Adaptation Impact: Increased sustainable, climate resilient development, in the following ways: 
1. Strengthened institutional and regulatory frameworks 
Institutional, financial and operational arrangements in the NMHSs will be strengthened through Component 1; 
moreover, regional cooperation for climate-related hazard monitoring and climate risk management will be 
institutionalised in the long-term by establishing an RCC-Network with operational nodes in each member country. 
Regulatory frameworks to produce and disseminate CP-CS will be developed (Activity 1.1.1) focusing on the end-users’ 
requirements. Capacity building for governmental stakeholders in sectoral ministries and in the NMHSs will be provided 
to strengthen the capacity to produce and deliver climate-related forecasts and warnings, and enhance understanding 
of climate-related risks and exposure, thereby improving preparedness and response planning capacity (Activity 1.3.2).  
2. Increase generation and use of CP-CS in decision-making  
The project will support the generation and use of specific CP-CS initially in three sectors, namely agriculture, fisheries 
and tourism. Additional sectors will also be considered, such as shipping, and the aviation sector in Mauritius and 
Seychelles where aeronautical meteorological services are provided by NMHSs (in Comoros and Madagascar, these 
services are provided by ASECNA). Tailored CP-CS will be developed in partnership with users in these sectors 
responding to user needs, whilst ensuring use of best communication channels to maximise user outreach. The number 
of users of CP-CS will be assessed during the baseline assessment for each country, under Activity 1.4.1. Progress in 
terms of number of users of CP-CS will be re-assessed through project mid-term and final evaluations. Based on the 
anticipated increased use of CP-CS in agriculture, fisheries and tourism, the average annual benefits of an EWS in 
terms of avoided costs were estimated to be about $14 million for the SWIO region as a whole (see Annex 3a). Other 
products, developed under the proposed Components 2 & 3, including downscaled climate change projections, climate-
related hazards and vulnerability maps, weather bulletins, impact-based forecasts and EWS, as well as the knowledge 
and decision support system will inform decision-making in the short-, mid- and long-term. Partnership with PIROI and 
its national counterparts and associated NGOs, established within the context of the proposed project, for effective MH-
IBF-EWS implementation at regional, national and local levels, will significantly contribute to demonstrate increased 
socioeconomic and environmental benefits for the most vulnerable communities (Activities 3.2.2 and 3.2.3). The CP-
CS produced under this project will be shared on the UIP to further leverage these new resources, and their use beyond 
targeted sectors. Beyond the project timeline, sector-specific services could be up-scaled and replicated to other priority 
sectors building on the methodologies, capacity building, technical support and lessons learned from the proposed 
project. 
3. Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced risk exposure  
The project will focus on end-users of the CP-CS to ensure production and dissemination of services is relevant and 
efficiently reaches targeted users. Most relevant communication platforms –mobile phone, radio or Internet – will be 
identified for each target users and CP-CS will be “packaged” based on their requirements. For example, 
agrometeorological advisories will be disseminated by mobile phone and radio in Comoros, Madagascar, and Mauritius 
(Activity 3.1.1). It is expected that farmers benefiting from these services will achieve a net profit of +10 to +15 % and 
an up to 10 % increase in agriculture productivity. Likewise, with access to reliable climate information, fishermen will 
be able to make informed decisions about when to go to the sea, and to protect their equipment and assets from climate 
extremes (Activity 3.1.2). Climate-related conditions also impact their ability for fish capture. At the same time, the 
establishment of MH-IBF-EWS, in coordination and collaboration with PIROI and its national counterparts and 
associated NGOs, will underpin early warning / early action, and therefore will provide significant socioeconomic and 
environmental benefits for the most vulnerable communities (Activities 3.2.2 and 3.2.3). The expected result is a 30% 
reduction in risk exposure at the end of the project (see Annex 3a).

=== PAGE 62 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 119 
 
 
 
59 
 
4. Strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes 
This will be ensured as CP-CS, including MH-IBF-EWS, are designed with the stakeholders (e.g., PIROI, national DRM 
institutions and NGOs) and last mile end-users (pilot local communities), who will be involved in the development, 
testing and validation of risk matrices for each hazard based on agreed risk levels and colour-codes, and description 
of related impacts and response/actions (Activities 3.2.2 and 3.2.3). These developments and testing will be done in 
the first three years of the proposed project, and then expanded and rolled out nationwide (in the last two years of the 
project) using scenarios, and through the dissemination of knowledge products and outreach materials with the 
assistance of NGOs, humanitarian agencies and UN partners that are on the ground, and through the community 
leaders, in order to reach all population in the four countries. Moreover, knowledge-brokers and key community 
members will be trained on risk preparedness and mitigation measures (Activity 3.3.2), and all services will be shared 
on knowledge platforms such as the UIP. Awareness raising campaigns will also be supported by the project under 
Activities 2.3.4 and 3.2.1-3.2.2.  
The benefits of the proposed project will span across the following areas: i) receiving direct agrometeorological 
advisories on cropping calendar and best varieties, droughts, heavy rainfalls and other climate-related hazards; ii) 
receiving ‘safety at sea’ alerts and warnings; iii) developing and implementing MH-IBF-EWS; iv) accessing more timely, 
accurate, and location-specific weather bulletins; and v) receiving adequate preparedness advice and emergency 
support before, during and after climate-related hazardous events. All together, these benefits will enable climate 
change adaptation, risk prevention and protection of lives, assets and livelihoods in the four target countries. The 
expected total number of (combined direct and indirect) beneficiaries benefitting from reduced vulnerability to 
climate change is estimated to be the total population of 29,241,477 across the four islands; of which more than 50% 
are women beneficiaries. Direct project beneficiaries were estimated at 67% of the total population (19,453,286); and 
indirect beneficiaries at 33% (9,788,191).  
The approach used to estimate number of beneficiaries is based on the delivery of CP-CS to targeted sectors; and 
based on access to improved forecasts and more timely early warnings via mobile phone, radio and the Internet. See 
Section 5.4, Annex 2 for additional details on beneficiary calculations. 
Total population per country: 845,477 in Comoros; 27,000,000 in Madagascar; 1,300,000 in Mauritius; and 96,000 
in Seychelles. 
• Direct beneficiaries: 
Direct beneficiaries are a proportion of the population with access to communication channels, i.e. radio, mobile 
phone and/or Internet access (whichever is the highest)118: 
Comoros: 60% in Comoros (mobile phone subscription) or 507,286 people 
Madagascar: 65% in Madagascar (radio) or 17,550,000 
Mauritius: in Mauritius (mobile phone) or 1,300,000 people 
Seychelles: in Seychelles (mobile phone)  
Total expected direct beneficiaries = 19,453,286 which is 67% of the total population over the 4 islands; 
of which at least 50% are women. 
• Indirect beneficiaries:  
Through collaboration with PIROI, the national DRM institutions, and NGOs, humanitarian agencies and UN 
partners on the ground for the development and implementation of MH-IBF-EWS, the indirect beneficiaries are 
the rest of the population, including the proportion that does not have access to radio, mobile phone and/or 
Internet access: 40% in Comoros or 338,191 people; 35% in Madagascar or 9,450,000; 0% in Mauritius and 
Seychelles. By focus on preparedness, the proposed investments will contribute to forecast-based early action; 
and therefore, working with partners that are supported by other initiatives and projects, 100% of the population 
will benefit from the project. 
 
 
118 The proportion was calculated using the highest percentage for people having access to one of these communication channels.

=== PAGE 63 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 60 OF 119 
 
 
 
60 
 
Of which at least 50% are women. 
Estimated indirect beneficiaries = 9,788,191, which is 33% of the total population over the 4 islands; of 
which at least 50% are women. 
 
The proposed approach for beneficiary calculation is ambitious and takes into account that climate-related hazard 
warnings, and preparedness and prevention advisories can be spread (i) by word of mouth, signs displayed in 
communities, sirens e.g. from the mosque, and trained knowledge brokers regardless of radio/mobile phone ownership; 
and ii) with the support of PIROI, the national DRM institutions, and NGOs, humanitarian agencies and UN partners, 
which are on the ground supported by other initiatives and projects. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The project will effect a paradigm shift that results in enhanced climate-resilience in Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius 
and Seychelles. It will catalyse impacts beyond the project’s lifetime and economic sectors for which specific CP-CS 
will be developed. This will be achieved through an innovative, integrated approach that not only enhances the 
technical and technological capacities to monitor and forecast climate-related hazards and extremes – as is often the 
traditional approach in hydrometeorological projects – but will also introduce the capacity to prepare and deliver 
forecasts based on impacts and warnings based on risks; and by working with PIROI and its national counterparts, 
and NGOs, will build the capacity for their uptake so that stakeholders and local communities take informed 
decisions. In addition, the project will strengthen institutional settings and frameworks supporting climate-related risks 
reduction and adaptation at regional and national scale. As such, the proposed interventions (1) address structural 
needs in each of the target countries; (2) take on a “capacity development-based” approach (i.e. incorporating 
strategic, institutional, financial, human resources aspects as opposed to only addressing technical/equipment 
improvements); and (3) build on pilot people-centered MH-IBF-EWS to develop a knowledge and decision support 
systems rolled out nationwide, and harmonized regionally – all this contributing to revising preparedness and 
response plans at regional, national and local levels in collaboration and coordination with PIROI and its national 
counterparts, and NGOs. As the four target countries (i) are vulnerable to similar large spatial scale climate-related 
hazards (e.g. tropical cyclones) which are influenced by ocean currents and sea surface temperature patterns, and 
(ii) face identical problems, challenges and needs; the regional aspect of the project is a strength that will further 
enhance project outcomes. This regional approach would ensure robust interoperability, efficiencies, and optimization 
of infrastructure costs, together with a higher level of harmonization, integration, and complementarity within the 
region. This will result in cost savings and promote efficiency and effectiveness in the systems, while contributing to 
improved monitoring and increased accuracy of forecasts, as well as underpins successful, cost-efficient climate risk 
mitigation and climate change adaptation in the SWIO region; over the longer term, it can increase savings and 
sustainability of the investments. Regional collaboration will be facilitated by IOC, which is the unique regional 
institution in the SWIO region covering Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles (see further details on the 
regional approach and ICO role in Section B.1., items 2. And 4.). Created by its Member States 36 years ago, the 
IOC has an established experience to implement large-scale climate-related projects and programmes in the region; 
moreover, the IOC has a key role of bringing together the island countries of the SWIO region, coordinating the 
implementation of project’s activities in these countries, and protecting their interests.  
The project meets the following GCF requirements:  
- 
Potential for scaling up and replication: All interventions are designed based on existing international best 
practices and recommendations, as well as technical regulations that define the standards from the WMO and 
the newly GBON concept. They are also building on; complementing and upscaling other past and ongoing 
climate services-related projects in the four target countries (see Section B.1). The regional collaboration for 
risk prevention, fostered by IOC, will be institutionalised through the establishment of an RCC-Network. The 
RCC-Network for the SWIO region will replicate success stories like the Caribbean Institute for Meteorology 
and Hydrology (CIMH) which was officially designated as the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) 
Regional Climate Centre (RCC) for the Caribbean region in 2017 after a four-year process; and the SEARCC-
Network and the Pacific RCC-Network that are currently in demonstration phase. Technical improvements for 
enhanced hazard monitoring and forecasting will also be supported at regional level through the design of

=== PAGE 64 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 61 OF 119 
 
 
 
61 
 
optimum regional composites for each of the subsystems—hydromet observational networks, modelling, 
forecasting, and service delivery that meet the existing and future needs of societies; and by setting up a 
Numerical Weather Prediction and Climate (NWP/NCP) regional team, building up on the BRIO project. The 
project scalability will be further enhanced by establishing a knowledge and decision support system for MH-
IBF-EWS at regional, national and local levels, which will be developed based on the lessons learnt from the 
MH-IBF-EWS pilots in each country and rolled out nationwide based on scenarios (Activities 3.2.2 and 3.2.3); 
and sharing this tool and others lessons learnt and best practices through the UIP and during SWIOCOF 
sessions, which will both be strengthened by the project (Activities 3.3.3 and 3.3.4); the UIP, as well as the 
NCOFs and SWIOCOFs will also be used to share the weather and seasonal forecasts, climate change 
projections and other CP-CS developed under this project, in order to facilitate their use by other – non-direct 
beneficiary – sectors and socio-economic groups. It is expected that the CP-CS’ use will reach all sectors 
during and after the implementation of the project, given the enhanced production of high-quality products and 
services. Users may include stakeholders from the private sector, which would be willing to pay for good-quality 
CP-CS that can inform key decisions (e.g. stakeholders from the tourism industry in Madagascar have already 
confirmed future possibility of buying adequate CP-CS relevant to their activity). The potential income from the 
private sector related to CP-CS has been estimated at up to 16% (in average) from the commercial sector, 
ranging from 10% (Comoros and Seychelles) to 30% (Mauritius) (see Annex 3a). Additional financial returns 
for the hydrometeorological services will enable further upscaling their observation networks and expanding 
the delivery of CP-CS to new areas and users across the country.  
- 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning: The specialised training center attached to the RCC-Network, 
the sessions of the SWIOCOF, as well as the UIP will be strengthened to facilitate exchange of climate-related 
information and risk management experience across the four countries. It will also promote collaboration for 
NWP/EPS developments, downscaling and calibration over the four countries through a shared platform, in 
order to improve the prediction of climate-related hazards such as tropical cyclones. Particular attention will be 
on promoting information sharing with the end-users of the climate services, i.e. the vulnerable communities. 
Hence, best communication means for vulnerable remote communities will be identified – including language, 
cultural and gender issues, communication channels, etc. Moreover, knowledge broker institutions for risk 
prevention will be trained to enhance risk understanding at the local level, and directly provide relevant advice 
and support for risk preparedness and recovery to local communities (Activity 3.3.2).  
- 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment: Climate-related information is not disseminated 
on a regular basis to climate sensitive sectors in Madagascar and Comoros. In Mauritius and Seychelles, 
information is disseminated but is not always timely or accurate, especially for rapid-onset events such as flash 
floods. It is also noted that information released by the NMHS is very technical and cannot always be used for 
decision-makers. By modernising the NMHSs, strengthening institutional settings (Output 1.2), and improving 
collaboration and communication between producers and end-users (Activity 1.1.1), the project will improve 
the quality and usability of climate-related products. Moreover, training will be provided to producers of CP-CS 
on how to generate user-tailored CP-CS (Activity 3.3.1) and to users and end-users of climate services to 
enhance their understanding and use of climate products (Activity 3.3.2). This process will be supported through 
climate outlook forums (COFs) which are being hosted on a regular basis at national and regional levels, as 
well as through dedicated training sessions implemented during the project lifetime. Finally, the project will set 
the basis to foster private sector (potential customers/clients) investments into climate services by 
strengthening the capacities of NMHSs to develop and deliver climate products that respond to user needs, 
e.g. the tourism industry. 
- 
Contribution to the regulatory frameworks and policies: The proposed project will strengthen the 
institutional set up of the NMHS in the four target countries and update existing climate change adaptation 
plans. Moreover, a regional framework for climate services will be developed and serve as umbrella under 
which national frameworks for climate services will be prepared and implemented. In addition, the proposed 
project will support the review or development of Hydromet Laws in the four countries, which will explore the 
possibility of establishing ring-fenced CIEWS funds (see Annex 2C). The climate-related products generated 
under the project Output 2.3 and shared on the UIP can also inform decision makers to develop policies and

=== PAGE 65 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 62 OF 119 
 
 
 
62 
 
strategies in climate-sensitive sectors. This will support a risk reduction culture in Comoros, Madagascar, 
Mauritius and Seychelles, as well as the harmonization of infrastructure, tools and processes.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The project fully supports the implementation of SDGs in the four countries, in particular SDG 2: End hunger, achieve 
food security and improved nutrition; SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being; and SDG 13: Take urgent 
action to combat climate change and its impacts. In addition, the project supports the operationalisation of the Sendai 
Framework [4] targets for Disaster Risk Reduction (SF-DRR) as well as risk-informed sustainable development. 
1. Environmental co-benefits  
The project will reduce the vulnerability of exposed populations and assets to climate change. As people are less 
affected by climate-related hazards, and their economic activities become more resilient, pressure on the natural 
environment will decrease. For example, agrometeorological advisories and weather warnings will enable climate-
smart decision making among farmers and fishermen. Farmers will be able to use adequate crop varieties based on 
the advisories, while farmers and fishermen will be able to protect their equipment and harvests as they receive 
warnings of hazardous hydrometeorological events. As a result, they will suffer less losses and damages from climate 
variability, change and extreme. This will, in turn, reduce pressures on the environment as, in many LDCs such as 
Madagascar and Comoros, unsustainable extraction of wood for charcoal production is a practice used to 
compensate for climate-related agricultural losses. In addition, the design and management of small dams for 
irrigation, for example, will also benefit from better climate-related data and dissemination services; if dams are better 
designed to capture water most efficiently, pressure on the ecosystems for water extraction will be reduced.  
2. Social co-benefits including health impacts 
The project will contribute to improve well-being, health and save lives. This will be achieved through strengthening 
EWS and other climate services such as the production and dissemination of agrometeorological information to 
improve agricultural productivity supporting food security. The proposed Hydromet project will provide information 
with regards to risks of floods and flash floods, as well as improve the production and dissemination of early warnings 
towards vulnerable communities and raise awareness of risk prevention and mitigation measures. With better 
information at hand and access to timely warnings, communities can take proactive steps to protect their lives and 
assets against potential climate-related disasters. Likewise, fishermen and farmers will be able to move their assets 
including fishing/farming equipment to protect them against climate-related hazards such as tropical cyclones and 
associated storm surges. Finally, the project will update climate change adaptation plans, which will in turn improve 
the quality of life in the four target countries in the long-term. 
3. Economic co-benefits 
Significant economic gains can be expected from the project; both in terms of reduced losses linked to climate-related 
hazards and increased financial returns/productivity in key economic sectors like agriculture and tourism. The Annual 
Average Benefits linked to EWS in terms of costs avoided has been assessed to be around USD 14 million for the 
entire SWIO region. The Annual Average Benefit from agro-climatic services have been estimated at USD 29,91 
million per year for the period 2026-2030 to up to 59,82 million per year for the period 2031 to 2035 for the four 
countries. Finally, the Net Present Value (NPV) of the project is estimated at USD 230 million at 5% discounting rate. 
Sensitivity analysis shows that NPV is still positive (USD 161 million) even if the project benefits are 30% lower than 
expected. Moreover, in the long term, revenues from the NHMS’ commercial services can be expected through the 
marketing of CP-CS, and will progressively complement and partly replace a portion of the public funding of NMHSs, 
covering from 10% (Comoros and Seychelles) to 30% (Mauritius) of their budget. At the same time, the investments 
alongside with the collaboration with PIROI and its national counterparts will contribute to the implementation of 
forecast-based action/forecast-based financing (FbA/FbF) planned for the SWIO region under the leadership of 
PIROI, and supported though other initiatives, based on the lessons learnt from the first experiment in the region, in 
Mozambique. For additional details on the economic and financial benefits of the project, please read Annex 3a, 
Economic Analysis. 
4. Gender-sensitive development impacts

=== PAGE 66 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 63 OF 119 
 
 
 
63 
 
The project includes a Gender Assessment and Action Plan (see Annex 8), which will operationalise gender-
responsive adaptation actions through the project results framework. Hence, the gender mainstreaming approach of 
the Hydromet project will include: mainstreaming gender-responsive approaches for the design of CP-CS, hydro-
meteorological systems, and EWS; promoting gender balance through the technical and maintenance capacity-
building activities, as well as institutional development targeted for hydro-meteorological networks, tools and systems; 
establishing gender-aware policy frameworks to inform collaboration between key sectors and national/regional 
hydro-meteorological services; and pioneering gender mainstreaming analyses and praxis regarding hydro-
meteorological systems, EWS and CP-CS in the Indian Ocean region and islands. 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The SWIO region has been recognised as a ‘climate hotspot’ (see Annex 2, and section B1). The affected population 
and physical damages resulting from climate-related hazards are likely to rise in the coming years, in the context of 
climate change.  
Despite different socio-economic contexts – with Comoros and Madagascar classified as LDCs, Mauritius as upper-
middle income country and Seychelles as high-income country – the economy and populations of these four islands 
are extremely vulnerable to climate-related hazards. In Comoros and Madagascar, the population is highly reliant on 
agriculture and fisheries, two key economic sectors which are severely affected by increased air and sea 
temperature, tropical cyclones, sea level rise, and coastal inundation and erosion. In Mauritius and Seychelles, the 
economy is highly depending on tourism, which is also threatened by tropical cyclones, increased occurrence of 
floods, flash floods and landslides, and storm surges resulting in coastal inundation and erosion.  
These four islands are also characterised by microclimates, which are strongly influenced by the ocean currents and 
sea surface temperature patterns, associated with the Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD). This makes it all the more difficult 
to predict climate-related hazards and therefore implement risk mitigation or planning and preparedness measures. 
More precisely, there is a lack of location-specific climate and weather information to inform decision-making 
processes, a limited production and dissemination of climate services that can help reduce risk exposure and 
vulnerability among communities and sectors, and limited cooperation at the regional level to monitor hazardous 
hydrometeorological events and share risk-related information in the SWIO countries. This is because of the limited 
technical capacity within NMHSs, as well as relevant expertise, training programmes and R&D activities to respond to 
users’ needs in terms of CP-CS (see Annex 2). Improving CP-CS to respond to user needs, reduce vulnerability to 
climate-related hazards and climate change, and ensure sustained economic growth also requires significant 
investments, which cannot be met by the NMHSs of the four target countries: while Comoros and Madagascar are 
considered low-income countries, all four countries are characterized by their high level of debt; their economy is 
threatened by climate change, with significant public spending already noted to recover from the physical damages 
resulting from climate-related hazards and emergency responses (see Annex 3a). Existing initiatives and investments 
in the four target countries supporting the improvement of CP-CS – as described in section B.1– have been 
assessed, and are complementary to the project; however, these interventions are limited to specific areas of a 
country and/or to a specific sector and cannot achieve the desired paradigm shift.  
Timely, reliable weather, climate and hydrological monitoring, forecasting and service delivery, including EWS, are 
necessary to equip decision-makers with the adequate information for disaster risk reduction and long-term 
adaptation planning. To achieve this in Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles, significant investments will 
be required not only to equip or upgrade observation networks and foster the production of climate services that 
respond to user needs in individual countries; but also to support the harmonisation of infrastructure, tools and 
processes, and enhanced communication and knowledge sharing at the regional level, through, inter alia, the 
establishment of an RCC-Network and frameworks for climate services. These latter interventions (i.e. with a regional 
scope) which underpin improvements at the national level, are new in the region. The outcomes of the proposed 
project will enable decision-making that will enhance livelihoods of the most vulnerable communities and support 
economic growth in key climate-sensitive sectors; increased economic growth can, in turn, support the production of 
climate services beyond the project’s lifetime. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 67 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 64 OF 119 
 
 
 
64 
 
It should also be noted that the project responds to a call to provide support at scale to NMHSs in the Indian Ocean 
region launched in 2010 by the African Union (AU) and the WMO. The project concept was developed by the IOC, 
which received repeated requests and approval from its ministerial council to develop the Hydromet project as a full-
scale funding proposal for the GCF. The project will involve all technical staff of NMHSs, who will collaborate with 
staff from the DRM institutions at national level in the four countries and at the regional level with PIROI, while 
international advisors on meteorology, climate, disaster risk management, and institutional and legal aspects (one in 
each area) will be hired tosupport the implementation of the project in the four countries. 
Section B1 above discusses how the proposed project contributes to the SAMOA pathway and the AU Agenda 2063. 
The project also supports the operationalisation of the Sendai Framework global targets for Disaster Risk Reduction 
(SF-DRR). In particular, the project will strengthen risk governance and management in the four target countries, by 
establishing a RCC-Network, as well as NFCS to enhance and harmonize disaster risk information and assessments, 
implement multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and early warning systems (Global Target G) in support of 
preparedness and recovery in the SWIO region. Moreover, the project will support staff trainings for DRM institutions 
and on-the-ground organisations and communities to better understand and use CP-CS and contribute to the 
development, testing and validation of MH-IBF-EWS. Risk preparedness will be enhanced within the four target 
countries, through more accurate and timely detection of climate-related risks, the development or strengthening of 
key CP-CS, including multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and early warnings, using best dissemination channels, 
the development of hazard maps and risk management plans, and capacity building interventions targeting the 
providers and users (including end-users) of CP-CS. 
The project will support the implementation of SDGs in the four countries, as hydrometeorological and impact-based 
forecast and early warning services, as those to be strengthened under the proposed project, are key enablers for a 
broad range of adaptation decisions; the CP-CS to be developed will also improve food security and reduce disaster 
risks and impacts on people, economic activities and assets. Hence, the project fully supports the implementation of 
SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition; SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-
being; and SDG 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.  
At the regional level, the IOC Member States have developed a joint adaptation strategy: Document cadre pour la 
stratégie régionale d’adaptation au changement climatique des pays membres de la Commission de l’Océan Indien 
2012-2020.119 This strategy aims at strengthening regional cooperation, fostering a shared understanding of regional 
issues, and improving the coordination of actions. To reach these aims, the strategy advocates strengthening 
forecasting and climate anticipation capabilities, to increase the capacity of all actors, and to more broadly 
disseminate climate-related information. The proposed Hydromet project will contribute to achieving these goals as 
the technical capacities of the NMHS will be enhanced and regional cooperation fostered through, inter alia, the 
establishment of a RCC-Network and a similar risk management culture. Dissemination of CP-CS will also be 
improved as well as the ability of people and last mile partners to interpret and use these tools.  
 
With regards to the NDCs, the project will support their achievement in each target country: 
• 
In Comoros, the priority actions of the NDC target the water and agriculture sectors, aim to integrate 
adaptation into sectoral policies, and to reduce vulnerability through poverty reduction (particularly noting the 
vulnerabilities of rural communities and farmers to climate change). Capacity and resilience of the agricultural 
sector is identified as a priority adaptation project. The Hydromet project will contribute to this priority by 
developing seasonal forecasts and agricultural advisories for Comoros and improving the dissemination of 
information and alerts among farmers and fishermen under activities 3.1.1 and 3.1.2. Another priority project 
of the NDC is the integration of climate change into relevant strategies, which will be supported under activity 
3.2.2 as the NAP and its sectoral plans will be updated with the climate change data downscaled under this 
project. Finally, the NDC has a priority to strengthen the resilience of the most vulnerable to disaster risks, 
through the implementation of MH-IBF-EWS, which is a main objective of Hydromet project.  
 
• 
Madagascar’s NDC emphasize the complementarity between adaptation and mitigation. Several priority 
measures are identified to support adaptation and reduce GHG emission in the country, including a ‘Large-
scale implementation of conservation and climate-smart agriculture and agroforestry’. Hydromet project will 
contribute to achieve this by developing and disseminating seasonal forecasts and agricultural advisories to 
 
 
119 
IOC Climate Change Portal. ‘Document cadre pour la stratégie régionale d’adaptation au changement climatique des pays 
membres de la Commission de l’océan Indien 2012-2020’. Accessed 18th August 2019. Available at: https://prodigious-lab.com/coi/wp-
content/uploads/2018/01/DR-Document-cadre-pour-la-strate%CC%81gie-re%CC%81gionale-d_adaptation-au-changement-climatique-des-
pays-membres-de-la-COI.pdf

=== PAGE 68 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 65 OF 119 
 
 
 
65 
 
farmers, thereby supporting climate-smart agriculture. Several priority actions of the NDC are also aligned 
with the objectives of Hydromet project and can be supported by the proposed interventions. For example, 
Hydromet will contribute to the development of multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and early warning 
systems. Finally, activity 1.1.1 of Hydromet will contribute to the finalisation of the “National framework for 
climate services” for which Madagascar has committed within the context of the Global Framework for 
Climate Services (GFCS), which is also an objective of the NDC. 
 
• 
Mauritius’ NDC underlines several priority actions to which the Hydromet project will contribute, for example: 
‘Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy: to understand disaster risk, implement disaster risk strategy, strengthen 
management of related governance, and invest in resilience.’ The Hydromet project will also partly contribute 
to the NDC’s priority ‘Water Resources Management: improve forecasting, management, protection and 
quality of water resources, including upgrading and building of new treatment plants and reservoirs and 
reducing water losses in the distribution system’. Forecasts will be improved through the technical 
enhancement and training of hydrological services i.e. on flood propagation models under activity 2.3.8; and 
risk management will be enhanced as hazard maps for floods will be developed under activity 2.3.3.  
 
• 
Seychelles’ NDC recommends further research to understand the impacts of a changing climate on “cyclone 
patterns, ocean and air currents, and…other climate phenomena such as El Niño”. The NDC also notes the 
necessity to undertake “climate change modelling and risks, monitoring of climate change impacts”. The 
Hydromet project will contribute to this under activity 2.3.8 to downscale climate change projections for 
Seychelles. Within the NDC, fisheries and tourism are recognised as highly vulnerable; Hydromet project will 
develop hazard maps relevant for tourism under activity 2.3.3. Improved, more accurate forecasts including 
IBF will also be produced under activities 3.2.2 and 3.2.3, and CP-CS will be disseminated using best 
channels for tourism and fisheries under activity 3.1.2, along with early warnings. Finally, under activity 3.2.4, 
the project will support the implementation of Seychelles’ Coastal Management Plan, thereby supporting the 
achievement of the NDC’s goal to reduce the vulnerability of coastal areas and the tourism sector.   
 
The Funding Proposal was prepared based on extensive in-country consultations and field visits which took place 
between May and November 2019, including one-on-one meetings with decision-makers in the public and private 
sectors, last mile partners (as organisations involved in on-the-ground disaster risk management, focused group 
interviews organised with vulnerable communities (especially women), and a series of workshops with relevant 
government and sector representatives to gather feedbacks on initial project interventions (see Annex 7). The four 
country NDAs have also been consulted during the project development phase. Moreover, the NDAs will follow 
the progress of the proposed project implementation in their country, through regular presence at National 
Project Steering Committees and Regional Project Steering Committee (see section B.4), in particular to 
ensure project alignment with their respective country’s climate change adaptation objectives, and its 
complementarity and synergies with other existing initiatives in this field. 
The project is aligned with several international and national policies and strategies pertaining to climate 
change adaptation and disaster risk reduction (details on existing policies and strategies can be found in Annex 
2). In a nutshell, these include: 
 
Comoros: the country has submitted its NAPA in 2006, which emphasises the need to “establishing 
and further developing early warning systems’120. It is currently developing its NAP and has submitted its 
NDC in 2016, which underlines the importance to develop an effective cross-sectoral early warning 
system. Comoros’ Strategic Plan 2017-2020 also notes in particular the current lack of stations, 
difficulties delivering services on time, and lack of capacity in the NMHS. Key partners that were 
consulted are: Department of Fisheries, Agriculture, Environment (acting as sector users); CERVO and 
COSEP (acting as governmental entities for risk management coordination and on-the-ground 
intervention); and Ulanga NGO and Red Cross/Crescent (civil society for preparedness/emergency 
relief). 
 
 
120 Ministry of Rural Development, Fisheries, Handicraft and Environment (2006). ‘Union of the Comoros: National Action Programme of 
Adaptation to climate change’. Accessed 19th August 2019. Available at: https://www.preventionweb.net/files/8507_com01e.pdf

=== PAGE 69 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 66 OF 119 
 
 
 
66 
 
 
Madagascar: the NAPA, submitted in 2006, highlights that improvements in climate services and 
development of agro-climatic products are critical to climate change adaptation. The NAP process was 
launched in 2011, and the NDC submitted in 2015. In this document, climate services, EWS, and sector-
specific climate risk management plans for agriculture and water are listed as short-term priorities. 
Madagascar has a National Climate Change Management Policy (PNLCC, 2012), and a National 
Strategy for Disaster Risks Management (NSDRM, 2016-2020), which all underline the need to 
strengthen climate services. Key partners that were consulted are: Fisheries and Agriculture Directorates 
(acting as sector users); the BNGRC-CERVO (acting as governmental entities for risk management 
coordination and on-the-ground intervention); and Capacity Building for Community (civil society for 
preparedness/emergency relief). 
 
Mauritius: the country has started its NAP process and submitted its NDC in 2015; both plans support 
climate change adaptation and promote use of EWS to enhance climate resilience. Moreover, the country 
has a National Climate Change Adaptation Policy, which notes the importance of information gathering, 
and regional and international collaboration to implement adaptation goals121.  Key partners that were 
consulted are: Water Resource Unit, Business Mauritius, the Fisheries and Shipping Directorates and the 
Ministry of Tourism (acting as sector users); the NDRRMC and Land Drainage Agency (acting as 
governmental entities for risk management coordination and on-the-ground intervention). 
 
Seychelles: the country has submitted its NDC in 2015, which highlights climate change impacts on 
fisheries, infrastructure, and tourism, among other sectors; the necessity for research and resources to 
“predict, prevent and respond to disasters” is emphasised. The Seychelles National Climate Change 
Strategy (2009) needs to be updated to support the implementation of the country’s new Climate Change 
Policy (currently under development). Key partners that were consulted are: Ministry of Environment, 
Ministry of Social Affairs, the Fishery Authority, Insurance company (acting as sector users); DRDM and 
the District Authority (acting as governmental entities for risk management coordination and on-the-
ground intervention). 
In the four countries, consultations were also organised with bilateral and international organisations including AFD, 
USAID, FAO, GIZ and UNDP; these are key actors involved in risk management. The discussions provided further 
insight on risk preparedness and management in the four countries; synergies with the current interventions of these 
organisations have been sought (see FS, Chapter 2 on baseline projects; and section B.1 above, Table 4). 
Based on in-country consultations and the case study analysis provided in the FS, an assessment of needs to 
improve risk management in the four countries was conducted (see chapter 4 if the FS). Detailed case studies of risk 
preparedness and management were particularly relevant to design project interventions that would improve on-the-
ground risk management, placing the last-mile partners (e.g. relief and disaster preparedness NGOs) and 
communities at the center. For example: 
• 
Communities and last-mile partners will be part of the participatory process to develop hazards maps and 
vulnerability maps, which will be used to guide on-the-ground interventions for risk preparedness and 
recovery (activities 2.3.3 and 2.3.4) 
• 
Last-mile partners and communities will be consulted to assess the adequacy between needs and solutions 
while packaging and disseminating MH-IBF-EWS and identify pathways for improvements (activities 3.1.2, 
and 3.2.1-3.2.3) 
• 
Last-mile partners will be consulted with the view to strengthen and streamline the collaboration between 
NMHS, DRM institutions and on-the-ground organisations to enable fast response with wide outreach. In 
particular, the project will address the communication gaps between NMHS, DRM institutions and on-the-
ground interventions services as well as identify pathways to solve difficulties of emergency services – e.g. 
Red Cross/Crescent – to reach local communities especially in remote location (risk identified in the FS – 
activities 3.2.1, and 3.2.1-3.2.3).  
• 
In addition, local organisations, volunteers and community leaders will have the opportunity to develop and 
implement MH-IBF-EWS promoting people-centric risk management.  
 
 
121 Ibid. at page 6.

=== PAGE 70 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 67 OF 119 
 
 
 
67 
 
• 
Last-mile partners and knowledge breakers will be trained to interpret and use the CP-CS co-developed with 
them under this project so that they can inform and train themselves (‘training-of-the-trainers approach) the 
vulnerable communities.  
The Hydromet Project was co-designed and validated by of each the beneficiary countries during the feasibility study 
process. At the project onset and during its implementation period, the country engagement and ownership will be 
continued and enhanced. Indeed, the NMHs (NIP), as lead national implementing entities, as all concerned national 
entities, will be the lead implementing national partners and will be involved in the project co – design activities at 
both regional and national level to insure the country ownership. NMHSs will be engaged and co -responsible of 
national activities implementation and results achievements in relation to the IOC (EE). NSP such as DRM institutions 
will be strongly involved to co-design and co-implement the activities related to EWS and last mile connectivity. 
Moreover, the rollout of NPC in each country, at the country request, aim at spreading and ensuring the involvement 
of national counterparts in the implementation of the project activities at the national level and not only at IOC (EE) 
regional level. Finally, the country project ownership and handover process of soft and equipment’s supports will start 
from the Project onset and will last during the entire Project. In fact, when it comes to co-design, training and capacity 
building the beneficiaries stakeholders will be actively engaged to participate to all steps and workshops session will 
be participatory. Regarding equipment’s operation and maintenance, the delivery and installations in the country is 
planned to take place at the end of the 3rd year implementation, from that steps, the operation and maintenance of the 
equipment’s is under the country responsibility. IOC, with PMU and WMO, and others technical partners will support 
the countries on the two years handover process until a complete country mastering. To the extent and when needed 
specifically for RADAR installation, technical support contract may be considered to support countries.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The Hydromet project, with its inter-linked components, is the most appropriate investment to achieve climate change 
adaptation objectives. In the absence of GCF funding – based on financial support from AFD and the EU only, 
respectively USD 5,504,183 and USD 6,172,916– it would be possible to improve meteorological services and 
capacity building partially but prioritizing a small sub-set of equipment in each country and focusing on pilot projects 
only in the most vulnerable areas instead of servicing CP-CS to key sectors nationally. Furthermore, the project 
would not be able to address the enabling environment and frameworks, neither fostering a regional approach, as set 
under Component 1. The full benefits in terms of avoided costs, long lasting gains in terms of development of climate 
services, for and by the private sector customers which are detailed in Annex 3a Economic Analysis and summarized 
below – would not be realized in the absence of GCF investments.  
Without the support of the GCF, the Hydromet project will lose the major part of its activities, namely all the 
infrastructure allowing strengthened climate services delivery and multi-hazard impact-based forecast and early 
warning systems at national and regional levels. In this scenario, the major benefits from the original Hydromet 
project (i.e. upgrading, refining the warnings from general cautionary advice to a detailed, location-specific, model-
based forecasts of hazard evolution, expected impacts or consequences and precautions for particular vulnerable 
segments of society) will no longer be possible. From the SWOT analysis and case studies described in Annex 2 
(Feasibility Study), it is noted the requirement for strengthen the ability to detect, monitor, forecast, and generate and 
disseminate meaningful and actionable warnings, while the DRM institutions in the SWIO region will continue to be 
benefiting from the support of the Indian Ocean Regional Intervention Platform (PIROI) and its related initiatives and 
projects. However, in order to ensure a people-centered end-to-end MH-IBF-EWS, coordination and collaboration 
with PIROI and its national counterparts, NGOs and other agencies, will be pursued throughout the project for the 
implementation of MH-IBF-EWS in pilot areas and rolling out nationwide. Therefore, all benefits of the annual 
average losses evaluated to approximatively USD 14 million for the four countries will not be achieved. The 
benefits from the potential private sector income will also be affected. The process of developing user-tailored climate 
services typically involving the translation of temporal and spatial information about the climate into decision-support 
tools to suit the needs of specific sector applications, will no longer be possible.

=== PAGE 71 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 68 OF 119 
 
 
 
68 
 
Following the WMO Guidelines on Emerging Data Issues (WMO-No. 1239)122, the design of the various hydromet 
subsystems proposed in the project (i.e. expansion of the observation network, ICT systems, downscaling and 
calibration of predictions over the countries/region, and implementation of MH-IBF-EWS) will explore the use of 
innovative technologies (such as those described in section B1, Table 5), cost sharing and, due to the limited staff in 
individual NMHSs, the development of a regional pool of experts that would work together towards common 
objectives and results, for sustainability of investments. The regional approach is key to underpin improvements in 
the production and dissemination of CP-CS.  
The improved agricultural profits attributable to Hydromet project for the four countries have been evaluated to be 
around USD 29,91 million per year for the period 2026-2030 to up to 59,82 million per year for the period 2031 to 
2035, with a conservative assumption (based on literature review and results in other projects) of a 10% increase in 
yields for 10% of the agriculture sector using agroclimatic services123. Without the Hydromet project, the absence of 
major infrastructure, tools and capacity building will seriously reduce the ability of NMHSs to produce tailored weather 
forecasts, climate predictions, and early warnings at the appropriate time and spatial scales. We reviewed the 
assumptions of a 1% productivity increase for 2% of the agriculture sector under a no-Hydromet project scenario.  
Total incremental value of 
agriculture production (USD million) 
during 2026-2030 
Madagascar 
Comoros 
Seychelles 
Mauritius 
With the Hydromet project 
21.8 
0.04 
0.03 
7.7 
Without the Hydromet project 
0.87 
0.02 
0.00 
0.31 
Impact on the economic rate of return 
The NPV, with the Hydromet project, have been assessed to USD 230 million for a 5% discounting rate (CB ratio of 
1:4,3). Without the Hydromet project, the NPV of the project becomes negative at - USD 26 million. The major share 
of benefits, evaluated at a total of USD 230 million at 5% discounting rate, will be lost. With the proposed Hydromet 
project, the EIRR become positive after the nineth year (four years after the project completion), and reaches 14% 
after 15 years (lifespan of the project). 
The main barrier to the development of the NMHSs in the four target countries without the Hydromet project is lack of 
funding. The target countries are not in a position to finance the Hydromet project alone as indicated in section B.5, 
without the contributions of the AFD, the EU and the GCF. The overall investment weight of the Hydromet project 
(±USD 71 million) represents 0.27 % of the combined GDP of the four countries (USD 28,343 million). In addition, 
the per capita burden on the four countries (29,147,444) to implement Hydromet alone would be approximately USD 
2.6 per capita. This level of investment is much higher than the spending ratios of other States in the world. Most 
NMHSs are funded in the range of 0.010-0.050 % of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), with a total average of 0.012 %. 
Per capita spending on NMHS is US $ 0.10 for at least one NMHS in every World Meteorological Organization 
(WMO) Regional Association, to almost US $ 13.00. The average for developing countries is about US $ 3.50 per 
capita of national population, and the average for the least developed countries is about US $ 0.25. 
 
 
122 https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=10124 
123 In Ghana, where farmers have experienced 30 to 80% increased yield per acre, or USD 75 to USD 125 per acre in revenue after 
receiving climate-related information through mobile phone and adjusting their agricultural practices accordingly (see project UNEP DTU in 
Ghana: https://unepdtu.org/partnerships-for-climate-action/). In Kenya, an ex-ante modelling study conducted by Hansen et al (2009) (full 
reference in pag 173 of the Annex 2, FS) found that seasonal forecasts based on a general circulation model led to gross margin increases 
of 9–24%, averaged across years, while perfect knowledge of daily weather was worth an estimated 24–69%. Ouédraogo et al (2018) (full 
reference in pag 173 of the Annex 2, FS) report that Burkinabé cowpea farmers with climate information showed higher yields than those 
without information (an average of 847 kg/ha compared to 685 kg/ha, +23%); moreover, information recipients were shown to have made 
decisions that resulted in savings in seed and pesticides, resulting in gross margin gains of 66% above the control group. In East Africa, a 
study looked at the relationship between agricultural outcomes and the employment of “climate resilient” strategies in Ethiopia; the authors 
found that receiving training in the use of weather information had the greatest influence on yield (17% increase) (Anuga & Gordon, 2016) 
(full reference in pag 173 of the Annex 2, FS). These studies (both ex-ante and ex-post estimates of impact of agricultural climate services), 
including Vaughan et al (2019) (full reference in pag 173 of the Annex 2, FS), show evidence of incremental agricultural productivity gains 
following the uptake of climate agro-advisories, however the range varies – in all cases studied, the lowest yield enhancement was 6.9% 
and the highest was 24%, so the assumption of 10% used in the proposed project was based on the percentage of enhanced agricultural 
productivity as a result of farmers receiving agro-climatic advisories, regardless to the type of crop, farms or risks.

=== PAGE 72 ===
D 
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 69 OF 119 
 
 
 
69 
 
The financing structure of the project is essentially based on investment grant for the implementation of the project, 
and co-financing (from Mauritius and Seychelles) for construction work and the operating and maintenance costs. As 
a result, the financial model will not weight on the public debt of the targeted countries. Country ownership of 
operating and maintenance expenses will have limited impact on the public debt, since it will be mostly achieved by 
strengthening the capacity of the personnel already assigned to operate the various systems at the National 
Meteorological Services. 
Moreover, the private sector of the four countries is not in a position to support the financing of the Hydromet project 
since most of the project's objectives fall under open access public services. In these four countries, the Corporate 
Social Responsibility is not as yet integrated in the countries private sector, except in Mauritius and Seychelles where 
some companies are more conscious of the impact they are having on aspects of society, including economic, social 
and environment; however, these are still not well established. is not in the role of the private sector to support the 
production of public services. There is therefore no risk of crowding out the private sector. 
The financial viability of the project is based on grant financing of investments. The absence of loan and therefore of 
obligation to repay capital and interest does not increase the burden of the public debt of the States. The ratios of 
public debts of the States are therefore not affected by the project funding. 
Finally – importantly – the four countries benefiting from the Hydromet project will be able to build sustainable, long-
term business models from the reliable operation of strengthened hydrometeorological systems and recover the costs 
of operation and maintenance (O&M) through revenue-generation / cost-recovery from commercial services, and 
through national budget support (see Annex 21).  
The budget funding analysis (see Annex 3a) shows that the impact of the Hydromet project will be easily handled by 
the four countries together, as the O&M costs of the new Hydromet equipment overall, on the budgets of the four 
beneficiary NHMSs, will be limited; these costs will be shared adequately among the RCC-Network member 
countries, as per the RCC-Network multi-lateral agreement signed between these countries under Activity 1.1.2 of the 
proposed project. Moreover, in the long term, development of commercial revenues may complement and eventually 
replace part of the current public funding of NMHS, from 10% (Comoros and Seychelles) to almost 30% (Mauritius) of 
their budget. This indicates that the Hydromet project-related interventions may no more rely on international funding 
in the long term.

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 70 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
70 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes 
as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
☐ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development 
 
 
E.2. Core indicator targets 
 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
and cross-cutting only) 
Annual 
Not applicable 
Lifetime 
Not applicable  
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) 
(a) Total project financing 
_____   Choose an item.    
(b) Requested GCF amount  
_____  Choose an item. 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
_____  t CO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
_____   Choose an item. / t 
CO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed 
(e = b / c) 
_____   Choose an item. / t 
CO2eq 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross-cutting only) 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
_____   Choose an item. 
(g) Public source co-financed 
_____   Choose an item. 
(h) Private source finance leveraged  
_____   Choose an item. 
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
_____   
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
_____  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
_____  
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
19,453,286 
50% female 
Indirect 
9,788,191 
50% female population is expected to be indirect beneficiaries   
For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 17. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
67% of which 50% females 
Indirect 
33% of which 50% females (rest of the population) 
For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 71 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
71 
 
E.3. Fund-level impacts 
 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
A1.0 Increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the 
most vulnerable people, 
communities and regions 
A1.1 Change in expected 
losses of lives and 
economic assets (US$) due 
to the impact of extreme 
climate-related disasters 
Humanitarian 
reports, 
including but 
not limited to 
the Rapid 
Damage and 
Needs 
Assessment 
reports 
(RDNA) and 
Post-Disaster 
Needs 
Assessment 
reports 
(PDNA) 
 
PIROI reports 
 
Community 
surveys  and 
government 
reports 
 
During Tropical 
Cyclone Enawo in 
2017, 81 lives 
(mostly Women 
and children) were
lost and damage 
to economic 
assets amounted 
to EUR 50 million 
(Number of 
women and 
children lost will 
be collected upon 
project 
commencement 
from    
RDNA and PDNA 
reports from the 
Local 
Governments) 
 
The 
introductio
n of MH-
IBF-EWS 
can reduce 
the 
damage to 
economic 
assets by 
3% or EUR 
1,5 million 
and reduce 
loss of life 
to less 
than 40 or  
50%  
The 
introductio
n of MH-
IBF-EWS 
can reduce 
the 
damage to 
economic 
assets by 
5% or 
EUR 2,5 
million and 
reduce 
loss of life 
to less 
than 16 or 
80%  
CP-CS are used 
by population in 
project sites and 
target sectors to 
inform decision-
making processes 
 
The produced CP-
CS leads to actual 
livelihood benefits 
for individuals,  
communities and 
sectors 
 
Well-established 
coordination and 
collaboration with 
regional and 
national DRM 
institutions and 
NGOs (under the 
leadership of 
PIROI) 
 
Occurrence of 
extreme weather 
events in project 
sites 
 
Humanitarian 
missions, including 
RDNA and/or 
PDNA conducted 
and reported 
 
PIROI and 
government 
reports prepared 
A1.0 Increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the 
most vulnerable people, 
communities and regions 
A1.2 Number of males and 
females benefiting from the 
adoption of diversified, 
climate resilient livelihood 
options (including fisheries, 
agriculture, tourism, etc.) 
Community 
survey and 
local 
government 
reports in 
project 
selected sites 
(2 sites per 
countries to 
be defined 
upon project 
commenceme
nt) 
 
 
RDNA and/or 
PDNA reports 
 
 
Climate-resilient 
fisheries (in 
project sites): 
Males: 0 
Females: 0 
 
Climate-resilient 
agriculture (in 
project sites): 
Males: number of 
males to be 
collected upon 
project 
commencement 
(during inception) 
from statistics and 
reports of the 
Local 
Governments and 
FAO 
Females: number 
of females to be 
collected upon 
project 
commencement 
For project 
sites in the 
4 countries 
(in 
fisheries): 
Male: 
additional 
50 
Female: 
additional 
50 
(or +5% 
male/ 
female of 
the 
baseline)  
For project 
sites in the 
4 countries 
(in 
fisheries): 
Male: 
additional 
250 
Female: 
additional 
250 
(or +10% 
male/ 
female of 
the 
baseline) 
Occurrence of 
extreme weather 
events in project 
sites 
 
RDNA and/or 
PDNA conducted 
and reported 
 
Communities and 
target beneficiaries 
in project sites 
wanting to engage 
in the MH-IBF-
EWS

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 72 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
72 
 
(during inception) 
from statistics and 
reports of the 
Local 
Governments and 
FAO 
A2.0 Increased resilience of 
health and well-being, and 
food and water security 
A2.2 Number of food 
secure households (in 
areas/periods at risk of 
climate change impacts) 
Household 
surveys 
 
Statistics and 
reports of the 
Local 
Governments 
and FAO that 
would 
demonstrate 
more 
productive 
and year 
around 
production of 
food 
Total number of 
food-secure 
households124125(f
or the project sites 
in the 4 countries) 
to be collected 
upon project 
commencement 
(during inception) 
from statistics and 
reports of the 
Local 
Governments and 
FAO 
 
Male-headed 
householders: 
number of male 
food-secured 
households to be 
collected upon 
project 
commencement 
(during inception) 
from statistics and 
reports of the 
Local 
Governments and 
FAO  
Female-headed 
householders: 
number of female 
food-secured 
households to be 
collected upon 
Total 
number of 
food-secure 
householder
s (for the 
project sites 
in the 4 
countries): 
Additional 
100 (or +5% 
of the 
baseline) 
Male-
headed 
householder
s: additional 
50 
Female-
headed 
householder
s: additional 
250 
  
Total 
number of 
food-secure 
householder
s (for the 
project sites 
in the 4 
countries): 
Additional 
500 (or 
+10% of the 
baseline) 
Male-
headed 
householder
s: additional 
250 
Female-
headed 
householder
s: additional 
250 
 
Hydromet 
information is 
disseminated to 
end-users using 
appropriate 
channels and used 
to inform decision-
making 
 
The produced CP-
CS bring actual 
benefits to 
communities and 
sectors, through 
the establishment 
of MH-IBF-EWS at 
regional, national 
and local levels 
 
The FAO definition 
for food security is 
applied in defining 
food-security 
households.126 
Food security will 
be monitored by 
working with the 
FAO, which is also 
implementing 
project in target 
countries, and 
gathering statistics 
from its surveys.  
 
 
124 For Comoros, data extracted from : Rapport ACCLIMATE (2011). ‘Etude de vulnerabilite aux changements climatiques: evaluation 
qualitative’. For Madagascar, data extracted from : http://www.foodsecurityportal.org/madagascar/resources. For Mauritius and Seychelles, 
data extracted from : https://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/foodsecurity/state-food-security-nutrition-2019-en.pdf?ua=1 
125 Households of Comoros, Madagascar and Seychelles: 
https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/ageing/household_size_and_composition_around_the_world_2017_d
ata_booklet.pdf; Households of Mauritius: https://www.africageoportal.com/datasets/02c0feecd29d4f219f4da2a4308e720c  
126 Households are food secure when they have year-round access to the amount and variety of safe foods their members need to lead 
active and healthy lives. At the household level, food security refers to the ability of the household to secure, either from its own production 
or through purchases, adequate food for meeting the dietary needs of all members of the household. See: 
http://www.fao.org/ag/agn/nutrition/household_en.stm

=== PAGE 76 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 73 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
73 
 
project 
commencement 
(during inception) 
from statistics and 
reports of the 
Local 
Governments and 
FAO  
 
A2.0 Increased resilience of 
health and well-being, and 
food and water security 
A2.3 Number of males and 
females with yearround 
access to reliable and safe 
water supply despite 
climate shocks and 
stresses 
Household 
surveys 
 
Statistics and 
reports of the 
Local 
Governments 
and FAO that 
would 
demonstrate 
year around 
access to 
reliable and 
safe water 
supply in 
agriculture 
with more 
production of 
food 
Household 
surveys 
 
Total number of 
males and 
females with 
access to reliable 
and safe water 
supply for the 
project sites in the 
4 countries (in 
agriculture) to be 
collected upon 
project 
commencement 
from statistics and 
reports of the 
Local 
Governments and 
FAO 
 
For project 
sites in the 
4 countries 
(in 
agriculture): 
Male: 
additional 
50 
Female: 
additional 
50 
(+5% of 
the 
baseline)  
For the 
project sites 
in the 4 
countries (in 
agriculture): 
Male: 
additional 
250 
Female: 
additional 
250 (+10% 
of the 
baseline) 
Hydromet 
information is 
disseminated to 
end-users using 
appropriate 
channels and used 
to inform decision-
making 
 
The produced CP-
CS bring actual 
benefits to 
communities and 
sectors, through 
the establishment 
of MH-IBF-EWS at 
regional, national 
and local levels  
 
Sufficient rainfall, 
groundwater and 
surface water can 
be mobilized to 
help achieve water 
security 
 
Water safety and 
reliability in 
agriculture is 
defined as water 
availability for at 
least 2 hours per 
day to be used for 
irrigation, 
throughout a 
calendar year 
 
E.4. Fund-level outcomes 
 
Expected Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term) 
Final 
 
Number of technologies and 
innovative solutions 
transferred or licensed to 
support low-emission 
development as a result of 
GCF support 
Technology: 
Audit reports 
of the on-
site 
inspections 
Reports of 
the Factory 
Acceptance 
Tests (FAT), 
Site 
Inspections 
Tests (SAT), 
and 
Operational 
Tests (OT) 
 
Measure: 
Technology: 
Number of 
technologies
(networks 
and 
systems) to 
be 
determined 
based on 
the 
assessment
s done 
under 
Activity 1.4.1 
(at the 
inception 
phase of the 
project) 
Technology: 
At least 2 
new 
technologies 
in place 
across the 
four 
countries in 
the SWIO 
region 
 
Measure: 
4 NFCS  
revised or 
established 
Technology: 
At least 4 new 
technologies in 
place across the 
four countries in the 
SWIO region 
 
Measure: 
A RFCS established 
4 NFCS  revised or 
established 
Government has a 
political will, 
institutional capacity 
and necessary 
resources to support 
O&M of the new 
technologies 
(networks and 
systems) 
 
NMHS are willing to 
participate in the 
development and 
adoption of RFCS and 
NFCS 
 
Sector specific 
stakeholders are

=== PAGE 77 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 74 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
74 
 
A Regional 
Framework 
for Climate 
Services 
(RFCS) 
established 
National 
Frameworks 
for Climate 
Services 
revised or 
established 
 
 
Measure:  
No RFCS 
1 NFCS 
Madagascar 
willing to participate in 
the development and 
adoption of RFCS and 
NFCS 
 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems for 
climate-responsive 
planning and 
development 
A5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
climate resilience and their 
effective implementation  
Approved 
national 
hydromet 
laws 
 
Approved 
national and 
local 
policies, 
guidelines 
and 
frameworks 
on climate 
services and 
MH-IBF-
EWS 
Existing 
hydromet 
laws do not 
have a 
sustainable 
mechanism 
for 
supporting 
O&M of 
NMHSs 
 
Existing 
plans 
currently do 
not have 
MH-
IBF_EWS 
(such as the 
national 
DRM plans; 
the SOP on 
EWS) 
Drafted 
National 
Hydromet 
Laws with a 
sustainable 
mechanism 
for 
supporting 
O&M of 
NMHSs 
 
Risk matrix 
with impact 
and 
response 
tables 
adopted by 
the local 
DRM 
authorities at 
the project 
sites 
 
Drafted 
guidelines 
on 
mainstreami
ng MH-IBF-
EWS in 
national and 
local 
disaster 
preparednes
s and 
response 
plans that is 
gender- and 
sector- 
sensitive 
 
National 
DRM 
Committee 
that is 
gender- and 
sector- 
sensitive (re-
)established 
 
Adopted National 
Hydromet Laws with 
a sustainable 
mechanism for 
supporting O&M of 
NMHSs 
 
Risk matrix with 
impact and 
response tables 
adopted by the local 
(at project sites) and 
national DRM 
authorities  
 
Final guidelines on 
mainstreaming MH-
IBF-EWS in local 
resilience planning 
and national SOPs 
of collaborating 
members of National 
DRM Committee 
that is gender- and 
sector- sensitive  
NMHS are willing to 
participate in the 
development and 
adoption of 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
and CP-CS 
 
Sector specific 
stakeholders are 
willing to participate in 
the development and 
adoption of SOPs 
National disaster 
response plans, EWS 
and SOPs are using 
hazard-based 
forecasting and 
warning information  
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems for 
climate-responsive 
planning and 
development 
A5.2 Number and level of 
effective coordination 
mechanisms  
National and 
local 
directives 
activating 
the 
Emergency 
Operation 
Center(s)  
 
Existing 
EWS 
coordinating 
bodies and 
mechanisms 
to be 
assessed at 
the project 
commencem
ent 
One inter-
agency 
national 
committee 
for MH-IBF-
EWS 
established 
 
One task 
force/commit
One inter-agency 
national committee 
for MH-IBF-EWS 
established 
 
One task 
force/committee 
established and led 
by the local 
government 
Stakeholders at 
national level and 
project sites are willing 
to participate in the 
Committees/Task 
Forces 
 
Committees and 
mechanisms 
established at the

=== PAGE 78 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 75 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
75 
 
Situation 
reports 
(inception 
phase)  
tee 
established 
and led by 
the local 
government 
authority in 
the project 
sites 
 
Coordination 
mechanisms 
improved to 
Level of 
Effectivenes
s 2 
authority in the 
project sites 
 
Coordination 
mechanisms 
improved to Level  
of Effectiveness 3 
national level and 
difference project sites 
are effective 
 
The scale of measure 
the Level of 
Effectiveness is: 
0 – no coordination 
mechanism 
1 – coordination 
mechanism in place; 
2 – coordination 
mechanism in place, 
meeting regularly with 
appropriate 
representation 
(gender, sector and 
decision-making 
authorities) 
3 – coordination 
mechanism in place, 
meeting regularly with 
appropriate 
representation 
(gender, sector and 
decision-making 
authorities), with 
appropriate 
information flows and 
monitoring of action 
items/issues raised 
A6.0 Increased 
generation and use of 
climate information in 
decision-making 
A6.1 Use of climate 
information products/services 
in decision-making in climate 
sensitive sectors  
Surveys 
among 
sectors and 
end-users 
 
National 
climate 
change and 
DRM/DRR 
policies, 
plans and 
situation 
reports 
 
Current 
climate 
information 
products 
/services in 
DRM 
decision-
making in 
climate-
sensitive 
sectors are 
hazard-
based 
 
CP-CS are 
not used in 
decision-
making in 
agriculture 
sector 
 
Absence of 
MH-IBF-
EWS across 
the four 
target 
countries in 
the SWIO 
region 
The DRM 
sector uses 
improved 
CP-CS in 
each 
country, 
leading to at 
least 20% 
(5’848’295) 
of the total 
beneficiaries
/ population  
 
MH-IBF-
EWS piloted 
in selected 
vulnerable 
communities 
in the four 
countries, 
leading to 
the 
reduction of 
the damage 
to economic 
assets by 
10% or USD 
5 million and 
reduce loss 
of life to less 
than 40 
Annual agriculture 
sector plans in each 
country are updated 
using hydromet data 
and MH-IBF-EWS, 
and relevant 
sectoral and 
extension workers 
are trained in the 
application of the 
plans, leading to 
reduction of losses 
in the agriculture 
production 
amounting to USD 
400.000/year (total 
for the four target 
countries) 
 
MH-IBF-EWS 
implemented at 
regional, national 
and local levels, , 
leading to the 
reduction of the 
damage to 
economic assets by 
30% or USD 15 
million and reduce 
loss of life to less 
than 16 
NMHSs, DRM 
institutions and 
sectors work together 
to co-produce 
improved user-friendly 
CP-CS, and to 
implement MH-IBF-
EWS at regional, 
national and local 
levels 
 
Sector authorities are 
willing to use the CP-
CS developed  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks 
A7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, communities, 
businesses and public-sector 
services of Fund-supported 
tools instruments, strategies 
and activities to respond to 
climate change and 
variability 
Surveys 
among 
selected 
communities
, sectors and 
local 
government
s on early 
warning/risk 
0 – No use 
of fund-
supported 
tools  
 
0 – No 
formal use 
of MH-IBF-
EWS & 
other 
Local 
government
s 
(municipaliti
es/urban 
councils – to 
be defined 
upon 
commencem
ent of the 
Local governments 
(municipalities/urban 
councils and rural 
authorities/district 
councils – to be 
defined upon 
commencement of 
the project with the 
selection of the 
project sites) at the 
The CP-CS developed 
during the project are 
still being 
used/maintained 
beyond the project’s 
lifetime 
 
There is continued 
commitment and 
uptake of the

=== PAGE 79 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 76 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
76 
 
perception 
survey 
 
Situational 
reports 
 
Local 
government
s’ annual 
reports 
climate-
related 
information  
by local 
government
s 
(municipaliti
es/urban 
councils and 
rural 
authorities/di
strict 
councils) 
 
0 – No  
households 
in the project 
sites have 
formally 
introduction 
of CP-CS in 
their 
agriculture 
plans 
project with 
the selection 
of the 
project sites) 
at the 
project sites 
have access 
and use MH-
IBF-EWS 
knowledge  
information 
and decision 
support 
system 
 
100 
households 
in the project 
sites who 
have 
introduced 
CP-CS in 
their 
agriculture 
plans have 
an average 
increase of 
annual 
income of 
3% 
project sites in the 4 
countries have 
access and use MH-
IBF-EWS knowledge 
information and 
decision support 
system 
 
500 households in 
the project sites who 
have introduced CP-
CS in their 
agriculture plans 
have an average 
increase of annual 
income of 5% 
 
information by target 
communities in the 
project sites 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks 
A7.2 Number of males and 
females reached by [or total 
geogrpahic coverage of] 
climate-related early warning 
systems and other risk 
reduction measures 
established/strengthened 
Baseline 
and endline 
surveys 
among 
selected 
communities
, sectors and 
local 
government
s on early 
warning/risk 
perception 
survey 
 
Situation 
reports 
0 - A 
baseline 
study of CP-
CS use in 
each target 
country will 
be 
undertaken 
under 
Activity 1.4. 
10% of the 
target 
population, 
i.e. 
2’924’147(to
tal in the 4 
countries’ 
project sites) 
(50% male 
and 50% 
female) with 
access to 
CP-CS, 
including 
MH-IBF-
EWS for 
tropical 
cyclones 
67% of the target 
population, i.e. 
19’453’286 (total in 
the 4 countries 
nationwide) (50% 
male and 50% 
female) ) with 
access to CP-CS, 
including MH-IBF-
EWS for tropical 
cyclones 
MH-IBF-EWS reach 
relevant population 
using adequate 
dissemination 
channels 
 
There is continued 
commitment and 
uptake of the 
information by target 
communities in the 
project sites 
 
Project sites will be 
defined at the project 
commencement 
(inception phase) 
 
A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of climate 
threats and risk-
reduction processes 
M8.1 Number of additional 
female and male passengers 
using low-carbon transport 
as a result of Fund support  
Public 
Surveys 
0 - A 
baseline 
study of CP-
CS use in 
project sites 
in the four 
target 
countries will 
be 
undertaken 
under 
Activity 1.4.1 
For project 
sites in the 4 
countries: 
Male: 
additional 250 
Female: 
additional 250 
(or +10% 
male/ female 
of the 
baseline) 
with access 
to CP-CS  
For project sites in the 
4 countries: 
Male: additional 750 
Female: additional 
750 
(or +25% male/ 
female of the 
baseline) with 
access to CP-CS  
Interactions between 
CP-CS providers and 
end-users is effective, 
through the UIP, 
NCOF, SWIOCOF and 
other means 
 
Awareness of climate 
threats and risk-
reduction responses is 
defined as the number 
of males and females 
who have attended the 
project workshops and 
meetings, and have 
received knowledge 
products and outreach 
materials

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 77 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
77 
 
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators 
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE 
reporting. Add rows as needed. 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
1. Generation, dissemination 
and uptake of climate-related 
information supported by 
effective organizational and 
institutional capacities, 
regional cooperation, and 
enabling environment 
1.1 Established RCC-Network 
for generating reliable regional 
CP-CS 
Report of the pilot 
phase of the RCC-
Network 
RCC-Network 
endorsed by WMO 
No RCC or 
RCC-Network in 
the SWIO region 
1 RCC-Network 
(pilot phase) 
 
1 RCC-Network (designated by 
WMO) 
 
Partner countries agree on a strategy and 
operating plan to set up the structure and 
functions of the RCC-Network, and to 
maintain the RCC-Network functions 
beyond project’s lifetime 
1.2 Adopted national hydromet 
laws with mechanisms for 
supporting O&M of NMHSs 
Reports of 
workshops of 
public 
consultations 
Hydromet Laws 
drafted and 
adopted 
 
No National 
Hydromet Laws 
revised or 
prepared with  
mechanisms for 
supporting O&M 
of NMHSs 
 
Drafted national 
Hydromet Laws 
revised or prepared 
with mechanisms for 
supporting O&M of 
NMHSs 
Adopted national Hydromet 
Laws revised or prepared with  
mechanisms for supporting O&M 
of NMHSs 
Stronger institutions provide an adequate 
environment to generate profit and retain 
staff 
 
Hydromet Laws support the functioning of 
NMHSs & CIEWS fund supports O&M and 
further investments required 
2. Upgraded obs. &  
monitoring, and information 
systems capacities secure 
reliable capacity to monitor 
climate-related hazards & 
assess trends 
2.1 Percentage of networks set 
up (i.e. procured, installed and 
operating) to improve the 
monitoring capabilities  
 
Audit reports of 
the on-site 
inspections 
Reports of the 
Factory 
Acceptance Tests 
(FAT), Site 
Inspections Tests 
(SAT), and 
Operational Tests 
(OT) 
Hydromet 
observation 
networks 
outdated and 
inadequate 
 
Number of 
networks to be 
determined/fine-
tuned based on 
the assessments 
done under 
Activity 1.4.1 
At least 20% of the 
Hydromet 
observation network 
expanded (total for 
the 4 countries) 
 
 
At least 80% of Hydromet 
observation network upgraded 
and expanded (total for the 4 
countries) 
 
 
The upgrade and expansion of the 
hydromet observation network will be 
upgraded and expanded using innovative 
technologies for cost-effectiveness 
 
Government commitment to secure 
adequate O&M for the monitoring 
equipment are fulfilled on a continuous 
basis both during the project 
implementation and afterwards   
2.2 A centralized platform in 
place to secure reliable 
capacity to monitor and 
forecast climate-related 
hazards systems integration in 
place to improve the process of 
generating forecasts  
Audit reports of 
the on-site 
inspections 
Reports of the 
Factory 
Acceptance Tests 
(FAT), Site 
Inspections Tests 
(SAT), and 
Operational Tests 
(OT) 
No Systems 
integration 
 
 
N/A 
Full Systems integration through 
a centralized platform in place to 
secure reliable capacity to 
monitor and forecast climate-
related hazards a  
The existing systems will be upgraded or 
new will be set-up using innovative 
technologies for cost-effectiveness, to 
facilitate their integration 
 
Government commitment to secure 
adequate O&M for the data management 
and other information systems are fulfilled 
on a continuous basis both during the 
project implementation and afterwards

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 78 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
78 
 
3. Generation of science-
based multi-hazard weather, 
climate and water risk info 
improve the quality of 
forecasts and warning, and 
impact-based decision-
making 
3.1 Number of farmers with 
access to CP-CS target for 
agriculture (gender-sensitive) 
Reports of 
Training sessions 
and lists of 
participants; 
training 
materials/content 
Absence of 
target CP-CS for 
agriculture 
Weather and climate 
advisories 
integrating the 
needs of farmers 
(both men and 
women), and 
tailored delivery and 
communication 
methods designed  
 
1’000’000 farmers (of which 50% 
are women) with access to CP-
CS target for agriculture 
Trained staff members are retained in the 
NMHSs 
 
Staff members of NMHSs collaborate with 
stakeholders and CP-CS users to develop 
target CP-CS products for agriculture 
 
Capacities built through the project are 
maintained and periodically updated 
3.2 Number of site-specific 
forecasts/warnings generated 
and issued daily by NMHSs 
Reports of 
Training sessions 
and lists of 
participants; 
training 
materials/content 
Lack of site-
specific 
forecasts 
Site-specific 
forecasts/warnings 
generated and 
issued daily by 
NMHSs for the 
capital city of each 
country 
 Site-specific forecasts/warnings 
generated and issued daily by 
NMHSs to the municipality level 
in each country 
Trained staff members are retained in the 
NMHSs 
 
Capacities built through the project are 
maintained and periodically updated 
4. Improved community 
resilience through the 
implementation of people-
centered MH-IBF-EWS at 
regional, national and local 
levels and 
improved/prepared 
preparedness & adaptation 
plans 
4.1 Implemented nation-wide 
MH-IBF-EWS covering tropical 
cyclones, heavy 
rainfalls/floods, storm surges 
and droughts in the four target 
countries  
Regulatory 
framework for MH-
IBF-EWS, SOPs, 
communication 
protocols;  
preparedness & 
adaptation plans 
Level 2 – nation-
wide EWS for 
Tropical 
Cyclones, not 
impact based 
 
No institutional 
responsibilities 
and 
communication 
protocols  
National framework 
for MH-IBF-EWS for 
the individual 
countries, which will 
guide the 
implementation at 
the local level 
 
Developed/ updated 
early warning 
protocols from 
hazard to impact-
based for issuance, 
communication and 
dissemination for 
each hazard in the 
project sites 
 
MH-IBF-EWS piloted 
in the project sites 
(Level of 
Implementation 7) 
Operationalized national 
framework for MH-IBF-EWS for 
the individual countries 
 
MH-IBF-EWS rolled-out natio-
wide (Level of Implementation 8) 
 
 
Governments have political will to 
implement relevant legal-regulatory 
reforms for effective and efficient MH-IBF-
EWS 
 
Levels of implementation of the MH-IBF-
EWS are defined as: 
Level 0 – No MH-IBF-EWS 
Level 1 – EWS for Tropical Cyclones in 
project sites, not impact based  
Level 2 – nation-wide EWS for Tropical 
Cyclones, not impact based  
Level 3 – EWS for multi-hazards (e.g. 
Tropical Cyclones and floods) in project 
sites, not impact based 
Level 4 – nation-wide EWS for multi-
hazards (e.g. Tropical Cyclones and 
floods), not impact based  
Level 5 – IBF-EWS for Tropical Cyclones 
in project sites 
Level 6 – nation-wide IBF-EWS for 
Tropical Cyclones 
Level 7 – MH-IBF-EWS in project sites 
Level 8 – nation-wide MH-IBF-EWS 
 
4.2 A centralized/dedicated 
User Interface Platform (UIP), 
including a “meteoalarm”-type 
Progress reports 
for the UIP 
development 
No dedicated 
UIP; only very 
limited climate 
Dedicated UIP 
established for 
UIP upgraded to include the 
DSS for the MH-IBF-EWS

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 79 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
79 
 
 
 
for dissemination of warning 
established and operating 
[yes/no] 
 
Reports of training 
sessions; lists of 
participants; and 
training 
materials/content 
 
 
information at 
the IOC website 
 
 
dissemination CP-
CS  
 
 
 
4.3 Improved NMHSs weather 
and climate services 
Surveys among 
users and 
communities in 
project sites 
User satisfaction 
index to be 
determined at 
the first 
SWIOCOF 
session 
supported by the 
project; and 
baseline survey 
in the project 
sites 
 
User satisfaction 
with the UIP and 
SWIOCOF > 40% 
 
User satisfaction index with the 
UIP > 72% 
 
The “user satisfaction index” is defined in 
the World Bank/ GFDRR (2019): 
Weathering the Change: how to improve 
hydromet services in developing countries 
(https://www.gfdrr.org/en/publication/weath
ering-change-how-improve-hydromet-
services-developing-countries), and 
considers communications, perceived 
accuracy and usefulness of NMHSs’ 
products and services for both 
professional partners and vulnerable 
groups exposed to natural disasters

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 80 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
80 
 
 
 
 
127 WMO, 2018. Step-by-step Guidelines for Establishing a National Framework for Climate Services 
 
 
E.6. Activities  
 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
1.1.1 Develop 
regional and national 
frameworks for 
climate services 
(RFCS & NFCS) 
The RFCS will be developed based on the GFCS led by WMO and serve as an 
umbrella under which each partner country will develop its own national 
framework for climate services. The RFCS will include the following elements: 
- 
a common regional methodology and rule book (based on 
international WMO standards) for weather monitoring and forecasting 
and climate monitoring for long term prediction at regional and 
downscaled level, relevant to the nature of hazards and resilient 
responses. 
- 
regional protocols to disseminate weather forecasts and climate 
predictions to relevant users and provide decision makers with the 
information they need for long-term planning. 
- 
a protocol for member countries to ensure a systematic collection and 
integration of user feedback to co-produce and improve climate 
services. 
- 
A draft profile of the RCC-Network that will be established under 
Activity 1.1.2, which will feed the SWIOCOF with the required 
products. 
The RFCS will also promote the role of the UIP and SWIOCOF (to be 
strengthened under Activities 3.3.3 & 3.3.4) as communication platforms to 
disseminate regional climate products developed by the RCC-Network, national 
climate products and hydromet warnings prepared by the NMHSs, and to 
facilitate communication and knowledge exchange among the RCC-Network 
member countries.  
Under this activity each country will develop a National 
Framework for Climate Services (NFCS) to coordinate, facilitate 
and strengthen collaboration among national institutions for 
enhanced use of CP-CS and to facilitate a long-term sustainable 
business model for national climate services.127 
At a same time, under the leadership of IOC, a Regional 
Framework for Climate Services (RFCS) will be developed to 
coordinate, facilitate and strengthen collaboration among 
regional institutions (e.g. PIROI) for enhanced use of CP-CS; 
and at the same time to introduce an harmonized approach 
across the region and input to the NFCS. 
 
1.1.1.1 Organise consultations with stakeholders in IOC, 
NMHSs, DRM institutions, climate sensitive sectors to develop 
the RFCS.  
1.1.1.2 Organise a regional workshop to validate the RFCS. 
1.1.1.3 Once the RFCS is validated, design the NFCS following 
the guidelines of the RFCS.  
1.1.1.4 Organise 4 national workshops to present and validate 
the NFCS in Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles. 
 
Responsible parties: 
- 
Leader: IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit an expert (meteorologist/climate services expert) 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: RCC and 
NMHSs  
RFCS and 4 
NFCSs

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 81 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
81 
 
 
 
128 WMO RCC-Network is a group of centres performing climate-related activities that collectively fulfil all the required mandatory functions of a Reginal Climate Centre (RCC). Each centre in a 
designated WMO RCC-Network will be referred to as a ‘Node’. A Node will perform, for the region or sub-region, one or several of the mandatory RCC activities (e.g. long-range forecasting (LRF), 
climate monitoring, climate data services, training). Only centres or groups of centres designated by WMO will carry the title ‘WMO RCC’ or ‘WMO RCC-Network’ respectively. See 
http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/wcasp/rcc/rcc.php  
129 WMO-No. 49, WMO Technical Regulations, https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/standards-technical-regulations#standards  
130 http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/wcasp/rcc/documents/WCASP80_TD1534.pdf 
 
Based on the RFCS, NFCS in the four target countries will be developed or 
improved, if already exists. These frameworks will also promote NCOFs as 
complementary forums to SWIOCOF/SARCOF in terms of calendar and 
content/activities. National frameworks will follow the broad guidelines from the 
RFCS – especially to harmonize processes and equipment for climate data 
monitoring among countries – but be country-specific. Ultimately, the RFCS 
and the NFCSs will contribute to develop a common risk culture in the IOC 
region that reinforces weather data and information sharing in order to better 
understand and monitor main hazards for the region (i.e. tropical cyclones, 
storms with strong winds and heavy rainfall). 
- 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: DRM 
institutions, climate sensitive sectors  
 
1.1.2 Establish the 
legal, institutional, 
financial and 
organisational 
strategy to establish 
the RCC within IOC 
RCCs and RCC-Networks 128 , established according to WMO technical 
regulations 129  / standards, are centers of excellence, holding regional 
responsibilities (not duplicating or replacing the responsibilities of NMHSs). 
RCCs and RCC-Networks’ mandatory functions include the development of 
regional climate products, as well as support training and capacity building 
interventions at the regional scale. The climate products include long-range 
forecasts, which can be used as decision-making tools for climate change 
adaptation and disaster risk reduction. With these products and tools provided 
by the ‘climate data services’ function, countries in the SWIO region will be able 
to produce and deliver better climate services to national users.  Additional 
functions, not mandatory but highly recommended by WMO, for RCCs/RCC-
Network will also be implemented for the benefit of the all IOC member countries. 
The RCCs/RCC-Networks constitute integral components of WMO's Global Data 
Processing and Forecasting System (GDPFS) underpinning the generation of 
climate information products by the NMHSs.  
The RCC-Network will be established under the aegis of IOC and will be 
submitted to WMO for endorsement through its concerned Regional 
Association; guidance throughout its implementation and ‘pilot phase’; and 
ultimately formal designation as part of the WMO/GDPFS. Based on the RCC-
Network profile prepared under Activity 1.1.1, a complete plan for establishing 
the RCC-Network for the SWIO region will be developed, based on WMO 
guidelines to establish RCC130; and based on an analysis of strategies and 
operating plans for establishing the other existing WMO RCCs/RCC-Networks. 
This activity includes the development of a legal, institutional, 
financial and organizational model for the establishment of the 
RCC-Network. This will be done through regional meetings and 
workshops led by IOC, with the participation of the four 
countries.  
As each country will have a particular function(s) in the RCC-
Network, these need to be discussed and agreed at the national 
level with the relevant authorities, and therefore, NMHSs of the 
four countries will be responsible for coordinating the inputs and 
organize the relevant consultative meetings and workshops at 
the national level. 
 
1.1.2.1 Establish a strategy and develop an operating plan for 
the RCC-Network, based on WMO technical regulations / 
standards, including the criteria for designating Regional for 
Climate Centers, in collaboration with IOC its future member 
states. The plan will include type and number of staff members 
needed; roles, responsibilities and functions of the RCC-Network 
and of its nodes, etc.  
1.1.2.2 Organise a validation workshop with IOC and the 
proposed member states of the RCC-Network, with the 
1 WMO 
RCC-
Network

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 82 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
82 
 
This plan must identify legal, institutional, financial and organizational model 
settings that would better suit the targeted region. 
The RCC-Network strategy  will define the purpose, goals and scope, while the 
operating plan will confirm and define the details, inter alia, of the following 
regional elements : 
- 
Which country will have the administrative and logistic responsibilities for 
the RCC-Network, under the aegis of IOC, and as a formal designated 
center by WMO; 
- 
IOC’s role (i) in the organisation of the SWIOCOF every year will be 
strengthened, and (ii) in the additional non-operational RCC-Network 
activities will be defined; 
- 
technical expertise and responsibilities for functions of the RCC-Network  
will be shared between IOC member countries. For regional products, a 
‘regional expert team’ will be set up, composed of selected hydro-
meteorologists from the concerned IOC member states.  
The RCC-Network established under this activity will  have the mandatory 
functions of WMO RCCs/RCC-Networks, including (i) operational activities for 
long-range forecasting (LRF) (see Activity 2.3.7); (ii) operational activities for 
climate monitoring; (iii) operational climate data services; and (iv) training in the 
use of operational RCC products and services (see Activity 2.2.1). Additional 
functions, not mandatory but highly recommended by WMO, for RCCs/RCC-
Network will also be implemented. These include: (a) climate prediction and 
climate projection (beyond 2 years timeframe); (b) research and development; 
(c) non-operational data services; and (d) coordination functions – IOC would 
have a clear role in the implementation of the last two. Attached to the RCC-
Network, there will be the establishment of a WMO Regional Instrument 
Centre, for the calibration and maintenance services for the hydro-
meteorological equipment, and of a regional center for specialized training and 
capacity building, to complement the existing training in the region (see Activity 
2.2.2); and the development of a UIP for the dissemination of the RCC-Network 
products and tools within the SWIO member states (see Activity 3.3.3). This 
platform will also be used for experience and knowledge sharing for adaptation 
and disaster risk reduction (complementing the SWIOCOF – see Activity 3.3.4), 
and for dissemination of the SWIO climate outlooks. Key sectors in the 
beneficiary countries members of the RCC-Network will be able to use the 
climate products, prepared by the RCC-Network, as decision-making tools to 
develop climate-resilient strategies, implement climate-adaptation measures, 
and guide investments. This will be done by ensuring that the climate products 
and services developed by the RCC-Network are used to co-produce climate 
services with users in climate-sensitive sector and national sectoral experts 
(e.g. agronomist to develop agro-meteorological bulletins) – see Output 2.3.  
The RCC-Network strategy and operating plan will also identify if new staff 
members should be recruited to run the RCC-Network nodes; and, if so, how 
participation of WMO, to validate the proposed strategy and 
operating plan, and institutional organization, as well as regional 
products and services to be delivered by the RCC-Network. At 
the end of the workshop, a multi-lateral agreement will be 
reached between IOC and its member states on all aspects of 
the RCC-Network. 
1.1.2.3 Develop a business model/cost-recovery plan that 
underlines how the regional products and services (agreed upon 
under sub-activity 1.1.2.2) will be financed from national 
contributions and other potential sources. 
1.1.2.4 Present and validate the ‘regional business model/plan’ 
for the RCC-Network during a participative workshop.  
1.1.2.5 Implement the RCC-Network ‘pilot phase’ (i.e. 
operationalize it) and submit the results to WMO for assessment 
and formal designation as part of the WMO/GDPFS. 
Responsible parties: 
- 
Leader: IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit an institutional/legal expert; an economist; and a 
meteorologist 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: IOC and NMHSs 
of the RCC-Network member countries 
- 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHSs of 
the RCC-Network member countries

=== PAGE 86 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 83 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
83 
 
 
 
131 https://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/www/IMOP/instrument-reg-centres.html  
132 For WMO Global Campus, see https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/meteoworld/wmo-global-campus. 
they will be paid in the long term (see below). RCC-Network staff members will 
receive basic trainings on CP-CS under Activity 1.3.2. 
Once the RCC-Network strategy and operating plan is approved by all member 
states and IOC, through multi-lateral agreement. They will also agree on how 
each member state will financially contribute to the running costs of the RCC-
Network beyond the project’s lifetime – e.g. finance for the maintenance 
laboratory, and the specialized training center (see Activity 1.1.3), and sharing 
O&M costs of the UIP (see Activity 3.3.3) and SWIOCOF (see Activity 3.3.4). A 
regional business model/plan will also be developed to explore possible 
business models and identify additional sources of funding for the RCC-
Network from public and private sectors through e.g. cost-recovery of regional 
CP-CS (see Annex 3a). 
1.1.3 Define 
strategies and 
operating plans  for 
the establishment of 
(i) a regional 
laboratory for 
maintenance and 
annual calibration of 
equipment as a  
WMO Regional 
Instrument Centre;, 
and (ii) regional 
center for specialized 
training  
A strategy and operating plan to set up a calibration and maintenance 
laboratory will be developed, especially to determine where the laboratory 
should be established, how it will be run and funded (by consulting with all IOC 
member countries), and what equipment will be needed to maintain and 
calibrate the hydromet equipment of the region, including those provided under 
Output 2.1. The establishment of this lab will follow WMO standard procedures 
for a formal designation as a WMO Regional Instrument Centre131. Moreover, a 
strategy and operating plan to strengthen and improve operationalization of a 
specialized training center (currently based in Mauritius) will be developed, 
ensuring that training performed by this center is complementary to training 
already performed in. This specialized training will be design and implemented 
to contribute to the WMO Global Campus132, by making available training 
materials developed by the center to WMO for wider use by all WMO Members. 
At the regional level, led by IOC, there will be regional 
workshops with the participation of the four countries to refine 
the requirements and develop strategies for the establishment of 
a regional laboratory in Seychelles and a regional training for 
specialized training in Mauritius. 
At the national level, there will be initial meetings for 
development of the operating plans, and follow up meetings/field 
visits to assess progress in the establishment of a regional 
laboratory in Seychelles (led by the NMHS of Seychelles) and a 
regional training for specialized training in Mauritius (led by the 
NMHS of Mauritius). 
 
1.1.3.1 Review existing training center capabilities in Mauritius 
and other training facilities in the region; identify weaknesses, 
gaps and specialized areas for implementation; and specify and 
provide the equipment and and tools, as required. 
1.1.3.2 Work with IOC and the staff members of the NMHSs in 
the four countries to define strategies and develop operating 
plans for the design/strengthen the maintenance lab and the 
specialized training center. 
1.1.3.3 Implement the specialized training center, and the 
maintenance and calibration lab (i.e. operationalize them) and 
submit documentation for formal designation by WMO. 
Responsible parties:  
1 WMO 
Regional 
Instrument 
Centre, and 
1 specialized 
training 
center

=== PAGE 87 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 84 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
84 
 
- 
Leader: IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit 2 experts specialised in maintenance & 
operation of observing networks; and hydro-
meteorology training working with IOC and NMHSs 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: NMHSs  
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHSs and staff 
members of other training providers in the region 
1.1.4 Prepare a 
strategy to improve 
Regional Numerical 
Weather (NWP) and 
Climate Prediction 
(NCP) 
 
This strategy aims to ensure the harmonization of weather forecasts and 
climate products across countries, based on international WMO technical 
regulations / standards. This strategy will be done at the regional level to define 
a vision and ways to achieve it for the NWP/NCP. The output of the regional 
NWP/NCP will be used at national level in the countries to improve the 
hydromet and climate services they produce and disseminate within their 
territories. This strategy must consider forecast verification and feedback, 
model post-processing/downscaling and calibration using modern techniques, 
and model output interpretation, and address requirements related to the use of 
deterministic and probabilistic forecasts. The strategy also needs to consider 
the NWP/NCP developments required and a sustainable mechanism to engage 
staff from the NMHSs of the 4 countries in these developments, to ensure joint 
ownership, aligned with the international good practice. 
The development of the Regional Numerical Weather and 
Climate Prediction strategy will be done at the regional level. Led 
by IOC, there will be consultative workshops with the 
participation of the four countries and partners, including the 
relevant WMO global and regional centers. 
 
1.1.4.1 Prepare a regional strategy and action plan to improve 
Numerical Weather and Climate Prediction, in collaboration with 
representatives of the NMHSs of each country and external 
expertise as needed (e.g. Météo-France, Copernicus partners). 
1.1.4.2 Design the downscaling and calibration approach for 
each country including the computing resources, using modern 
techniques (e.g. artificial intelligence) and technologies (e.g. 
cloud). 
1.1.4.3 Organise a regional workshop with the representatives of 
the NMHSs of each country and relevant external partners to 
validate the strategy and action plan (implementation will be 
done under Output 2.3). 
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader: IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a consultant (meteorologist) 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: IOC and NMHSs 
in each country  
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: IOC and NMHSs, 
and relevant external partners 
1 Strategy 
and action 
plan 
document 
1.2.1 Strengthen the 
institutional, 
operating and 
financial strategy of 
NMHSs for each 
target country 
The purpose of the strategy is to improve efficiency within NMHSs with 
particular attention given to retaining skilled staff (including those hired and/or 
trained under this project). For this, institutional settings will be improved in 
order to streamline the role and responsibilities of staff members (existing and 
newly hired under Activity 1.3.1).  
The strategy will also strengthen the operationalisation of NMHS to meet 
WMO’s requirements for category 3 NMHS. For example, FS, Chapter 3 
indicates the following needs to be addressed: 
Under this activity, each country will review existing 
arrangements and will develop institutional, operating and 
financial strategies of their NMHSs. 
 
1.2.1.1 Update the capacity assessment conducted in Annex 2 
(FS, Chapter 3) 
1.2.1.2 Investigate through consultations with relevant 
stakeholders the collaboration between met, hydro, and DRM 
Robust 
institutional 
strategies, 
including 
detailed 
business 
plans for 
each NMHS

=== PAGE 88 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 85 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
85 
 
- 
establish a formal written governance structure for DGM (Madagascar) 
and ANACM (Comoros);  
- 
ensure participation of the NMHSs in research projects (4 countries – to 
be done under Output 2.3); 
- 
established procedures to collect users’ feedback on CP-CS (4 countries 
– to be done through the NFCS and UIP); and 
- 
improve dissemination of forecasts and national observations on website 
(4 countries – to be done under Component 3). 
All these elements will be included in the NMHS strategy and implemented 
under Components 1, 2 and 3 of the proposed project. 
Other recommendations from the FS point to the need for capacity building and 
staffing - which will be addressed under Activity 1.3.1 and 1.3.2. 
The institutional strategy will also strengthen the collaboration between 
meteorological, hydrological, DRM services and sectoral ministries and provide 
guidelines for NMHS’ contribution to the production of climate-related policies 
and strategies. 
As part of this strategy, an in-depth analysis of cash flow will be performed to 
explore new business models with cost-recovery plan. A business plan will then 
be developed for each NMHS. The business model/plan is key to ensure the 
long-term maintenance and operation of the NMHS, the sustainability of new 
equipment and software (e.g. maintenance and operation costs, license 
renew), and yearly organisation of the NCOF (which are promoted in the 
NFCS, developed under Activity 1.1.1). The business model/plan will take into 
account economic growth/avoided costs expected through the project in 
climate-sensitive sectors (see Economic Analysis Annex 3a); it will also identify 
sources of funding for the NMHS through public budget and commercial 
services of CP-CS. 
services and identify pathways to increase collaboration and 
improve communication 
1.2.1.3 Analyse cash-flows within NMHS and national markets to 
identify potential customers of CP-CS and willingness to pay, 
price elasticity (in public and private sector), as well as other 
sources of finance to support the production of CP-CS in the 
long-term. 
1.2.1.4 Develop, present and validate the recommendations for 
institutional and financial strengthening, as detailed in the 
business plans that are aligned with each country’s 
reality/context – e.g. from centralised to decentralised models – 
during 4 national workshops. 
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader: IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit 1 institutional expert and 1 economist 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: the NMHS of 
each country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHS, stakeholders 
from the public and private sectors 
1.2.2 Develop a 
transition support 
plan required for 
each NMHS, DRM 
institutions and 
relevant sectoral 
ministries (Capacity 
Development Plans) 
The transition support plans are developed to prepare, support, and help 
individuals, teams, and organizations (NMHSs and main stakeholders) in the 
implementation phase of the proposed project; these plans will enable 
organizational change based on the needs required by the project. For the 
purpose of Hydromet project, the plans will be developed for the NMHSs, DRM 
institutions and sectoral ministries in GFCS priority areas, in all 4 target 
countries. 
This is required to support the implementation of project interventions, and the 
‘organizational change’ required in these institutions to adapt to the changes 
introduced by new technologies and tools. It is important that the project 
implementation entities implement the activities accordingly with the NMHS on 
a joint co-built plan to ensure a proper appropriation of these activities and 
better project outcome sustainability. This is based on lessons learned with 
Under this activity, each country will develop capacity 
development plans based on their respective assessment of the 
current capacity. 
 
1.2.2.1 Define measurable stakeholder gains (inside and outside 
the NMHSs) through consultations with these stakeholders, and 
create a roadmap for their achievement 
1.2.2.2 Track assumptions, risks, dependencies, costs, returns 
on investment, dis-benefits and cultural issues 
1.2.2.3 Organise workshops to inform various stakeholders of 
the reasons for the organizational change, the benefits of 
successful implementation, as well as a detailed plan of what the 
changes will entail and their key role in the process. 
Capacity 
Development 
Plans

=== PAGE 89 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 86 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
86 
 
 
 
133 ‘Road Mapping and Capacity Development Planning for NMHSs – A Guidebook’ (WB/GFDRR, 2020) - 
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/570671605083362138/pdf/Road-Mapping-and-Capacity-Development-Planning-for-National-Meteorological-and-Hydrological-
Services-A-Guidebook.pdf 
134 See WMO, 2017. Guidelines on the Role, Operation and Management of National Meteorological and Hydrological Services, 2017 Edition, WMO-No. 1195. 
135 See WMO, 2015. Basic Documents, 2015 Edition, WMO-No. 15. 
136 See Rogers et al, 2019. Weathering the Change : How to Improve Hydromet Services in Developing Countries?. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank. License: CC 
BY 3.0 IGO. 
other projects and international developments/guidance133.At the same time, 
throughtout the process of developing the Capacity Development Plan, 
activities will be carried out to contribute to retaining the skilled, trained and 
talent staff, including: 
• 
Job descriptions either developed or revised, as appropriate. 
• 
a career path defined and established, including the related grades and 
salary 
scales, 
for 
meteorologists, 
meteorological 
technicians, 
hydrologists, and hydrological technicians, following the WMO 
guidelines. This also includes the process for progression in the career, 
as well as salary scales upgrade/update, based on the business cases 
that will be prepared and presented to the respective Ministries of 
Finance in each country. 
• 
Incentives for promotion of the staff in place. This would include a 
“learning-by-doing” process, which includes training, experience and 
exposure; as well as staff rotation (primarily at a national level, but when 
feasible within the SWIO region). 
• 
Hand over protocols in place to ensure continuity, in case of a staff 
member leaves the Service. 
• 
Traing of Trainers in place to ensure continuity. 
1.2.2.4 Define an effective education, training and/or skills 
upgrading scheme for the organisation (Capacity Development 
plans) 
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader: IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit 1 expert in production and sale of CP-CS (e.g. 
from MF, UKmet, etc.)  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: NMHS in each 
country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHS and DRM 
institutions in each country 
1.2.3 Review and/or 
strengthen legal and 
regulatory materials, 
including the 
potential 
establishment of a 
CIEWS fund 
The national legal instrument establishing a National Meteorological and 
Hydrological Service (NMHS) is an important element for its successful 
operation. It helps to define its mission and mandate; ensure clarity in the 
definition of its responsibilities; provide legal authority for certain 
responsibilities; gain recognition of its contribution to society; and facilitate 
allocation of adequate resources (WMO, 2017)134.  
The legal instrument is also a means of demonstrating how governments will 
meet their obligations under various international agreements, including the 
WMO Convention (WMO, 2015)135. 
Rogers et al (2019)136 explains that:  
(1) 
Policy, legal, and institutional frameworks should be established to 
clearly define the roles and responsibilities of the NMHS and other organizations 
within the central and local governments, and to enhance collaboration with 
stakeholders;  
Under this activity, each country will review their legal and 
regulatory materials; and review and evaluate all possible 
mechanisms to establish a CIEWS fund. Based on this analysis, 
each country will revise / strengthen their respective legal and 
regulatory materials. 
 
1.2.3.1 Review the current institutional and legal arrangement 
sin each country 
1.2.3.2 Analyse relevant international best practices and 
customize examples for the national contexts in each country 
1.2.3.3 Draft new or revise existing Hydromet Laws to include 
the possibility of establishing and operating CIEWS funds 
1.2.3.4 Conduct public consultations to get feedback for 
finalization of the draft Laws 
Hydromet 
laws revised 
or prepared 
with the 
possibility of 
establishing 
CIEWS funds

=== PAGE 90 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 87 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
87 
 
 
 
137 https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/environment-
energy/low_emission_climateresilientdevelopment/blending_climatefinancethroughnationalclimatefunds.html  
(2) 
To facilitate effective early warning services, it is important to establish 
a legal framework that makes NMHS the single authoritative voice for warning 
services, along with the efficient communication and dissemination mechanisms 
for end-users; and, 
(3) 
Policy, legal, and institutional frameworks help building government 
(ministries of finance, economy, and planning) understanding of the importance 
of NMHSs, with the hope of leading to a legally binding commitment fixed in credit 
or a grant agreement to increase budget support and allocations for O&M costs. 
 
It is expected that the developed or revised Laws in each country would also 
facilitate allocation of adequate resources, including for O&M costs, through the 
establishment of a ring-fenced CIEWS fund; and would provide a legal and 
regulatory framework for working with other public and private sectors.  The 
establishment of a CIEWS draws upon the experience and information from the 
UNDP work on the establishment of National Climate Funds (NCFs) to support 
countries to collect, coordinate, blend and account for climate finance137; as 
well as on the WMO and WB activities to strengthen the Hydrometeorological 
Laws and policies in the countries by defining the roles of NMHSs in the 
climate area, and supporting and securing sustainable budgetary resources for 
their operations. The latter relies on well-documented business cases and 
revised Hydromet reglementary and policy documents to be put in place by the 
respective governments throughout the project implementation. The steps 
toward the establishment of the CIEWS include:  
(i) review and revise the Hydromet Law of each target country to allow 
commercial services, revenue generation, public-private engagement, and the 
establishment of a Trust Fund (the CIEWS) with clear indication of its goals; 
and, 
(ii) the development of the regulations (and their implementation) that define 
the CIEWS components and structure, including: (a) defining the programmatic 
and management objectives; (b) identifying capitalization, i.e. potential sources 
of funds linking with the objectives – this would require discussions with 
stakeholders, national and international partners and others; (c) defining 
effective governance – typically a Steering Committee is established with clear 
Terms of Reference, chaired by the Minister in charge for the NMHSs, the 
Director-General of the NMHS (who usually acts as the Secretariat), and with 
the participation of stakeholders / user sectors and partners; (d) defining 
fiduciary and implementing arrangements; and (e) describing monitoring, 
reporting and verification processes. 
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader: IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit 1 expert in legal and institutional aspects 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: NMHS in each 
country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: Government 
Ministries and Institutions, National Committees, public and 
private sectors, NGOs, UN Agencies and development partners 
involved in each country

=== PAGE 91 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 88 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
88 
 
 
 
138 https://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/dra/etrp/documents/1083_Manual_on_ETS_en_rev.pdf 
This activity relates to procuring the technical assistance for the review of the 
possible mechanisms and preparation of the required documentation for the 
establishment of the CIEWS.   
1.3.1 Recruit new 
staff members for the 
RCC-Network and 
NMHSs 
Staffing needs will be identified for each NMHS, and has been identified for the 
RCC under Activity 1.2.1. For example, the FS identified the need for 
meteorological services to hire more staff with MSC’s and PhD’s to meet the 
requirements of WMO NMHS Category 3. If new staff is to be recruited – which 
will be decided by each NMHS at project onset –, it would require commitment 
and investment from the national government to sustain the positions beyond 
project completion. 
Under this activity, each country will access its NMHS needs in 
terms of human resources to carry out both its national 
responsibilities and its functions as part of its RCC-Network 
node. Based on the result of the assessments, there will be 
recruitment of staff in each country. 
 
1.3.1.1 Assess staffing needs for the RCC-Network and in each 
NMHS to contribute to the production of improved and new 
weather and seasonal forecasts and climate projections. 
1.3.1.2 NMHS recruit new staff members (if needed) with 
required expertise.  
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a consultant (hydromet expert) 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : IOC, RCC-
Network and NMHSs to be nominated for each country  
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: IOC and NMHSs to 
nominate for each country for need assessment 
Staff 
recruited 
1.3.2 Train new and 
retrain existing staff 
The training will be aligned with the WMO competency frameworks, especially 
the once for climate services personnel. It will cover, inter alia, basics on 
climate services, risk prediction models, and risk exposure of population and 
sectors; with regards to risk exposure, the training will use the hazard maps 
and vulnerability assessments prepared under Activities 2.3.5 and 2.3.6. The 
training will not only target staff members of the National Meteorological 
Services and RCC-Network, but also staff in National Hydrology Services, in 
DRR and climate-sensitive sectors of the GFCS. It will be implemented by 
national/regional universities, research institutions and academics with a 
priority given to those located within or nearby the SWIO region (e.g. Indian 
Ocean-based consultants working on RIMES). Twinning arrangements with 
advanced NMHSs (within the context of the WMO Global Campus) may also be 
considered.  This training program will be aligned with the WMO Standards for 
Education and Training in Meteorology and Hydrology138 (Basic Instruction 
Packages for meteorologists and meteorological technicians; and for 
hydrologists and hydrological technicians). 
Under this activity, in each country, new and existing staff will be 
trained/retrained at national/regional universities and research 
institutions. Twinning arrangements with WMO global and 
regional centers will also be considered. 
 
1.3.2.1 Identify relevant training programmes in national/regional 
institutions, as well as within the context of the WMO Global 
Campus, and aligned with the WMO Standards for Education 
and Training in Meteorology and Hydrology 
1.3.2.2 Train new and retrain existing staff within these 
programmes. 
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a consultant (hydromet expert); national or 
regional universities/research center/academics etc. to 
conduct basic trainings 
Trained staff

=== PAGE 92 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 89 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
89 
 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : RCC-Network, 
NMHSs, DRM institutions and climate-sensitive sectors 
of the GFCS 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: RCC-Network, 
NMHSs, DRM institutions and climate-sensitive sectors of the 
GFCS for training need assessment 
1.4.1. Conduct 
baseline studies on 
how CP-CS  and 
MH-IBF-EWS for 
hydro-meteorological 
hazards are used in 
each beneficiary 
country, and on user 
requirements for 
improving such 
services 
The studies will be conducted to assess access to, and use of CP-CS at 
baseline in the following sectors: agriculture and fisheries (Comoros and 
Madagascar); agriculture and tourism (Mauritius); fisheries and tourism 
(Seychelles); as well as access to early warnings for tropical cyclones and 
other hydro-meteorological hazards in all countries. This will build 
understanding of current CP-CS outreach in each target countries, how these 
are used, and any user requirements to address the weaknesses/gaps, in order 
to inform the development of the detailed system (Activity 1.4.2) as well as to 
identify pathway to increase CP-CS outreach through the proposed project. 
An initial assessment of the access to CS-CP and user needs was conducted 
per key sector and presented in the FS. This assessment identifies needs for 
improvements. This state of affairs of the ‘needs’ will be reconfirmed and fine-
tuned at the project onset to make sure we consider any new conditions (such 
as those implied by the COVID-19 pandemic) and adjustments made since the 
FS preparation. In order to measure progress in terms of uptake, efficiency and 
effectiveness of project investments by the user sectors, these will need to 
replicate such surveys during the project implementation. 
Under this activity, each country will conduct studies to assess 
the access to, and use, of CP-CS, as well as the status of the 
EWS at the baseline level; these will be re-assessed at project 
mid- and end-term to demonstrate achievements throughout 
project implementation. 
 
1.4.1 Conduct surveys in each country to assess the access and 
use of CP-CS and EWS for hydro-meteorological hazards, as 
well as any user requirements to address the weaknesses/gaps 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a consultant (hydromet expert);  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : NMHSs 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHSs, DRM 
institutions, climate-sensitive sectors of the GFCS and targeted 
communities, public and private sector stakeholders 
receiving/using CP-CS 
Baseline 
assessments 
done in each 
country 
1.4.2. Fine tune the 
design of the 
hydromet 
observational 
networks, modelling, 
forecasting, and 
service delivery 
systems for each 
NMHS, taking a 
regional harmonized 
approach  
This activity will include the development of the detailed/fine-tuned system 
integration specifications, including all project activities and taking into account 
the existing sub-systems. It will also include the preparation of technical 
specifications and tender documents for equipment and services.  This will be 
developed taking a regional approach to ensure harmonization of the various 
systems across the SWIO region. Technical specifications could be developed 
with the support of the IOC for a regional harmonized approach. This greater 
degree of harmonization will result in cost saving and will increase systems’ 
efficiency and effectiveness, while also contributing to improved monitoring and 
more accurate forecasts. E.g. by using common technical specifications for 
observing systems, it would facilitate the maintenance and calibration of 
sensors at the WMO Regional Instrument Centre being established under 
Activity 1.1.3. 
The systems integration will help to develop new information products and 
services, and operationalizing their production. 
Implementation support will be provided to each NMHS team for effective 
functioning of the overall system. 
Under this activity, each country will develop the detailed/fine-
tuned systems technical specifications, while the tender process 
will be carried out by IOC. The detailed list of equipment and 
information systems per country is provided under Activities 
2.1.1 and 2.1.2, respectively. 
 
1.4.2.1  Detail/Fine tune the design of each sub-system of the 
overall system including, inter alia, global, regional and national 
observations, ICT, modelling, forecasting and service delivery  
systems 1.4.2.3 Prepare technical specifications for the different 
various equipment, tools, services and systems to be procured, 
taking into account innovative techniques and technologies 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a firm (specialised in provision of hydro-
meteorological equipment) which will be responsible for 
Activity 1.4.1; 1.4.2; 2.1.1; and 2.1.2)  
Technical 
specifications 
and tender 
documents

=== PAGE 93 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 90 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
90 
 
As indicated above, the system integration will ensure functional compatibility 
of the modernized meteorological and hydrological systems with the global and 
regional systems as recommended by WMO and with the existing systems 
installed at each NMHS. 
The refinement of the design of an optimum composite surface observation 
network and associated ICT systems for the SWIO region will be aligned with 
the Global Basic Observing Network (GBON) concept, with a minimum set of 
stations in target countries, in terms of type, number and location of the 
stations, as well as the exchange of their data internationally for improved NWP 
and climate analysis.  
This Activity will support the technical assistance required to fine-tune the 
specifications of the networks and technology systems, oversight their 
installations and testing, as well as to promote enhanced practices. 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : NMHS in each 
country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: IOC and NMHS in 
each country 
1.4.3 Ensure full 
system integration 
from observation 
stations to delivery of 
CP-CS to end-user 
This activity includes the development of step-by-step practices and 
procedures for system integration and coordination of project activities.  
The observation and monitoring network and remote sensing equipment will be 
modernised/ completed with harmonized equipment for all NMHSs to facilitate 
information exchange (Activity 2.1.1).  
In addition, ICT systems will be upgraded following the with WMO technical 
regulations / standards (Activity 2.1.2).Various networks, and even the same 
type of network but from different manufacturers use different datalogger 
software which collect data in different formats. Their associated data 
management systems only allow the display of the data coming from the same 
network and same manufacturer. This activity will therefore support the 
development of a data integration “architecture” where the all data from the 
various networks and within the same network from different manufacturer be 
transmitted to a centralized Datacenter (to be established under the proposed 
project) and converted in the WMO standard formats. All these standardized 
data will then be integrated and displayed in a single data management system 
(rather than those individual systems provided by the different 
manufacturers/suppliers) – the standardized WMO Climate Data Management 
System (please see https://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/wcp/wcdmp/CDM_3.php). 
As part of this activity, a detailed study of the various networks and types of 
equipment, data formats and transmission will be study with the intend to 
develop the data integration “architecture” and implement/develop the various 
scripts required to ensure the transmission, conversion, standardization, as 
well as automation of the data management. 
It is expected that this activity will include the active participation of experts 
from developed NMHSs (e.g. through twinning arrangements), which are 
This activity includes the development of step-by-step practices 
and procedures for system integration and coordination of 
project activities in each country. 
 
1.4.3.1 Conduct capacity gap analysis of ICT system in each 
country 
1.4.3.2 Design the proper technical integration of the different 
systems (ICT design/data integration ”architecture”) from 
previous activity to make the overall system as efficient as to 
disseminate services including, inter alia: data, products and 
services flow and exchange, and protocols and standard 
operating procedures between the NMHSs and beneficiary 
institutions; taking into account innovative techniques and 
technologies   
1.4.3.3 implement the data integration ”architecture” through the 
develop the various scripts required to ensure the transmission, 
conversion, standardization, as well as automation of the data 
management 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a firm (specialised in provision of hydro-
meteorological equipment) which will be responsible for 
Activity 1.4.1; 1.4.2; 2.1.1; and 2.1.2)  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: NMHS in each 
country 
ICT design

=== PAGE 94 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 91 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
91 
 
directly involved or well familiar with operational aspects of production and 
service delivery of meteorological and hydrological products and actively 
involved in the development of WMO programs. 
As per the previous activity, the design of the ICT systems will also be 
designed according to the GBON concept. 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHS in each 
country 
2.1.1 
Modernise/upgrade 
climate-related 
observation and 
monitoring network   
The observation and monitoring network and remote sensing equipment in 
each NMHS will be modernised/ upgraded with harmonized equipment for all 
NMHSs to facilitate information exchange. The reinforcement will follow WMO 
technical regulations / standards; equipment linked to hydrology – in particular 
to monitor rainfall in water catchments – have been identified through the 
HYCOS study (see Annex 22) and, for Mauritius, also through the ER2C 
project.  
In Madagascar, the hydrological equipment will be established to complement 
what has been set up under Project PACARC and the future UNDP-GCF 
‘Hydromet Madagascar’ project. 
Options will be explored for leveraging funds from the newly GBON Systematic 
Observations Financing Facility (SOFF) for the completion of the 
implementation of the optimum composite surface observation network (refined 
under Activity 1.4.2). This Activity relates to procuring new equipment (full or 
parts of the equipment) to modernize or upgrade/update the networks, as these 
are either inexistent or outdated. 
 
In each country, modernise/upgrade the networks based on the 
detailed plan and specifications produced under output 1.4 
2.1.1.1 In Comoros: 
Rehabilitation/extension of the building where the National 
Meteorological Service is based, upgrade the national synoptic 
networks (meteorological stations following the Feasibility Study 
recommendations – Annex 2; and hydrologic stations following 
HYCOS recommendation), sub-synoptic rainfall network in flood-
prone  areas, agrometeorological observing network, AWOS and 
ASOS, meteo-oceanographic buoys, Upper air radiosounding 
system, Doppler radar, Tower for radar 
2.1.1.2 In Madagascar: 
Upgrade national synoptic networks (meteorological stations 
following the Feasibility Study recommendations – Annex 2; and 
hydrological stations following HYCOS recommendations), sub-
synoptic rainfall network in flood-prone areas, 
agrometeorological observing network, Upper air radiosounding 
system, Doppler radar, Tower for radar 
2.1.1.3 In Mauritius: 
Upgrade national synoptic networks (AWS and hydrological 
stations following HYCOS recommendation), sub-synoptic rain 
network in flood-prone areas (Port-Louis), Wave radar for North 
Mauritius, Rodrigues and Agalega, Maregraph for North 
Mauritius, Rodrigues and Agalega and Brandon, Lightning 
detection network station at Rodrigues, Upper air radiosounding 
system for Agalega, Saint Brandon and Rodrigues, Doppler 
radar for Rodrigues, Tower for radar 
2.1.1.4 In Seychelles: 
Upgrade national synoptic networks (AWS and hydrological 
stations following HYCOS recommendations), sub-synoptic 
rainfall network in flood-prone areas (Mahé, Praslin and La 
Digue), Wave radar for Mahé, Praslin and La Digue, Tide gauge 
for Mahé, Praslin and La Digue, Lightning detection network 
stations for Mahé, Praslin and La Digue, Doppler radar for Mahé, 
Tower for radar 
New/upgrade
d hydro-
meteorologic
al equipment 
in the four 
target 
countries

=== PAGE 95 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 92 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
92 
 
 
 
139 https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=5174 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a firm (specialised in developing technical 
specifications for the provision of hydro-meteorological 
equipment) which will be responsible for Activity 1.4.1; 
1.4.2; 2.1.1; and 2.1.2)  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : NMHS in each 
country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHS in each 
country 
2.1.2 
Modernise/upgrade 
the information  and 
communication 
technology systems  
Based on a capacity gap analysis, modernize/upgrade the ICT systems 
following the WMO technical regulations / standards. This includes equipment 
and tools in support of data acquisition, retrieve, storage, archiving, 
management, visualization and production. 
This Activity relates to procuring new equipment (full or parts of the equipment) 
to modernize or upgrade/update the technology systems, as these are either 
inexistent or outdated. 
 
In each of the four countries the following systems will be 
upgraded and/or set-up by the firm hired under Activity 1.4.1 
working with the NMHSs: 
2.1.2.1 Data collecting system 
2.1.2.2 Automatic Meteorological Switching System 
2.1.2.3  Data center  
2.1.2.4 Storage and archive of national data 
2.1.2.5 Forecaster workstation 
2.1.2.6 Climatological Database Management System 
2.1.2.7  Service delivery platform (i.e. end user production 
system) 
Responsible parties,  
2.1.2.8 In order to ensure systems integration, data centers will 
be established at regional and national levels, accordingly. This 
will be done by exploring and assessing physical versus cloud-
service approaches. 
2.1.2.9 Develop standard operating procedures for all data 
processes, following the WMO Guidelines on Quality 
Management in Climate Services139. 
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a firm (specialised in provision of hydro-
meteorological equipment) which will be responsible for 
Activity 1.4.1; 1.4.2; 2.1.1; and 2.1.2)  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : NMHS in each 
country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHS in each 
country 
New/upgrade
d information 
systems

=== PAGE 96 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 93 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
93 
 
2.2.1 Establish a 
maintenance and 
calibration laboratory 
(WMO Regional 
Instrument Centre) 
A regional maintenance laboratory (WMO Regional Instrument Centre) will be 
built and equipped to do support maintenance work and calibration of the 
existing and new acquired hydromet equipment, following the strategy 
developed under Activity 1.1.3. This will serve to avoid current extra cost 
sending the sensors or other equipment with a limited lifetime and in need of 
regular maintenance overseas for maintenance (typically to Kenya or South 
Africa at present). This will result in skills available in the SWIO region, 
efficiency and effectiveness, and cost saving and sustainability of the 
investments. 
A regional maintenance laboratory (WMO Regional Instrument 
Centre) will be built and equipped in Seychelles to do support 
maintenance work and calibration of the existing and new 
acquired hydromet equipment for the four countries in the 
region, following the strategy developed under Activity 1.1.3. 
 
2.2.1.1 Build the laboratory based on the defined strategy and 
operating plan developed under Activity 1.1.3 
2.2.1.2 Provide all equipment and tools that are required based 
on the  laboratory strategy and operating plan, and gap analysis 
developed under Activity 1.1.3 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a firm (specialised in provision of hydro-
meteorological equipment) which will be responsible for 
Activity 1.4.1; 1.4.2; 2.1.1; and 2.1.2) ; and a firm for 
building the building 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: NMHS in each 
country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHS in each 
country 
1 regional 
calibration 
center (WMO 
Regional 
Instrument 
Centre) 
2.2.2 Equip the 
specialized training 
center for the region, 
hosted by Mauritius 
NMHS (which will 
contribute to the 
WMO Global 
Campus) 
The specialized training center will be complementary to the existing facilities in 
the region. It will be upgraded following the defined strategy and operating plan 
developed under Activity 1.1.3. 
A specialized training center for the region will be equipped in 
Mauritius to support training in the region, for the four countries 
and also contribute to the WMO Global Campus by making 
available the training materials developed by this training center, 
following the strategy developed under Activity 1.1.3. 
 
2.2.2.1 Buy and install relevant equipment and tools to support 
specialized training (as determined in the laboratory defined 
strategy  and operating plan developed under Activity 1.1.3) 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a firm (specialised in provision of hydro-
meteorological equipment) which will be responsible for 
Activity 1.4.1; 1.4.2; 2.1.1; and 2.1.2)  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : NMHS in each 
country 
1 equipped / 
modernized 
training 
center 
(contributing 
to the WMO 
Global 
Campus)

=== PAGE 97 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 94 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
94 
 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHS in each 
country 
2.3.1 Downscale and 
calibrate 
meteorological 
forecasts by making 
use of numerical 
weather 
prediction/ensemble 
prediction systems 
(NWP/EPS) and 
applying modern 
techniques such as 
artificial intelligence 
This activity will serve to improve the production of short-range ‘day-to-day’ 
forecasts and warnings in each target country (see Activity 3.1.1). Moreover, 
staff members of NMHSs, with the support of DRM institutions, will be trained in 
probabilistic forecasts and on its use to produce multi-hazard impact-based 
forecasts (MH-IBF) to translate hydromet hazards into sector and location-
specific impacts. This is key to enable mitigation response from the 
government. Both daily forecasts and MH-IBF will benefit from high-quality data 
which are produced and collected with the equipment established under 
Activity 2.1.1 and 2.1.2.  This activity is aligned with the strategy to improve 
Regional Numerical Weather and Climate Prediction developed under Activity 
1.1.4. 
Aligned with the strategy to improve Regional Numerical 
Weather and Climate Prediction developed under Activity 1.1.4, 
staff from the four NMHSs will be trained at the regional center in 
Mauritius. This activity will be coordinated by IOC, and includes 
the participation of international experts as lecturers. 
 
2.3.1.1Conduct objective forecast verification and develop a 
calibration/post-processing system over individual countries in 
the SWIO region, using modern techniques 
 
2.3.1.2 Conduct NWP/EPS aligned with the strategy to improve 
Regional Numerical Weather and Climate Prediction developed 
under Activity 1.1.4 
 
2.3.1.3 Conduct downscaling using e.g. Artificial Intelligence 
techniques (deep learning) to adapt the numerical weather 
prediction/ensemble prediction systems combining them with 
observing data with IoT data analytic capability 
 
2.3.1.4 Conduct training in probabilistic forecasts and ensemble 
prediction systems for use in MH-IBF to address “what the 
weather will do rather than only what the weather will be”  
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to work 
with  relevant experts (e.g. existing staff of the 
specialized training center in Mauritius; and other 
training facilities in the region 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : National 
Meteorological Services in each country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: National 
Meteorological Services and DRM institutions (for IBF) in each 
country 
Trained staff 
4 
downscaled 
and 
calibrated 
NWP/EPS 
systems  
2.3.2 Establish 
threshold values for 
issuing warnings 
based on extreme 
value analysis and 
review of historical 
Technical analysis (using Extreme analysis tools and climate data) and review 
of the historical hydrometeorological events that caused flooding and other 
hazardous events will be undertaken to determine the threshold values for 
each hazard for each country. This would need to be harmonized at the 
national level for effective MH-IBF-EWS at regional, national and local levels. 
This is an activity carried out at the national level in each 
country, with workshops with NMHSs and DRM institutions and 
other stakeholders (including NGOSs) to agree on national 
threshold values for issuing warnings based on extreme value 
National 
thresholds 
for issuing 
warnings 
harmonized 
at regional 
level

=== PAGE 98 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 95 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
95 
 
hydrometeorological 
events 
analysis and review of historical hydrometeorological events in 
each country.  
There will be also regional workshops led by IOC, with the 
participation of the four NMHSs and of PIROI, for harmonization 
of threshold warnings across the region to facilitate integration of 
warning information into the regional “meteo-alarm” type 
dissemination. 
 
2.3.2.1 Carry out extreme analysis with the climate data in each 
country 
2.3.2.2 Workshops with NMHSs and DRM institutions and other 
stakeholders (including NGOs) at national and local levels to 
discuss and agree on the national thresholds for issuing 
warnings in each country 
2.3.2.3 Workshops with NMHSs and PIROI and its national 
counterparts for regional harmonization of the warning criteria 
(including analysis of current situation, climatorological analysis 
of the severe events, harmonization proposal, discussions and 
formal agreements among countries, definition of common 
dissemination approaches, capacity building, etc.) 
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU to recruit a 
hydro-meteorologist/climate change experts (1 
consultant per country) and organize workshops 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : NMHSs, DRM 
institutions 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHSs and DRM 
institutions and other stakeholders (including NGOs) in each 
country, PIROI 
2.3.3 Develop 
hazards maps  
As a base to improve climate risk understanding among staff members of 
NMHSs, DRM institutions (with technical support from institutions in charge of 
hydrology and hazard maps) and CP-CS users, and to serve as decision-
making tools for disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation (see 
Component 3), hazard maps, which take into account climate change impacts 
on return period/intensity of selected hazards, will be produced in selected 
areas of the four target countries. The production of the maps will rely on 
enhanced climate and weather monitoring (Activity 2.1.1) and improved, 
downscaled climate change projections (Activity 2.3.7).  
As rainfall induced floods are significant throughout the SWIO region (related to 
tropical cyclones or not), flood risk maps will be prepared for the four countries, 
This is an activity carried out at the national and local levels in 
each country, with workshops with NMHSs and DRM institutions 
and other stakeholders (including NGOSs) to understand he 
frequency and intensity of selected hazards, and develop or 
update the hazard maps using the monitoring equipment 
established under Activity 2.1.1 and based on return period of 
the hazards. 
 
2.3.3.1 Integrate or review existing hazard maps (if existing) 
2 hazard 
maps per 
country

=== PAGE 99 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 96 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
96 
 
focusing on selected vulnerable areas. In Mauritius, this process will build on 
ER2C and the Land Master Plan initiatives (see Baseline projects) and 
complement the flood maps developed by LDA and Audit of Rivers (Ministry of 
Environment) under these 2 initiatives.   
In addition to floods, the following maps will be produced: 
- droughts for Comoros (relevant to agriculture in Anjouan) and Madagascar 
(also relevant to agriculture); and 
- coastal erosion for Mauritius and Seychelles (relevant to tourism and urban 
development planning). 
The hazard maps will serve to indicate the location, frequency (probability of 
occurrence taking into account climate change) and intensity of hazards.  
These maps will be useful to develop risk prevention plans (see Component 3).  
The maps will be produced by the NMHSs with technical support from 
institutions in charge of hydrology, and shared regionally on the UIP (see 
Activity 3.3.3). 
2.3.3.2 Identify areas most affected by the selected hazard in 
each country based on existing maps (if any), consultations with 
relevant stakeholders, scientific sources, etc. 
2.3.3.3 Conduct consultations with stakeholders and community 
members in these areas to understand frequency and intensity 
of selected hazards 
2.3.3.4 Develop or update hazard maps using the monitoring 
equipment established under Activity 2.1.1, and based on return 
period of the hazards taking into account climate change 
projections and impacts, and based on stakeholder consultations 
conducted under 2.3.3.3 
2.3.3.5 Present and validate the maps during national workshop 
2.3.3.6 Share maps on the UIP established under activity 3.3.3. 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a hydro-meteorologist/climate change/DRM 
experts (1 consultant per country)  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : NMHS and 
DRM institutions in each country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHS and DRM 
institutions and sectors in each country 
2.3.4 Develop 
climate vulnerability 
maps 
Based on the hazard maps produced under Activity 2.3.3, a mapping exercise 
for climate-risk vulnerability – of people and assets – will be conducted in a 
participative way with the NMHS, local authorities of hazardous-prone areas, 
public and private sectors representing agriculture/fisheries, tourism, health, 
water sectors and at-risk communities. The purpose will be to identify main 
assets and most vulnerable people affected by the selected hazards (selected 
under Activity 2.3.3) from a local point of view and based on how people/assets 
were affected during past events. This all-inclusive process will draw on local 
experiences and perspectives in order to capture current risks; such process 
will also contribute to awareness-raising among diverse stakeholders and 
encourage their involvement in DRM processes (including through the 
provision of feedback on climate products). Once the vulnerability assessments 
and maps are finalized and validated, training will be implemented for NMHSs, 
stakeholders from climate-sensitive sectors and local authorities in the selected 
vulnerable areas for which the maps were developed to raise understanding of 
risk exposure at the local level, and future risks taking into account climate 
change projections (downscaled under Activity 2.3.7). The hazard maps will be 
useful to inform the NAP development process in the four countries, or their 
update (see Activity 3.2.4). 
This is an activity carried out at the national and local levels in 
each country. Based on the hazard maps produced under 
Activity 2.3.3, a mapping exercise for climate-risk vulnerability – 
of people and assets – will be conducted in a participative way 
with the NMHS, local authorities of hazardous-prone areas, 
public and private sectors representing agriculture/fisheries, 
tourism, health, water sectors and at-risk communities. There 
will also be workshops at national and local levels to raise 
awareness of climate-related vulnerability and shifts in the 
context of climate change. 
 
2.3.4.1 Conduct vulnerability assessments in areas most 
affected by selected  hazards (at least 2 areas per country) 
2.3.4.2 Develop vulnerability maps  
2.3.4.3. Organise workshops to raise awareness of climate-
related vulnerability and shifts in the context of climate change 
2.3.4.4 Share maps on the UIP established under activity 3.3.3. 
Responsible parties:  
1 
vulnerability 
map per 
country

=== PAGE 100 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 97 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
97 
 
- 
Leader: IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a DRM expert 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: NMHS, DRM 
institutions and sectors in each country 
- 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHS, 
DRM institutions, sectors and vulnerable communities 
in each country 
 
2.3.5 Undertake risk 
analysis 
incorporating hazard, 
exposure and 
vulnerability to 
identify potential 
impacts from 
extreme events 
This activity will involve compilation of various datasets available for 
characterizing hazard, vulnerability and exposure to develop a tool in 
quantifying risks, i.e. potential impacts. This tool will therefore be used to 
analyze exposure and determine potential physical, environment, social and 
economic impacts in the four countries due to their respective hazards. This 
risk analysis tool or methodology will be used in generating multi-hazard 
impact-based forecasts and early warnings and visualization maps through the 
knowledge and decision support system that will be developed in Output 3.2.  
 
This is an activity carried out at the national and local levels in 
each country. This activity will involve compilation of various 
datasets available for characterizing hazard, vulnerability and 
exposure to develop a tool in quantifying risks, i.e. potential 
impacts. This tool will therefore be used to analyse exposure 
and determine potential physical, environment, social and 
economic impacts in the four countries due to their respective 
hazards. This risk analysis tool or methodology will be used in 
generating multi-hazard impact-based forecasts and early 
warnings and visualization maps through the knowledge and 
decision support system that will be developed in Output 3.2. 
 
2.3.5.1 Conduct training in the combined use of weather 
forecasts, vulnerability and exposure data (using GIS) to 
understand hazards’ impacts on sectors and locations 
2.3.5.2 Develop risk maps  
2.3.5.3. Organise workshops to raise awareness of climate-
related risks 
2.3.5.4 Share maps on the knowledge and decision support 
system established under activity 3.2.3. 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader: IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a DRM expert 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: NMHS, DRM 
institutions and sectors in each country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHS, DRM 
institutions, sectors and vulnerable communities in each country 
Trained staff 
 
2.3.6 Carry out  
downscaling of  
global and regional 
seasonal forecasts to 
national level, and 
use them to produce 
Annex 2, the FS, Chapter 3 has identified gaps in producing seasonal 
agrometeorological forecast at local level especially for Comoros, Madagascar 
and Mauritius, where agriculture is a key economic sector. 
This activity will serve to downscale the production of seasonal forecast by: 
- training experts of the target countries to develop skills in downscaling of 
global seasonal forecasts. 
Aligned with the strategy to improve Regional Numerical 
Weather and Climate Prediction developed under Activity 1.1.4, 
staff from the four NMHSs will be on hands-on training at the 
regional center in Mauritius. This activity will be coordinated by 
IOC, and includes the participation of international experts as 
lecturers, for the common training sessions for the four 
Trained staff 
 
4 
agrometeorol
ogical

=== PAGE 101 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 98 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
98 
 
agrometeorological 
products 
- defining and generating (by countries' experts) climate products or 
services from datasets created (in line with the needs of national users). 
- providing countries in the region with high-resolution regional seasonal 
forecasts, downscaling them to national level, and use them to produce 
agrometeorological products. 
In Madagascar, the training will use the methodologies and complement the 
PrAdA project (see baseline projects).  
The forecasts will be packaged according to users’ needs and disseminated 
under Activity 3.1.1. 
countries. This activity also includes individual tasks such as 
downscaling of global and regional seasonal forecasts to 
national level and production of agrometeorological products for 
each of the four countries. 
 
2.3.6.1 Develop specific training for agrometeorologists and 
implement it  
2.3.6.2 Develop agrometeorological advisories 
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to work 
with relevant experts (e.g. existing staff of the 
specialized training center in Mauritius; and other 
training facilities in the region) 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : National 
Meteorological Services and agriculture sector in the 
target countries 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: agriculture services 
in each country 
advisory 
bulletins 
2.3.7 Build the 
capacity do 
downscale climate 
models for national 
purposes   
Regional downscaling and national calibration of the different climate models 
will be performed at regional level with representatives of each country’s 
National Meteorological Services. The production of downscaled climate 
change projections will use BRIO outputs and be based on BRIO 
methodologies. Based on the downscaled climate change projections, impact 
assessments to various sectors will be prepared in each country. The climate 
change models and projections as well as the sectoral models and impact 
assessments will be shared on the UIP.   
The implementation of these downscaled and sectoral models will be done at 
national level under component 3. 
Aligned with the strategy to improve Regional Numerical 
Weather and Climate Prediction developed under Activity 1.1.4, 
staff from the four NMHSs will be on hands-on training at the 
regional center in Mauritius. This activity will be coordinated by 
IOC, and includes the participation of international experts as 
lecturers, for the common training sessions for the four 
countries. This activity also includes individual tasks such as 
downscaling of climate models to national purposes in each of 
the four countries. 
 
2.3.7.1 Produce downscaled climatic change projections at 
country level based on the regional models developed under 
BRIO 
2.3.7.2 Share downscaled forecasts and CC projections on the 
online platform  
2.3.7.3 Produce sectoral models and impact assessments to 
anticipate the climate impacts in each country (e.g. urban 
hydrology, pollution, agrometeorology, sea state, coastal 
erosion) 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to work 
with  relevant experts (e.g. staff of the specialized 
Trained staff

=== PAGE 102 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 99 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
99 
 
training center in Mauritius); and other training facilities 
in the region  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : National 
Meteorological Services in each country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: National 
Meteorological Services and relevant sector stakeholders in 
each country 
2.3.8 Build the 
capacity for 
hydrological 
modelling for flood 
forecasting (i.e. flood 
propagation model) 
Annex 2, the FS, Chapter 3 has identified gaps in monitoring hydrology data, 
hydrology expertise and forecasting floods in the four target countries. This is 
also underlined in the HYCOS study (Annex 22). Hence, the training will target 
the staff members of the National Hydrological Services in the four target 
countries. The purpose of the training is to: i) improve knowledge of 
hydrological processes in water catchments; ii) improve knowledge of  different 
types of floods that can occur on different types of water catchments; iii) 
monitor flood risk on key water catchments using the hydrological equipment 
established under Activity 2.1.1; iv) understand how to set up a flood risk alert 
system for one/several specific water catchments (which will be set up under 
Activity 3.1.2); v) understand urban flood risks based on IDF curves; and vi) 
learn how to produce flood hazard maps and flood vulnerability assessments 
(see Activity 2.3.3 and 2.3.4).    
The following activity will buid on the existing data and hydrological and 
Hydraulic modelling software and other related tools. As such, countries like 
Mauritius, through the Land Drainage Authority “LDA” is already developing a 
Land Drainage Master Plan. Madagascar have also developed a national 
strategy to mitigate floods. 
Under this activity, staff from the four NMHSs will be on hands-
on training at the regional center in Mauritius. This activity will be 
coordinated by IOC, and includes the participation of 
international experts as lecturers, for the common training 
sessions for the four countries. This activity also includes 
individual tasks such as hydrological modelling for flood 
forecasting in each of the four countries.  
 
2.3.8.1 Design and implement relevant training in one of the 
regional center or at national level 
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU to recruit 
hydrologist 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : National 
Hydrological Services in each country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: National 
Hydrological Services in each country 
Trained staff 
3.1.1 Set up/update 
protocols (standard 
operating 
procedures) to 
produce and deliver 
improved daily 
weather bulletin, 
multi-hazard impact-
based forecasts, 
seasonal forecasts, 
and 
agrometeorological 
advisories 
The FS (Annex 2, Chapter 3) has identified needs to improve the production 
and delivery of the daily weather bulletin, IBF, seasonal forecasts, and other 
weather products among the population of the four target countries. 
This activity will improve the production and delivery of weather forecasts, 
which are used by all for ‘everyday life’ in the four target countries, and IBF 
which support risk prevention. The accuracy of these forecasts will be 
enhanced, thanks to a production of high-quality climate-related data, under 
Outcome 2. Under this activity, staff members of the National Meteorological 
Services – which has been trained under activity 2.3.1 for the downscaling of 
meteorological forecasts and production of IBF – will receive support from a 
communication expert to prepare, package and disseminate their forecasts 
using relevant communication channels – including television, radio, and the 
website of the meteorological services - to ensure user-friendly format and wide 
outreach. 
In addition, in Comoros (Anjouan), Madagascar and Mauritius (where 
agriculture is a key activity – see Annex 2, FS, Chapter 1, and Annex 3a, 
Under this activity, there will be a consultative process to 
improve the production and delivery of weather forecasts and 
agrometeorological advisories in each country. In each country, 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) will be established for 
processes of co-production of products between the NMHS and 
relevant stakeholders, and of delivery of forecasts, advisories 
and warnings. Specific agrometeorological bulletins will be 
developed in each countries. 
At the regional level, there will be coordination workshops for 
consolidation, harmonization and dissemination of the weather 
and climate bulletins at the regional User Interface Platform 
(UIP). PIROI and other relevant regional entities will be part of 
this consultative process at the regional level. 
 
Agricultural 
advisories  
Improved 
weather 
bulletins

=== PAGE 103 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 100 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
100 
 
 
 
140 https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=5174 
141 https://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/www/DPFS/Meetings/ET-OWFPS_Montreal2016/documents/WMOGuidelinesonMulti-hazardImpact-basedForecastandWarningServices.pdf 
Economic Analysis), agricultural advisories will be prepared by staff members 
of the National Meteorological Services – trained under Activity 2.3.6 – in 
coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture, and representatives of farming 
communities to provide feedback on the format of the advisories and best 
communication channels. Where possible, the project will build on existing 
initiatives like PrAdA in Madagascar, by diversifying the type of crops for which 
agricultural calendars are produced, by upscaling success and by diversifying 
communication means used to disseminate agricultural advisories.  
 
3.1.1.1 Conduct surveys among population to assess user 
satisfaction and to identify best ways to package/prepare the 
forecasts to be disseminated among the public in each country . 
3.1.1.2 Identify best packaging format and communication 
channels in each country – including TV, radio, newspaper – 
through surveys among population in particular farmers in 
Comoros, Madagascar and Mauritius, fishermen in Comoros and 
Seychelles, and the tourism industry in Seychelles and 
Mauritius. 
3.1.1.3 Support the National Meteorological Services to format 
their forecasts adequately for each communication channel – 
using local languages as appropriate. 
3.1.1.4 Prepare agricultural advisories through a participative 
process 
3.1.1.5 Identify best communication channels and language/ 
format for farmers in Comoros, Madagascar and Mauritius 
3.1.1.6 Disseminate the advisories using best communication 
channels 
3.1.1.7 Disseminate all weather bulletins and advisories on the 
UIP to collect users’ feedback  
3.1.1.8 Develop standard operating procedures for all 
processes, following the WMO Guidelines on Quality 
Management in Climate Services140 and the WMO Guidelines on 
Multi-hazard Impact-based Forecast and Warning Services141. 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader: IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a communication consultant  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation: National 
Meteorological Services and Ministry of Agriculture in 
each country 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: National 
Meteorological Services and population including farmers (for 
surveys on packaging information and best dissemination 
channels) in each country

=== PAGE 104 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 101 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
101 
 
3.1.2 Set up 
protocols (standard 
operating 
procedures) to 
strengthen MH-IBF-
EWS dissemination 
for and uptake by 
key sectors and 
among the general 
public 
Thanks to the equipment installed under Component 2, NMHS will be able to 
forecast climate-related hazards earlier and more accurately. This activity will 
focus on improving warnings for climate-related risks in the four target 
countries. A presentation and assessment of how warnings are currently 
disseminated to vulnerable sectors (of the GFCS areas) and to the general 
public has been conducted in Annex 2, the FS, Chapter 2 and 3. The 
assessment underlines problems to issue timely warnings,that have a wide 
outreach in the four target countries (see Case Studies in Chapter 3 for 
concrete examples). 
To address this problem, end user’s in-depth analysis will be performed at 
national scale in each country to ensure the perfect adequacy between needs 
and solutions while packaging EW. In particular, consultations will be organised 
with vulnerable socio-economic groups in each country to identify best 
communication means to disseminate warnings – including mobile cellphone, 
radio and trusted local stakeholders/leaders. Once channels have been 
identified, stakeholders e.g. at radio or national TV, or even community leads 
will be trained to disseminate user-friendly warnings in local languages.  
In addition to strengthening the early warning systems for tropical cyclones in 
the four target countries to ensure a wider outreach, the following early 
warnings will be established or strengthened, to target these specific groups:  
- 
in Comoros: EW for farmers and fishermen (using specific 
communication channels to reach these groups) focusing on heavy 
rainfalls (complementing and building on ‘Ensuring climate resilient 
water supplies in the Comoros islands’ UNDP-GCF project) and 
storms 
- 
in Madagascar: EW for farmers and fishermen (using specific 
communication channels to reach these groups and building on 
PrAdA in Madagascar) focusing on heavy rainfalls and storms  
- 
in Mauritius: EW for farmers and stakeholders in the tourism and 
health (using specific communication channels to reach these groups 
– based on methodologies and outputs from project SAWIDRA for 
health) focusing on heavy rainfalls, heat waves and storms  
- 
in Seychelles: general public and stakeholders in tourism for heavy 
rainfalls and storms (e.g. through mobile phone app); specific 
warnings for fisheries for storms and algal blooms (building on IAEA 
‘Monitoring of Algal Bloom’ initiative). 
Under this activity, there will be a consultative process to 
improve the production and delivery of MH-IBF-EWS in each 
country. 
 
3.1.2.1 Identify how to best package MH-IBF-EW information in 
user-friendly format through surveys with the general public, and 
with specific targeted vulnerable groups/sectors in each country. 
3.1.2.2 Train stakeholders in identified best dissemination 
channels for the general public and for the targeted groups (e.g. 
radio/TV presentations/community leaders) will be trained to 
disseminate warnings  
3.1.2.3 Work with PIROI and its national counterparts and 
NGOSs to strengthen SOPs for MH-IBF-EWS at regional and 
national levels based on the results of the pilots in each country 
(carried out under Activity 3.2.2) 
Responsible parties: communication consultant hired under 
3.1.1 
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a communication consultant  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : NMHS, DRM 
and targeted sectoral institutions in each country 
- 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: IOC, 
NMHS, DRM institutions and population (for surveys) in 
each country 
 
Strengthened 
MH-IBF-
EWS in each 
country and 
at regional 
level 
3.2.1 Improve data 
sharing and 
coordination with 
emergency services 
Strengthening the collaboration between NMHSs and DRM institutions was a 
recommendation identified in Annex 2, the FS, Chapter 4. Such collaboration 
will be fostered in the four countries under this project’s (see Activity 1.2.1). 
Through case studies, the FS has also underlined problems linked to disaster 
 In each country, on a national level, this activity will first review 
existing emergency response plans and communication 
processes between relevant stakeholders with a view to improve 
National and 
local 
emergency

=== PAGE 105 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 102 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
102 
 
for on-the-ground 
interventions at 
national and local 
levels 
risk management in the four countries (see SWOT analysis, Annex 2, the FS, 
Chapter 3); it underlines  communication gaps between NMHS, DRM 
institutions and on-the-ground interventions services as well as highlights 
difficulties of emergency services – e.g. Red Cross/Crescent – to reach local 
communities especially in remote location.  
On a national level, this activity will first review existing emergency response 
plans and communication processes between relevant stakeholders with a 
view to improve them to guide quick on-the-ground interventions to mitigate risk 
impacts. 
Because disaster risk response happens at the local level, the national 
response plans will be downscaled in 2 pilot areas per country selected based 
on the hazard and vulnerability maps produced under Activities 2.3.3 and 2.3.4. 
At this level, it is not always possible for emergency services to reach the 
populations. Hence, key stakeholders to involve in risk prevention and 
response at the local level (i.e. local volunteers or trusted local 
stakeholders/leaders who can facilitate emergency responses at the local level) 
will be identified. Their capacity to understand risk warnings and advisories, to 
provide advises on risk prevention and to react during/after a hazardous event 
will be strengthened through trainings. 
This activity, piloted at the local level in in 2 vulnerable areas, will demonstrate 
how to downscale national emergency response plans at the local level to 
improve risk prevention, mitigation and recovery, in order to be replicated in 
other vulnerable sites.   
them to guide quick on-the-ground interventions to mitigate risk 
impacts. 
Because disaster risk response happens at the local level, the 
national response plans will be downscaled in 2 pilot areas per 
country selected based on the hazard and vulnerability maps 
produced under Activities 2.3.3 and 2.3.4. At this level, it is not 
always possible for emergency services to reach the 
populations. Hence, key stakeholders to involve in risk 
prevention and response at the local level (i.e. local volunteers 
or trusted local stakeholders/leaders who can facilitate 
emergency responses at the local level) will be identified. Their 
capacity to understand risk warnings and advisories, to provide 
advises on risk prevention and to react during/after a hazardous 
event will be strengthened through trainings. This activity, piloted 
at the local level in in 2 vulnerable areas in each country, will 
demonstrate how to downscale national emergency response 
plans at the local level to improve risk prevention, mitigation and 
recovery, in order to be replicated in other vulnerable sites. 
 
3.2.1.1 Working with NMHS, DRR institutions and emergency 
services, identify pathways to improve communication and 
coordinate interventions among these services 
3.2.1.2. Conduct local assessment of on-the-ground intervention 
organisations including local community leaders, red 
cross/crescent, NGOs in 2 pilot sites per country 
3.2.2.3 Update national and develop local emergency response 
plans working in partnership with DRM institutions, emergency 
response services and local stakeholders 
3.2.2.4 Train local stakeholders in the selected pilot sites on risk 
prevention, mitigation and recovery 
3.2.2.5 Develop disaster risk reduction products – e.g. flyers in 
local languages, signs displayed and pictures – to place in 
strategic public spaces of the selected pilot sites to inform 
communities of DRR measures   
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a DRM consultant  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : DRMR 
institutions and emergency services 
response 
plans

=== PAGE 106 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 103 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
103 
 
- 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: DRM 
institutions, emergency services and population (for 
surveys) in each country 
 
3.2.2 Develop risk 
matrices for each 
hazard with agreed 
risk levels and 
colour-coded, and 
description of related 
impacts and 
response /actions; 
test and validate in 
selected sites in the 
four countries; 
expand and roll out 
nationwide 
Aligned with the activity 3.2.1, a national framework for MH-IBF-EWS for each 
country will be developed and harmonized at the regional level. This framework 
will guide the implementation of MH-IBF-EWS at the local level. This involves 
collaboration among NMHS, PIROI and the national DRM institutions, and 
other stakeholders, the development risk matrices for each hazard with agreed 
risk levels and colour-codes, and description of related impacts and 
response/actions. Selected vulnerability sites in each country will be selected to 
use such risk matrices and associated information for testing and validating 
MH-IBF-EWS, with the assistance of PIROI and its national counterparts and 
associated NGOs. These developments and testing will be done in the first 
three years of the proposed project, and then expanded and rolled out 
nationwide (in the last two years of the project) using scenarios, and through 
the dissemination of knowledge products and outreach materials with the 
assistance of NGOs and through the community leaders, in order to reach all 
population in the four countries.  
Aligned with the activity 3.2.1, a national framework for MH-IBF-
EWS in each country will be developed and harmonized at the 
regional level. This framework will guide the implementation of 
MH-IBF-EWS at the local level. This involves collaboration 
among NMHS, PIROI and the national DRM institutions, and 
other stakeholders, the development risk matrices for each 
hazard with agreed risk levels and colour-codes, and description 
of related impacts and response/actions. Selected vulnerability 
sites in each country will be selected to use such risk matrices 
and associated information for testing and validating MH-IBF-
EWS, with the assistance of PIROI and its national counterparts 
and associated NGOs. These developments and testing will be 
done in the first three years of the proposed project, and then 
expanded and rolled out nationwide (in the last two years of the 
project) using scenarios, and through the dissemination of 
knowledge products and outreach materials with the assistance 
of NGOs and through the community leaders, in order to reach 
all population in the four countries. 
 
3.2.2.1 Organize workshops with NMHS, PIROI and the national 
DRM institutions, and other stakeholders, NGOs and local 
communities at pilot areas to develop risk matrices for each 
hazard with agreed risk levels and colour-codes, and description 
of related impacts and response/actions 
3.2.2.2 Carry out exercises in the pilot areas to test and validate 
the risk matrices and associated information 
3.2.2.3 Develop scenarios to roll out nationwide 
3.2.2.4 Harmonize approaches at regional level 
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a DRM consultant  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : NMHSs, PIROI 
and national DRM institutions and emergency services 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: DRM institutions, 
emergency services and population, NGOs in each country 
8 MH-IBF-
EWS at local 
areas 
 
1 national 
MH-IBF-
EWS 
 
1 regional 
MH-IBF-
EWS

=== PAGE 107 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 104 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
104 
 
 
 
142 http://www.meteoalarm.eu 
143 https://vigilance.meteofrance.fr/fr 
144 http://www.meteofrance.re/vigilance-reunion 
145 https://www.wmo.int/gmas/ 
 
3.2.3 Develop a 
knowledge and 
decision support 
system to support 
the implementation 
of MH-IBF-EWS at 
regional, national 
and local levels 
At the same time, a web-based knowledge and decision support system (DSS) 
that aggregate information from the four target countries, with MH-IBF and 
color-coded risk-based warnings (regional “meteoalarm”142/”vigilance”143144-
type platform that would also contribute to the WMO Global Multi-hazard Alert 
System – GMAS145) will be jointly develop to support early warnings / early 
actions at regional, national and local levels. While this DSS is primarily to 
support DRM operations, it is intended to also address impacts to the relevant 
socioeconomic sectors in the country (i.e. agriculture, fisheries and tourism). 
3.2.3.1 At the regional level, develop a web-based knowledge 
and decision support system (DSS) that aggregate MH-IBF-
EWS information from the four target countries 
3.2.3.2 Implement the Common Alert Protocol (CAP) in each 
country and associate in the DSS 
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a DRM consultant  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : NMHSs, PIROI 
and national DRM institutions and emergency services 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHSs, PIROI, 
national DRM institutions, emergency services and population, 
NGOs in each country 
 
1 knowledge 
and decision 
support 
system 
 
4 CAPs 
3.2.4 Update long 
term climate change 
adaptation plans 
responding to the 
needs of each 
country 
Comoros, Madagascar and Mauritius are in the process of developing their 
NAP, which will be finalised in 2020. Based on the high-quality climate data 
and projections produced under Component 2 (in particular Output 2.3), the 
NAPs will be updated.  
In Seychelles, where no NAP is being developed, the project will support the 
implementation of the R&D component of the existing Coastal Management 
Plan (based on hazard maps developed under Activity 2.3.3) and update the 
national climate change strategy (in support to the new climate change policy 
to be validated in 2019). 
The plans will be shared on the UIP (Activity 3.3.3). 
3.2.2.1 Update NAPs in Comoros, Madagascar and Mauritius 
3.2.2.2 In Seychelles, work with the Climate Change Department 
to implement the CMP and update the national climate change 
strategy 
 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a climate change adaptation consultant  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : Ministry of 
Environment/ climate change units; relevant sectoral 
ministries (e.g. agriculture) 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: Ministry of 
Environment/ climate change units; relevant sectoral ministries 
(e.g. agriculture) 
Updated 
NAPs and 
climate 
change 
strategies

=== PAGE 108 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 105 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
105 
 
3.3.1 Train staff 
members of NMHS 
and in the RCC on 
how to package 
climate-related 
information in a user-
friendly way 
Workshops with NMHSs and CP-CS users in priority areas of the GFCS will be 
organised to ensure better packing of climate-related products prepared by the 
NMHSs including sector-tailored forecasts and EWS. At least 15 members of 
each NMHS will be trained. 
Under this activity, each country will organize workshops with 
NMHSs and CP-CS users in priority areas of the GFCS to 
ensure better packing of climate-related products prepared by 
the NMHSs including sector-tailored forecasts and EWS. 
Similarly, at the regional level, IOC will organize workshops with 
the NMHSs CP-CS users in priority areas of the four countries 
for the development of regional climate products to be generated 
by the RCC-Network. 
 
3.3.1.1 Develop training programme on packaging and 
communicating climate-related information 
3.3.1.2. Identify stakeholders within key institutions of provider 
and user of CP-CS to invite at workshop 
3.3.1.3 Organise workshops to facilitate discussions between 
producer and users of CP-CS and identify ways of packaging 
CP-CS so that they are understandable and useful. 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise and 
communication consultant hired under Activity 3.1.1  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : NMHSs and 
CP-CS users 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: NMHSs, DRM 
institutions and relevant sectoral organisations 
Trained staff 
3.3.2 Train 
knowledge brokers – 
including NGOs, red 
crescent/cross, local 
leaders and 
extension officers – 
and representatives 
of sectors in the 
GFCP-CS areas 
(public and private 
organisations) on 
how to interpret and 
use CP-CS for 
decision-making  
Key knowledge broker institutions for risk prevention and response at the local 
level will be identified in each country. Their capacity to understand hazard 
warnings and advisories, to provide accurate advices on risk prevention and to 
react during/after a hazardous event will be strengthened through trainings. 
Under this activity, key knowledge broker institutions for risk 
prevention and response at the local level will be identified in 
each country. Their capacity to understand hazard warnings and 
advisories, to provide accurate advices on risk prevention and to 
react during/after a hazardous event will be strengthened 
through trainings. 
At the regional level, there will be workshops with the NMHSs of 
the four countries, PIROI and its national counterparts (DRM 
institutions in the four countries) to ensure early warning / 
warning actions at regional, national and local levels. 
 
3.3.2.1 Identify local ‘knowledge brokers’ in risk prevention 
3.3.2.2 Develop a training programme for knowledge brokers 
on how to interpret and use CP-CS for decision-making 
3.3.2.3 Organise a workshop to train knowledge brokers 
3.3.2.4 Prepare and disseminate knowledge material (also on 
the UIP)

=== PAGE 109 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 106 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
106 
 
 
 
146 
http://regionalclimate-change.sc/en/ 
147 An example of such a platform is Meteoalarm, which was developed under the framework of the European Meteorological Services Network (EUMETNET) (and which recently incorporated 
hydrological warnings). 
148 
http://regionalclimate-change.sc/en/ 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise and 
communication consultant hired under Activity 3.1.1  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : DRM 
institutions 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: DRM institutions and 
knowledge brokers 
3.3.3 Strengthen the 
User Interface 
Platform (UIP) 
The project will strengthen the existing Regional Climate Portal developed by 
IOC and hosted by Seychelles (SMA) since August 2019146. The platform, 
which is regional and will be a key communication tool for the RCC-Network 
(see Activity 1.1.2), is already used by MF and IOC to disseminate climate-
related information following the SWIOCOFs. Through Hydromet project, the 
platform will serve to facilitate access to CP-CS (weather bulletin, seasonal 
forecasts, warnings, climate change projections and vulnerability 
assessments), including those produced during the SWIOCOFs and NCOFs, 
within and between countries. The products developed under Output 2.3 – the 
climate-related hazards maps and vulnerability maps – will also be shared on 
the platform, as well as the updated, downscaled climate change projections 
produced under the same Output.  The platform will target stakeholders 
working in the GFCP-CS priority areas (from public and private sectors, e.g. 
ministries, business, researcher, etc.) to provide them with decision-making 
support tools or with climate-related information that can be used to produce 
targeted CP-CS. For this purpose, the information will be packaged according 
to their needs.  
In addition, in line with the development of regional capacity for disaster risk 
management in SWIO, there is a need to harmonize the warning criteria for 
hydro-meteorological hazards within the region. It is important for individual 
countries to share and display the warnings for at least 48 hours, in a manner 
understandable for professionals and the public, using a dedicated regional 
web platform147 as part of the UIP. IOC will have a critical role in this 
harmonization process. 
The platform will be designed to include a page where users of CP-CS can 
provide feedback on the services they receive (Annex 2, the FS, Chapter 3 has 
identified a lack of feedback mechanism between NMHS and users of climate 
services). 
The project will strengthen the existing Regional Climate Portal 
developed by IOC and hosted by Seychelles (SMA) since 
August 2019148. The Portal will be upgraded and will incorporate 
the new CP-CS developed under the project, as well as the 
above-mentioned DSS. 
 
3.3.3.1 Identify gaps/weaknesses in the 
design/operationalisation of the existing Regional Climate Portal. 
3.3.3.2 Conduct interviews with users of the platform to identify 
gaps/weaknesses in information provided (packaging, content, 
‘usability’) 
3.3.3.3 Develop and implement a communication strategy to 
improve the platform which include tool to collect users’ 
feedback on CP-CS. 
3.3.3.4  Associate the DSS (developed under Output 3.2) to the 
UIP 
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise and 
communication/IT consultant hired under Activity 3.1.1  
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : RCC-Network, 
NMHSs, CP-CS users, the public 
- 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: IOC, 
National Meteorological Services and platform users  
 
1 
strengthened 
regional UIP

=== PAGE 110 ===
E 
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 107 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
107 
 
 
3.3.4 Support 
SWIOCOFs to 
ensure the active 
participation of 
climate services 
users 
SWIOCOF is a yearly event convened by IOC (in September). Its efficiency will 
be assessed by a meteorologist expert and recommendations will be made to 
improve its impact, in particular to enhance its complementarity with 
NCOF/SARCOF. This assessment will seek to assess SWIOCOF so it can 
provide CP-CS users with relevant and action-oriented seasonal information; 
and offer a platform for users to provide feedback on CP-CS including early 
warning systems (improvement to be made based on assessment of existing 
process in SWIOCOF). The lessons learned collected from users will be shared 
on the online platform (strengthen under Activity 3.3.3). To note that a funding 
strategy to maintain SWIOCOF beyond the proposed project’s lifetime will be 
developed under Activity 1.2.1. 
SWIOCOF is a yearly event convened by IOC (in September), 
but with poor representation of climate services users. The 
project will support such users and also improvements in the 
content and organization of the events. 
 
3.3.4.1 Conduct capacity gap analysis on SWIOCOF to identify 
pathways for improvements 
3.3.4.2. Identify how to best complement SARCOFs and NCOFs 
3.3.4.3 Design a strategy for IOC to improve SWIOCOF with a 
view to enhance users’ implication in the forum.  
Responsible parties:  
- 
Leader : IOC with the Support of PMU expertise to 
recruit a meteorologist expert 
- 
Beneficiary supervision and validation : IOC, RCC-
Network, CP-CS users 
Stakeholders to be involved and consulted: SWIOCOF 
participants 
Strengthened 
SWIOCOF

=== PAGE 111 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 108 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
108 
 
 
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements will comply with the relevant GCF policies.  
Reporting to the PMU 
The EE, through its PMU, will ensure the day-to-day monitoring and overseeing project implementation, ensuring 
coordination with relevant partners including NPCs, NFPs, NMHSs and NDAs, exchanging with local government, etc.  
Every semester, the PMU will review project performance and assess any potential risks. This task will be performed by 
the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Officer member of the PMU, with the assistance of the four national Project Focal 
Points (NFP) and (NPCs). The RPC will visit project sites at least once a year; and more if deemed necessary. NPCs 
will liaise continuously with the RPC. At the national level project implementation report will be prepared by the NPCs 
on a biannually basis; the RPCs will monitor the implementation progress and adjust the annual work plan and 
objectives. At the end of the disbursement period, the EE will prepare a project completion report summarising the main 
events of the implementation phase, the results achieved, and the lessons learned. This report will also provide 
recommendations for future improvements.  
Reporting to the AE 
During the disbursement period, AFD will receive reports from the EE, i.e. the IOC, to track progress and identify 
potential issues as well as improvement opportunities. In this document, the EE will report on a semi-annual or annual 
basis on performance indicators; these indicators will be detailed in a result monitoring framework developed to assess 
progress towards the Project Development Objective (PDO); while intermediate indicators will monitor the progress of 
each component over the lifetime of the Project.  
Accounting and financial audits will also be conducted every year by an independent third party. AFD will tender and 
contract independent consultancy services for the mid-term review (MTR) and for the ex-post evaluation of the project 
after its full completion for a terminal evaluation (TE). The MTR and TE aim to improve future project implementation as 
well as other projects/programmes by deriving lessons from experience and to find ways to make aid more effective. 
Reporting to the GCF 
Annual Performance Reports (APR) will be duly prepared by AFD and shared in a manner compliant with the provisions 
of the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA), the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) and the Monitoring and 
Accountability Framework (MAF) of GCF. In particular, the APR may include a narrative report on the implementation 
progress based on the logical framework, considerations on the ongoing performance of the proposed project, updates 
on the indicators, and a report on environmental and social safeguards (ESS) as well as gender issues.

=== PAGE 112 ===
F 
F 
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 109 OF 119 
 
 
 
109 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operationalTechnical 
and operational 
MediumMedium 
High  
Description 
Project implementation could be affected by the limited capacity of NMHSs to operationalise the new/upgraded 
hydro-meteorological equipment and tools, and to implement project. This could happen if: i) NMHSs do not appoint 
appropriate experts to operationalise the equipment and tools, or do not provide adequate training to their staff 
members; ii) Staff members of the NMHSs are not involved in project implementation; or iii) Operation and 
maintenance costs during and after project cannot be met by the NMHSs.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
These risks will be mitigated through the following project interventions: i) the signature of a Memorandum of 
Understanding between the EE and each national counterpart of beneficiary country to confirm their involvement and 
commitment, ii) institutional and technical capacity of beneficiary NMHSs will be strengthened to improve their 
operationalisation and retain skilled staff; staff will also be trained to operationalise equipment and tools, and new 
staff will be hired (as needed) to enable effective project implementation and coordination; iii) the project has been 
designed in consultation with the NMHSs of each beneficiary country, which will be involved in project implementation 
at the national level; indeed, a National Focal Point (NFP) will be appointed within the NMHS to ensure collaboration 
and involvement of these services during project implementation; the NMHSs will also be represented during bi-
annual national project steering committees and annual regional steering committee to ensure their commitment and 
engagement; and iv) modernization of key equipment and tools, and training on their operation and maintenance will 
support increased capacity for project implementation among the beneficiary NMHSs during and after the project; 
moreover, a calibration and maintenance center (WMO Regional Instrument Centre) will be established for the SWIO 
region to facilitate the maintenance and calibration of hydro-meteorological equipment; finally, as indicated in the 
Economic Analysis (Annex 3a), financial capacity of the NMHSs would increase through the production and 
commercialisation of high-quality CP-CS, hence additional financial resources will be reinvested into operation and 
maintenance after project implementation.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
High 
Description 
The proposed project could be affected by limited commitment of the government towards project implementation; for 
example, new appointments in the government – ministries or NMHS management – could affect project 
implementation in the country.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The risk is more significant in politically-instable countries, prone to government re-shuffle. To ensure strong 
involvement of the beneficiary countries, extensive in-country consultations – with representatives of the NMHSs, 
relevant line ministries, and NDAs – were conducted during the project development phase. Two series of workshops 
were held (at national and regional levels) to provide opportunities for countries to comment and adjust requirements. 
As such, expectations from NMHSs and CP-CS users have been incorporated where relevant to ensure greater buy-
in. NPC will also be appointed within the NMHS to coordinate project implementation in their country. In addition, the 
IOC will sign bilateral agreements with each Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which, in turn, will sign agreements with the

=== PAGE 113 ===
F 
F 
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 110 OF 119 
 
 
 
110 
 
line ministry of the NMHSs in the four target countries. This will serve to ensure that NMHSs remain in charge of 
national project implementation (through their NPC), even if changes occur at the head of the parent ministry.  
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Security issues and vandalism put hydro-meteorological equipment at risk of damage or loss. Tensions with the 
population located where the new hydro-meteorological equipment will be installed could rise especially if population 
relocation is necessary; this could result in damages caused by the impacted population to the equipment. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Several actions will be undertaken to avoid relocating population, engage with the population located nearby hydro-
meteorological equipment and ensure the equipment is not damaged during and after project implementation: 
- 
No relocation is foreseen within this project: most equipment will be set up or upgraded in sites already used 
by such equipment and building extension/construction (for the NMHSs in Comoros and Seychelles) will take 
place on land already acquired by the NMHSs;  
- 
Communities surrounding the newly established/upgraded equipment will be informed beforehand of the 
purpose of the project and type of equipment to be installed; 
- 
The equipment will be equipped with argos tracking tags, whenever possible; 
- 
Fences will be set up around the equipment; 
- 
Awareness-raising of the benefits of CP-CS will be conducted so that the communities appreciate the value of 
the hydromet equipment installed nearby; and 
- 
Agreements will be signed with the NMHSs or their line ministry of the 4 countries to protect the equipment 
during their lifetime (e.g. equipment insurance where possible). 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
There is a risk that climate-related hazards will damage the hydro-meteorological equipment during and after the 
project lifetime. For example, tropical cyclones and storms could destroy automatic weather stations and 
communication infrastructure if those are not carefully placed using resilient materials.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The four beneficiary countries are affected by climate-related hazards which could cause damages to the newly 
established equipment. Particular attention will be given to site selection to install new equipment in ‘risk-free’ areas – 
e.g. avoiding low-land areas affected by floods. This will, for example, be ensured by installing the new equipment in 
similar location of previously set equipment if this location is known for not being affected by climate-related hazards 
and extremes. In addition, all infrastructure and equipment will be built with adequate construction materials and 
efficient design to be resilient to severe and frequent tropical cyclone events, floods, high winds etc (future-proof). 
Finally, enhanced climate-related forecasts and risk assessments will enable the NMHSs to protect or remove 
movable equipment when a warning is issued.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium

=== PAGE 114 ===
F 
F 
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 111 OF 119 
 
 
 
111 
 
Description 
There is a risk that innovative technology and techniques compromise the end result in terms of quality of 
observations and forecasts, as well as operations and maintenance, due to limited expertise. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
While the project will promote the use of innovative solutions both in terms of observation systems and downscaling 
of forecasts, only well established and proven technology and techniques will be used, and therefore particular 
attention will be given to the development of the technical specifications and terms of reference to ensure, as well as 
to the evaluation process, to ensure that they meet this requirement.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
High 
Description 
The proposed project could be affected by limited commitment of the government towards supporting continuously 
the required financial and human resources required for O&M. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
As described in the O&M Plan (see Annex 21), efforts will be made throughout the project implementation to ensure 
that sustainable funding and human resources are in place for the implementation of the project and beyond project 
implementation, by applying the following mechanisms to support O&M in the four countries: 
(a) Introducing value-added services through cost recovery of meteorological services and commercial services; 
(b) Promoting Public-Private Engagement (PPE); 
(c) Engaging with the UN and other international partners working in the four countries; 
(d) Establishing business plans and revising the Hydromet Laws in each of the four countries for revenue 
generation and license fees; 
(e) Leveraging funds from the SOFF/GBON. 
In summary, as for Mauritius and Seychelles, in order to complement government funding, the strengthening and 
enabling of the institutional framework and policy will be essential to achieve the availability and sustainability of the 
O&M budget by mainstreaming Climate services commercialization and establishing cost recovery of meteorological 
services, as described in the O&M Plan – revenue generation (Annex 21, pages 2 to 6). Such an improvement 
should also be achieved by the project for Comoros and Madagascar (see in particular page 4 of the O&M plan, 
Annex 21). A Commitment Letter from IOC, confirming country commitment post-project implementation period to 
operate and maintain the equipment, is attached in the project package as Annex 0_IOC_commitemtent_Letters.  
In addition, and particularly for Comoros and Madagascar, in order to ensure the sustainability of the system, the 
project is considering a more secure alternative based on the mobilization of funds from the SOFF/GBON in order to 
support the O&M costs (see O&M Plan, Annex 21, page 9). Noting that SOFF/GBON will primarily support SIDS and 
LDCs, Comoros and Madagascar are eligible to get such support. Thus, a request has already been submitted to the 
WMO, as a project technical partner, to consider these countries for the SOFF implementation, and a letter is 
expected to be received by countries and IOC from WMO to be attached to the project package. For Comoros and 
Madagascar, additional agreements with ASECNA (see O&M Plan, Annex 21, page 4) are being negotiated to 
ensure that the newly installed equipment can be considered as a new asset that can be operated and maintained 
under the ASECNA umbrella. It is recalled that AFD is a long-standing partner of ASECNA and has recently 
supported ASECNA with a non-souvereign loan of 60 M€. 
Additionally, the PIROI (Red Cross network  in the IO region), which is already involved in the IOC project generally 
and EW actions during extreme events, will play a crucial role as in the implementation of the MH-IBF-EWS and last 
mile connectivity by ensuring that critical early warning information is delivered in a timely and efficient manner.

=== PAGE 115 ===
F 
F 
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 112 OF 119 
 
 
 
112 
 
PIROI will also assist in bridging with and bringing the support of IFRC who is very active in the region in pursuing 
the implementation of Forecast-based Financing (FbF), which is being currently piloted in the region in Mozambique, 
but expected to be expanded to other countries (not included in this project proposal as this is being supported 
through other mechanisms). PIROI has already expressed its support to the project, and an official letter from IFRC 
is expected to be received and attached to the project package to confirm PIROI commitement. 
At the end of the project, it is considered that the environment is enabled for the NMHSs and DRM institutions to be 
strong enough to allow the Mauritius and Seychelles to leverage sufficient O&M costs and to allow Madagascar and 
Comoros to take over GCF commitment on O&M to be mobilized during the project onset. Description of all activities 
that will be in place during the project to support and create an enabling environment for the sustainability of 
investments are described in the O&M Plan provided as part of the project proposal package (Annex 21).

=== PAGE 116 ===
G 
G 
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 113 OF 119 
 
 
 
113 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
The proposal for Hydromet project is predominantly for capacity building and institutional strengthening to deliver 
improved climate services. There will be an associated provision of new hydrometeorological equipment and tools for 
monitoring, data storage, data processing, modelling, forecasting and service delivery systems. These are specified 
in relation to both the needs of each country and requirements for coordinated IOC regional climate services 
provision. This component of the project encompasses the refurbishment and re-equipping of existing weather 
stations and installation of strategically-placed weather monitoring equipment facilities and river gauges, etc. Such 
state of the art technology will record meteorological and hydrological data to be analysed and disseminated to 
government services and end users, including the general public.  
Environmental and social risks 
As evaluated in the assessment, the project is expected to have minimal environmental and social impacts and is 
more likely to generate beneficial impacts. The project has been classified overall as Category B. The safeguards 
risks are primarily associated with the installation of new meteorological equipment mounted on masts (e.g. new or 
rehabilitated automatic weather stations, AWS), in the case of the Doppler Radar units on small tower structures (also 
supplied will be work stations, computers, wiring, etc.), and installation of hydrological stations.  
AWSs are typically installed within local government owned properties. A very limited area is required for each 
weather station (some 100m2) at sites of modified and semi-natural habitat, such as airfields or government research 
institutes. With the exception of river gauges, the equipment will be installed almost exclusively at existing stations 
where they can be protected from damage, being on secure premises and/or through secure fencing. Many stations 
have fallen into disuse and project meteorological equipment will be established on existing sites on government-
owned land; therefore, the project will not result in land acquisition and/or resettlement of local population. It is 
anticipated that there will be minimal planning requirements but following the environmental planning procedure of the 
ESMF all local permitting requirements will be adhered to and the PMU will facilitate and assure such regulations are 
respected and ESMF plan reporting requirements will enable monitoring and accountability. 
In each of the countries it is anticipated that one Doppler Radar unit will be installed and these will be mounted on a 
base of a tower (up to some 8 meters in height). There will also be a small number of wave-monitoring buoys and tidal 
gauges. Modification and extension of existing buildings associated with offices and weather station facilities is also 
envisaged. The Seychelles government are relocating their main offices at their own expense and these will receive 
certain project supplied computers and data processing equipment.  
Negative environmental and social impacts which would potentially occur from the installation works of AWSs include 
noise pollution from machinery and equipment, increase in generation of solid wastes, and increase in dust emissions 
as a result of excavation and civil works during the installation of the AWSs especially in new sites. These impacts 
will affect, albeit temporarily, occupational health and safety of workers to be involved during construction works and 
surrounding localities in close proximity to the selected local government owned properties.  
The ESMF (E&S framework) has examined all such potential impacts and suggests negligible potential impacts if 
basic codes of good health and safety practice are followed by contractors, including national and international 
regulations applicable in the countries including ILO conventions. The nature of the project is such that its potential 
physical impact and safeguards risk factor is necessarily limited. The new physical infrastructure element at any 
location will be very modest in size and dispersed in siting so cumulative issues are not a relevant consideration.  
Environmental Management  
The process of optimal site selection for facilities is addressed together with health and safety guidance for 
construction. Planning requirements for Doppler Radar installations and the wave height monitoring buoys will 
respect national planning compliance expectations. The construction safeguards are not only relevant to installation 
works but also any protection fencing to guard against third party damage. A “fit-for-purpose” approach is adopted in 
line with the GCF risk-based policy to the project proponent and guide management and monitoring of sub-

=== PAGE 117 ===
G 
G 
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 114 OF 119 
 
 
 
114 
 
contractors. The project will ensure that all equipment to be purchased meets international environmental, safety and 
technical standards. 
Where there are alternative options in siting the proponent will seek the optimal location subject to approval of the 
national environmental authorities. An E&S safeguard monitoring and reporting component will constantly review and 
audit the implementation of the programme including setting up of new and rehabilitated hydrometeorological stations 
to verify that safeguards are implemented. 
In conclusion, very limited negative risks are predicted to arise from the project and, when effectively implemented, the 
project will provide reliable climate-related data of importance for climate risk adaptation and enhancing the 
management of natural resources, mitigating vulnerability of exposed populations and assets to climate change. Some 
sites will benefit positively as buildings and station sites in poor condition are renovated resulting in positive direct and 
indirect impacts. The accompanying training in use of new project-supplied equipment will include health and safety in 
equipment and facility use.  
The ESMF (see Annex 6) presents actions to assure sound safeguards implementation to manage risks and achieve 
compliance with national and IFC requirements, and therefore realise the significant benefits of the project while 
avoiding or mitigating any adverse effects. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The proposed GCF project includes a Gender Assessment and Action Plan (Annex 8).  
The analytical prerogatives of the Gender Assessment and Action Plan are informed by both GCF and AFD gender 
policies: the 2018 Gender Policy and Action Plan passed by the GCF (building upon the 2014 edition)149; and, the 
AFD Strategy on Gender and the Reduction of Gender Inequalities (2014), as well as its AFD Group Strategy 
2018 – 2022.150 There is no gender strategy available currently at the IOC level151. However, national gender plans 
are available in each of the four countries.152 These plans were reviewed along with other gender-related legislations 
such as on economic empowerment and prevention of gender-based violence, and with gender-related protocols like 
the CEDAW and Maputo protocols. These serve to point out the national legal and institutional frameworks and the 
gender priorities of each country, which can be used to support gender equality through the proposed project.  
The proposed Gender Assessment provides an overview of the gender baseline in each beneficiary country 
(alongside a regional appraisal). The assessment is based on rapid in-country missions as well as desk-review of 
available secondary literature and data. Particularly, the assessment identifies key gender-related factors that 
determine climate resilience, access to EWS and CS, potential inequality aspects and trickle-down effect of project 
benefits towards end-users of CP-CS (most particularly within vulnerable communities). 
Semi-structured interviews (with focus groups, and institutional representatives) were conducted during short in-
country missions. A comprehensive desk-review was conducted based on existing literature on gender, climate 
change adaptation, climate services and hydro-meteorological services. The triangulated assessment was 
synthesised to cover the four project countries, taking into consideration their unique contexts and performances and 
across social indicators. 
Gender-differentiated climate impacts and natural disasters: The World Economic Forum (WEF)’s report The 
Global Risks Report 2020 finds that the top five among the primary ten risk factors facing the world population are 
 
 
149 GCF – Green Climate Fund (2018). Updated Gender Policy and Action Plan. Policy Document.  
Accessed 22 April 2019. Available at: https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/1087995/GCF_B.20_07_-
_Updated_Gender_Policy_and_Action_Plan_2018_2020.pdf/9bd48527-6e35-a72a-2f52-fd401d16d358 
150 AFD – Agence Française de Développement (2019). Official Website. Accessed 2 August 2019. Available at: https://www.afd.fr/en/page-
thematique-axe/gender-equality  
151 However, it should be noted that Seychelles has put a GCF Readiness proposal together, which request the development of a regional IOC 
strategy for equal woman involvement in environmental projects. See GCF (2017). Readiness Proposal with the Indian Ocean Commission 
(IOC) for Republic of Seychelles. Project Document. 
152 Comoros : National Policy on Gender Equality and Equity (2008) 
Madagascar : National Policy for the Promotion of Women (2000 – 2015) 
Mauritius : National Gender Policy Framework (2008) 
Seychelles : National Gender Policy (2016)

=== PAGE 118 ===
G 
G 
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 115 OF 119 
 
 
 
115 
 
environmental in nature: (in order of risk) extreme weather, climate action failure, natural disasters, biodiversity loss, 
human-made environmental disasters.153 Gender determinants (such as consumption patterns and incidence of 
poverty, access to and control of resources and power, time use patterns and economic activities) when juxtaposed 
with environmental risks, can uniquely compound and overlap to create progressive vulnerabilities in each of the 
project countries. High burden of adverse impacts of climate change, especially with the lack of EWS, CS, and 
hydromet services, will limit not only adaptation capacities in real time, but also have intergenerational effects and 
undo progress made towards gender equality in the island nations (with increased consequences especially in LDC 
contexts of Madagascar and Comoros). 
Gendered access to adaptation solutions: Site visits undertaken in the Comoros (Moroni) and Seychelles (La 
Digue, Praslin and Victoria) and engagement with government officials in all four countries, revealed that adaptation 
solutions, ranging from DRR training to climate-resilient agricultural inputs, face gendered barriers. For the 
operationalisation of the Hydromet project, it is important to consider that women are often not allowed to access 
public spaces (where EW may be announced – such as mosques in Comoros) or have limited to no radio access (in 
Madagascar), and generally, the dissemination of information are restricted to channels primarily accessed and 
controlled by men.  
Gendered limitations in decision-making institutions and representation: Decision-making institutions, power-
sharing mechanisms and overall representation tend to be skewed towards men in all four IOC member countries, 
excepting Seychelles. Yet, at the same time, women make important household decisions daily, in these countries, 
that pertain to domestic food security, water provision, and other essentials – which contribute towards DRM 
response, resilience during hazardous hydrometeorological events, and adaptation capacities. An adequate 
integration of these complex and gendered phenomena in the project approach will, thus, be necessary to respond to 
particular needs and interests of vulnerable groups at decentralised and grassroots locales. Bottom-up, tailored 
approach, will ensure project ownership, and sustainability at the community context. 
Side-lining local adaptation measures and information channels: Communities of the SWIO possess experience, 
history and knowledge in the management and use of natural resources as sustainable livelihood sources. Thus, self-
help adaptation methods, particularly those discrete and reactive in nature – information channels, sharing of 
resources and communal control of wastage during crises, building strategies – can be traced among these 
communities. The project, especially due to its focus on building resilience of communities, as well as ecosystems, 
thus has to ensure the incorporation of these techniques into broader, pre-emptive EWS, CS and hydromet services. 
Such a process will require vetting as well as emphasis on cross-community dialogue to tailor these provisions, 
consider inclusions and exclusions, manage expectations, etc. 
Additionally, Annex 8 gives consideration to gender-based violence and time poverty154 experienced by women and 
men (in some contexts), and how these phenomena can also constrain the adoption of adaptation solutions, 
particularly in ex post disaster and other vulnerable contexts. 
In order to address the above-mentioned gendered limitations, particularly women’s participation in adaptation 
solutions, and to build on the potential opportunities of increased gender equality through the objectives and outputs 
of the Hydromet project, a Gender Action Plan has been developed.  
Key actions included in the plan are presented in the table below per project component: 
 
Project Component 
Gender Action Point  
1. Capacity Building, Institutional, 
Development and Regional 
Cooperation  
- Include gender-responsive policy inputs in regional and national 
frameworks developed for climate services (with reference to WMO Gender 
Strategy) 
 
 
153 World Economic Forum – WEF (2020). Official Website. Accessed 17 January 2020.  
Available at: http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Global_Risk_Report_2020.pdf 
154 An individual is time poor if he/she is working long hours and is also monetary poor, or would fall into monetary poverty if he/she were 
to reduce his/her working hours below a given time poverty line. Thus being time poor results from the combination of two conditions 
(source: World Bank elibrary)

=== PAGE 119 ===
G 
G 
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 116 OF 119 
 
 
 
116 
 
 
- Ensure gender capacity building through the design of training modules to 
assist transition and capacity development plans of NMHSs, DRM institutions 
and relevant sectoral ministries 
- Increase gender parity in new staff and trainees hired for EWS, CS, and 
hydromet services 
2. High Quality Climate – related 
data, and improved EWSs and 
climate risk assessments  
- Ensure gender-engagement training of observers and forecasters, 
particularly those involved in impact-based forecasting and nowcasting, to 
increase gender-responsiveness to EWS and CS products 
- Research and Development activities to include community and social 
vulnerabilities, particularly gendered impacts and gender-differentiated 
capacities of resilience, in the hazard maps and climate vulnerability maps 
developed for each country  
3. Enhanced use of climate 
services for climate change 
adaptation and disaster risk 
reduction at national and regional 
levels  
- Conduct needs assessments to ensure gender-responsiveness to daily 
weather bulletins, seasonal forecasts and agrometeorological advisories  
- Ensure gender-responsiveness in EW dissemination, particularly the limited 
access women have to public spaces (mosques in Comoros), or information 
channels (radio in Madagascar), and the incidence of gendered time poverty 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Contracting Authority  
In line with the Accreditation Master Agreement that sets forth, among others, the general terms and condition 
between the Parties in connection with Funded Activity, AFD (AE) will enter into Funded Activity Agreement with the 
Green Climate Fund. Furthermore, the Accredited Entity will carry out the project through signing a Subsidiary 
Agreement (SA) with the IOC as the Executing Entity, representing the beneficiary countries. This SA and its related 
documents will specify the mandates, duties and engagements related to IOC and related to national counterparts 
beneficiaries of the project, specifically, National Service Providers of each beneficiary countries.  
For the implementation of the Project, the IOC (EE) will enter into contractual agreements with each of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs (MoFA) of Beneficiary countries which. The Contractual arrangements can take the shape of a 
“Project Agreement (PA)”.  
The contractual agreements to be established between the EE (IOC) and each of the four countries shall designate 
the NMHSs, as lead implementing entities, in each of the four target countries, wherein all the activities and funds 
allocated will be described, as well as their functions and responsibilities throughout the project implementation.  
At National level, each MoFA will also sign an agreement with line ministries of the National Meteorological and 
Hydrological Services or with the concerned Agencies directly such as for Seychelles and Comoros, and with 
Disaster Risk Management Institutions, and each entity considered as national services providers in the project  
context. These agreements aim at clarifying the mandates, roles and commitments of each party. 
Procurement  
AFD’s Procurement rules are in line with international standards provided by the World Bank Group. The AFD 
Procurement guidelines will apply to the EE, in charge of implementing the Hydromet project. For a detailed 
presentation of AFD Procurement rules, see the Procurement Guidelines for AFD Financed Contracts in Foreign 
Countries available on AFD’s website. 
(https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2017-09/directives-passation-marches-etats-etrangers-english-version.pdf).  
All procurement undertaken will be done by the EE (IOC) and based on AFD procurement guidelines. On the 
procurement process the EE (IOC), will be supported by the Project Management Unit. PMU will be mandated to (i) 
monitor the procurement plan implementation and its updates, (ii) to draft the tender dossiers internally and or by the 
mobilization of qualified experts, procure, and assess the bids under the bids under EE supervision (iii) to supervise 
the implementation. The EE will be the unique signatory of services and equipment’s contracts. 
AFD supervision of the project

=== PAGE 120 ===
G 
G 
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 117 OF 119 
 
 
 
117 
 
AFD will provide no–objections :  
1) 
Prior to the signing of the Contractual agreement between EE and MoFA and contractual agreement 
between MoFA and National line ministries or beneficiary entities, 
2) 
On semi-annual national reporting Progress Reports, and on annual technical and financial work plan 
prepared by the PMU,  
3) 
On every step of a tendering process according to its own procedures.  
 
Bi annual supervision missions will take place; including mobilization of headquarters expertise. Environmental, social 
and gender AFD expert staff could be assigned to the monitoring of the ESMP and Gender Action Plan.  
Financial Management  
The detailed provisions regarding financial management of the GCF resources by AFD will be described in the 
Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) signed between GCF and AFD. Reporting will be provided by AFD to the GCF 
specifying among others: 1) the amounts already committed and disbursed by AFD to the EE; 2) the remaining 
amount; and iii) a provisional disbursement schedule on a one-year rolling horizon. Annual Performance Reports 
(APR) will be submitted to GCF following the reporting requirements detailed in the FAA. These reports will include a 
narrative on the implementation progress based on the logical framework, considerations on the ongoing 
performance of the project, updates on the indicators, and on ESS as well as gender. The APR will be submitted to 
the Secretariat on an annual basis for the period ending on 31 December within 60 days after the end of the relevant 
annual period. The first APR will be submitted following the end of the calendar year after the Parties have entered 
into the relevant FAA and the last APR will be submitted within six months of the end of the relevant reporting period. 
The implementation reporting period of the Project will start from the date of effectiveness of the FAAs until the 
project implementation end date. Mid-term and final independent evaluation of the project will be organised. 
Accounting and disbursements  
The subsidy agreement to be signed between AFD and IOC will establish the terms and conditions of the 
cooperation, and define clear roles and responsibilities for both parties. The projects AFD, EU and GCF funds will be 
directly and exclusively managed by the EE (IOC), through a dedicated project account to be open and managed by 
IOC, and by AFD (AE). Disbursements will take the form of advance payment to the EE (IOC) or direct payment by 
the AE (AFD) to firms contracted for works, supply of goods or services. There will be no direct management of the 
funds or any disbursements to the national Entities or NHMS. 
Payments in the form of advances, except for the first advance, will be made under the following conditions: 
-- The result of the audit carried out on the previous advance is satisfactory to the AFD; 
- These audits are carried out by an independent audit firm selected by IOC, after the AFD has given notice of no 
objection to the terms of reference of the audit assignment and to the audit firm selected. 
As the AE, AFD will disburse funding received from the GCF and the EU, EE must open a separate bank account for 
the project; this ensures transparency regarding financial transactions and renders audits more efficiently. The EE, 
with the support of the PMU; will be the manager of the revolving advance project account. Revolving Advance 
payments will be made by AFD at the request of IOC, based on the issuance of activity reports and according to the 
disbursement schedule of the convention. The advance payments tranches will be used for :  
i) 
signed services contacts with a maximum amount of thousand dollars (100,000 EUR),  
ii) 
payment of PMU staff members, and PMU set-up and running costs. 
 
Each request to be introduced by the EE for a new advance payment drawdown should be accompanied by the 
necessary proof of consumption of funds from the previous advance tranches (70% of the previous (N-1) and 100% of 
the advance (N-2) and all other relevant documents and services contracts.  
For all contract providers of goods and services with an amount superior to thousands euros (100,000 EUR), direct 
payments will be covered by AFD.

=== PAGE 121 ===
G 
G 
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 118 OF 119 
 
 
 
118 
 
As IOC is in the process of acquiring GCF accreditation, it will benefit from capacity development in the project from 
acting as EE.  
During the disbursement period, AFD will receive semi-annual reports from IOC on implementation to track progress 
and identify potential issues as well as improvement opportunities. The RPC will liaise with AFD every quarter to 
report on project implementation. AFD will also be represented at the Project Regional Steering Committee organised 
every year. Controls will be performed before every disbursement by the PMU Financial Officer so as to continuously 
oversee the correct implementation of the project. Accounting and financial audits will be conducted by an 
independent third party. At the end of the disbursement period, AFD will prepare a project completion report 
summarising the main events of the implementation phase, the results achieved, and the lessons learned. This report 
will also provide recommendations for future improvement.  
Cash Flow 
The figure below depicts the flow of funds between IFIs, the AE, the EE and the providers of services, goods and 
equipment. 
 
 
Figure 4: Flow of Funds 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
  
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 122 ===
H 
H 
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 119 OF 119 
 
 
 
 
119 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule   
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☒ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  HYCOS Feasibility Study 2019

=== PAGE 123 ===
UNION DES COMORES 
Unite-SoMarite-Developpement 
I^^^StE^ 'Wi 
B J a ^ i 
- w j j g ^ 
Ministere de 1'Agriculture, 
x i ^ s : * ^ ^ 
ti 
ti - i u 
dela Peche, at de rEnvirotinement, 
l i i J I j 
A A ^ I J - U i l j j l l j 
a 
lUJi J i 
lull . L ^ i sjbi 
Direction Generaie 
de i'Environnement et des Forets 
Moroni, on 23 April 2020 
Ref.N°20- 
06 
/MAPE/NDA 
To 
The Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
Korea 
Subject: Funding proposal for the GCF by Agence Fran?aise de Development (AFD) regarding 
Building Regional Resilience through Strengthened Meteorological, Hydrological and 
Climate Services in the Indian Ocean Commission Member Countries (Hydromet Project) 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the project Hydromet as in Union of Comoros included in the funding proposal 
submitted by AFD to us on 27 April 2020. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of youssouf HAMADI, the National 
focal point of Union of Comoros. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, 
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) 
The government of Union of Comoros has no-objection to the project as included in 
the funding proposal; 
(b) 
The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Comoros's 
national priorities, strategies and plans; 
(c) 
In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project as 
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations. 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
[We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the project 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 126 ===
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, ENERGY& CLIMATE CHANGE 
ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE DEPARTMENT 
 
Office of the Principal Secretary 
Botanical Gardens, Mont Fleuri , P.O. Box 445, Victoria, Mahe, Republic of Seychelles 
Tel. No. (+248) 4670568 
 
Email: w.agricole@env.gov.sc / w.agricole@meteo.gov.sc  
Please address all correspondence to the Principal Secretary – Mr Wills Agricole 
 
DATE:  5th February, 2020 
 
Yannick Glemarec 
Executive Director 
Green Climate Fund 
Songdo Business District 
175 Art Center-daero 
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA 
 
 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Indian Ocean Commission 
regarding 
“Building 
Regional 
Resilience 
through 
strengthening 
Meteorological, hydrological and climate service in the Indian Ocean 
Commission member states (Hydromet)” 
 
Dear Sir, 
 
We refer to the “Building Regional Resilience through strengthening 
Meteorological, hydrological and climate service in the Indian Ocean 
Commission member states (Hydromet)” project in Seychelles as included 
in the funding proposal submitted by Indian Ocean Commission to us on 31st 
January, 2020. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Green Climate 
Fund (GCF) NDA of SEYCHELLES. Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the 
content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby communicate 
our no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal. 
 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
a) The government of Seychelles has no-objection to the project as 
included in the funding proposal; 
b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with 
Seychelles’ national priorities, strategies and plans;

=== PAGE 127 ===
c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the 
project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with 
relevant national laws and regulations. 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the 
project as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be 
implemented within the scope of the project. We acknowledge that this letter 
will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
 
Kind regards,  
 
 
Wills Agricole (Mr.) 
 
GCF NDA OF SEYCHELLES AND 
PRINCIPAL SECRETARY/ENERGY & CLIMATE CHANGE

=== PAGE 128 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Building Regional Resilience through Strengthened 
Meteorological, Hydrological and Climate Services in the 
Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) Member Countries 
(Hydromet Project) 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Agence Franҫaise de Développement (AFD)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific location(s) 
of project or target country 
or location(s) of programme 
Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, and Seychelles 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
Wednesday, February 3, 2021 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and French 
Explanation on language 
French is an official language of Comoros, Madagascar, and 
Seychelles. 
 
English is the official language of Mauritius and an official 
language of Seychelles. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.afd.fr/en/ressources/hydromet-project-
annex-6-environmental-and-social-management-
framework  
 
French: 
https://www.afd.fr/fr/ressources/projet-hydromet-
annexe-6-cadre-de-gestion-environnementale-et-sociale 
Other link(s) 
https://www.afd.fr/en/e-s-complaints-mechanism  
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
Wednesday, February 3, 2021 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and French 
Explanation on language 
French is an official language of Comoros, Madagascar, and 
Seychelles. 
 
English is the official language of Mauritius and an official 
language of Seychelles.

=== PAGE 129 ===
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.afd.fr/en/ressources/hydromet-project-
annex-6-environmental-and-social-management-
framework  
 
French: 
https://www.afd.fr/fr/ressources/projet-hydromet-
annexe-6-cadre-de-gestion-environnementale-et-sociale 
Other link(s) 
https://www.afd.fr/en/e-s-complaints-mechanism  
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework”. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Wednesday, February 3, 2021 
Place 
In the vicinity of the four National Meteorological and 
Hydrological Services sites, where some of the national 
consultations were conducted with stakeholders (e.g. local 
NGOs). National Meteorological and Hydrological Services 
addresses are:  
 
Comoros: Agence Nationale de l’Aviation Civile et de la 
Météorologie (ANACM), BP 72, Moroni 
 
Madagascar: Direction Générale de la Météorologie (DGM), 
Rue FARAFATY. BP 1254 Ampandrianomby, Antananarivo 
(101) 
 
Mauritius: Mauritius Meteorology Services (MMS), Saint 
Paul Road, Vacoas 
 
Seychelles:  Seychelles Meteorological Authority (S MA), PO 
Box :1604 International Airport, Mahe

=== PAGE 130 ===
Disclosure has also been made on the Commission de 
l’Océan Indien website: 
https://www.commissionoceanindien.org/portfolio-
items/hydromet/  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
Thursday, June 18, 2020 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Tuesday, March 16, 2021 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 131 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP161 
Proposal name: 
Building Regional Resilience through Strengthened 
Meteorological, Hydrological and Climate Services in the Indian 
Ocean Commission (IOC) Member Countries 
Accredited entity: 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) 
Country/(ies): 
Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, and Seychelles 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
Four South-West Indian Ocean countries will 
benefit from substantially strengthened 
ability to generate and effectively use climate 
data 
The financial sustainability of operations and 
maintenance will be critical to the proposal’s 
success after the project implementation 
period 
Reaches total population of the project 
countries: improvements to early warning 
and early action, impact-based forecasting, 
forecast-based financing 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XVII, titled “List of proposed conditions and 
recommendations”, respectively.  
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background  
3. 
Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles are all highly vulnerable to natural 
hazards amplified by climate change factors. The four countries, all located in the South-West 
Indian Ocean region, must deal with tropical cyclones and heavy rainfalls, which in turn cause 
floods, flash floods, landslides and drought. Rising sea levels also increase coastal vulnerability. 
Tropical cyclones represent a frequent and substantial threat and have been responsible for 
significant historical economic losses and casualties. In order to better manage and prepare for 
these threats to the lives and livelihoods of these four countries, the proposed project will 
support investments to produce high-quality impact-based climate-related products and 
services, including early warning systems (EWS), at the regional and national levels. These 
products and services will be more accurate, location-specific, and user-tailored, and they will 
increase lead time to prepare for climate-related hazards.  
4. 
Currently, Comoros and Madagascar have low capacity to deliver weather, climate, and 
hydrological services, often referred to as “hydromet services.” These countries require support 
to achieve the “Basic” level of hydromet services as defined by World Meteorological

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 132 
 
 
Organization (WMO) standards. Mauritius and Seychelles are at the “Basic” level. This project 
proposal will raise the capacity of the respective National Meteorological and Hydrological 
Services (NMHSs) of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles to the “Essential” level, 
meaning that all four countries can develop and provide climate predictions including seasonal 
climate outlooks, work with users in various sectors to identify their weather and climate data 
requirements, and provide advice on climate information and products.  
5. 
The proposed project takes a regional approach, which the accredited entity (AE) argues 
is key as the four target countries are vulnerable to similar climate-related hazards and face 
identical problems, challenges and needs. Project design focuses on sharing expertise and tools 
between regional and national levels to reach a similar level of operational capacity in each 
country, ensuring robust interoperability, efficiencies and optimization of infrastructure costs. 
6. 
The project cost totals USD 71.4 million. The total figure is comprised of USD 52.8 
million applied from the GCF, USD 5.4 million in co-financing contributions by French 
Development Agency (AFD) and USD 6.2 million from the European Union’s Intra-ACP Climate 
Services Program. Project countries will contribute USD 6.9 million in a mix of cash and in-kind 
contributions.  
7. 
The Secretariat team has assessed the proposal’s environmental and social safeguards 
(ESS) and concurs with the AFD Category B rating. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Component 1: Capacity-building, institutional development, regional cooperation and public-
private engagement (total cost: USD 8.5 million; GCF cost: USD 1.5 million)  
8. 
Component 1 aims to strengthen regional cooperation through targeted investments in 
capacity building and institutional development. Through the component a regional climate 
centre network (RCC-Network) will be established among the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) 
member countries. Regional and national frameworks for climate services to be developed 
through the project should enable the development and delivery of climate services at the 
respective levels. Institutional strengthening, including the business models/plans for the 
respective NHMS, will also be implemented to achieve financial returns and retain skilled staff. 
Hydromet regulatory material will be reviewed to explore opportunities to establish or 
strengthen existing national funds for climate information and early warning services. 
9. 
 Key strengths of Component 1 include the exploration of new business models with a 
cost-recovery plan for each NMHS (Activity 1.2.1). Each business model/plan is key to ensure 
the long-term maintenance and operation of the NMHSs, the sustainability of new equipment 
and software, and yearly funding for the National Climate Outlook Forums. While the RCC-
Network will also include business plans to engage the private sector in the region, its cost 
effectiveness and usefulness is somewhat difficult to assess.  
Component 2: High-quality climate-related data, improved multi-hazard impact-based forecasts 
and EWS (MH-IBF-EWS), and climate risk assessments (total cost: USD 32.1 million; GCF cost: USD 
28.9 million)  
10. 
Component 2 represents the project’s core hydromet infrastructure and systems 
investments as well as the capacity-building needed to successfully operate that infrastructure. 
It also represents the majority of GCF funding requested. Under Component 2, observation and 
monitoring network equipment and information systems will be modernised in line with WMO 
technical standards. A regional maintenance and calibration laboratory (WMO Regional 
Instrument Centre) will be established to optimize the maintenance and calibration of this 
equipment. In addition, the technical capacities and expertise of NMHS staff members will be

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 133 
 
 
improved through specialized training. Data centres will also be established at regional and 
national levels and a quality management system will be put in place. 
11. 
While the proposed project has put in place arrangements for the operation and 
maintenance (O&M) of the equipment and systems, this has been an issue for previous 
investments and therefore remains a concern and risk factor. The long-term viability and 
usefulness of these investments will hinge on the ability of the NHMS and the IOC to successfully 
operate and maintain investments in this component in particular, and project investments 
more broadly.  
Component 3: Enhanced accessibility and use of climate services for climate change adaptation, 
and improved capabilities in implementing a people-centred MH-IBF-EWS for disaster risk 
reduction (total cost: USD 17.3 million; GCF cost: USD 16.8 million)  
12. 
Through Component 3, climate products and services will be used to reduce 
vulnerability and increase resilience of vulnerable socioeconomic groups. NMHSs will also be 
able to consult with end users to improve the quality and usefulness of their climate-related 
information, products and services. Component 3 particularly aims at equipping decision-
makers and communities with the tools they need to prepare for climate-related hazards and to 
adapt to short- and long-term climate variability and change. Long-term climate change 
adaptation plans will be updated in line with new results from the climate change projections 
supported under Component 2.  
13. 
Component 3 is critical to ensure that the climate information and data generated 
reaches the end users most vulnerable to climate change hazards. In addition, improved daily 
weather bulletins, seasonal forecasts, and agrometeorological advisories will add value and 
build resilience among key climate-vulnerable sectors.  
Operations and maintenance and contingency costs (total cost: USD 9.3 million; GCF cost: USD 3.4 
million)  
14. 
During the project implementation period, Madagascar and Seychelles will fully finance 
their respective O&M costs, while a combination of GCF grant funding and government in-kind 
contributions will pay for the O&M costs of Comoros and Mauritius.  
15. 
After completion of the proposed project, O&M costs will be supported by government 
funds. Alternatively, the project country governments will seek prospective O&M funding from 
the new Global Basic Observing Network/Systematic Observations Financing Facility 
(GBON/SOFF) initiative and/or cost-recovery from the commercialized new climate products 
and services. There is also the potential establishment of a ring-fenced Climate Information and 
Early Warning System (CIEWS) through a Hydromet Law. Supporting details of post-
implementation O&M are elaborated in the Operations and Management Plan annex. 
Project management (total cost: USD 2.9 million; GCF cost: USD 2.1 million) 
16. 
GCF is the primary funder of project management costs and the expected share is within 
GCF policy limits.  
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
17. 
This is a large, ambitious project with many expected outcomes and beneficiaries. The 
principal investment will be in the meteorological and hydrological observation networks, for 
which significant infrastructure is proposed. However, this is necessary to improve the services 
being delivered by the NHMS of the four countries as they address the issues and complexities 
of a new climate paradigm.  
18. 
One of the key issues likely to emerge from the project in the longer term will be 
capacity development and subsequently the project’s sustainability if that capacity development

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 134 
 
 
is not achieved. The establishment of a regional training centre to address the need for capacity 
development will be a key factor for the long-term success of the project and some additional 
detail on this would be useful. 
19. 
However, the project appears to be transformative and innovative and has the scope to 
significantly improve the lives and livelihoods of many of the residents of Comoros, Madagascar, 
Mauritius and Seychelles. 
3.1 
Impact potential                                                                            Scale: High 
20. 
The South-West Indian Ocean African small island developing States of Comoros, 
Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles are extremely vulnerable to natural hazards and climate 
change, especially tropical cyclones and heavy rainfalls, leading to floods, flash floods and 
landslides, drought, increased temperatures and sea level rise. Scientific observations confirm 
shifts in the climate patterns observed in the South-West Indian Ocean region, including more 
floods (both directly and indirectly associated with tropical cyclones) and drought, based on a 
comparison of the periods 1961–1990 and 1991–2020, as well as increased temperatures. 
Climate-related disasters in Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles have affected about 
14.4 million people in the period 1964–2014, with physical damage estimated at USD 13.1 
billion, and are expected to further increase in the context of climate change.  
21. 
Improvements in services warning of high-impact climate and weather events are 
imperative in order to increase the resilience and safety of nations in the future. Without this 
proposed intervention, it is likely that, minimally, Comoros and Madagascar will be locked in a 
vicious cycle of extreme poverty among the most vulnerable communities as they struggle to 
recover from a cascade of seasonal and annual hurricanes and related climate disasters. The 
urgency and benefits of building resilience through anticipatory action to improve their critical 
services, infrastructure and living standards through this project cannot be overemphasized. 
22. 
The total number of beneficiaries (combined direct and indirect) of these interventions 
is estimated to be 29,241,477 across the four countries, of which at least 50 per cent will be 
women beneficiaries. The direct project beneficiaries are estimated to amount to 19,453,286 
people representing 67 per cent of the total population, with indirect beneficiaries amounting to 
9,788,191 people. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
                                     Scale: Medium–High 
23. 
The proposed hydromet project is designed to strengthen the resilience of the most 
vulnerable communities by modernizing hydromet and disaster management services; 
strengthening national and regional institutional frameworks; fostering regional cooperation; 
and expanding climate knowledge and awareness. The regional approach is key to underpinning 
improvements in the production and dissemination of climate services through economy of 
scale, as the four target countries are vulnerable to similar climate-related hazards and 
socioeconomic conditions. It would ensure robust interoperability, efficiencies and optimization 
of infrastructure costs, together with a higher level of harmonization, integration and 
complementarity within the region. 
24. 
The proposed project seeks to introduce innovative approaches to impact-based 
forecasting and forecast-based financing to ensure that last-mile delivery is based on the best 
available science and practices that target the most vulnerable with actionable risk information. 
It will provide observation networks to detect and monitor changes in the oceans, land and 
atmosphere through radar, cloud, Internet of Things and big data analytics technologies that are 
compliant with the WMO Global Basic Observing Network standards. It is envisaged that this 
will significantly improve forecast accuracy and lead times, thereby enabling better anticipatory

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 135 
 
 
planning and action. Collectively, these actions will reduce the cost of both the production and 
delivery of climate information and early warning services.     
25. 
The proposal also seeks to establish a regional training centre for capacity development 
as an important initiative that requires significant investment in order to attract and sustain 
appropriately qualified staff. The proposal does not provide clear information on where these 
staff will be recruited or trained. The regional training centre will help to build the capacity of 
national institutions in the production of robust meteorological, hydrological, climatological and 
engineering solutions to build resilience in the region. 
26. 
The proposal directly addresses several GCF outcomes for adaptation, namely: (i) A5.0: 
strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and 
development; (ii) A6.0: increased generation and use of climate information in decision-making; 
(iii) A7.0: strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks; and (iv) A8.0: 
strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential                      Scale: Medium–High 
27. 
Each year, Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles collectively face up to 
USD 251.45 million in losses due to natural hazards. Related threats to livelihoods and economic 
growth in these island countries are increasing, exacerbating the baseline situation. 
28. 
The proposal states that improvements in forecast accuracy and lead times for location-
specific weather forecasts will enable better agricultural planning and decision-making, such as 
accurate scheduling of calendars for the agriculture sector. The impact-based forecasts will also 
facilitate risk-prevention measures, and timely early warnings will enable the protection of 
lives, buildings, fisheries, tourism, agricultural equipment and harvests, among other assets. 
29. 
The proposal will provide significant environmental, economic and social co-benefits. It 
will directly contribute to the following Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): (i) SDG 1: End 
poverty in all its forms everywhere; (ii) SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved 
nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture; (iii) SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote 
well-being for all at all ages; (iv) SDG 11:Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, 
resilient and sustainable; (v) SDG 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its 
impacts; and (vi) SDG 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources 
for sustainable development.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient                                                                Scale: High 
30. 
Comoros and Madagascar are classified as least developed countries, while Mauritius is 
classified as an upper-middle-income country and Seychelles as an upper-income country. 
31. 
The four countries must deal with tropical cyclones and heavy rainfalls, which in turn 
cause floods, flash floods, landslides and drought. Rising sea levels also increase coastal 
vulnerability. Tropical cyclones represent a frequent and substantial threat and have been 
responsible for significant historical economic losses and casualties. There is clear evidence that 
all four nations are vulnerable to climate change and that this will have a significant impact on 
their gross domestic product. 
32. 
All four countries are developing substantial legislative responses to climate change, as 
well as climate change policies. They have all adopted nationally determined contributions, and 
Comoros and Madagascar have submitted their national adaptation programmes of action. All 
countries, except Seychelles, are in the process of developing their national adaptation plan. 
Other relevant domestic policies include Comoros’ National Strategic Plan 2017–2020, 
Madagascar’s National Climate Change Management Policy (2012), Mauritius’ National Climate

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 136 
 
 
Change Adaptation Policy Framework (2012), and Seychelles’ National Climate Change Strategy 
(2009) and Climate Change Policy. 
3.5 
Country ownership 
                                                         Scale: Medium 
33. 
The project was endorsed at the political level by the IOC Council of Ministers. It is well 
aligned with and supports several policies and strategies currently implemented both at the IOC 
level and in the four countries, in particular their nationally determined contributions, the SDGs, 
the African Union’s Agenda 2063, and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–
2030. However, the proposal will benefit from additional evidence in the form of a high-level 
commitment towards contributions to the operation and maintenance of the investments in 
each of the target countries.  
34. 
Strong community engagement will be necessary to enable the advances made by the 
NMHS to be translated into more effective and inclusive early warning services. Some 
references in the funding proposal indicate that national emergency management services are 
involved (e.g.: “The government of these four countries, as well as users and end-users of 
Climate Products and Climate Services (CP-CS) such as sectoral ministries, private sector and 
local communities, have been consulted during the process of preparing this proposal”); 
however, there appear to be insufficient details on addressing the “last mile” and 
communicating the messages to the most vulnerable populations. The Secretariat highly 
recommends that the AE take the necessary steps to enhance coherence and complementarity 
among the institutions involved in disaster management, both at the national and regional 
levels. Also, since the project focuses on resilience-building, equal attention should be placed on 
disaster management agencies and hydromet services. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
                                   Scale: Medium–High 
35. 
The proposal indicates that the project will build on, scale up and complement past and 
ongoing regional and national initiatives and projects. To ensure complementarity and identify 
synergies with existing and planned projects, meetings have been conducted in the four 
countries with multilateral and bilateral development partners that are strongly involved in the 
region, specifically in developing hydromet projects.  
36. 
It is estimated that the benefits resulting from the intervention will lead to improved 
agricultural revenues in the four countries amounting to around USD 29.9 million per year for 
the period 2026–2030 and up to USD 59.8 million per year for the period 2031–2035, with a 
conservative assumption of a 10 per cent increase in yields for 10 per cent of the agriculture 
sector using agroclimatic services. The net present value (NPV) of the project is estimated at 
USD 230 million at a 5 per cent discount rate. Moreover, in the long term, revenues from the 
commercial services of the NHMS can be expected through the marketing of climate information 
and early warning services and will progressively complement and partly replace a portion of 
the public funding of NMHS, covering from 10 per cent (Comoros and Seychelles) to almost 30 
per cent (Mauritius) of the budget for those services. The grant investments could lay the 
groundwork for potential future cost recovery through tailored information products.  
37. 
The proposal explains that the four countries will be able to develop sustainable long-
term business models for the reliable operation of the investments and recover the costs of 
O&M through revenue generation/cost recovery from commercial revenues, and through 
national budgetary support. The regional costs will be shared among the RCC-Network member 
countries, in accordance with the RCC-Network multilateral agreement signed between those 
countries under activity 1.1.2 of the proposed project. Moreover, in the long term, the 
development of commercial revenues may complement and eventually replace part of the

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 137 
 
 
current public funding of NMHS. This indicates that the hydromet project-related interventions 
may no longer need to rely on international funding in the long term. 
38. 
The executing entity (EE) will be the IOC, which will manage the project in close 
collaboration with AFD, which is the AE. The IOC will support four national project coordinators 
based within the NMHS of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
39. 
The proposed project is predominantly geared towards providing capacity-building and 
institutional strengthening interventions in the four target countries to provide improved 
climate services. The project will also provide new hydrometeorological equipment and tools 
for monitoring, data storage, data-processing, modelling, forecasting and service-delivery 
systems. One component of the project includes refurbishing and re-equipping existing weather 
stations and installing facilities for weather monitoring equipment. The AE assessed the project 
as potentially having environmental and social risks and impacts that are expected to be mostly 
minimal, with a few activities potentially having limited risks and impacts, particularly with 
respect to construction-related activities. The accredited entity (AE) has classified the project 
overall as category B under the GCF risk categorization system. The Secretariat agrees with the 
categorization and confirms that it is within the risk level to which the AE has been accredited. 
The AE has developed an environmental and social management framework to provide 
guidance on the actions to be applied during project implementation to manage the identified 
risks and impacts of the project. 
40. 
The project’s environmental co-benefits include reduced pressure on the extraction of 
wood for charcoal production that occurs when farmers look for other sources of income to 
compensate for climate-related losses in agricultural outputs. There will also be reduced 
pressure on water extraction because the improved climate-related data will result in the 
establishment of irrigation facilities, such as small dams, that are able to capture water more 
efficiently. Social co-benefits include better health and nutrition among the countries’ 
populations as a result of a more secure food supply due to improved agricultural productivity. 
The exposure of communities to the risk of flooding will also be minimized as a result of the 
enhanced early warning systems in place. 
41. 
The environmental and social risks and impacts of the project are primarily associated 
with the installation of new meteorological equipment such as the mounting on masts of new or 
rehabilitated automatic weather stations, the construction of Doppler radar units on small 
tower structures, and the installation of hydrological stations. Limited negative environmental 
and social impacts could potentially occur from construction-related installation works for the 
automatic weather stations, including the creation of temporary nuisance noise from operating 
the machinery and equipment, an increase in generation of solid wastes, and an increase in dust 
emissions due to excavation and civil works. Workers are also expected to be exposed to 
various occupational health and safety hazards. These issues will also be applicable to the 
installation of the Doppler radar units in each country. Occupational health and safety issues 
will be mitigated by following basic codes of good health and safety practices that will need to 
be followed by the contractors. 
42. 
The modification and extension of existing buildings that house offices and weather 
station facilities are also expected to result in the generation of solid wastes. Some electronic-
related wastes will also be generated and will need to be properly disposed of during the 
installation of computers and data-processing equipment. The use of solar panels as a source of 
electricity may also generate potentially hazardous wastes, which will need to be disposed of

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 138 
 
 
through the competent authorities. The adverse impact of installing a number of wave-
monitoring buoys and tidal gauges will be avoided by selecting appropriate sites where no 
impacts are expected on the marine flora and fauna.  
43. 
The project is not expected to result in additional land acquisition or the relocation of 
households since most of the equipment that will be established or replaced will be in existing 
sites where local governments own the properties (e.g. airfields or government research 
institutes). Further, only a small parcel of land is required for each weather station 
(approximately 100 m2). To prevent the facilities from being vandalized, the communities 
surrounding the newly established or upgraded equipment will be informed of the project, and 
fences will be erected around the equipment. 
44. 
The AE will have responsibility for overall oversight of implementation and monitoring 
of the safeguards policy during project implementation. The secretariat of the Indian Ocean 
Commission, as the executing entity, will be in charge of obtaining environmental, health and 
safety permitting requirements with the relevant national authorities. At the project level, a 
project management unit will be established, which will be staffed by technical experts, 
including an environmental and social officer who will ensure adequate implementation of 
project management and monitoring measures. 
45. 
The project has conducted consultations with various stakeholders during the project 
development phase, including representatives from government departments of agriculture, 
fisheries and tourism. This included engaging with government officials, members of non-
governmental organizations and potential beneficiary coastal villages and fishing communities. 
The consultation process is inclusive of all socioeconomic, ethnic and age groups. Further 
consultations and engagement with stakeholders and end-users will also be conducted during 
project implementation through implementation of the stakeholder engagement strategy. The 
AE has provided screening for indigenous peoples and states that the relevant standard will not 
be triggered owing to the historically mixed and multicultural societies in the project areas.  
46. 
The project will establish a grievance redress mechanism; the related material will be 
translated into the local language and disseminated at all national project coordinator offices to 
provide stakeholders and potentially or likely to be affected communities and households with a 
means of providing feedback or expressing grievances and receiving responses with regard to 
the implementation of project activities. This will be set up at the project management unit, 
where a grievance and redress committee will be established to set out the necessary steps for 
disseminating information on the grievance redress mechanism regarding contact information 
and appropriate modes of lodging grievances. Aggrieved communities or individuals shall have 
access to grievance redress mechanisms at all three levels: the GCF Independent Redress 
Mechanism, the grievance redress mechanism of the AE, and the grievance redress mechanism 
at the project activity level. 
4.2 
Gender policy  
47. 
   The accredited entity (AE) provided a gender assessment and gender action plan and 
therefore complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.  
48. 
In the gender assessment, the AE provided country-wide details on international 
policies, conventions, frameworks, and legal instruments ratified or signed by targeted 
countries, and highlighted national laws and governance mechanisms which help the targeted 
countries advance gender equality using enabling policy environments. The gender assessment 
undertaken by the AE was informed by a desk review as well as through stakeholder 
consultations which involved the participation of a significant number of women in all four 
targeted countries. The key indicators demonstrate a high degree of vulnerability of women and 
girls to interdependent social, economic and environmental factors. In spite of this, Seychelles,

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 139 
 
 
per World Bank estimates, had the highest gross domestic product per capita in Africa in 2016, 
and consumption patterns increased substantially despite high poverty levels in Comoros.  
49. 
The assessment highlights that women and men are affected differently by climate-
induced disasters and respond disproportionately to climate services and early warning 
systems (EWS). It illustrates that women are more time-poor than men, whether employed or 
not, in targeted countries, irrespective of their employment status. Another dimension of time-
poverty is the lack of opportunities to change current time-use patterns within households and 
explore other economic activities. Therefore, implementing gender-responsive measures 
involving the full participation of women might prove challenging at first, but is not impossible 
in the long run. In the targeted countries, women’s engagement in entrepreneurial activities is 
highly restricted. Women also have a limited presence in the science, technology, engineering 
and mathematics (STEM) stream and normally do not earn equal wages as their male 
counterparts. Where women are employed, they occupy low-ranked positions and/or 
temporary or unskilled jobs. Despite having constitutional rights, women’s land tenure and 
property rights are precarious. Ownership of property is in the name of the head of household 
(usually men). Men are dominant decision-makers within the household and the wider 
community. Men control most economic and productive resources and have easier access to 
capital, savings and investment opportunities than women, all of which are conditions 
considered crucial to achieving resilience, boosting adaptive capacities, responding to climate-
induced disasters in a timely manner, and gaining access to relevant information and the ability 
to capitalize on adaptation opportunities.  
50. 
The gender assessment identified gender-based violence (GBV) and intimate partner 
violence (IPV) as socially ‘accepted’ and deeply entrenched cultural norms across the countries. 
GBV persists as a shadow pandemic in the Indian Ocean region, including in the four targeted 
countries. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies found that GBV 
is a constant theme in post-disaster contexts. In the Indian Ocean region, greater incidences of 
GBV and IPV usually result from negative shocks; loss of family members, livelihoods and 
homes; domestic conflicts; existence of patriarchal attitudes; high and regular unemployment 
rates among men; wife’s economic dependence on her husband; and tolerance of violence. With 
increasing frequency and intensity of climate-related hazards and risks in the Indian Ocean 
region, GBV is expected to increase exponentially, reiterating the importance of resilience 
mechanisms and adaptation opportunities through gender-sensitive climate services and EWS 
interventions in targeted countries. GBV, including its causes and impacts, are fleshed out well 
in the gender assessment. The AE, through its focus on hydromet, climate services and EWS, will 
reduce gender-related vulnerabilities and mobilize partners to implement awareness-building 
campaigns and capacity development measures on GBV prevention for relevant ministries and 
existing or new staff/trainees, including women. 
51. 
The AE has provided a gender action plan that contains relevant outcomes, outputs, 
activities, indicators and targets to ensure improved access by marginalized women to user-
friendly technologies which would provide information on hydromet services, climate services 
and EWS. Keeping in mind the time-use patterns and time poverty faced by women, the AE will 
work with relevant stakeholders to optimize women’s and girls’ active participation in activities 
without fully disrupting their daily routines, advocate for reducing their unpaid work and/or 
redistribute their workloads. Additionally, separate consultations with women and girls will be 
held to help them express their opinions freely and without coercion. The gender action plan 
also contains means of verification and responsible units/persons, including gender experts. 
Costs for gender experts have been included in the plan. A gender expert will be recruited at the 
regional level and will be supported by a gender expert for each targeted country.    
52. 
Activities identified in the gender action plan across the targeted countries are: (a) 
promote gender-informed capacity development through the design of training modules to 
support transition and development plans of the national ministry for hydromet services,

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 140 
 
 
disaster risk reduction institutions and relevant sectorial ministries; (b) increase gender parity 
in new staff and trainees hired for hydromet services, climate services and EWS, which will 
allow women to not only be involved in STEM-related expertise but also increasingly allow 
them to participate in decision-making on climate-resilient technology innovation and 
implementation; (c) build capacities of observers and forecasters, particularly those involved in 
impact forecasting and nowcasting, to increase the gender-responsiveness of climate services 
and EWS products; (d) research community/social vulnerabilities, particularly gendered 
impacts and gender-differentiated capacities for resilience, and include them in hazard and 
climate vulnerability maps developed for each targeted country; (e) conduct needs assessments 
to ensure the gender-responsiveness of daily weather bulletins, seasonal forecasts and 
agricultural advisories; (f) ensure gender-responsiveness in EWS dissemination, particularly 
with regard to the limited access women have in public spaces (e.g. mosques in Comoros) or to 
information channels (e.g. radios in Madagascar); and (g) incorporate time-use analyses to 
ensure effective and meaningful participation of women and other vulnerable groups in 
trainings and information campaigns on climate services and EWS. The AE articulated a 
comprehensive and overarching assessment for all targeted countries, with further 
commitments to conduct country-level assessments to tease out more context-specific gender 
issues. Such assessments will help address critical gender considerations like time-poverty and 
GBV through “localized” solutions. The AE is also committed to ensuring its initial gender 
diagnosis is accurate and monitoring gendered outcomes with the support of the executing 
agency and last-mile partners. The AE will, through country-specific assessments, ensure the 
integration of GBV as a key measurement variable while studying time-use analyses to ensure 
that this theme is adequately covered, particularly in the context of how it influences or affects 
gendered dimensions of time poverty.   
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium risk)  
53. 
The funding proposal request USD 52 million as part of a USD 71 million project for 
building resilience through strengthened meteorological, hydrological and climate services in 
the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) Member Countries. This will be achieved by (1) institutional 
strengthening and reforms, capacity-building and public-private engagement; (2) improvement 
and modernisation of hydro-meteorological systems and services; and (3) enhancing the use of 
climate services. Co-financing in the form of grants will be provided by AFD (USD 5.4 million) 
and the EU (6.1 million). In-kind co-financing will be provided by the governments of Comoros 
(USD 1.3 million), Madagascar (USD 1 million), Mauritius (USD 1.7 million) and Seychelles (USD 
2.8 million). 
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk) 
54. 
The accredited entity AFD is a public international financial institution. AFD is rated as 
AA by Fitch and Standard and Poor’s and has a strong track record of support by the French 
government.  
55. 
The IOC will be the EE. The IOC has experience in project management with different 
development partners including the regional EU-funded ISLANDS and AFD-funded ACCLIMATE 
multi-year projects. Total projects under management currently exceed USD 200 million and 
include climate and environment related projects. The EE will set up a Project Management Unit 
(PMU) and will be the only entity mandated to engage personnel, supervise procurements 
processes and to manage the funds. The National Meteorological and Hydrological Services 
(NMHSs) of each beneficiary country are expected to be designated by their respective

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 141 
 
 
governments as the lead implementing national entity. NMHSs, will be accountable to IOC (EE) 
for project execution at the national level.  
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
56. 
Continued government support: Project success could be affected by limited 
commitment by any of the governments in supporting the project with the needed financial and 
human resources for O&M over the lifetime of the project (15 years). This risk is partially 
mitigated by activities undertaken during project implementation to obtain sustainable funding 
and human resources. However, it is advised that full commitment to cover any potential O&M 
funding and human resources gaps for the lifetime of the project shall be provided before 
funded activity agreement effectiveness.  
57. 
Security risks: Security issues could put hydro-meteorological equipment at risk of 
damage or loss. Tensions with the population where the new hydro-meteorological equipment 
will be installed could rise in case of need for relocation to accommodate equipment (although 
no relocation is foreseen at this stage by the AE). Risk is mitigated by community engagement, 
tagging and fencing of equipment and agreements with the NMHSs to protect equipment during 
its lifetime.  
58. 
Project sourcing and selection: The impact of the project will depend on effective 
procurement of new equipment and the capacity of the NMHSs to operationalise new or 
upgrade existing equipment and tools. Lack of allocation of human resources or continued 
retention of knowledge could reduce benefits of the project over time. Comfort can be derived 
from the Memorandum of Understanding between the EE and the beneficiary country, capacity 
development at the NMHSs and possible increase of financial capacity of the NMHS as result 
commercialization envisioned. 
59. 
The economic internal rate of return of the project is estimated at 14 per cent, with the 
economic internal rate of return becoming positive in the ninth year of operations. The AE 
concludes that the private sector of the four countries is not in a position to support financing 
the hydromet project since most of its objectives fall under open access public services. 
Nevertheless, during the project the AE envisions developing business models to recover the 
costs for O&M.  
4.3.4. 
Compliance risk (medium risk)  
60. 
The Agence Française de Développement (AFD), as the AE, confirm that no project 
activities will be undertaken in any jurisdiction which is subject to or affected by United Nations 
Security Council resolutions.  
61. 
AFD confirm that, in accordance with their internal processes and pre-approval due 
diligence procedures, individuals and entities are screened against the UN sanction list. AFD 
have re-assigned these obligations to its executing entity, the Indian Ocean Commission, to 
ensure no individual or entity that is listed on any United Nations Security Council sanctions list 
will be involved with the project in any manner. 
62. 
AFD advise that due diligence conducted is limited to the EE. Members states (i.e. the 
project countries) cannot be subject to due diligence according to AFD's procedures. The 
National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHS) will be committed into the project 
on the aegis of their line ministries.  
63. 
AFD confirm that there are no intentions to distribute or disburse to beneficiaries, either 
directly or indirectly, cash, vouchers, commodities or other items of value.  
64. 
AFD advise that they conducted a risk assessment and due diligence on this project 
regarding money laundering and financing of terrorism (ML/FT) and prohibited practices (PP),

=== PAGE 142 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 142 
 
 
according to its internal procedures (which were reviewed by GCF at the time of AFD’s 
accreditation with GCF). The process concluded that the project presented a limited level of risk. 
Despite this, appropriate mitigation measures have been taken, including:  
(a) 
The implementation scheme, which limits the mandate of the EE to one entity (i.e. the 
IOC), to monitor the flow of funds and procurement process, rather than having five EEs 
according to the AMA agreement (with as many bank accounts), to be audited; 
(b) 
Inclusion of a Financial Officer and a Monitoring and Evaluation Officer in the Project 
Management Unit;  
(c) 
AFD provision of a Non-Objection state at all levels of technical and financial reporting; 
and 
(d) 
Audits reports. 
65. 
AFD confirm that anti-money laundering and counter-financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) 
due diligence has been duly conducted during the instruction process and that risk mitigation 
will be monitored during project implementation. 
66. 
AFD advise that they will carry out internal controls to prevent, mitigate, identify, report 
and remedy any risks, indications, or allegations of ML/FT, sanctions violations, or prohibited 
practices in accordance with its internal procedures, which have been recognized by the GCF for 
accreditation of AFD.  
67. 
AFD inform that the above-mentioned control measures will be re-assigned to the EE, 
with an obligation to provide information without delay if the EE becomes aware of information 
which leads to any ML/FT, sanctions violations, or prohibited practices. 
68. 
AFD advise that an annual audit by an independent and reputable auditing firm will be 
conducted to check that all drawdowns/advances paid into the EE’s programme account have 
been used in accordance with the terms of this Agreement.  
69. 
AFD advise that the AFD grievance management mechanism will be included in 
subsidiary agreements signed between AFD and IOC.1 
70. 
Recommended risk rating: The Office of Risk Management and Compliance’s 
Compliance Team (“ORMC/Compliance”) has conducted a review of the project in accordance 
with relevant GCF Board approved policies and does not find any material issue or deviation 
with respect to compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding proposal, the 
ORMC/Compliance Team have determined a risk rating of ‘medium’ and have no objection to 
this request proceeding to the next steps for processing. 
71. 
ORMC/Compliance would like to remind AFD, as the AE, of its continuing obligations 
and responsibilities with regard to monitoring and reporting any risks for ML/FT and PP among 
the intended counterparties, executing entities, beneficiaries, persons involved, or any of the 
proposed activities. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
72. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
73. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
 
1 https://www.afd.fr/en/e-s-complaints-mechanism 
   https://www.afd.fr/en/combating-corruption

=== PAGE 143 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 143 
 
 
Summary risk assessment 
Rationale 
Overall programme 
Medium 
Success of the project depends on successful 
procurement and continued operation of 
equipment and retention of knowledge. Project 
equipment is exposed to security risks. 
Continued government support for O&M is 
advised.  
Accredited entity (AE)/executing 
entity (EE) capability 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
74. 
AFD will be the Accredited Entity (AE) for the project and be responsible for overseeing 
the implementation, financial management, evaluation, reporting and closure of the project's 
activities. AFD will have the overall responsibility of the Project implementation and ensure that 
the Grant Proceeds are utilised according to the terms of the Funded Activity (FAA) Agreement 
and the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA). 
75. 
The IOC will be the project's Executing Entity (EE). Thus, will assume the overall 
responsibility for the effective delivery of project inputs and interventions to achieve the 
expected project outputs. To fulfil its role, the EE will set up a Project Management Unit (PMU). 
The IOC will be the only entity mandated to engage, supervise procurements processes, and 
manage the funds. IOC as EE, and the regional organisation mandated by the member countries 
to develop the project and submitted to the GCF, will enter into a Project Agreement (PA) with 
the Ministries of Foreign Affair (MoFA) of each concerned country member, which are the 
official representatives. 
76. 
The National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHSs) of each beneficiary 
country are expected to be designated by their respective Government as the lead implementing 
national entity (NIP). NMHSs will be respectively accountable to IOC (EE) for the project 
execution at the national level. NMHSs, as the NIP and other NSPs, will not be mandated for the 
use and management of GCF funds and all related procurement process.  
77. 
The IOC and AFD will directly and exclusively manage the project's funds. 
Disbursements will take the form of advance payment to the EE (IOC) or direct payment by the 
AE (AFD) to firms contracted for works and the supply of goods or services. There will be no 
direct management of the funds or any disbursements to the national Entities or NHMS. 
78. 
The accounting and financial audits will be conducted by an independent third party. At 
the end of the disbursement period, AFD will prepare a project completion report summarising 
the implementation phase's main events, the results achieved, and the lessons learned. This 
report will also provide recommendations for future improvement. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
79. 
The theory of change (TOC) clearly defines the ultimate project goal and explicitly states 
the causal logic which informs the project’s design. The TOC’s stated outcomes are defined in a 
manner that is clearly supportive of meeting the ultimate project goal. The ‘if, then, because’ 
logic is clearly shown in the diagram as provided in the funding proposal.  
4.5.1. 
Logical framework

=== PAGE 144 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 144 
 
 
80. 
At the core indicator level, the logical framework has been designed with relevant 
details, as per the GCF results management framework (RMF) and performance measurement 
frameworks (PMFs). This includes reporting on the appropriate core indicator for adaptation 
(number of direct and indirect beneficiaries disaggregated by sex). Additionally, the respective 
impact, outcome and project performance indicators for the targeted results areas of ‘Increased 
resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions’ 
(A1.0) and ‘Increased resilience of health and well-being, and food and water security’ (A2.0) 
are properly articulated.  
81. 
At the GCF Outcome level, the AE has properly included the indicator for technologies 
and innovative solutions transferred as a result of GCF support with relevant mid-term and final 
targets. However, we note that indicator A5.1 is a qualitative indicator, and we suggest to the AE 
that the baseline be determined based on careful analysis of the country-specific circumstances. 
It is good practice for formulation of the target to correspond to the major requirements for this 
indicator, such as defining the type of incentives and mechanisms, integration of the 
mechanisms in the planning process and the measurement of effectiveness. 
82. 
Indicator A5.2, refers to both the number and the level of effective coordination 
mechanisms, and as such it is both a quantitative and qualitative indicator. The AE has 
articulated the recommended scorecard approach and has defined the different levels of 
effectiveness. The main assumptions made as part of the scorecard development should be 
reported in the assumptions section. Good practice for this indicator includes: 
(a) 
The targets specify the actual mechanisms to which they are related; 
(b) 
The targets examine the level of effective coordination by applying a scorecard 
approach; and 
(c) 
It is clearly specified how the targets are related to the planning process. 
4.5.2. 
Implementation timetable  
83. 
The implementation timetable for the funding proposal has been completed 
appropriately. It shows all activities and key milestones associated with each phase of the 
project and they are consistent with the logical framework.  
4.5.3. 
Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements 
84. 
The arrangements for monitoring, evaluation, and reporting (section E.7 of the funding 
proposal) are adequate. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
85. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement (the “AMA”), was signed with the Accredited Entity 
on 11 November 2017 and it became effective on 16 January 2018. 
86. 
The Accredited Entity has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. 
87. 
The proposed project will be implemented in the Union of the Comoros, the Republic of 
Madagascar, the Republic of Mauritius and the Republic of Seychelles, countries in which GCF is 
not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in these countries, which risks need to be further 
assessed. The Secretariat has engaged with these countries as follows: 
(a) 
With respect to the Union of the Comoros, the Secretariat submitted a draft privileges 
and immunities agreement to the Government of the Union of the Comoros on 7 April

=== PAGE 145 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 145 
 
 
2016 and a bilingual version was submitted to the Government of the Union of the 
Comoros on 10 December 2018. The agreement is currently under the Government’s 
review; 
(b) 
With respect to the Republic of Madagascar, the Secretariat submitted a draft privileges 
and immunities agreement to the Government of the Republic of Madagascar on 26 
January 2016 and a bilingual version was submitted to the Government of the Republic 
of Madagascar on 13 May 2019. The agreement is currently under the Government’s 
review; 
(c) 
With respect to the Republic of Mauritius, the Secretariat submitted a draft privileges 
and immunities agreement to the Government of the Republic of Mauritius on 12 April 
2016. The Government of the Republic of Mauritius has indicated that it would not be 
possible to grant privileges and immunities to GCF through a bilateral privileges and 
immunities agreement; and 
(d) 
With respect to the Republic of Seychelles, the Secretariat submitted a draft privileges 
and immunities agreement to the Government of the Republic of Seychelles on 7 April 
2016. The agreement is currently under the Government’s review. 
88. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF 
are made only after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the countries, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and 
immunities. 
89. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and 
(b) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 146 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 146 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP161 
Proposal name: 
Building regional resilience through strengthened 
hydrometeorological-climate information services in Indian 
Ocean Member Countries 
Accredited entity: 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) 
Country/(ies): 
Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, and Seychelles 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium to low 
1. 
The South-West Indian Ocean (SWIO) region is represented by four small island 
developing states (SIDS) namely the Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles. The 
location of the SWIO States is close to the southern part of the continent of Africa. The islands 
are subject to frequently occurring tropical cyclones (TC), which often devastate the islands due 
to high intensity wind speed and subsequent storm surges. The islands are also subject to heavy 
rainfall and occassional droughts. On a global scale, the region is known as a climate hotspot, 
considering its exposure to climate-induced hazards that not only threaten lives but also 
adversely affect the livelihoods of the islanders. 
2. 
According to recent studies, the four countries have faced over 100 disastrous climatic 
events over the past 50 years. The adverse impacts were faced by 14.4 million people, while the 
cumulative economic toll was estimated at USD 13.1 billion. Rapid onset cyclones appear as 
nightmares to seagoing fishermen due to the absence of any reliable forecasting mechanism, 
even though there have been tremendous advancements in both model-based forecasting and 
communication systems globally. As a result, lives have been lost, particularly those of seagoing 
fishermen in the four countries. In addition to the loss of lives, physical infrastructure have been 
severely damaged in all four countries. Many such infrastructures belong to the tourism sector, 
which is the main economic activity. Due to repeated damages to tourism infrastructure, small 
operators found it difficult to maintain their businesses. There are agricultural activities in the 
larger islands such as Madagascar and the Comoros1, where heavy rainfall and seasonal 
droughts often trigger crop loss and subsequent food insecurity within farming households.  
3. 
TCs are the most frequently occurring hazard in the SWIO region. The Southwest Indian 
basin is one of the most active areas for cyclonic activities in the world. In terms of cyclonic 
intensity, the TCs are found to be more intense than those occurring in other parts of the world. 
On average, as many as 13 TCs with a threshold intensity of 63 kilometres per hour are formed 
each year in the region. The SWIO cyclones generally occur between mid-November and the end 
of April of the following calendar year. Available historical records suggest that a total of 847 TC 
events have occurred in the SWIO region between 1950 and 2014. Fortunately, not all TCs have 
made landfall in the islands. However, the high intensity wind and rough seas cause significant 
loss and damage, especially in the fisheries and agricultural sectors.  
 
1 These two islands are also least developed countries (LDC).

=== PAGE 147 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 147 
 
 
4. 
In addition to TCs, there are non-tropical cyclone (NTC) induced rainfall, which is 
significant throughout the SWIO region. Such events generally cause heavy rainfall, which 
triggers flooding and, often, landslides. Sometimes NTC events occur with very high intensity 
rainfall that also causes flash floods. Between 1970 and 2015, Mauritius and Seychelles had the 
highest number of NTC-related flooding events at 20 and 22, respectively, of which 9 in 
Mauritius and 1 in Seychelles were considered catastrophic events. During this same period, 
Madagascar and the Comoros experienced nine and two catastrophic events, respectively. 
5. 
Unfortunately, the land-based as well as oceanic temperatures in the SWIO region are 
found to be increasing. The rise in sea surface temperature is of great importance due to the fact 
that its seasonal change beyond a threshold triggers TCs to occur during cyclone season and 
NTCs to occur during rainy season. An effort has been made to understand the rainfall 
variability in the SWIO region. Comparing the two periods 1961–1990 and 1991–2016, an 
increase in precipitation during the rainy season and a decrease in precipitation during the dry 
season were noted, which implies a historical increase of flood and drought events, respectively. 
Based on the available science, it is generally understood that both TC and NTC events will 
increase in the coming decades, further threatening lives and livelihoods of people in the four 
countries. 
6. 
It is proven that timely and precise climate information, through an effective early 
warning system (EWS), can significantly reduce loss and damage burden. Many countries across 
the world experiencing multiple hazards (MH), such as the countries in the SWIO region, have 
successfully enhanced disaster risk reduction (DRR) efforts by means of both meteorological 
and hydrological forecasting. Impact-based forecasting (IBF) demands a complete 
understanding of the two scientific disciplines including the understanding of causes and 
subsequent effects in physical terms so that computational models can be customized through 
calibration and employed to project future. Unfortunately, not all regions with such an array of 
hydro-meteorological hazards have the prerequisites to develop MH-IBF-EWS. While the need 
for stakeholder-tailored forecast messages is paramount for the SWIO, and the change in 
climate system demands a strengthened forecasting system, the existing national 
meteorological and hydrological services (NMHS) in each of the four target countries have little 
infrastructure as well as human capacity to deliver an MH-IBF-EWS. Climate change warrants 
immediate mobilization of resources to acquire data handling and processing capacity as well as 
modelling capacity, as per global standards prescribed by the World Meteorological 
Organization (WMO) and various centres of excellence on other issues including hydrology. Not 
only financial support is needed; substantial technical assistance and hand-holding is also 
required so that human and institutional capacities are built and retained with the help of such 
global centres of excellence. 
7. 
The funding proposal claims to be part of the development of NMHS. However, the 
proposal hardly has any activity on the hydrology aspect and is biased in its approach towards 
observations and delivering EWS. Without adequate investment and development of capacities 
on hydrological modelling (which is needed to bring down to the micro-watershed levels 
information regarding water run off following a forecast rainfall), several of the claimed benefits 
will not materialize.  
8. 
The four SWIO SIDS have come forward to develop projects aiming at building capacities 
at the nodal points involving NMHS as well as developing regional capacity to better understand 
the physical relationships among ocean, land and atmosphere at regional scale by forming a 
regional centre of excellence on their own by means of extended cooperation and coordination. 
However, the financial resources needed to start the process are perhaps too much for the 
region, especially when the larger two of the four islands belong to Africa’s least developed 
countries (LDC), which is why they requested GCF to contribute financial support for their 
collective effort. WMO is expected to provide support for the development of regional capacity.  
9. 
The proposed project consists of three components, which are as follows:

=== PAGE 148 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 148 
 
 
(a) 
Component 1: Capacity-building, institutional development, regional cooperation and 
public-private engagement; 
(b) 
Component 2: Generation of high quality climate-related data, improvement of MH-IBF 
and EWS, climate risk assessments and climate change projections; and 
(c) 
Component 3: Enhancement of accessibility and use of climate services for climate 
change adaptation, and improvement of capabilities in implementation of a people-centred MH-
IBF-EWS for DRR at national/regional levels. 
10. 
Component 1 will focus on institutional development, a key pillar in delivering IBF and 
early warning services in a sustained fashion. Institutional development will be achieved by 
building the capacity of personnel so that they develop expertise in collating and processing 
data, and generate and disseminate hazard-specific forecasts following internationally 
acceptable standards. To achieve this objective, courses will be developed and training imparted 
in cooperation with WMO. Equal effort will have to be ensured for hydrological data generation 
and handling. Basic level training sessions will not be helpful in expertise development. It is 
recommended that customized training sessions be designed under the aegis of WMO and a 
globally recognized centre of excellence on hydrology and hydraulics so that professional 
courses are administered to achieve the objective of developing human capacity on data 
handling, modelling and generation of climate bulletin/forecasting. 
11. 
Under the same component, additional efforts for institutional development will be 
considered, such as the procurement and setting up of equipment; data archival systems; 
measures to calibrate models as necessary; ground truthing (particularly for hydrological model 
calibration); implementation of operation and maintenance (O&M) plan; and enhancement of 
capacity to cater to the need for the delivery of legal mandate. Two other important functions 
under component 1 include fostering regional cooperation and promoting public-private 
engagement so that the private sector can receive tailored climate information to protect their 
businesses. The latter will in turn enable the NMHS to earn revenue that will partially cover 
their recurrent O&M costs. 
12. 
Following the capacity building efforts under component 1, the application of advanced 
modelling skills will be organized under component 2. The focus of this component will be to 
deliver MH-IBF-EWS. At the national level, it is expected that climate hazard maps will be 
generated and vulnerability assessments will be conducted through consultations with various 
stakeholders. Under component 2, the WMO regional instrumentation centre will be established 
wherein the regional laboratory will be hosted in a bid to foster regional cooperation. 
13. 
Component 3 is primarily designed to reach “last mile” users of climate information with 
bulletins and forecasts so that needs-responsive information tailored for specific purposes will 
be generated and disseminated. The approach here is people-centric, which will determine how 
and under which condition the climate information and forecasts will be delivered to achieve 
maximum attention of the various users at the grassroots. The information will eventually be 
designed and delivered in a form and substance understandable by the stakeholder groups.  
14. 
The project is expected to deliver the much-needed country-specific and region-wide 
capacities to deliver MH-IBF-EWS within its five-year implementation period. Much needed is 
the training of NMHS staff working in observations (including quality control and assurance), 
data management and application of information and communication technologies, as included 
in the proposal. However, such trainings are not sufficient. The funding proposal does not 
include other aspects that are very much needed on the hydrological aspects, namely the 
acquisition of hydrological models (which are expensive) and the initial set-up of these 
hydrological models (which is even more expensive, since it requires micro-catchment level

=== PAGE 149 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 149 
 
 
calibration2 and subsequent validation using observational data). Without these fundamental 
enabling steps, the operational use of hydrological models and the development of specialized 
hydrological information needed for addressing floods (feeding into possible design of 
protective infrastructure) and allocating water to address droughts are not possible. Moreover, 
the guidance of a centre of excellence on hydrology is needed. Reliance on NMHS-built 
capacities on meteorology will not be sufficient to deliver flood forecasting, flood risk 
assessment and other hydrological services. 
15. 
Assuming that the project will deliver its objectives as envisaged in the theory of change, 
the project will benefit 19.45 million people, which represents some 67 per cent of the total 
population of the four target countries. Following the issuance of early warnings with adequate 
lead time, it is expected that people will be able to save their lives, particularly those who are 
required to go to open sea for fishing. The tourism sector in all four countries and the 
agriculture sector in the Comoros and Madagascar will benefit the most. In terms of its impact 
potential, the proportion of the population that will benefit appears impressive. It is expected 
that about 50 per cent of the large number of beneficiaries will be women, although in reality an 
effective forecast actually reduces the post-hazard burden of women significantly.   
16. 
The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) understands that the aspects related 
to hydrology in the proposal are given lesser priority compared to that of meteorology and that 
there has not been any involvement of globally acclaimed centres of excellence on hydrology to 
provide guidance on calibration and modelling of hydrology and flood hydraulics. Considering 
this shortcoming, the independent TAP finds the impact potential as medium to low. However, if 
the accredited entity (AE) considers corrective measures, engages a centre of excellence on 
hydrology to guide the latter processes (as WMO is engaged upfront for a similar role for 
meteorology), and finds other sources of funding to develop adequate NMHS capacity, 
particularly in the Comoros, Madagascar and Mauritius (where no hydrological models are 
available), the impact potential can be higher. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium high 
17. 
Advanced technology-based probabilistic modelling and forecasting techniques are not 
new anymore; therefore, one may not find innovation in the approach of the project. However, 
building modelling capacities to generate precise and useful forecasts through the application of 
modelling techniques can be quite challenging. For the four SIDS in question, acquiring such 
capacities means taking a huge leap, given the rudimentary state of affairs involving IBF. Once 
the existing institutions have appropriate instrumentation and human resources to deliver 
advanced climate information, the outputs will automatically find clientele in the private sector. 
This will open up new opportunities for developing a business model for the generation of 
model-driven hazard forecasts and their uptake within the private sector. 
18. 
The project will introduce a much enhanced capacity to prepare and deliver forecasts on 
the basis of perceived impacts and warnings in view of the understanding of hazard risks. This 
will enable institutions to stay away from traditional methods of hazard advisories, which 
generally leave virtually no lead time for communities to react and safeguard their lives and 
livelihoods. In technical terms, the project will make efforts to use advanced science-based and 
technology-driven climate information so that, instead of deterministic forecasts, reliable 
probabilistic forecasts may be disseminated towards avoiding loss and damage of lives and 
properties of affected communities in the participating SIDS. The above indicates a significant 
paradigm shift in both approach and delivery of EWS in each of the participatory countries in 
the SWIO region. 
 
2 Calibration at micro-catchment level is also time consuming.

=== PAGE 150 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 150 
 
 
19. 
The absence of hydro-meteorological data in the desired level of resolution and time-
steps is the first and foremost deficiency being faced by most developing countries. The 
situation is even worse in SIDS. In the absence of observational data, computer-driven models 
cannot be validated and their outputs cannot be used for generating reliable forecasts. Since a 
doplar radar can capture and transmit on time meteorological data within a 200 km radius, such 
data can be a great boon towards calibration of available models for the generation of forecasts. 
Once the physical relationships of various climatological parameters are understood and 
calibrated for the SWIO region, strengthening of modelling exercises and replication will 
become possible, at least at the technical level. The effort towards building up technical as well 
as human capacity will enable the replication processes, provided that the trained human 
capacities are retained within the NMHS system. 
20. 
The project aims at knowledge sharing and learning in a number of modalities: (i) 
specialized training by hydro-meteorological specialists will be engaged in the proposed 
Regional Climate Change Network, (ii) training sessions of the SWIO Climate Outlook Forum, 
and (iii) UIP will be strengthened to facilitate information and risk management experience 
across the participating countries. There will be opportunities for sharing of learnings regarding 
model calibration and downscaling techniques and development of numerical weather 
prediction/ensemble prediction systems. The regional laboratory will be a centre for NMHS 
experts to cross-check their modelling-related learning and subsequent sharing under the 
guidance of professionals representing WMO. The institutions that manage hazard and disaster-
related information will be trained so that they reach the “last mile” information recipients in 
the most effective manner in each of the four countries. 
21. 
The assistance to set up technologies such as doplar radar and upper air observation 
network in the SWIO region will continue to generate data that are critical to calibrating the 
models and generating reliable forecasts with a certain degree of precision. Since the countries 
will retain both the instrumentation and human resources, and the O&M costs are committed 
including the salaries of personnel to be engaged and trained, it is expected that the regional 
meteorlogical and hydrological services (RMHS) and NMHS will continue to deliver results 
beyond completion of the project intervention. 
22. 
The project will contribute significantly to the creation of an enabling environment 
across almost all aspects of MH-IBF-EWS involving key institutions in all four countries. 
Strengthening institutions with data acquisition and processing equipment, trained human 
resources and other capacities to deliver user-tailored climate products and climate services 
will enhance the enabling capacities of NMHS institutions. The guidance of WMO will contribute 
significantly to human and institutional enabling capacity, especially on meteorological aspects 
of MH-IBF-EWS. Moreover, policy harmonization and the standardization of output data and 
risk information with respect to global best practices and potential in-country regulatory 
reforms will greatly contribute to an enabling environment that will pave the way to meaningful 
forecasting. 
23. 
However, efforts on capacity in hydrological and hydraulic aspects of a multi-hazard 
forecasting and EWS appear neglected in the proposal. The involvement of potential centres of 
excellence on such aspects has not been found in the proposal, which may limit progress 
towards the coveted goal of MH-IBF-EWS.  
24. 
In view of the above-mentioned discussion, the independent TAP finds paradigm shift 
potential to be medium high. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
           Scale: Medium to high 
25. 
Since the overarching goal of the project is to build hydro-meteorological technical and 
institutional capacities to advance MH-IBF-EWS, the project may not have immediate direct

=== PAGE 151 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 151 
 
 
contribution to achieving sustainable development goals (SDG) as such, perhaps with the 
exception of SDG 13 (enhanced climate action). However, once the RMHS and NMHS are fully 
operational, it may be expected that the project outcome will contribute either directly or 
indirectly to SDG 2 (zero hunger, by preventing hazard-related food production losses), SDG 3 
(good health and well-being, by means of protecting lives and household-level well-being 
through the issuance of hazard warnings), SDG 5 (gender equity and women’s empowerment, 
by means of reducing disproportionate gender-related burden in the wake of hydro-
meteorological disasters), and SDG 6 (ensure access to water and sanitation for all, in particular 
targets 6.5 integrated water resources management and 6.6 protect and restore water-related 
ecosystems). 
26. 
Economic co-benefits: Provided that hydrological and hydraulic modelling (which is not 
part of this project) is developed and integrated into MH-IBF, the project is expected to help end 
users plan early and safeguard their lives, vulnerable assets and livelihoods in the wake of every 
extreme event including cyclonic storm surges and flash floods. Costs avoided through reducing 
risks of loss and damage could be quite substantial, as has been seen in many hazard-prone 
climate hotspots. It is not only at household level that such avoided costs will be substantial, it is 
also expected to drastically reduce the burden on government spending in post-hazard 
emergency relief operations and social rehabilitation of impacted populations. 
27. 
Moreover, governments in impacted states are also required to invest in refurbishing 
damaged infrastructure following a disastrous hydro-meteorological extreme event, the cost of 
which may be reduced considerably if proper early warnings are provided with increased lead 
time so that institutions can take adequate precautionary measures. All such possibilities are 
expected to contribute to the economic co-benefits that are likely to be accrued from the project 
outcomes.  
28. 
In the SWIO States, significant economic potential lies with the tourism sector, and 
seamless airport operations are crucial for realizing tourism-related opportunities in island 
states. However, the latter can only materialize if airport operations are adequately guided 
through the timely issuance of advanced early warnings in relation to inclement weather 
conditions, especially in SIDS. The importance of advanced early warnings in tourism 
development cannot be overemphasized in SIDS. This project will likely serve the regional 
airport hub and therefore regional tourism-related economic growth potential. In turn, the post-
project long-term O&M of the hydro-meteorological capacities will benefit profusely from the 
proceeds of sales of advanced EWS and information to the airport authorities. The latter will not 
only help materialize healthy economic co-benefits, it will also foster a public-private co-
benefitting relationship in the region. 
29. 
Social co-benefits: One of the outcomes of the project will be increased lead time for 
people to take precautionary measures against sudden onset hazards, ensuring greater 
household and community-level well-being and health care. Bringing disaster-related mortality 
rate down to zero, especially among seagoing fisherfolk, will be a great outcome. All these social 
co-benefits are achievable in the long run if the project triggers the enabling conditions and 
continues efforts with the help of global centres of excellence such as WMO. 
30. 
Agro-meteorological information and advisories can be generated, which then provide 
for extension services to interplay with farmers and eventually ensure maintenance of 
agricultural productivity, despite impinging agro-climatic hazards. There have been many 
instances across the world where timely agricultural advisories and early warnings have led to 
effective measures at farmers’ levels that culminated into avoidance of food insecurity and/or 
market price hike of agricultural products. Furthermore, timely and precise agricultural 
advisories can trigger index-based insurance products for relevant private sector entities, which 
in turn open up new opportunities for agricultural insurance. However, availability of both 
meteorological and hydrological inputs into adequately calibrated and customized models 
underpins the development of climate information that generally contribute to the latter

=== PAGE 152 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 152 
 
 
possibilities in the long run. All these may not be achieved within the timeline of the project 
implementation. 
31. 
Environmental co-benefits:  As such, there is no direct co-benefit that may be accrued 
from the project. However, prevention and/or reduction of loss burden and damage might 
influence poor people to not practice maladaptive measures such as destruction of vegetation, 
terrestrial and marine ecosystems and, particularly, biodiversity.  
32. 
The project talks about potential environmental co-benefits with small dam operations 
following issuance of warnings/advisories. However, given the weak integration of hydrological 
aspects of modelling, including calibration and validation of hydrological models, such potential 
benefits may not be realized under the project. The low-level ambition in modelling and the 
short time frame for project implementation could also put limits on fully integrating critical 
hydrological models and their outputs within the project implementation timeline. The 
independent TAP also found that the importance of hydrological aspects with respect to 
meteorological aspects is kept relatively low especially in seeking peer guidance on successful 
integration of hydrological models, which might slow down the likelihood of achieving MH-IBF 
on hydrological aspects. 
33. 
Gender-related co-benefits: Issuance of early warnings can potentially save lives during 
extreme weather events. It has been found in many countries that morbidity rates due to 
cyclonic storm surge are particularly higher for women and children. In this context, the 
strengthening of EWS in a hazard-prone climate hot spot is always gender-friendly. 
34. 
Since the project will integrate societal response towards early warnings and advisories, 
the processes create avenues to integrate gender concerns in designing messages for climate 
information and advisories. The policy and regulatory measures, as proposed, might re-examine 
the gender friendliness of available provisions and recommend inclusive policy and regulatory 
measures. The gender assessment and action plan (annex 8 of the funding proposal package) 
elaborate on such possibilities of gender mainstreaming throughout project implementation.   
35. 
Based on the above discussion, it appears to the independent TAP that the sustainable 
development potential of the proposed project is medium to high. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
               Scale: High 
36. 
In recent years, a number of cyclones have hit the SWIO countries, causing devastation 
due to high intensity winds, storm surge and wide-spread flash floods. While physical immobile 
infrastructure have been damaged in all these countries, damages have also been recorded in 
agricultural productivity, particularly in the islands of the Comoros and Madagascar. The future 
outlook of these islands in the wake of climate change is also very bleak, since higher level of 
climate forcing with subsequent rise in sea surface temperature will tend to increase the 
frequency of occurrence of high intensity cyclonic events in the SWIO region. According to 
globally available literature, the SWIO region has been recognized as a climate hotspot. 
37. 
The four target countries are not homegenous in terms of economy and economic 
structure of their inhabitants. While the key drivers of advanced economies such as Mauritius 
and Seychelles include tourism, it suffers due to frequent occurrence of high intensity cyclonic 
storm surge and flash floods, leaving uncomfortable conditions for tourism to thrive. Moreover, 
the inability of regional airports to operate during such high intensity cyclonic events adversely 
affects tourism, limiting income opportunities from tourism and offshore recreational activities. 
38. 
The situations in relatively larger islands such as the Comoros and Madagascar are even 
worse when the said cyclonic events restrict income opportunities for farmers and fisherfolk. 
Since these two LDCs have high poverty (on the basis of per capita income) and the poor are 
dependent on agricultural productions and sea-bound fisheries, climate-induced extreme events

=== PAGE 153 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 153 
 
 
hit the poor segment of their populations hard. Therefore, the general need for EWS is rather 
high. Such needs cannot be met by keeping the forecasting capacities in their current forms in 
the four countries. 
39. 
In addition to people, communities and economic sectors need financial as well as 
technical support to overcome existing barriers. NMHS institutions, including those providing 
DRR services, need adequate support towards upgrading and modernizing their respective 
services to achieve MH-IBF-EWS. There is also a need for enhanced cooperation and 
coordination at regional level so that regional-scale land-ocean-atmospheric climatological 
systems can be understood and the knowledge shared among the participating countries. 
Furthermore, the nodal point for fostering regional cooperation needs active collaboration and 
technical guidance from centres of excellence such as WMO. 
40. 
However, for the latter need, one may find weakness in the funding proposal not having 
adequate planning to rope in hydrological centres of excellence for much-needed hydrological 
research and IBF. While it is heartening to see that the project pays due attention to 
strengthening the capacities of relevant institutions for both meteorological and hydrological 
aspects, the absence of global peer bodies on hydrology in the advisory capacity weakens the 
realization of the intent of the project.   
41. 
As indicated earlier, the target countries belong to SIDS, of which two are LDCs. 
Although per capita income in Mauritius and Seychelles are higher, the size of these economies 
is very small. As a result, none of these countries individually or even collectively could arrange 
finance to develop robust data collection and subsequent modelling facilities. The overall 
investment weight of the project represents 0.27 per cent of the combined GDP of the four 
countries. The demand for forecasting data/information for the private sector is currently low, 
which does not provide the incentive to finance a project through public financing windows. 
Under such circumstances, viable alternate financing is virtually absent, despite the utmost 
needs of the recipient countries to deliver MH-IBF-EWS. 
42. 
The independent TAP rates the needs of the recipient as high. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
Scale: High 
43. 
The African Union (AU), in collaboration with WMO, made a call in 2010 to provide 
support at scale to NMHS in the wider Indian Ocean region. This project can be considered a 
response to the call of AU. The Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) has been instrumental in 
developing the concept, responding to repeated requests and approval from IOC’s Ministerial 
Council. The outcome of the project fits into the regional vision titled AU Agenda 2063. At a 
global scale, the project contributes to the operationalization of the Sendai Framework, with an 
aim to reduce disaster risks in the participating countries. 
44. 
The IOC member States have jointly developed an adaptation strategy for 2012–2020. 
The strategy aims at strengthening regional scale cooperation through coordinated actions, 
emphasizing climate forecasting and anticipation capabilities so that all actors can participate in 
disseminating climate information. The proposed regional project therefore resonates well with 
regional and global policies and strategies on relevant issues. 
45. 
Although it is a regional project, its central focus is also grounded well in each of the 
participating country’s policies and strategies. In all four countries, the respective nationally 
determined contributions (NDCs) highlight the needs for much strengthened hydro-
meteorological forecasting capacities to reduce climate-related loss and damages. The NDC of 
the Comoros prioritizes the implementation of MH-IBF-EWS, while that of Madagascar commits 
to the finalization of the “national framework for climate services” within the Global Framework 
of Climate Services. The NDC of Mauritius attaches priority to implementing its DRR strategy 
and its water resources management strategies, where emphasis is placed on improved

=== PAGE 154 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 154 
 
 
forecasting capabilities. The NDC of Seychelles highlights the necessity to undertake “climate 
change modelling, ….. monitoring of climate change impacts”, recognizing the high vulnerability 
of its fisheries and tourism sectors, where the importance of early warning is paramount. The 
policy environment for the proposed project, in view of global, regional and country contexts, is 
found to be fully aligned. 
46. 
The design of the project was aided by stakeholder consultations in the participating 
countries. The international development partners active in the region took part in organizing 
such consultations. The process integrated and/or appaised past and ongoing projects in the 
region and tried to build synergies with such initiatives. The design process took cognizance of 
the various needs of stakeholders, including those of “last mile” grassroots people, partners and 
relevant institutions. All of the needs have been reflected in the feasibility study report (i.e., 
annex 2).  
47. 
The project was co-designed and validated by the respective NMHS institutions in each 
of the SWIO countries. As a result, the respective NMHS institutions are proposed as lead 
national implementing entities. The NMHS will be responsible for managing instrumental and 
human capacities likely to be built, coordinating with respective national and regional 
organizations for standardization of processes and fine-tuning of products, and eventually 
disseminating such climate information products as per the needs of the “last mile” 
beneficiaries. They will be responsible for maintaining the trained human resource pool and 
arranging O&M for equipment according to the O&M plan provided in the funding proposal 
package.  
48. 
The above discussions lead the independent TAP to infer that the country ownership for 
the project is high. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium to low 
49. 
The hydro-meteorological project proposes a budget of USD 71 million of which about 
USD 54 million (i.e. 74.23 per cent of the total) is requested from GCF as grants. The AE and the 
European Union are providing USD 5.5 million and USD 5.85 million, respectively, as co-
financing. The total co-financing amount is USD 16.75, which gives a ratio of 1:0.347. 
50. 
In absence of the requested GCF financing, the available financing will enable the project 
to pay for a small sub-set of equipment needed and piloting the dissemination of climate 
information products in small pockets in the four target countries. However, such disjointed 
efforts and partial enhancement of instrumentation capacities will not do justice to the holistic 
needs of overall capacity-building, including modern equipment, computational requirements 
and automation, trained and expert human capital for running the models, and development of 
tailored forecasting messages and their dissemination. A piecemeal approach will simply not 
work in this case, and therefore the co-financing will be largely wasted if GCF financing is not 
committed upfront. 
51. 
The entire objective is to generate accurate climate forecasting with adequate lead time, 
which is commonly done by involving public sector institutions across the world. Unfortunately, 
the private sector has not been seen as the lead actor in such an endeavour anywhere in the 
world, which is why the financing falls on the shoulders of individual states. In this case, without 
the participation and active support of GCF, the financial requirements cannot be met by the 
SWIO countries. This is why the public sector driven activities need financing from GCF. 
52. 
There is no denying the fact that two of the four target countries (Mauritius  and 
Seychelles) have healthy per capita income. However, the two other countries (the Comoros and 
Madagascar) do not only have much lower per capita income, but also a significant proportion 
of poor people who are climate vulnerable. Since all four countries belong to SIDS, the proposal

=== PAGE 155 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 155 
 
 
for grant financing (highest concessionality) is justified as per the GCF criteria of giving 
preferential treatment towards assessing funding requests from SIDS. 
53. 
In an attempt to improve the existing forecasting capabilities to deliver MH-IBF-EWS, a 
significant technological upgrade is proposed, at least on meteorological aspects of forecasting. 
Global best practices will be emulated under the guidance of a global centre of excellence, WMO. 
However, equal thrust has not been observed on hydrological aspects, which will limit the 
overall effectiveness of advanced forecasting on water related matters. To be effective, both 
meteorological and hydrological excellence will have to be attained simultaneously through the 
project interventions. The current bias on meteorological aspects will reduce effective 
application of global best practices. 
54. 
The funding proposal identifies four streams of potential benefits from the project, 
which include the following: (i) damage avoided through DRR, (ii) loss avoided through 
sustained agricultural production and subsequent food security, (iii) health costs avoided by 
restricting spread of infectious diseases, and (iv) gains from improved water resources 
management. The delivery of the last item will not be realized within the project 
implementation period of five years. Also, damage related to flooding will not be adequately 
forecasted without the full application of hydrological models. The cost estimates have removed 
the last two benefit streams, while comparing benefits with costs. 
55. 
The benefit to cost estimation considered a time horizon of 15 years for the project, 
while it also considers 5 per cent discount rate. The economic efficiency estimates reveal a 
positive net present value of USD 230 million, with a cost-benefit ratio of 1:3.6. The economic 
internal rate of return becomes positive after the ninth year (four years after project 
completion), and reaches 14 per cent by the project completion. This indicates that the project’s 
economic efficiency is high. 
56. 
The same analysis involving a 30 per cent decline in benefits provided a sensitivity 
analysis, which also yields a net positive net present value of USD 161 million and a still healthy 
cost-benefit ratio of 1:1.8. The major decline in benefits dampens the economic internal rate of 
return, however it still appears attractive. Therefore, the economic efficiency of the project is 
found to be high, even without the potential benefits added from water resources management. 
57. 
Despite such economic considerations, the use value (considering the social and gender 
related needs) of the forecasts will greatly decline due to the inherent weakness of the 
inadequate integration of hydrological modelling and subsequent forecasting. The time frame 
for the project and its budget will not be sufficient for the project proponents to procure, 
develop and calibrate globally-acclaimed hydrological and hydraulic models so that accurate 
forecasts may be made possible. Moreover, such models are not only expensive, the proponents 
will also have to expand the idea of building institutional capacities for the inclusion of 
hydrological modelling and forecasting by committing to additional costs, which are not seen in 
the budget spread of the project. This therefore appears as a missed opportunity, which is why 
the overall implementation of MH-IBF-EWS may not be effectively accomplished within the 
project budget and stipulated timeline. 
58. 
In view of the above considerations, the effectiveness and efficiency of the project is 
rated as medium to low. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
59. 
Without equal emphasis on hydrology, the project is not considered as among the best. 
However, the independent TAP recognizes the need for much improved forecasting capacities in 
the four SIDS and recommends that the Board approve the project.

=== PAGE 156 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 156 
 
 
60. 
The independent TAP recommends for the AE to actively engage with a global centre of 
excellence on hydrology and give adequate emphasis on the inclusion of hydrological data 
collection, monitoring and subsequent modelling in each of the four target countries, so that 
effective forecasting for multiple hazards becomes a reality within the lifetime of the project.

=== PAGE 157 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 157 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP 161) 
Proposal name: 
Building regional resilience through strengthened 
hydrometeorological-climate information services in Indian 
Ocean Member Countries  
Accredited entity: 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) 
Country/(ies): 
Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, and Seychelles 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
 
Impact potential 
AFD, as the AE, thanks ITAP for the Funding Proposal (FP) review and assessment regarding 
the Impact Potential. We note the ITAP’s conclusion that the Hydromet Project will have 
Medium to Low impact potential.  
Indeed, AFD agree on the importance and the strong benefit of the engagement with WMO 
centre of excellence on hydrology, and agree on the necessity to lever additional sources of 
funding to support hydrological and Hydraulic activities modelling activities.  
Noting that AFD acknowledges the equal importance of addressing meteorological and 
hydrological needs in the four target countries at national level to bring down the 
understating and impacted based forecast to the watershed level, AFD is pleased to confirm to 
ITAP that following the ITAP/AE meeting, the Funding Proposal has been already 
strengthened and completed to highlight the importance of the hydrological aspects as per 
the constructive ITAP questioning. AFD inform ITAP that a specific annex on hydrological and 
hydraulic existing tools –Annex 22-B) have been developed to confirm the completeness of 
the FP assessment.  
AFD, would like to bring to ITAP attention, that the Hydromet Project supports activities on 
hydrological data generation and handling under Activities 2.1.1 (observation systems), 2.1.2 
(information systems), and 2.2.1 (calibration laboratory), as these activities cover both 
meteorological and hydrological aspects. These activities will be supported by a strong 
capacity building and training program (Activity 1.3.2) on which engaging a WMO Centre(s) 
of Excellence on Hydrology will support meeting ITAP recommendations.  
As a first approach, AFD, have already identified the following centres that may be considered 
as partner for the Project Implementation: the UK Centre of Ecology and Hydrology (CEH), 
and the Indian Institute of Technology Roorke/Department of Hydrology), the WMO Global 
Hydrological Data Centres (in Germany, Russian Federation and the Netherlands), and others 
(such as ECMWF, JRC and RIMES).  
I addition to these activities, AFD recalls its support to ongoing others projects related to 
hydrological and Hydraulic capacity development specifically in Mauritius and Madagascar 
and Seychelles (Annex 22b). For efficiency and to avoid any financial effort duplication, AFD 
did not considered the necessity to provide countries like Mauritius with new licences.  
Moreover, based on its large experience in LDCs, the AE recommends the use of open source 
models, alongside with global and regional datasets – e.g. from the EC/Copernicus GloFAS

=== PAGE 158 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 158 
 
 
 
(https://www.globalfloods.eu), and RIMES Flood Forecasting System 
(https://www.rimes.int) – that could be calibrated over the four countries.  
AFD emphasizes that WMO is a technical implementing partner for the Hydromet Project and 
is considered as a member of the Project Regional Steering Committee – this has also been 
highlighted in the FP. Finally, AFD would like to recall that the HYCOS assessment of the IOC 
countries has been developed by WMO and endorsed by the AE, to be financed under the 
Hydromet project. In addition, through the partnership with WMO, the beneficiary countries 
will also benefit from the newly developed WMO Global Hydrometry Support Facility 
(HydroHub)1. These facts should secure the ITAP on the already existing strong dialogue and 
collaboration with WMO on hydrological, which dialogue will be maintained during the 
implementation of the project. 
Based on what is develop above, AFD understand that the impact potential assessment of the 
Hydromet Project can be considered by ITAP as “High”.  
Paradigm shift potential 
AFD thanks ITAP for the Funding Proposal review and assessment regarding the Paradigm 
Shift Potential. We note the ITAP’s conclusion that the Hydromet Project will have Medium 
High sustainable development potential, since ITAP considered that capacity development 
regarding hydrological and hydraulic aspects of the multi-hazard forecasting and EWS 
described in the Hydromet project may not be sufficient to achieve the coveted goal of MH-
IBF-EWS.  
AFD concurs on the equal importance of od addressing meteorological and hydrological 
aspects in MH-IBF-EWS. Based on the ITAP /AE meeting relevant discussions on the Funding 
Proposal on this specific issue, AFD took the opportunity to enhance and clarify theses 
aspects, following the constructive recommendation from ITAP.  
In particular, AFD would like to confirm to ITAP that the FP activities cover the development 
of flood hazard maps for each of the four target countries under Activity 2.3.3 of the 
Hydromet Project. Vulnerability maps and flood risk analysis will be carried out for 2 pilot 
areas in each country under Activities 2.3.4 and 2.3.5, respectively. Flood forecasting 
capabilities will be introduced under Activity 2.3.8 (please refer to the previous response 
(above) on Impact Potential related to the hydrological and hydraulic tools, and to Annex 
22b-Hydrological capacity development), including the use of ECMWF probabilistic data as an 
input to the flood forecasting model to generate probabilistic flood forecasts. For Impact 
Based Flood Forecasting, AFD agree on the necessity of linking warning to flood hazard 
mapping and modelling, exposure and vulnerability data to estimate the likely impact using 
concepts and approaches that are consistent with WMO Guidelines on Multi-Hazard Impact-
based Forecast and Warning Services. 
Sustainable development potential 
AFD thanks ITAP for the Funding Proposal review and assessment regarding the Sustainable 
Development Potential. AFD appreciates ITAP’s positive assessment of the economic, social 
environmental and gender-related co-benefits; however, it notes the ITAP’s conclusion that 
the Project will have Medium to High sustainable development potential since ITAP 
considered that capacity development regarding hydrological and hydraulic aspects in the 
Hydromet project may not be sufficient to fully achieve the environmental benefits of MH-
IBF-EWS, and the social benefits accrued from agromet advisories.  
 
1 https://public.wmo.int/en/our-mandate/water/High-quality-data-supports-science

=== PAGE 159 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 159 
 
 
 
In this sense, AFD would like to confirm that the FP have been already modified after ITAP 
meeting to highlight the hydrological aspects, as described in previous responses to reflect 
the equal importance of addressing meteorological and hydrological aspects in MH-IBF-EWS 
and agromet services. Engagement with WMO Centres of Excellence on Hydrology will be 
pursued. 
Needs of the recipient 
The description of the Project’s “needs of the recipient” reflects the information provided in 
the Funding Proposal package. The AE thanks ITAP for the Funding Proposal review and 
assessment as “High” regarding the Needs of the Recipient. 
Country ownership 
The description of the Project’s “country ownership” reflects the information provided in the 
Funding Proposal package. AFD thanks ITAP for the Funding Proposal review and assessment 
as “High” regarding the Country Ownership. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
AFD thanks ITAP for the thorough Funding Proposal (FP) review and assessment regarding 
the Efficiency and effectiveness.  
AFD, as the AE, appreciates ITAP’s positive assessment of the results on the avoided damages 
and losses that the project will allow as well as on the gains, inter alia, in productivity impacts 
in the agricultural and tourism sectors. However, the AE considers that the evaluation of the 
criteria of efficiency and effectiveness “Medium to Low" mainly due to hydrological and 
hydraulic aspects could be revisit noting that the project (i) have dedicated activities related 
to hydrological aspects, and those will be strengthened with the additions included in the FP, 
based on ITAP’s recommendation (and described in previous responses); and (ii) strengthen 
synergies with ongoing projects on resilience and flood risk management especially those 
being implemented in beneficiary countries with the support of the AFD. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
AFD thanks sincerely ITAP for the overall Funding Proposal (FP) review and assessment. The 
assessment document provides a good summary of the Project as it relates to the GCF’s six 
assessment criteria. We welcome the recommendation that the Project be funded without 
conditions. 
AFD also welcome the recommendation from ITAP related to hydrological aspects, and 
together with the EE, is very keen to consider engaging with a Global Centre(s) of Excellence 
on Hydrology, as developed above in the Impact Potential part. 
AFD, as the AE, will continue working closely with WMO, and will explore the newly 
developed WMO Global Hydrometry Support Facility (HydroHub) 
(https://public.wmo.int/en/our-mandate/water/High-quality-data-supports-science), to 
complement existing initiatives and further support the hydrological aspects in the Hydromet 
project.  
With previous clarifications and additions to the FP on the hydrological aspects (as 
described/detailed in previous responses), AFD would appreciate that ITAP considers the 
Hydromet Project among the best, specifically when we consider its regional approach, which 
will lead to strong SIDS’ integration and levelling up.

=== PAGE 160 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.08 
Page 160 
 
 
 
AFD will be very thankful for a strong endorsement of the Hydromet Project by ITAP.

=== PAGE 161 ===
Building Regional Resilience through Strengthened 
Meteorological, Hydrological and Climate Services 
in the Indian Ocean Commission Member Countries 
(Hydromet Project) 
Annex 7: Gender Assessment & Action Plan 
January 2021 
AFD/DOE/CLI-DCP-2017-060 
Contract #: CZZ2152-MS-2019-03 
Gender documentation for FP161

=== PAGE 162 ===
This technical assistance operation is financed by Agence Française 
de Développement (AFD) under the Adapt'Action Facility. This 
Facility, which started in May 2017, supports African countries, LDCs 
and SIDS in the implementation of their commitments under the Paris Climate Agreement, by financing studies, 
capacity building and technical assistance activities, particularly in the adaptation sector. The authors take full 
responsibility for the content of this document. The opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of AFD 
or its partners. 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................................................. 2 
1 
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................................ 1 
2 
METHODOLOGY ............................................................................................................................... 4 
2.1 
APPRAISAL OF GENDER MAINSTREAMING PRIORITIES OF GCF AND AFD ................................................. 4 
2.2 
CONCURRENT TRIANGULATION AND IN-COUNTRY MISSIONS ................................................................. 5 
2.3 
LITERATURE REVIEW AND STRUCTURE OF THE ANALYSIS ....................................................................... 7 
3 
GENDER MAINSTREAMING, SECTORAL ISSUES & HYDRO-METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
SERVICES .......................................................................................................................................... 9 
3.1 
THE GENDER-CLIMATE CHANGE-EWS/CS NEXUS ............................................................................ 10 
3.2 
MAINSTREAMING GENDER WITHIN CLIMATE INFORMATION SERVICES IN THE IOC COUNTRIES ................... 12 
3.3 
TAILORING PRODUCTS TOWARDS END USERS IN CLIMATE-VULNERABLE SECTORS .................................... 13 
3.4 
UTILISING COMMUNITY INFORMATION CHANNELS AND LOCAL KNOWLEDGE .......................................... 14 
3.5 
CREATING OPPORTUNITIES TO OVERCOME GENDERED BARRIERS ......................................................... 15 
4 
SOCIOECONOMIC AND GENDER BASELINE IN THE IOC COUNTRIES ................................................ 17 
4.1 
NATIONAL AGGREGATE STATISTICS AND DATA ................................................................................... 17 
4.2 
POLICY ENVIRONMENT ................................................................................................................. 28 
4.3 
COMPOSITE INDICES – HDI, GDI, GGI, GGGI, AND MPI .................................................................. 31 
5 
CONCLUSION: REGIONAL POTENTIAL & WAY FORWARD ............................................................... 35 
6 
GENDER ACTION PLAN ................................................................................................................... 36 
7 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ............................................................................................................................... 58

=== PAGE 163 ===
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
 
AFD  
 
Agence Française du Développement 
AU  
 
African Union 
AUC  
 
African Union Commission  
CEDAW  
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Violence Against Women 
COI/IOC  
Commission de l’Ocean Indien / Indian Ocean Commission 
CS 
 
Climate Information Services 
CVI 
 
Climate Vulnerability Index 
DIE  
 
Deutsches Institute für Entwicklungspolitik 
DRR 
 
Disaster Risk Reduction 
EWS 
 
Early Warning System/s 
FHH 
 
Female-headed Households 
GBV 
 
Gender-based Violence 
GCF 
 
Green Climate Fund 
GDI 
 
Gender Development Index 
GFDRR  
Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction and Recovery 
GGGI 
 
Global Gender Gap Index 
GII 
 
Global Inequality Index 
GNI 
 
Gross National Income  
HDI 
 
Human Development Index 
ICT 
 
Information Communication Technology 
IFRC 
 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 
IPV 
 
Intimate Partner Violence 
IUCN 
 
International Union for the Conservation of Nature 
LDC 
 
Least Developed Country/ies 
MHH 
 
Male-headed Households 
MPI 
 
Multidimensional Poverty Index 
NMHS  
National Meteorological and Hydrological Services 
RCCC 
 
Regional Climate Change Centre 
RCSS  
 
Regional Climate Services Strategy 
OECD 
 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
OPHI 
 
Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative 
SADC 
 
Southern African Development Community 
SDG 
 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SIDS 
 
Small Island Developing States 
SIGI 
 
Social Institutions and Gender Index 
SMS 
 
Short Messaging Services 
SWIO RAFI  
Southwest Indian Ocean Island Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative 
UIP 
 
Regional User Interface Platform 
UNDESA  
United Nations Department of Economics and Social Affairs 
UNDP 
 
United Nations Development Programme 
UNFCCC  
United Nations Framework Convention Climate Change 
UNODC  
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
UN-OHRLLS 
Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, 
                               Landlocked Developing Countries, and Small Island Developing States 
VAW 
 
Violence Against Women 
WEF 
 
World Economic Forum 
WHO 
 
World Health Organization 
 
WMO 
 
World Meteorological Organization

=== PAGE 164 ===
1 
1 
Introduction 
This Gender Assessment and Action Plan has been prepared to assist the design of a Green Climate 
Fund (GCF) funding proposal by Agence Française de Développement (AFD) and Indian Ocean 
Commission (IOC), titled: Building Regional Resilience through Strengthened Meteorological, 
Hydrological and Climate Services in the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) Member Countries 
(Hydromet).  
This project aims to bolster climate resilience and adaptive capacities among communities by 
developing national hydro-meteorological services, strengthening regional cooperation and climate 
knowledge sharing, and with an overall focus on improving and scaling up climate information 
services (CS) delivery and early warning systems (EWS) in the IOC countries. These countries have 
been identified as ‘climate hotspots’ - vulnerable to climate risks and impacts due to greater 
exposure to coastal erosion, natural hazards, sea-level rise and saline intrusion, temperature 
variability, to cite a few factors. This is compounded by the following1: remoteness and deprivation 
from the benefits of scale, low income and assets, small domestic markets and heavy dependence 
on a few external markets, high volatility of economic growth, fragile natural environments, and 
socioeconomic as well as gendered vulnerabilities.  
With three components (1: capacity building, institutional development, regional cooperation, 
public-private engagement); 2: high-quality climate-related data, improved multi-hazard impact-
based forecasts and EWSs, and climate risk assessments; and, 3: enhanced use of climate services 
for climate change adaptation, and improved capabilities in implementation a people-centred MH-
IBF-EWS for DRR), the proposed project can reduce, towards greater gender time poverty in the 
four countries by:  
• 
Mainstreaming gender-responsive approaches for the design of CS products, hydro-
meteorological systems, and EWS; 
• 
Promoting gender balance through the technical and maintenance capacity-building 
activities as well as institutional development targeted for hydro-meteorological networks, 
equipment and systems; 
• 
Establishing gender-aware policy frameworks to inform collaboration between key sectors 
and national/regional hydro-meteorological services; and 
• 
Pioneering gender mainstreaming analyses and praxis regarding hydro-meteorological 
systems, EWS and CS in the Indian Ocean region.  
A kaleidoscope of overlapping cultural, economic, social and political roles form gender relations 
in the Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles. Given the expanse of the region and the 
unique markers of Comorian, Malagasy, Mauritian and Seychellois societies, these roles have 
multiple facets, broadly reflecting the:  
 
1      
UN-OHRLLS – Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries, and 
Small Island Developing States (2015). Small Island Developing States in Numbers: Climate Change Edition 2015. Report. 
Accessed 16 July 2019. Available at: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/2189SIDS-IN-NUMBERS-
CLIMATE-CHANGE-EDITION_2015.pdf

=== PAGE 165 ===
2 
• 
Geographical and geopolitical specificity of the region: Comoros2 and Madagascar3 are 
identified as Least Developed Countries or LDCs – UN designated countries for aid, 
preferential market access, and special technical assistance due to low income (calculated 
by a three-year average of Gross National Income or GNI), human assets and, economic 
vulnerability. Further, Mauritius and Seychelles along with Comoros are also classified as 
Small Islands Developing States or SIDS, which are a distinct group of developing island 
countries facing specific social, economic and environmental vulnerabilities. SIDS were 
recognized as having special status both for their environment and development at the 
Earth Summit, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992. 
• 
Traditional and faith-based norms within intraregional societies of the four countries: the 
IOC covers a vast oceanic and land area, which despite a shared climatic and environmental 
system in the region reflect diversity among cultures, communities and customs. Seychelles, 
among the four island nations, has been distinctively a matrilineal society with greater 
access to both public and household expenditure and decision-making for women. On the 
other hand, Comoros, Madagascar and Mauritius have been traditionally patrilineal 
societies with varying amounts of decision-making accorded to women in the public and 
private sphere.  
• 
Gender gaps in economic roles and political representation: the data collated from the 
four countries, explored in detail – see Section 3, reveal the different baselines in the IOC 
countries. 
At the outset, the project recognises that the lack of a gender-responsive approach to address the 
above baseline (see Section 3 for details), particularly stemming from:  
• 
Supposed ‘common sense’ notions that climate services are gender-neutral4; 
• 
Side-lining of gender needs or ethnic vulnerabilities in adaptation design, resilience 
capacity-building and mitigation services5; and 
• 
Lack or scant allocation of financial means, gender budgets and dedicated resources 
towards mainstreaming gender action 
will limit the potential, inclusiveness and success of the project goals in the Indian Ocean islands. 
Without gender analysis and mainstreaming in IOC Hydromet, the benefits of increased support 
and access to climate services, in tandem with awareness-raising and capacity-building, may accrue 
to better-off households or more mainstream groups that are able to capitalise on new 
 
2 
UNDESA – United Nations Department of Economics and Social Affairs (2018). LDC Country Profile: Comoros. Brief Report. 
Accessed 1 August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wpcontent/uploads/sites/45/LDC_Profile_Comoros.pdf 
3 
UNDESA (2018). LDC Country Profile: Comoros. Brief Report. Accessed 1 August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wpcontent/uploads/sites/45/LDC_Profile_Madagascar.pdf 
4 
Current literature on climate change, and its effects and emergent risks, are predominantly produced in scientific circles. 
Yet, there is increasing evidence that adopting social science methods, and situating resilience and adaptation practice 
within a broader science-policy interface and right-based perspectives, can gear projects towards environmental and 
socioeconomic co-benefits. Particularly, this could better prepare communities to avoid resource strife and respond to the 
complexity of social arrangements, reducing far-reaching impacts of climate risks. See Butterfield, R. (2018) ‘Bringing 
rights into resilience: revealing complexities of climate risks and social conflict’ in Disasters. Journal Article.  
5 
Poor or missing gender analysis, or the lack of gender-responsive action, may lead to planners or personnel depending on 
women to assume a central role in their coping strategies, which may not be the practical reality for many vulnerable 
communities. Further, this also glosses over the existing burdens on women among such groups. See Nelson. V., 
Meadows. K., Cannon, T., Morton, J., & Martin, A. (2002) ‘Uncertain predictions, invisible impacts and the need to 
mainstream gender in climate change adaptations’ in Gender and Development. Journal Article.

=== PAGE 166 ===
3 
opportunities and respond better to changes implemented through the project.  
 
A ‘gender lens’, thus, is both necessary and relevant for the project to maximise its outcomes, 
particularly creating hydro-meteorological, EWS and CS capacities for observation of weather 
phenomena and climate change impacts for vulnerable sectors; and, ensuring preparedness against 
natural and climate-induced hazards, disasters and weather variations that cannot be avoided. This 
gender-responsive approach is also crucial for establishing institutional structures and broad-based 
political and socioeconomic frameworks to mobilise medium- and long-term climate change 
adaptation action as well as regional cooperation.

=== PAGE 167 ===
4 
2 
METHODOLOGY  
2.1 Appraisal of Gender Mainstreaming Priorities of GCF 
and AFD 
The analytical prerogatives of this Gender Assessment and Action Plan are informed by both GCF’s 
and AFD’s respective gender policies.  
The GCF adopted a revised version of its 2014 Gender Policy and Action Plan on June 2018 in 
Korea.6 The revised Policy addresses pertinent issues on gender and climate change: the expansion 
of gender mainstreaming beyond the preserve of ‘women’s issues’; and the identification of 
synergies with the in-house Indigenous People (IP) Policy as well as the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)’s Gender Action Plan (GAP), Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) and Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women 
(CEDAW). Overall, the Policy and Action Plan reinforce the responsiveness of GCF to the multiple, 
heterogeneous, culturally diverse context of gender inequality to better address and account for the 
links between gender issues and climate change – a perspective that has been mainstreamed in the 
development of the funding proposal for IOC Hydromet.  
The AFD recognises the important contributions made by increased gender equality to 
development. In 2013, the French Government made the promotion of gender equality a priority 
through the adoption of the French Gender and Development Strategy 2013 – 2017.7 In 2014, AFD 
defined its Strategy on Gender and the Reduction of Gender Inequalities. It is based on three 
priorities: prevent gender inequalities in the operations financed by AFD; promote gender 
as one of the objectives of AFD’s operations; and support progress in societies on these 
issues.8 
Further, the AFD defines itself as a ‘100% Social Link’ agency in its Strategy 2018-20229: 
“All AFD Group actions will aim to bolster social link – or at least not weaken social link – 
by reducing inequalities and improving access to essential goods and services such as education, 
health, nutrition, water, energy, judicial protection, and culture. The Group will also close gaps in 
economic participation by facilitating access to property ownership, employment, and credit, and by 
connecting isolated areas to the rest of the world. This multidimensional commitment will help 
attain SDG 1 (eradicate poverty), SDG 10 (reduce inequalities), and SDG 5 (gender equality). It also 
includes all AFD actions that contribute to SDG 2 (zero hunger), SDG 3 (good health and well-being), 
SDG 4 (quality education), and SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth); and, the SDGs that 
address access and territorial challenges: SDG 6 (water and sanitation), SDG 7 (clean and affordable 
energy), and SDG 11 (sustainable cities and communities).” 
 
 
 
6 
GCF – Green Climate Fund (2018). Updated Gender Policy and Action Plan. Policy Document. Accessed 22 April 2019. 
Available at: https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/1087995/GCF_B.20_07_-
_Updated_Gender_Policy_and_Action_Plan_2018_2020.pdf/9bd48527-6e35-a72a-2f52-fd401d16d358 
7 
AFD – Agence Française de Développement (2019). ‘Gender Equality’. Official Website. Accessed 2 August 2019. Available 
at: https://www.afd.fr/en/page-thematique-axe/gender-equality 
8 
AFD (2019). Ibid. 
9 
AFD (2018). Towards a World in Common: AFD Group 2018 – 2022 Strategy. Policy Document. Accessed 2 August 2019. 
Available at: https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2018-09-04-05-09/afd-group-strategy-2018-2022.pdf

=== PAGE 168 ===
5 
The IOC, as of January 2020, does not have a regional gender policy in place. However, a GCF 
accreditation and readiness proposal put together for the IOC by Seychelles stipulates the 
identification and development of regional needs for equal representation of women in 
environmental projects. 10  
2.2 Concurrent Triangulation and In-country Missions 
This Gender Assessment is informed by a concurrent triangulation research design: firstly, semi-
structured interviews (with community focus groups, key informants within governments and 
technical organizations, and institutional representatives of met and related departments) were 
conducted during the rapid in-country missions (five working days in each IOC country in the 
months of June and July 2019).  
Secondly, the focus of these interviews was ensured to reflect upon and build on the information 
and secondary data gathered from the desk-review of existing literature (see bibliography under 
chapter 6). Participants and stakeholders were identified using a combination of purposive and 
snowball sampling during the mission, and classified according to their levels of knowledge, 
exposure and access on climate change, early warning systems, and gender baseline and inequality 
issues to prioritise and vet information and data received.  
The concurrent triangulation research design was deemed suited to the IOC Hydromet gender 
assessment, given: the flexibility to convert secondary quantitative and qualitative findings into 
narrative data for the comprehension of the studied phenomenon, and the accuracy it can provide 
to samples of intermediate or small size (which were the primary sources). The research undertaken 
in the four countries, was also formative in nature and rapid in mandate, necessitating the prompt 
methodology to establish an inventory of information related to gendered aspects of EWS, CS and 
hydromet services, relevant for the delivery of outputs identified in the results framework. The 
methodology, thus, informed the in-country missions for gender data and information scoping, 
described in chronological order below: 
 
Madagascar (24 – 28 June 2019) 
The week-long in-country mission in Madagascar, based out of Antananarivo, primarily focused on 
identifying and interviewing key informants (particularly government stakeholders such as 
representatives from the Ministries of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries; Tourism; Social 
Protection and the Advancement of Women) and experts (international organizations and NGOs) to 
understand the country context the country context and gender baseline, especially gauging the 
availability of gender-related secondary data and information on climate-vulnerable sectors (such 
as, participation of women in agriculture).  
Multi-stakeholder meetings with different government wings (key climate-vulnerable sectors such 
as the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries; and the Ministry of Environment, Ecology and 
Forests) provided an overview of gendered labour force participation and potential beneficiaries in 
these sectors. A report on women and environment for the National Adaptation Planning process, 
finalised in February 2019, was also obtained to inform this analysis.  
 
Additionally, meetings were held with and reports were received from: 
 
10 
GCF (2017). Readiness Proposal with the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) for Republic of Seychelles. Project Document. 
Accessed 15 January 2020. Available at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/466992/Readiness_proposals_-
_Seychelles___Indian_Ocean_Commission___Entity_Support.pdf/7a649544-1b41-430e-b735-c53a840d62ba

=== PAGE 169 ===
6 
• 
A local non-governmental organisation (NGO) – Capacity-Building for Communities (C for C) – 
that focuses on women’s economic empowerment and gender-based violence (GBV) activism 
in rural Malagasy communities under the EU-funded SAHALA programme; and 
• 
USAID Madagascar for technical information on gender baselines that have informed their 
agenda and programming in the country, particularly the Fararano Food Security project. 
 
Comoros (01 – 05 July 2019) 
The week-long in-country mission in the Comoros archipelago was trifurcated to cover all three 
islands: Anjouan, Grande Comore, and Mohéli. Gender-related data scoping and information 
collection were undertaken primarily by the consultant in Moroni, Grande Comore. This involved: 
• 
Engagement with key government stakeholders such as Ministry of Civil Aviation and 
Meteorology, Ministry of Civil Protection, Ministry of Fisheries, etc; 
• 
Consultation with NGOs and volunteer associations such as International Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Societies; and 
• 
Key-informant interviews with UN organisations active in the islands – Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).  
Additionally, site visits (organized through the project focal point in the meteorological department) 
in Grande Comore to areas hit by Cyclone Kenneth were undertaken along with the core and 
complementary studies team. Focus group discussions in coastal communities of north Ngazidja 
were held with women’s representatives and village elders. These were conducted in a semi-
structured interview format, using both open-ended and closed questions to gather information 
regarding: 
• 
Current and past livelihoods in the communities, particularly fishing practices (dominated by 
men), ylang ylang plucking (dominated by women); 
• 
Gendered access to government and NGO aid, resources and capital in the selected sites; 
• 
Information dissemination channels among different groups within the communities 
(particularly, public spaces such as mosques and women’s limited access to these); and 
• 
Importantly, the ex-ante (the EW was received mostly by men, and women were uninformed / 
underinformed about the cyclone), during (it was revealed that due to lack of information 
dissemination, many communities in Ngazidja lost their housing and managed to take part in 
last-minute evacuations) and ex-post coping mechanisms taken by men and women, in 
response to the cyclone (such as community mobilization and sharing of resources – many 
families were depending on familial and neighbour networks as their houses were yet to be 
repaired, losses of agricultural land were yet to be reversed). 
 
Seychelles (22 – 26 July 2019) 
The week-long in-country mission in Seychelles was based out of Mahé Island, the largest island and 
governance centre of the archipelago. At the outset, a multi-stakeholder meeting organised through 
the Seychelles Meteorological Authority brought different governmental departments such as 
Ministry of Tourism, Civil Aviation, Ports and Marine, Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture, 
Seychelles Fisheries Authority, etc. This helped identify the key stakeholders and existing CS, EWS 
and hydro-meteorological services, and understand the gender requirements in terms of sectoral 
users and beneficiaries. Field visits, organised through the meteorological services, to Praslin and La 
Digue islands, facilitated rapid assessments of coastal erosion sites and engagement with private 
enterprises (potential users of climate services) that have experienced sea intrusion-related losses.

=== PAGE 170 ===
7 
A gender-focused meeting was organised with the Gender Secretariat housed within Seychelles’ 
Ministry of Social Affairs, Community Development and Sports. Key-informant interviews with the 
Principal Secretary and other operatives of the Secretariat highlighted gender- and youth-related 
issues, that inform the climate- and disaster-readiness of the country: primarily market 
segmentation in the labour force, drug epidemic and gender-based violence (GBV) among certain 
communities. 
 
Mauritius (29 July – 02 August 2019)  
The week-long in-country mission in Mauritius was centred around Port Louis, the capital city and 
administrative hub, and focused on pinpointing sectoral stakeholders, cost-estimation of climate-
related losses, and institutional collaborations for climate and hydro-meteorological services in the 
administrative structure. This began with bringing key sectors for a joint stakeholder meeting, 
including the Mauritius Meteorological Services, Ministry of Agro Industry and Food Security, and 
Ministry of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries and Shipping. Following the identification 
of potential beneficiaries of improved climate services, a targeted gender meeting with key 
informants (Gender Coordinators) in the Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family 
Welfare was organised.  
This meeting was crucial in mapping the current gender baseline in Mauritius, and understanding 
gender issues in context with cross-cutting factors such as socioeconomic performance and caste 
determinants. Further, it shed light on gender roles in Mauritian societies and how these relate to 
climate change preparedness, and potential adaptation options through hydro-meteorological 
services and products. The key-informant interviews with Gender Coordinators in the Ministry were 
combined with secondary data collection and policy appraisal through the existing knowledge 
products of the department, as well as collation of existing gender assessments done for 
environment- and climate change-related funding proposals on solar energy, land management, etc. 
2.3 Literature Review and Structure of the Analysis 
A comprehensive desk-review of existing literature was conducted on gender, climate change 
adaptation, climate services and hydro-meteorological services. Literature was drawn from: in-
house documents and similar projects of both GCF and AFD; research reports from international 
organisations or knowledge platforms (UNDP, World Meteorological Organisation – WMO, 
Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform); multilateral development banks and international 
financial institutions (primarily the World Bank and the African Development Bank – AfDB); journals 
(Gender and Development, Disasters, Society and Natural Resources); and grey literature (for 
example, Beijing 25+ country report for Comoros11, SAHALA-EU activity report for Madagascar12, 
 
11 
UN Women & Union Des Comores, Commissariat National à la Solidarite, à la Protection, er à la Promotion du Genre 
(2014). Rapport Pays sur les Progres Realises dans la Mise en Œuvre de la Plateforme D’Action de Beijing+25. Government 
Report. Accessed 2 August 2019. Available at: https://www.unwomen.org/-
/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/csw/64/national-reviews/comoros.pdf?la=en&vs=2402 
12 
EU & C for C (2018). Rapport Final des Activites du Project – Couvrant la Periode du 01er Avril 2016 au 31 Mars 2018. 
Project Evaluation Report.

=== PAGE 171 ===
8 
CEDAW shadow report for Mauritius13, and National Comprehensive Review report for 
Seychelles14).  
The next section (Section 2) presents gender-responsive elements related to sectoral issues to be 
incorporated within project outcomes to reduce climate vulnerability, particularly of at-risk 
households and ethnic minority groups; gender considerations and actions for stakeholders; and 
presents normative information to gear the overall proposal towards better socioeconomic, gender 
and environmental co-benefits.  
The literature review revealed useful data and research, which were informed by varied 
methodologies and perspectives. Thus, a derivative baseline (Section 3) with additional data points 
from composite indices and national aggregates has been inferred to identify the gender barriers 
and dynamics in the IOC countries, and to substantiate Section 2. Subsequently the section also 
explores the policy environments in Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles, and presents 
a potential list of gender collaborators relevant for project activities and stakeholder consultations 
during project implementation. 
 
13 
Gender Links, Young Queer Alliance, Media Watch Organization, and SOS Femmes (2018). Report to CEDAW from 
Mauritius. Shadow Report. Accessed 2 August 2019. Available at: 
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CEDAW/Shared%20Documents/MUS/INT_CEDAW_CSS_MUS_32569_E.pdf 
14 
UN Women & Government of Seychelles, Ministry of Family Affairs (2019). Seychelles: National Comprehensive Review. 
Report. Accessed 2 August 2019. Available at: https://www.unwomen.org/-
/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/csw/64/national-reviews/seychelles.pdf?la=en&vs=4554

=== PAGE 172 ===
9 
3 
GENDER MAINSTREAMING, SECTORAL ISSUES & 
HYDRO-METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
SERVICES 
The World Economic Forum (WEF)’s report The Global Risks Report 2020 finds that the top five 
among the primary ten risk factors facing the world population are environmental in nature: (in 
order of risk) extreme weather, climate action failure, natural disasters, biodiversity loss, human-
made environmental disasters.15 These risk factors are often compounded by ‘threat multipliers’ 
such as precarious economic status and lack of political access (including, decision-making bodies); 
performance on health, education and livelihood indicators (which are often worsened by extreme 
weather events and natural disasters); limited access to productive assets, information networks, 
skills (which work as buffers during ex-post disaster situations); among others.  
Employing a gender mainstreaming perspective will highlight these complex social development 
phenomena and interconnected nature of risks and threats in the western Indian Ocean nations. 
Once identified, this will form the gender and social development context in which the IOC 
Hydromet has to be operationalized. In doing so, the project’s change narrative can also amend 
some of these persistent inequalities and unequal access, which often result in specific and 
entrenched vulnerabilities in the IOC countries.  
Vulnerabilities, thus, can be defined a set of general characteristics that impair the ability of a social 
group to cope with, respond effectively to, and adapt to external shocks, including those emerging 
from climate change, natural hazards, and disasters.16 This perspective is an important point of 
departure for the IOC Hydromet project, as vulnerabilities (in the background of risks and threat 
multipliers) need addressing through a range of climate adaptation activities, as they act as 
impediments for coping capacities against climate risks and impacts.  
Further, these vulnerabilities, whether compounded or individual, can reverse the progress 
achieved in securing household economic stability (with spillover effects on food, energy and water 
security) and managing community, resource and social strife. They can also reverse advances made 
on developmental goals and social change, particularly in the precarious contexts of both LDCs and 
SIDSs. On the other hand, gender mainstreaming through the Gender and Development (GAD) 
approach17 (as adopted by the project) will also recognise the role marginalised and vulnerable 
groups can play, and not simply stylise them a priori as ‘victims’. With an inclusive project design, 
they are often able to contribute traditional and artisanal knowledge of coping and improvising 
strategies, which can either be strengthened and mainstreamed as well as used as a basis for 
further capacity development. 
This section presents a synthesis of gender, environment and climate change issues, as these 
pertain to EWS and CS, as a broad background informing the gender-responsive perspective of IOC 
Hydromet. Then, it identifies sectoral recommendations in relation to gender-responsive planning 
for CS that have been identified for the project’s design and operationalisation.  
 
15 
World Economic Forum – WEF (2020). Official Website. Accessed 17 January 2020.  
Available at: http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Global_Risk_Report_2020.pdf 
16 
DIE – Deutsches Institute für Entwicklungspolitik (2009). “Climate Change Adaptation from a Gender Perspective”. 
Discussion Paper.  
17 
The GAD approach seeks to correct systems and mechanisms that produce gender inequality by focusing not only on 
women, but also by assessing the social status of both women and men. Moreover, it emphasises the role of men in 
resolving gender inequality, and places importance on the empowerment of women, who are placed in a socially and 
economically weaker position than men.

=== PAGE 173 ===
10 
3.1 The Gender-Climate Change-EWS/CS Nexus 
In December 2019, the 25th Conference of the Parties (COP) was held in Madrid, Spain and 
organized by the Government of Chile, bringing together all the signatories to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Renewed demands and efforts for gender 
mainstreaming and gender-responsive climate change adaptation were highlighted by the Women 
and Gender Constituency – particularly the inadequacy of transformative action (and policy gaps) on 
gender-climate issues towards the Lima Work Programme and its Gender Action Plan. 
COP 25 and other high-level policy engagements, between states and international organizations, 
reveal that gender and climate change issues have been recognized in adaptation and mitigation 
policy design and action. Yet, despite having currency as a concept and perspective, the 
operationalization of gender-responsive measures in adaptation and mitigation action remains 
scarce.  
Further, resource mobilization and commitments by national governments, in tandem with local 
actors, do not exhibit the percolation of these issues – especially at grassroots level where gender-
responsive climate action is crucial in determining overall resilience and adaptive capacities of 
communities. 
As elaborated in the funding proposal, this Gender Annex concurs that climate impacts in the IOC 
countries will be on demographic groups that are (primarily) reliant on natural resource-based 
livelihoods and agriculture, as well as tourism. The stakeholders in these sectors, in each IOC 
country, require capacity-building to manage changed climate phenomenon, natural disasters and 
hazards, as well as increasing and intensifying weather events. It has been generally observed, that 
female-headed households and women commonly face higher risks and greater burdens from these 
impacts, particularly compounded by incidence of poverty, unequal participation in decision-making 
processes, disparities in labour markets, health risks, etc.  
The following table identifies the main risks and challenges relevant for gender mainstreaming in a 
multi-country EWS and CS adaptation project like IOC Hydromet.

=== PAGE 174 ===
11 
 
MAIN GENDER RISKS AND CHALLENGES FOR IOC HYDROMET 
GENDER-
DIFFERENTIATED 
IMPACTS OF CLIMATE 
EFFECTS AND 
NATURAL DISASTERS 
The first and foremost hurdle for the project is the gender-specific differences 
(in consumption patterns and incidence of poverty, access to and control of 
resources and power, time use patterns and economic activities, etc.) that 
uniquely compound and overlap to create gendered vulnerability to climate 
change in each IOC country.  
This high burden of adverse impacts of climate change, especially with the lack 
of EWS, CS, and hydromet services, limit not only adaptation capacities in real 
time, but also have intergenerational effects and undo progress made towards 
gender equality in the island nations (particularly in SIDS and LDC contexts). 
GENDERED ACCESS TO 
ADAPTATION 
SOLUTIONS 
IMPLEMENTED BY THE 
PROJECT 
Field visits and engagement with government officials revealed that adaptation 
solutions, ranging from climate-smart agriculture to DRR training, face 
gendered impediments in percolation (when these are rarely mobilized). 
Women are often not allowed to access public spaces (where EW may be 
announced), for example mosques in Comoros. They may have limited access to 
radios or other information channels, such as in Madagascar. As a  trend in the 
region, dissemination of information are limited to channels primarily accessed 
by men. Additionally, time poverty (explored below) experienced by women 
and men (in some contexts) can also constrain the adoption of adaptation 
solutions, particularly in post-disaster and other vulnerable contexts.  
SIDELINING LOCAL 
ADAPTATION 
MEASURES AND 
INFORMATION 
CHANNELS 
Communities have long histories and praxis of engagement with and 
management of natural resources. Consequently, local adaptation methods, 
information channels, and disaster strategies (albeit discrete and reactive) have 
also existed. Resilience of communities, as well as ecosystems, can be ensured 
through the incorporation of these primarily reactive techniques into broader, 
pre-emptive EWS, CS and hydromet services with an emphasis on cross-
community dialogue to tailor these provisions.  
GENDER-BASED 
VIOLENCE (GBV) 
Despite mounting evidence for interlinkages between GBV and environmental 
factors, academic enquiry and practical integration of this perspective remains 
limited in adaptation practice. Physical, sexual and psychological harm are 
usually exacerbated during ex-post situations of climate impacts and losses, 
disasters and extreme weather events.  
In the Indian Ocean island nations, GBV rates are high (when reported), and 
often go underreported (with, in fact, Madagascar lacking a recent nation-wide 
survey). In the Seychelles archipelago, men also experience high levels of 
violence (uncharacteristic to the region, where women are usually targeted) 
alongside a persistent drug addiction epidemic, creating further barriers in the 
face of frequent and severe climate impacts. 
GENDERED 
LIMITATIONS IN 
DECISION-MAKING 
INSTITUTIONS 
(RELATED TO EWS, CS 
& HYDROMET) & 
REPRESENTATION 
Decision-making institutions, power-sharing mechanisms and overall 
representation tend to be skewed towards men in all four IOC countries, barring 
Seychelles. Yet, at the same time, women make important household decisions 
daily, in these countries, that pertain to domestic food security, water provision 
and other essentials. Without the adequate integration of these complex and 
gendered phenomena, it will be difficult to respond to particular needs and 
interests of vulnerable groups at the local level. In such a context, interventions 
become restricted to implementing scenario-based adaptation solutions, which 
are essentially top-down, that lead to limited successes and lack of ownership 
at the community level.

=== PAGE 175 ===
12 
3.2 Mainstreaming Gender within Climate Information 
Services in the IOC Countries 
The countries identified by the project are uniquely vulnerable to aggregate shocks from both 
economic and environmental stressors due to their small size, isolation, and other geographic, 
economic and socio-political features. The climate impacts on household well-being and the 
effectiveness of prevailing risk management mechanisms are not well understood, despite the use 
of different types of risk assessments, household income and expenditure surveys, and poverty 
analysis having been conducted in the region, and the macroeconomic impacts of negative shocks 
having been well studied in generic contexts. 
Given this lack of understanding regarding the effects of climate-related risks, natural hazards and 
disasters, along with inadequate CS, cannot be empirically quantified but can be hypothesised to 
produce unevenly distributed impacts within a population. The impacts and exposure compound 
with current incidence of impoverishment, gender inequality and lack of access to social safety 
networks and disproportionately affect the poorer and more vulnerable demographics – 
determined by the needs, opportunities and perils facing men and women. In this context, gender-
responsive CS will play a unique and positive role in increasing adaptability and resilience of 
communities towards climate-related risks and hazards; bolstering national meteorological and 
hydrological institutions (NMHS) and weather variation as well as observation, data collection, 
analysis, and interpretation; and strengthening EWS.  
At the outset, mainstreaming gender in CS through the project will involve the consideration of the 
following factors in activity design: 
• 
Division of labour (activity/place); 
• 
Visibility of labour (formal/informal sector); 
• 
Poverty levels (incidence/severity); 
• 
Human development factors, including:  
nutrition pattern (current levels of health/morbidity and mortality rates),  
literacy levels (access to information/ability to act on information and knowledge),  
recourse to legal protection (inheritance/land rights); 
• 
Access to and supply of information; 
• 
Access to critical resources (emergency aid/loans/insurance); and 
• 
Influence over decision-making processes (authority/power over domestic, community and local 
management).  
• 
Household responsibilities and time-use (domestic and unpaid care as well as reproductive 
work, fuel and water provisioning) 
• 
Incidence of physical, social and psychological violence in the household (especially how 
gender-based violence and intimate partner violence trends are affected in ex post disaster 
contexts)

=== PAGE 176 ===
13 
3.3 Tailoring Products towards End Users in Climate-
Vulnerable Sectors 
The IOC countries have faced consequences of disasters (including climate-induced disasters), 
extreme weather events and the pitfalls of limited meteorological capacities in recent years. For 
example: 
• 
Comoros is estimated to have lost between 60 – 80% of staple crops, water facilities and 
housing due to Cyclone Kenneth.18 
• 
The Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI)19 calculated by Germanwatch e.V. identifies Madagascar 
as the 7th most affected by climate event and related losses in 2017. 
• 
The Southwest Indian Ocean Risk Assessment (SWIO RAFI), conducted by the Global Facility for 
Disaster Risk Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) and World Bank, finds that Mauritius 
experiences a combined US$ 110 million in combined direct losses from earthquake, floods and 
tropical cyclone each year.20 
• 
In 2013, a Damage, Loss, and Needs Assessment report21 by the Government of Seychelles 
(supported by the European Union or EU and the World Bank) found that Cyclone Felleng 
caused an estimated loss of US$ 8.4 million, equivalent to 0.77% of the country’s GDP.  
The above predicament of the IOC countries can be contextualised by a CGIAR report22 that 
highlights how the extent of exposure to the impacts and losses of climate events is determined 
mainly by three factors: 
• 
Ex ante and ex post coping mechanisms; 
• 
The resources and information available to a community; and 
• 
The frequency and intensity of shocks/impacts that determines income shortages and asset 
loss, and cause failures of local recovery techniques built up over time. 
The reports reiterate the importance of hydromet and CS as well as a robust EWS in the Indian 
Ocean island countries, and how these cannot simply be limited to technical capacities and tools, 
particularly because expected and unavoidable variations in climatic patterns, climate-induced 
disasters and hazards, and unpredicted climate change risks will create different exposure patterns 
among communities.  
To address these differential exposure patterns, CS products, such as impact forecasting (analysing 
and disseminating implications of the forecast and specific uses of the forecast information) and 
nowcasting (short range weather forecasting, particularly from ground-based remote sensing 
 
18 
ReliefWeb (2019). ‘Comoros Humanitarian Situation Report – Cyclone Kenneth’. Online Report. Accessed 09 September 
2019. Available at: https://reliefweb.int/report/comoros/comoros-humanitarian-situation-report-no-2-cyclone-kenneth 
19 
GermanWatch (2019). Climate Vulnerability Index 2019. Report. Accessed 09 September 2019. Available at: 
https://germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202019_2.pdf 
20 
The World Bank & Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery – GFDRR (2016). Disaster Risk Profile: Mauritius. 
Accessed 09 September 2019. Available at: https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/mauritius.pdf 
21 
Government of Seychelles (2013). Seychelles Damage Loss and Needs Assessment Report 2013. Report. Accessed 09 
September 2019. Available at: https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/Seychelles_DaLA_2013_Floods.pdf 
22  
CGIAR CCAFS – Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (2013). ‘Investigating Climate 
Information Services through a Gendered Lens’. Working Paper no. 42.

=== PAGE 177 ===
14 
systems, radars, wind profilers) etc., have to be geared towards end users, particularly those with 
low access in vulnerable sectors such as agriculture, fishing, and pearl farming.  
Gearing CS products for greater end-to-end value and effectiveness thus functions in tandem with 
gender-responsive mapping of users and stakeholders. The project will address this through the 
Regional Climate Services Strategy (RCSS), which will allow for user feedback mechanisms to 
evaluate the effectiveness and pitfalls of CS – recalibrating and configuring these products to 
optimise value and information, where necessary. 
3.4 Utilising Community Information Channels and Local 
Knowledge 
A complementary approach to creating user-friendly and gender-responsive climate service 
products is sourcing local knowledge, artisanal practices and traditional know-how to inform EWS 
and CS products as well as other hydromet technical and maintenance capacity building activities. 
Conducting mapping exercises, informed by participant observation and a consultative approach, 
will be key to: understand how local information and warning systems work; identify community 
engagement and decision-making groups; and invest in gender-relevant or women’s groups. 
Further, the consideration of gendered access to technology in the different countries is an 
important factor in the delivery and efficiency of CS products. The importance of understanding 
differences in access to information and communication technologies (ICTs) between women and 
men, as well as variations in usage patterns and desired value-added services have been highlighted 
in recent research, particularly for climate-smart agriculture.23 The data reveals that often women 
are falsely presumed to have similar levels of access and usage as men to ICTs24, creating a 
significant gender gap that can determine the effectiveness and percolation of CS products and 
EWS. Additionally, gender-disaggregated data is often available for the national level – concealing 
large variations in access and use by geographical region and rural versus urban communities.25 
Addressing these factors will assist in empowering women in their roles as key actors in climate-
vulnerable sectors, encourage active participation and involve them as information producers, and 
draw out valuable inputs for climate information product design. 
A CGIAR26 report finds that inclusion of traditional methods and gender-responsive design in 
community engagement could substitute for where modern innovations are lacking in gender 
awareness or accessibility, as these utilise strong social networks that have historical continuity 
within the community and provide a familiar means of communication. Adaptation to technological 
changes is not linear, hence these traditional methods can be easily hybridised with modern 
technology such as (where available) radio, television and short messaging service (SMS) through 
telecom networks to ensure impact forecasting products and other relevant climate content are 
disseminated effectively. The GAP report shows that in some contexts it is important to build on the 
existing socio-political networks that form the basis of information sharing, EWS, DRR. Since the 
 
23  
USAID (n.a.). Gender and Information Communication Technology (ICTs). Survey Toolkit.  
 
Accessed 01 October 2019. Available at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/15396/Gender_and_ICT_Toolkit.pdf  
24  
USAID (n.a.). Gender and Information Communication Technology (ICTs). Ibid. 
This was particularly true for Comoros – where women (in focus group discussions) revealed the lack of access to 
technology within the household (for example, mobile phones). Further research can identify the sociocultural norms 
informing this, which remains beyond the scope of this assessment.  
25  
Ibid.   
26 
CGIAR CCAFS – Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (2013). Ibid.

=== PAGE 178 ===
15 
project is expected to introduce newer technologies, to encourage uptake, it will be important to 
build on the existing, traditional systems - such as public announcements in mosques in Comoros 
and radio usage in Madagascar. At the project onset and during implementation period, the 
reassessment of the baseline will be tackled for each country with the support of the last mile 
partner such as IFRC/PIROI. This will allow identifying carefully if there are traditional networks that 
can be built on, how these serve different gender interest groups, and then to figure how improved 
hydromet and early warning services can build on this to improve outcomes. The consultation 
process have shown that sometimes-traditional networks may exclude women, as it was observed 
in Comoros. 
Feedback loops, by which community members, specifically women in vulnerable groups such as 
subsistence agriculture-dependent smallholders, can reflect upon which methods work best for 
their particular context, are also necessary.27 By introducing new technologies into traditional 
networks and means of communication, climate information providers, such as field workers from 
met services, may be able to extend the reach of their climate information services and help more 
vulnerable communities to adapt to environmental and climate changes. 
 
3.5 Creating Opportunities to Overcome Gendered 
Barriers 
Section 3 below presents detailed statistics related to poverty and hardship, labour and education, 
and health and social indicators to demonstrate the gendered realities of the Indian Ocean islands 
under the purview of this project. To further the analyses, it is important to consider the intra-
household dynamics between men and women pertaining to culture- and faith-based 
socioeconomic practices. Regionally, it is commonplace for women to participate in the bulk of 
domestic, care and reproductive work – which is further exacerbated28 with productive labour due 
to high levels of male out-migration for seasonal work. Thus, it can be surmised that gendered time 
poverty in the project countries is high. 
Bardasi and Wodon define29 an individual as ‘time poor’ if he/she is working long hours, while being 
simultaneously monetary poor, or facing the risk of monetary poverty if he/she were to reduce 
his/her working hours below a given time poverty line. Thus, time poverty results from the 
combination of two conditions30: 
• 
Firstly, the individual does not have enough time for rest and leisure once all working hours 
(whether spent in the labour market or doing household chores such as cooking and fetching 
water and wood) are accounted for; and 
• 
Secondly, the individual cannot reduce his/her working time without either: increasing the level 
of poverty of his/her household (if the household is already poor); or leading his/her household 
to fall into monetary poverty due to the loss in income or consumption associated with the 
reduction in working time (if the household is not originally poor). 
 
27 
Ibid. 
28 
Wodon, Q. & Bardasi, E. (2006). “Measuring Time Poverty and Analyzing its Determinants: Concepts and Applications to 
Guinea” in Economics Bulletin (Vol. 10, No. 12). Journal Article.  
29 
Ibid. 
30 
Ibid.

=== PAGE 179 ===
16 
An additional implication of time poverty is the lack of flexibility/opportunity to change the current 
time usage pattern within the household to explore other economic activities or, as in the case of 
this project, to explore autonomous or technical adaptation options against climate-induced 
weather variation, natural disasters and hazards such tropical cyclones, and other climate risks.  
In addition to facing the time poverty-related risks, GBV persists as a serious epidemic in the Indian 
Ocean region, as explored further in Section 3. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Societies (IFRC), upon conducting in-depth research31 on its designated regional zones and 
national societies, found that GBV is a constant theme in post-disaster contexts. Given the negative 
shocks, loss of family members, livelihoods and homes, domestic conflict levels tend to rise, leading 
to greater incidence of GBV and IPV, among other effects on gender relations. With the increasing 
frequency and intensity of climate-related hazards and risks, GBV can be expected to witness an 
upward trend, reiterating the importance of resilience mechanisms and adaptation opportunities 
through CS in the beneficiary countries.  Further, recent research32 undertaken by the International 
Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) with USAID has revealed potential risks of and 
connections between environment- and climate-related stressors and increased GBV, which are 
both detrimental to the well-being of survivors as well as impediments for inclusive climate change 
adaptation and resilience. 
 
 
31 
IFRC – International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (2015). Unseen, Unheard: GBV in Disasters. 
Report.  
32 
Research connecting environmental and climate-related stressors to GBV is nascent. AGENT – Advancing Gender in the 
Environment (USAID-IUCN partnership) is the at the forefront of collating, analysing and identifying these stressors in 
different contexts.

=== PAGE 180 ===
17 
4 
SOCIOECONOMIC AND GENDER BASELINE IN 
THE IOC COUNTRIES 
The previous section underscored the important nexus issues of gender, environment, climate risks, 
and threat multipliers, which are relevant towards the successful implementation of the project. 
Gender mainstreaming, in line with GCF and AFD standards, requires taking stock of the complex 
phenomena that inform the existing gender inequalities in any society. In the context of climate 
change and environment, the under usage of gender and social indicators has led to a lacuna in the 
available data, necessitating the use of indirect (but related) points of entry, such as: poverty and 
hardship; labour and education; and, health and social indicators. AFD’s in-house gender profiles33 
for Comoros, Madagascar and Mauritius (not available for Seychelles), similarly, establishes the 
gender landscape by analysis the health, access to water and sanitation, education and professional 
training, etc.   
4.1 National aggregate statistics and data 
The national-level data points (divided into three categories: poverty and hardship; labour and 
education; and health and social indicators) presented below are not comparable across countries, 
given the different methodologies of each statistical bureau or equivalent national counterpart. 
These broadly speak to issues34 identified by the GCF as crucial in the project design stage (such as: 
poverty levels; participation of men/women in formal/informal labour markets; gender-
disaggregated education and literacy indicators; gender-disaggregated health, morbidity and 
mortality statistics; etc.) to map and mainstream existing vulnerabilities. 
4.1.1 Poverty and Hardship 
POVERTY & HARDSHIP INDICATORS 
COMOROS 
MADAGASCAR 
MAURITIUS 
SEYCHELLES 
% of Population Below International Poverty Line 
17.9a 
77.6b 
7.90c 
1.10d 
% of Population Below National Poverty Line 
42.4a 
70.7b 
0.50c 
39.3d 
% of Population in Severe Multidimensional Poverty 
16.1e 
57.1e 
- 
- 
% of Population Vulnerable to Multidimensional Poverty 
22.3e 
11.8e 
- 
- 
% of Female-Headed Households (FHHs) 
27.7f 
19.3f 
17.0g 
51.0h 
% of Male-Headed Households (MHHs) 
72.3f 
80.7f 
83.0g 
49.0h 
NOTE: 
NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL POVERTY LINE: National poverty lines are defined according to each country’s specific 
economic and social circumstances. The national poverty lines are typically lower in poorer countries and higher in 
 
33 
AFD (n.a.). Profil Genre: Afrique (three of the four countries available under the continent tab) Accessed 20 January 2020. 
Available at: 
https://www.afd.fr/fr/ressources/profil-genre-
afrique?fbclid=IwAR104PGZ_TlhVqDdO2ie3V6KeACfxzckkJyajNAUWBCp93m5_4T0UqqKn-M 
34 
GCF and UN Women (2017). “Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects”. Policy Document. Accessed 07 
August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/194568/Guidelines__GCF_Toolkit_Mainstreaming_Gender.pdf/860d1
d03-877d-4c64-9a49-c0160c794ca7

=== PAGE 181 ===
18 
richer countries. International poverty lines attempt to hold the real value of the poverty lines consistent across 
countries by accounting for differences in purchasing power across countries.35 
For Comoros, the international poverty line is 432.2 in Comorian franc (2013) or US$ 1.90 (2011 PPP).a 
For Madagascar, the international poverty line is 1415.9 in Malagasy ariary (2012) or US$ 1.90 (2011 PPP).b 
For Mauritius, the international poverty line is 36.1 in Mauritius rupees (2012) or US$ 1.90 (2011 PPP).c 
For Seychelles, the international poverty line is 16.8 in Seychelles rupees (2013) or US$ 1.90 (2011 PPP).d 
MULTIDIMENSIONAL POVERTY: In the post-2015 SDG and Agenda 2030 framework, SDG 1 targets poverty elimination 
– in all forms and dimensions. This mandate requires tools to enumerate (quantitatively) and assess (qualitatively) 
poverty levels in different countries – here the MPI can be a useful tool. It compares acute multidimensional poverty 
for more than 100 countries and 5.7 billion people, and monitors changes over time.36 The global MPI scrutinises a 
person’s deprivations across 10 indicators in health, education and standard of living and offers a high-resolution lens 
to identify both who is poor and how they are poor. It complements the international $1.90 a day poverty rate by 
showing the nature and extent of overlapping deprivations for each person. The 2019 update uses data from 50 
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), 42 Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS), one DHSMICS and eight national 
surveys that provide comparable information to DHS and MICS. 
GENDER-DISAGGREGATION OF HOUSEHOLDS: Micro data analyses (conducted by the World Bank Development 
Research Group), with consideration for macro, population and demographic factors, reveals the importance of 
introducing heterogeneity in household poverty figures as well as contextualising how FHHs and MHHs function, 
conditional upon location, age, number of members, marital status, economic access, etc.37 ‘Feminisation of poverty’ 
is a concept that gained currency in the development and aid sector since the 1990s – but more recent analysis and 
data collection reveals that such concepts may border on generalisations rather than being based on realities. Instead 
the data reveals more complex trends: firstly, it can be more conclusively ascertained that certain types of FHHs are 
frequently found to head disadvantaged households; and, secondly, in Africa FHHs have better rates of poverty 
reduction than MHHs. Gender-disaggregation of households, with consideration in tandem of other conditions, is 
therefore an important method to understand the specificities of poverty incidence in a certain context. 
Sources of data/information for this table: 
a The World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: Comoros’. Technical Note (online). 
Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at: https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB-9722-
4AE2-ABC7-AA2972D68AFE/Global_POVEQ_COM.pdf 
b The World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: Madagascar’. Technical Note 
(online). Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at: https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB-
9722-4AE2-ABC7-AA2972D68AFE/Global_POVEQ_MDG.pdf 
c The World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: Mauritius’. Technical Note (online). 
Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at: https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB-9722-
4AE2-ABC7-AA2972D68AFE/Global_POVEQ_MUS.pdf 
d The World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data Portal (2019). ‘Poverty and Equity Brief: Seychelles’. Technical Note 
(online). Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at: https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB-
9722-4AE2-ABC7 AA2972D68AFE/Global_POVEQ_SYC.pdf 
e UNDP & University of Oxford (2019). Table I: Multidimensional Poverty Index. Composite Index Data. Accessed 07 
August 2019. Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/mpi_2019_table_1.pdf 
 
35 
The World Bank, Data Help Desk (2018). ‘Poverty Data: National and International Poverty Lines’. Technical Note (online). 
Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at: https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/193309-should-i-use-
national-or-international-poverty-lin for more.  
36 
UNDP & OPHI (2019). Global MPI 2019: Illuminating Inequalities. Report. Accessed 15 August 2019. Available at: 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/mpi_2019_publication.pdf 
37 
The World Bank, Development Research Group (2015). ‘Women Left Behind? Poverty and Headship in Africa’. Working 
Paper no. 7331. Accessed 10 August 2019. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/277221468189851163/pdf/WPS7331.pdf

=== PAGE 182 ===
19 
f The World Bank & Union des Comores (2017). Comoros Poverty Assessment. Report. Accessed 15 August 2019. 
Available at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/342321528113131924/pdf/125069-WP-P156542-OUO-9-
Comoros-Poverty-Assessment-revised.pdf 
g United Nations Population Fund (2012). Population Dynamics and Household Structure. Country Implementation 
Profile. Accessed 28 August 2019. Available at: https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/resource-
pdf/FINAL_Mauritius.pdf 
h World Health Organization – WHO (2016). Country Cooperation Strategy 2016 – 2021. Policy Document. Accessed 28 
August 2019. Available at: https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/254891/ccs-syc-2016-2021-
en.pdf;jsessionid=E8B0B324965D261078C3BA1B2C44A0BC?sequence=1 
 
Comoros 
The poverty incidence indicators presented above show Comoros’ position as compared to the 
other three IOC countries. Given Comoros’ status as an LDC, the statistics lay bare the intensity and 
extent of poverty, identified along both national and international poverty line indicators, as well as 
UNDP – OPHI’s MPI. The latter goes a step further to enumerate the sections of the population that 
can be exposed to multidimensional poverty, implying the possibility of poverty traps and risks 
associated with external shocks (in the context of this project relating to the lack of EWS and 
hydromet services) to an already-vulnerable context.  
However, a World Bank Poverty Assessment report38 finds that although Comoros has slow GDP and 
GNI growth, available household surveys and national accounts show important increases in 
consumption patterns. This highlights the importance of the informal sector and heavy reliance on 
remittances (which flow through informal channels), as well as the lack of data and enumeration 
capacities.39  
The pervasiveness of the informal economy and remittance-based capital channels influence 
household decision-making. This, in turn, plays an important role in the determination of poverty, 
adaptation access and mitigation opportunities. The proportion of female-headed households 
(FHHs) has reached 27.7% (2014), showing a 6.2 percentage point increase from 2004 figures.40 
Further, the report finds that between 2004 and 2014, the proportion of bottom 40% households 
headed by women increased by almost 10 percentage points, from 18.6% in 2004 to 27.9% in 2014. 
Overall, however, there are fewer FHHs in the archipelago as compared to male-headed households 
(MHHs).41   
Thus, it can be posited that FHHs have not witnessed a proportionate increase in income and 
consumption with the advances made in household expenditure and consumption patterns (with 
the caveats that the data quality is low and the nature of the FHH is transient, factors which are 
beyond the scope of this assessment). 
 
38  
The World Bank & Union des Comores (2017). Comoros Poverty Assessment. Ibid.  
39 
Ibid.  
40 
Ibid.  
41 
Ibid.

=== PAGE 183 ===
20 
 
Madagascar 
The poverty incidence indicators presented above show Madagascar’s position as compared to the 
other project countries. In a recent report42, the World Bank identified Madagascar as the poorest 
country in the sub-Saharan Africa (where internationally comparable data was available), with 
present real GDP lower than in the 1960s. This poverty is associated with low and declining labour 
productivity – by 2012, Madagascar’s GDP per employed worker had fallen to the lowest in the 
world except for the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).43 The high level of multidimensional 
poverty (over 55%) also reveals the intensity of deprivation and different types of poverty faced by 
the majority of the Malagasy population. Given that an additional ~12% of the population is 
vulnerable to multidimensional poverty, it can be posited that even minor external shocks can 
destabilise household consumption patterns and lead to poverty (where the household is 
vulnerable to multidimensional poverty) and entrench poverty levels (where households are already 
facing multidimensional deprivation).  
A complementary study conducted by the World Bank in 201444 finds that about a fifth of all 
households nationally are headed by women – primarily because they are widowed, divorced, or 
separated. While on primary inspection, FHHs do not appear, as a group, to be significantly worse 
off than MHHs, the situation is different when the study controls for certain covariates including 
location and age, as well as, importantly, the marital status of the household head.45 Conditional on 
location only, FHHs in both rural and urban areas experience lower consumption than MHHs.46 
Mauritius 
The poverty incidence indicators presented above show Mauritius’ position as compared to the 
other project countries. In contrast to the LDC status of Comoros and Madagascar, the World Bank 
classifies Mauritius as an upper-middle income country with low levels of poverty and inequality, 
having diversified its economy and accomplishing unprecedented structural transformation.47 
However, in 2010, after sugar and textile (the main Mauritian exports) lost preferential status from 
western markets48, the economy has witnessed initial setbacks. Concurrently, inequality has risen, 
lowering the living standards of the poorer sections of the populace – which has complex gendered 
aspects that inform it.  
The main contributor to rising inequality is the variance among earnings (males) situated in different 
social classes – showing the imperatives of redistribution and pro-poor investment in the country. 
Mauritius, additionally, has low female labour participation (compared to peer economies – see 
table below), and women continue to be disadvantaged in access to the labour market, which can 
 
42 
The World Bank (2016). Shifting Fortunes and Enduring Poverty in Madagascar. Report. Accessed 15 August 2019. 
Available at:http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/413071489776943644/pdf/113582-v2-FINAL-PUBLIC-7817-
Madagascar-Poverty-Report.pdf 
43 
The World Bank (2016). Shifting Fortunes and Enduring Poverty in Madagascar. Ibid. 
44 
The World Bank, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management (PREM) – Africa (2014). Face of Poverty in Madagascar: 
Poverty, Gender and Inequality Assessment. Report. Accessed 15 August 2019. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/538821468271809604/pdf/781310PRIORITY0English0Apr900May012.pdf 
45 
The World Bank, PREM – Africa (2014). Face of Poverty. Ibid.  
46 
Ibid. 
47 
The World Bank (2017). Mauritius: Addressing Inequality through More Equitable Labour Markets. Report. Accessed 17 
August 2019. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29034 
48 
The World Bank (2015). Mauritius: Inclusiveness of Growth and Shared Prosperity. Report. Accessed 17 August 2019. 
Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23804

=== PAGE 184 ===
21 
be attributed to traditional models of domestic and care work persistent in most Mauritian 
households. The World Bank finds49 that the disproportionate expansion of the female labour force 
is through the entry of women primarily from affluent households – contributing to greater 
inequality between households. To elucidate, since affluent households possess certain advantages 
over their poorer counterparts, women are increasing the income of these households while 
women in poorer households lack access to productive and economic resources (ipso facto, 
widening the inequality gap in the country).  
Economic inequality is an important consideration for this project as the main focus is towards 
increasing climate risk resilience and disaster preparedness through CS, EWS and other hydromet 
products. External shocks caused by cyclones and storms, which are common in Mauritius, are 
known to push vulnerable households into poverty and keep poor households caught in the cycle of 
poverty traps. With rising household income inequality in Mauritius, more and more households will 
continue to be exposed, impacting also on the existing rates of low female labour participation in 
the market from these economic strata as well as increasing the household care and domestic work 
burden. 
Seychelles  
The poverty incidence indicators presented above show Seychelles’ position as compared to the 
other project countries. Similar to Mauritius, the archipelago nation is different from its Indian 
Ocean counterparts: Seychelles has the highest GDP per capita in Africa ($15,410 in 2016).50 The 
Seychelles also has better social indicators than comparator small countries – it achieved most of 
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), especially for education, health, poverty eradication, 
and the environment.51 However, income inequality remains significant in the country, with a GINI 
Index score of 46.8 (2013), placing it among the top-25 most unequal countries.52 
The persistently unequal distribution of income, despite Seychelles’ long-standing policy focus and 
high spending on public services, social protection and housing incentives, point to constraints in 
accessing economic opportunities and reduction of productivity in the economy, according to the 
World Bank.53 These constraints could well intensify as the economy develops further with current 
trends, causing income gaps and capacity barriers, especially with increasing climate risks in the 
region.  
Key informant interviews conducted with the Ministry of Social Affairs, Community Development 
and Sports also revealed the correlation of high unemployment rates among youth with gendered 
drug (heroin) abuse in the main islands, particularly among young boys and men. United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) provides empirical confirmation of this: Seychelles is among the 
countries and areas with the highest rates of injected drug use (more than 3.5 times the global 
average).54 
 
49 
The World Bank (2017). Mauritius: Addressing Inequality through More Equitable Labour Markets. Ibid. 
50 
The World Bank (n.a.). ‘Seychelles: Country Overview’. Online. Accessed 17 August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/seychelles/overview. 
51 
The World Bank (2012). Country Partnership Strategy: Seychelles. Policy Document. Accessed 17 August 2019. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/524151468165858183/pdf/669190CAS0P1240Official0Use0Only090.pdf 
52 
The World Bank, Development Research Group (2013). ‘Gini Index’. Online Databank. Accessed 20 August 2019. Available 
at: ‘https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI?end=2017&most_recent_value_desc=true&start=1979&view=chart 
53 
The World Bank (2017). Seychelles: Systematic Country Diagnostic. Report. Accessed 20 August 2019. Available at: 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/27559 
54 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime – UNODC (2013). World Drug Report 2013. Accessed 23 August 2019. Available 
at: https://www.unodc.org/unodc/secured/wdr/wdr2013/World_Drug_Report_2013.pdf

=== PAGE 185 ===
22 
These issues can be identified as indirect exposure risks to climate hazards and disasters, as well as 
impediments in adaptation capacities and opportunities. Given that Seychelles is particularly 
dependent on imports, rising commodity prices (especially food and fuel) also are high risk factors 
for households struggling with lower income as well as drug addiction and abuse problems in the 
backdrop of climate-related risks.  
The World Bank Country Partnership Strategy for the Republic of Seychelles55 identifies the 
vulnerabilities of being a small island nation and reiterates the importance of enhancing its ability to 
cope with increased climatic variability through mechanisms like EWSs and better coordination with 
other agencies, such as the meteorological wing. It also recommends the formulation of social 
safety nets (with the potential of to be scaled up) in connection with EWS and CS in the country. 
4.1.2 Labour and Education 
LABOUR AND EDUCATION INDICATORS 
COMOROS 
MADAGASCAR 
MAURITIUS 
SEYCHELLES 
% of Labour Force Participation – Female 
37.4a 
83.6b 
45.4c 
66.9d 
% of Labour Force Participation – Male 
44.1a 
89.2b 
74.2c 
73.9d 
% Agricultural Labour – F 
63.3e 
65.0f 
6.0g 
- 
% Agricultural Labour – M 
52.6e 
71.0f 
8.0g 
- 
% Non-Agricultural Informal Labour – F 
19.5h 
38.0i 
- 
- 
% of Formal Labour – F 
17.0a 
- 
- 
- 
% of Formal Labour – M 
39.7a 
- 
- 
- 
% Adult Literacy Rate – F 
77.6e 
68.0j 
91.0j 
94.0j 
% Adult Literacy Rate – M 
84.0e 
75.0k 
95.0k 
93.0k 
NOTE: 
LABOUR FORCE PARTICIPATION: The labour force participation rate is a measure of the proportion of a country’s working-
age population that engages actively in the labour market, either by working or looking for work; it provides an indication 
of the size of the supply of labour available to engage in the production of goods and services, relative to the population 
at working age. The breakdown of the labour force (formerly known as economically active population) by sex and age 
group gives a profile of employment distribution of the labour force within a country.56 
 
GENDER-DISAGGREGATED LABOUR STATISTICS: These figures show the percentage of female and male labour force 
involved in different sectors of the economy – agriculture (which is the primary sector in Comoros and Madagascar), non-
agricultural/non-farm informal sector and formal sector. It is important to introduce heterogeneity in labour statistics to 
analyse, evaluate and monitor the way an economy is performing and the effectiveness of current and longer-term 
policies in generating employment. 
 
LITERACY RATE: According to UNESCO UIS, literacy rate is the percentage of the population aged 15 years and over who 
can read and write with understanding a short simple statement on his/her everyday life. Generally, ‘literacy’ also 
encompasses ‘numeracy’ – the ability to make simple arithmetic calculations. 
Sources of data/information for this table: 
a Quoted in Arab Development Portal (2019). Comoros Statistical Snapshot 2019. Figures from the International Labour 
Organisation – ILO & Institute National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques et Démographiques – INSEED (2013). 
 
55 
The World Bank (2012). Country Partnership Strategy: Seychelles. Ibid.  
56 
ILO (n.a.). ‘ILOSTAT Technical Note’. Online. Accessed 16 August 2019. Available at: https://www.ilo.org/ilostat-
files/Documents/description_LFPR_EN.pdf

=== PAGE 186 ===
23 
Data Report. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available at: 
http://data.arabdevelopmentportal.com/StatisticalSnapshot/?ln=en&type=country&query=COM/ 
b ILOSTAT (2015). ‘Country Profile: Madagascar’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.ilo.org/ilostatcp/CPDesktop/?list=true&lang=en&country=GBR 
c ILOSTAT (2017). ‘Country Profile: Mauritius’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.ilo.org/ilostatcp/CPDesktop/?list=true&lang=en&country=GBR 
d ILOSTAT (2017). ‘Country Profile: Seychelles’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.ilo.org/ilostatcp/CPDesktop/?list=true&lang=en&country=GBR 
e The World Bank, Gender Data Portal (2019). ‘Comoros’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available at: 
http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/comoros 
f The World Bank, Gender Data Portal (2019). ‘Madagascar’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available at: 
http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/madagascar 
g The World Bank, Gender Data Portal (2019). ‘Mauritius’. Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available at: 
http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/mauritius  
h African Development Bank – AfDB (n.a.). Comoros: Country Gender Profile. Report. Accessed 26 August 2019. Available 
at: https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Project-and-Operations/Comoros%20-
%20Country%20Gender%20Profile.pdf 
i The World Bank, Human Development Department – Africa (2010). Labour Markets Conditions in Madagascar. Report. 
Accessed 24 August 2019. Available at: 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMADAGASCAR/Resources/LaborMarkets.pdf 
j The World Bank, Open Data (2019). ‘Literacy rate, adult female 15+’ (collated from UNESCO UIS). Online Databank. 
Accessed 30 August 2019. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.FE.ZS 
k The World Bank, Open Data (2019). ‘Literacy rate, adult male 15+’ (collated from UNESCO UIS). Online Databank. 
Accessed 30 August 2019. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.MA.ZS 
Comoros 
Indicators compiled for the labour and education sectors show the interrelated nature of the two 
sectors, and how these help determine both individual and national well-being. Comoros, among 
the four countries targeted by this project, displays the lowest labour force participation (both male 
and female) – testifying to its status as an undiversified economy, dependence on remittances and 
high levels of non-wage activities. In the context of climate change and increasing disasters, the lack 
of diversification in the economy and natural resource-based livelihoods for a majority of the 
population can create impediments to adaptation opportunities, access to climate services and ex-
post disaster relief.  
An AfDB Country Gender Assessment57 finds that the labour market in Comoros is characterised by 
the feminisation of precarious employment, informal activities, and unemployment – the 
agricultural sector employs the largest number of women (about 67%) while the civil service 
employs only 30% of women, particularly in low-level jobs. There are more self-employed women 
(56.1%) than men (47.5%), in tandem with 47% of the unemployed in Comoros being women.58 To 
cite an example, the field visits revealed that women also tend to be employed in ‘add-on’ activities: 
in the fishing communities, pêcher à pieds (fishing by feet) is a common practice. Men undertake 
boat-capture fishing, while women extract small fishes, oysters and crabs by walking along the sea 
coast during low tides. In the non-agricultural informal sector (traders, small entrepreneurs and the 
self-employed), women occupy a further 19.5% of jobs.59 Female employment in Comoros remains 
 
57 
African Development Bank – AfDB (n.a.). Comoros: Country Gender Profile. Ibid. 
58 
Ibid. 
59 
Ibid.

=== PAGE 187 ===
24 
low with only 13.7% of women in the wage-earning group, 69.2% of which are in ‘unsheltered 
employment’.60 
Madagascar 
The International Labour Organisation – ILO in its flagship Key Indicators of the Labour Market – 
KILM study61 finds a positive correlation between education and productive employment in 
different countries. In Madagascar, ILO’s findings are conclusively replicated: although labour force 
participation is high, the country has uniquely high poverty rates in the region, as large sections of 
the population are dependent on agriculture. In fact, literacy rates collated for the country are 
misleading: over half of the population (and consequently, the workforce) lack qualified training and 
knowledge to enter the formal sector (which accounts for less than 3%62 of the total economy). The 
agricultural livelihoods-dependent economy and households are vulnerable to external shocks and 
climate risks, reiterating the importance of robust CS, EWS and hydromet products and services to 
strengthen income strategies and resilience.  
Further, the World Bank identifies a three-tiered gender gap in Madagascar.63 For example, median 
earnings for women in non-agricultural employment reach only two-thirds of earnings tabulated for 
men.64 The differences are partly explained by differences in levels of education, yet women with 
similar characteristics as men are paid comparatively less.65 Additionally, the gender wage gap is 
highest in the informal private non-agricultural sector, and this appears to be largely linked to firm 
size and other characteristics.66 Women, thus, appear to face difficulties and possibly discrimination 
in at least three areas: access to education, access to higher paying jobs and same pay in those jobs, 
and access to financial capital and other institutions that favour firm growth.67 
Mauritius 
Indicators compiled on labour and education display the linkages between the two sectors, and how 
these help determine both individual and national well-being. In Mauritius, the gendered dynamic 
of the labour market is evident: female labour force participation is quite low compared to peer 
economies. This can be primarily attributed to tradition- and faith-based norms that inform 
domestic and household labour (care, reproductive and related work) in Mauritian society. 
A study68 conducted on gender, education and labour market however problematises the ‘common 
sense’ hypothesis suggesting better educational access imply better labour market opportunities. In 
fact, Gokulsing et al find that though girls outperform boys at all education levels (primary, 
secondary and tertiary), their access to job opportunities is reduced.69 The female unemployment 
rate is higher than that of males, while women who manage to enter the labour market are 
 
60 
Ibid. 
61 
ILO (2016). Key Indicators of the Labour Market. Report. Accessed 01 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---stat/documents/publication/wcms_498929.pdf 
62  
The World Bank, Human Development Department – Africa (2010). Labour Markets Conditions in Madagascar. Ibid. 
63 
Ibid. 
64 
Ibid. 
65 
Ibid. 
66 
Ibid. 
67 
Ibid. 
68 
Gokulsing, D. and Tandrayen-Ragoobur, V. (2014), "Gender, education and labour market: evidence from 
Mauritius", International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, Vol. 34 No. 9/10 
69 
Ibid.

=== PAGE 188 ===
25 
segmented to remain in low-occupation jobs.70 As mentioned in an earlier section, women entrants 
from affluent households primarily fuelled the recent expansion of female labour – showing how 
women’s access to the market and remunerative prospects are stymied by existing household 
income levels.71 
These existing gaps translate into inequalities, such as in: decision-making authority and power 
within the household; control over economic and productive resources; and access to capital, 
savings and investment opportunities; which are crucial in determining resilience capacities, 
disaster response and the ability to capitalise on adaptation opportunities.  
Seychelles  
The archipelago nation presents distinctive statistics for labour and education sectors, as compared 
to peer economies or other African countries. A SACMEQ (Southern and Eastern Africa Consortium 
for Monitoring Educational Quality) study72 which conducted a cross-country analysis of the 
magnitude of the variation in reading and mathematics scores, and the between- and within-school 
components of that variation, show the differences between Seychellois girls and boys. Girls 
outperformed boys in all SACMEQ indicators, evincing different rates of streaming at different 
education levels with the gender disparity favouring the former.  
Despite higher levels of education, however, female labour force participation still lags behind male 
labour force participation by almost 10%73, with the Gender Secretariat reporting considerable 
dropout and occupational streaming rates for women from the labour market. A study conducted 
by the University of Cape Town finds that women are more likely to be under-paid (19.6% relative 
to males’ 11.2%), when selected characteristics for minimum wage violation levels and depth are 
explored. Seychelles presents a unique case for labour and education performance, underscoring 
the complex social phenomena that inform socioeconomic indicators, which provide the baseline 
upon which climate adaptation and resilience can be built. 
4.1.3 Health and Social Indicators 
HEALTH & SOCIAL INDICATORS 
COMOROS 
MADAGASCAR 
MAURITIUS 
SEYCHELLES 
# # Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) Per 100,00 Live 
Birthsa 
335 
353 
53 
- 
# Under-Five Mortality Rate, Per 1000 Live Birthsb 
69 
44 
13 
14 
% Exposure to Gender-Based Violence (GBV) 
5c 
- 
24d 
58e 
Note: 
MATERNAL MORTALITY RATIO & UNDER-FIVE MORTALITY RATE: The World Health Organisation (WHO) identifies MMR 
or complications during pregnancy and childbirth as a leading cause of death and disability among women of 
reproductive age in developing countries. The MMR represents the risk associated with each pregnancy, i.e. the obstetric 
risk. It was a MDG and is an SDG 3 indicator. Similarly, the under-five mortality rates take stock of preventable child 
deaths below the age of 5. Inequities in child mortality between high-income and low-income countries remain large, 
according to the WHO. In 2017, the under-five mortality rate in low-income countries was 69 deaths per 1000 live births 
– around 14 times the average rate in high-income countries (5 deaths per 1000 live births). Reducing these inequities 
 
70 
Ibid. 
71 
The World Bank (2015). Mauritius: Inclusiveness of Growth and Shared Prosperity. Ibid. 
72 
Government of Seychelles, Department of Education and Human Resources Development (n.a.) Streaming in Seychelles: 
from SACMEQ research to Policy Reform. Accessed 22 August 2019. Available at: 
http://www.sacmeq.org/sites/default/files/sacmeq/research/Papers%20from%20the%202005%20International%20Invita
tional%20Educational%20Policy%20Research%20Conference/leste.pdf 
73 
ILOSTAT (2017). ‘Country Profile: Seychelles’. Ibid.

=== PAGE 189 ===
26 
across countries and saving more children’s lives by ending preventable child deaths are important priorities, particularly 
under the post-2015 SDG agenda.  
LIFETIME EXPOSURE TO GBV: According to the World Bank, around 1 in every 3 women in the world will face physical 
and/or sexual abuse during their lifetime; and 1 in 4 children bear witness to domestic or GBV. Although the data is 
sketchy, incidence of GBV is common and normalised through local beliefs and customs in the Indian Ocean Islands. 
Gender Links, a South Africa-based women’s organisation, finds that cultural contexts of preserving family honour, 
shame stemming from experiencing violence, and lack of redressal and grievance mechanisms as well as low support for 
GBV survivors result in continued and elevated rates of GBV in the region. 
Sources of data/information for this table: 
a The World Bank, Open Data (2015). ‘MMR, modelled estimate (collated from WHO/ UNICEF/ UNFPA/ UNDESA). Online 
Databank. Accessed 22 August 2019. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.STA.MMRT 
b The World Bank, Open Data (2017). ‘Mortality Rate, under 5 (collated by the UN Inter Agency Group for Child Mortality 
Estimation). Online Databank. Accessed 23 August 2019. Available at: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.DYN.MORT 
c The World Bank, Open Data (2017). ‘Comoros: Proportion of women subjected to sexual/ physical violence in last 12 
months (collated by the UNDS). Online Databank. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available at: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.VAW.1549.ZS?locations=KM 
d Gender Links (n.a.). ‘Mauritius: VAW Baseline Research’. Online. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available at: 
https://genderlinks.org.za/what-we-do/justice/research/violence-against-women-baseline-research/mauritius-vaw-
baseline-research/ 
e Gender Links (n.a.). ‘Seychelles: GBV National Baseline Research’. Report. Online. Accessed 24 August 2019. Available at: 
https://genderlinks.org.za/what-we-do/justice/research/violence-against-women-baseline-research/seychelles-vaw-
baseline-research/ 
 
Comoros 
Selected health and social indicators presented above, particularly the staggering maternal 
mortality ratio (MMR) and under-five mortality rate, display how the health system in Comoros is 
plagued by limited access to medical centres, insufficient resources with frequent drug shortages, 
skilled staff shortages, inadequate staff training opportunities, and weaknesses in health data 
collection, analysis, and processing.74 In 2003, the MMR was 381 deaths per 100,000 live births, and 
has seen a downward trend marked at 335 deaths in the latest survey (2015). Although GBV rates 
are lower and atypical in the region, Comoros has a high rate of child marriage (32%, according to 
the UN Women Global Database on Violence Against Women). 
The WHO suggests75 that climate change effects on health outcomes and indicators can be based on 
approximation, however even conservative predictions have tended towards highlighting the 
negative impacts it can have on a populace. Indeed, with erratic weather events and increasing 
frequency (and intensity) of climate-related disasters, a limited healthcare system can only be 
expected to falter (if not fail entirely), underpinning the necessities of strengthened climate services 
in the country. 
Madagascar 
The data gathered on Madagascar for health and social indicators reveal a similar predicament to 
that of Comoros. High MMR and under-five mortality rates, along with the country’s struggles with 
pneumonic plague in 2017 and 2018, indicate a lack of investment in the public health system, 
 
74 
African Development Bank – AfDB (n.a.). Comoros: Country Gender Profile. Ibid. 
75  
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-health

=== PAGE 190 ===
27 
limited access to healthcare, and gaps in preparedness, surveillance and response capabilities. 
Although national GBV rates are not available yet for the country, a UNFPA pilot study (in 
Antananarivo, Diego and Tulear) found about 30% of women reported having experienced GBV.76 
Further, Madagascar has a high rate of child marriage (41%, according to the UN Women Global 
Database on Violence Against Women). 
Given this baseline, climate-sensitive health impacts/disease outbreaks (such as malaria, typhoid, 
and cholera in the aftermath of disasters) can be expected to further destabilise households, create 
income shocks, and lead to preventable loss of life. The latter is also a marked gender phenomenon, 
as gender differences have been shown to have conclusive linkages with meteorological hazards 
due to physiological, behavioural and socially constructed influences on health outcomes.77 
Mauritius 
In contrast to Comoros and Madagascar, Mauritius’ performance on health and social indicators is 
better, proving the importance of consistent and relevant government investment in the public 
health sector and social institutions. According to time-series data reported by the Government of 
Mauritius, however, there are recent spikes in MMR and under-five mortality (especially in 2017).78 
Gender Links finds that about a quarter of women in Mauritius have experienced some form of GBV 
in their lifetime, including partner and non-partner violence, while a similar proportion of men 
admit to perpetuating violence against women in their lifetime.79 Violence occurs primarily in 
intimate partner relationships, showing how IPV is the predominant type of GBV in the island 
country, in addition to minimal rates of reporting: only 0.3% of women in Mauritius have reported 
domestic violence.80 It can be speculated from the Gender Links baseline study that actual levels of 
GBV (and IPV) are higher and go underreported in the country.81 
Linkages between health indicators, climate change resilience and GBV are less tenuous than 
previously assumed and have been emphasised more and more through targeted socio-
anthropological research.82 For the overall success of climate change adaptation efforts, these 
considerations need to inform mainstreaming activities, to ensure better targeting of beneficiaries 
and delivery of project goals.  
Seychelles 
In a similar vein to Mauritius, Seychelles has better indicators of health outcomes (such as life 
expectancy and child mortality rates) than many other small island states, primarily because of free 
access to healthcare provided by the state. Since the 2000s, the country has recorded zero maternal 
mortality; births attended by skilled health staff hovers between 99 and 100%, and the proportion 
of women receiving prenatal care has consistently been over 99%.83 The island nation achieved 
 
76 
The New Humanitarian (2013). ‘Small steps in Madagascar’s fight against GBV’. Online News Report. Accessed 03 
September 2019. Available at: http://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/feature/2013/12/10/small-steps-madagascar-s-fight-
against-gender-based-violence 
77  
Neumeyer, E. & Plümper, T. (2007).’The gendered nature of natural disasters: the impact of catastrophic events on the 
gender gap in life expectancy, 1981 – 2002’ in Annals of the Association of American Geographers (Vol. 97, No. 3).  
78 
Government of Mauritius (2017). Health Statistics Report 2017. Government Report. Accessed 03 September 2019. 
Available at: http://health.govmu.org/English/Documents/2018/ANNUAL%20REPORT%202017%20FOR%20PRINTING.pdf 
79 
Gender Links (n.a.). ‘Mauritius: VAW Baseline Research’. Ibid.  
80 
Ibid. 
81 
Ibid. 
82  
https://genderandenvironment.org/2018/08/survey-linkages-between-gender-based-violence-gbv-and-the-environment/ 
83 
The World Bank (2012). Country Partnership Strategy: Seychelles. Ibid.

=== PAGE 191 ===
28 
most of the health-related MDGs, and is on track to operationalise policy and budgetary allocations 
towards SDG 3 (Good Health and Well-Being). 
Yet, challenges crop up in the broader health landscape in the Seychelles. UNODC reports that 
Seychelles is among the countries and areas with the highest rates of injected drug use (more than 
3.5 times the global average).84 Interviews held with the Gender Secretariat in Victoria confirmed 
these findings and revealed the gendered nature of substance abuse in the country: demand for 
illegal heroin and other substances originate primarily from unemployed youth and men in the 
country. 
GBV studies in Seychelles have uniquely featured both women and men: in partnership with Gender 
Links, the Government has determined that the most common form of violence against men is 
emotional violence (29%), followed by physical violence (12%), economic violence (9%), and sexual 
violence (3.3%). Violence against women stands at a staggering 58%, showing the prevalence of 
different types and complex incidence of GBV in the islands. Although the linkage between GBV and 
environment is a nascent topic of research, the evidence of violence as a threat multiplier of risks 
(as well as exposure to them) is mounting.85 
The WHO suggests86 that SDG 13 (Climate Action) and SDG 3 (Good Health and Well-Being) are 
closely related, with results gained in one sector positively impacting results in the other. Targeted 
health-related investment for continued results, thus, is important for the archipelago – with better 
CS, EWS and hydromet products assisting in disaster-related health outcomes.  
4.2 Policy environment 
This sub-section takes stock of the policy environment and legal frameworks available for gender-
responsive climate change adaptation in the project countries (including international conventions 
such as the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women or CEDAW, 
national laws and policies, strategy documents on gender and climate change), as well as a list of 
potential institutions for collaboration on gender mainstreaming during the project cycle. 
Identification of legal tools and enabling policies, particularly at the baseline outset, are crucial in 
ensuring that gender inequality can be addressed through tangible and formal procedures. 
Additionally, the inclusion of local and national gender partners develops capacity and technical 
knowledge towards future gender efforts while establishing ownership of the project and the 
change narrative being implemented.  
The Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI)87 category (very low to very high discrimination), 
indicating the relative strength of legal and social institutions in the country, is presented for 
Madagascar (only aggregate available), and scores in other indicators are presented for all four IOC 
countries targeted by the project. The SIGI covers four dimensions88 of discriminatory social 
institutions, spanning major socioeconomic areas that affect women’s lives: discrimination in the 
family, restricted physical integrity, restricted access to productive and financial resources, and 
restricted civil liberties. 
 
84 
UNODC (2013). World Drug Report 2013. Ibid.  
85  
https://genderandenvironment.org/2018/08/survey-linkages-between-gender-based-violence-gbv-and-the-environment/ 
86  
http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/health-policy/sustainable-development-goals/publications/2019/policy-briefs-
on-health-and-the-sustainable-development-goals/sdg-13-health-and-climate-action 
87 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development – OECD, Development Centre (2019). ‘What is SIGI?’. Official 
Website. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: www.genderindex.org  
88 
Ibid.

=== PAGE 192 ===
29 
Social Institutions and Gender Index 2019 
(SIGI)89 
Comoros90 
Madagascar91 
Mauritius92 
Seychelles93 
Categorisation into 5 segments from very 
low to very high discrimination 
- 
HIGH 
- 
- 
% Prevalence of Discrimination in the 
Family 
81 
57 
53 
41 
% Restricted Physical Integrity 
28 
32 
- 
- 
% Restricted Access to Financial and 
Productive Resources 
- 
39 
19 
- 
% Restricted Civil Liberties 
- 
59 
41 
- 
NOTE: 
Calculated by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)’s Development Centre, the SIGI is 
a cross-country measure of discrimination against women in social institutions (formal and informal laws, social norms, 
and practices) across 180 countries. Discriminatory social institutions intersect across all stages of girls’ and women’s 
lives, restricting their access to justice, rights and empowerment opportunities and undermining their agency and 
decision-making authority over their life choices.  
As underlying drivers of gender inequalities, discriminatory social institutions perpetuate gender gaps in development 
areas – such as education, employment and health – and hinder progress towards rights-based social transformation 
that benefits both women and men.  
The SIGI’s variables quantify discriminatory social institutions such as unequal inheritance rights, child marriage, 
violence against women (GBV/VAW), and unequal land and property rights. Through its 180 country profiles, country 
classifications, unique database and its innovative simulator, the SIGI provides a strong evidence base to effectively 
address the discriminatory social institutions that hold back progress on gender equality and women’s empowerment, 
allowing policy makers to scope out reform options and assess likely effects on gender equality in social institutions. 
 
COMOROS 
CEDAW,  
Maputo 
Protocol 
Comoros acceded to the CEDAW on 31 October 1994, but has not yet ratified it. The island nation 
also ratified the Maputo Protocol (The Protocol to the ‘African Charter on Human and Peoples’ 
Rights’ on the Rights of Women is Africa) as one of the earlier signatories.  
Gender Policies 
In Comoros, the law prohibits discrimination based on gender and the government has taken steps 
to improve the political participation of women. The Constitution was revised in 201894 to include 
the Articles 30, 34 and 36 to ban abandonment and GBV, and increase political representation – 
with provision for government intervention, where necessary, for the actualisation of these rights.  
Governmental 
Mechanisms 
The National Commission on Solidarity, Civil Protection and Promotion of Gender is the primary 
socio-civic organisation for the mobilisation of gender mainstreaming efforts. The Beijing 25+ 
report produced by the Commissariat shows that baseline understanding of gender inequality 
 
89 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). ‘2019 Results’. Official Website. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: 
www.genderindex.org/countries  
90 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). Country Profile: Comoros. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/KM.pdf 
91 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). Country Profile: Madagascar. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/MG.pdf 
92 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). Country Profile: Mauritius. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/MU.pdf 
93 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). Country Profile: Seychelles. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/SC.pdf 
94 
UN Women & Union Des Comores, Commissariat National à la Solidarite, à la Protection, et à la Promotion du Genre 
(2014). Rapport Pays sur les Progres Realises dans la Mise en Œuvre de la Plateforme D’Action de Beijing+25. Ibid.

=== PAGE 193 ===
30 
issues in the country exists.  
 
MADAGASCAR 
CEDAW, 
Maputo Protocol 
Madagascar ratified the CEDAW on 17 March 1989. Madagascar has also signed the Maputo 
Protocol but is yet to ratify it through national prerogatives due to reservations regarding abortion-
related policies. 
Gender Policies 
The following policy tools towards gender mainstreaming exist in the country: Gender and Elections 
strategy (2015–2020), aimed at enhancing the representation and participation of women in 
decision-making; and a National Action Plan for combating GBV. 
Madagascar is identified as having ‘high’ discrimination on the SIGI index, which takes stock of 
discrimination in the family, restricted physical integrity, restricted access to productive and 
financial resources, and restricted civil liberties.  
Under the Constitution all citizens are equal before the law and are protected from discrimination 
based on gender.95 Yet, regarding basic citizenship rights, the status of women and men is uneven. 
Until 2017, for example, the Nationality Code did not allow a Malagasy woman to confer her 
nationality to her children. Under civil law, women and men have equal rights marry. In 2007, the 
law was amended to increase the legal age of marriage for women and men to 18. Further, the law 
recognises both civil and traditional ceremonies (if legally registered by an officer of civil status) and 
prohibits bigamy (Law on Marriage and Matrimonial Regimes, 2007).96 In practice, customary 
marriages are widely practiced, and few are legally registered, leaving women without the 
protections offered through the civil law. Traditional and faith-based norms, a national CEDAW 
shadow report97 identifies, perpetuate unequal treatment of women in family matters such as 
marriage, divorce, and child custody. 
Governmental 
Mechanisms 
Ministry of Population, Social Protection and Promotion of Women is the national gender machinery 
for the country and has extensive experience working with different funds and UN/aid agencies. 
 
MAURITIUS 
CEDAW, 
Maputo Protocol 
Mauritius acceded to the CEDAW on 09 July 1984, but is yet to ratify it. In June 2017, Mauritius 
also ratified the Maputo Protocol (with reservations), noting the commitment of the government 
of Mauritius to securing the rights of every woman and child through various programmes.  
Gender Policies 
Under the 1968 Constitution all citizens are equal before the law and are protected from 
discrimination based on gender.98 The state’s Constitution affords both women and men the same 
rights to access justice, including provisions for legal aid and interpretation services, for example.  
Yet, while discrimination of all forms is prohibited by the state’s Constitution, the law provides 
exemptions in matters relating to personal status, including marriage, divorce, death and 
inheritance. 
However, Mauritius has been proactive in incorporating gender mainstreaming goals through its 
state machinery, and is currently developing a draft National Gender Policy Framework with EU 
 
95 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). Country Profile: Madagascar. Ibid.  
96 
Ibid.  
97 
The Madagascar Coalition of Civil Society Organization (2015). CEDAW Shadow Report: Madagascar. Accessed 12 
September 2019. Available at: 
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CEDAW/Shared%20Documents/MDG/INT_CEDAW_NGO_MDG_21897_E.pdf 
98 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). Country Profile: Mauritius. Ibid.

=== PAGE 194 ===
31 
support to replace the 2008 version.99 Further, a National Action Plan to Combat Domestic Violence 
was formulated by the Family Welfare and Protection Unit in 2007. 
Governmental 
Mechanisms 
The Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare is the primary organisation 
for the mobilisation of gender mainstreaming efforts. It is proactive and well equipped for gender-
responsive activities, has previously developed (and is developing a replacement) policy 
framework, and has a demonstrated knowledge of the intersections between gender and 
environmental issues. 
 
SEYCHELLES 
CEDAW, 
Maputo Protocol 
Seychelles acceded to the CEDAW on 05 May 1992, but is yet to ratify the convention. The 
archipelago nation also ratified the Maputo Protocol (2006), and is one of the frontrunners in 
fulfilling its commitments to the African Union.  
Gender Policies 
The Seychelles has the following two gender-specific policies: the National Strategy for Domestic 
Violence 2008 – 2012; and the National Action Plan on Gender-Based Violence 2010 – 2011.100 
Seychelles has been one of the better performers for gender indicators in the continent – the 
CEDAW, for example, particularly recognises the high representation of women in parliament 
(~44%) and in the public service. The Committee also welcomes the quality and accessibility of 
maternal and child health-care services by the government, in addition to the results achieved 
regarding de facto equality between girls and boys in the education sector. 
The country also welcomed an election observation mission (exclusively staffed by women) on 04 
September 2016 by the African Union Commission (AUC). Additionally, in 2012, the Gender 
Secretariat of the Government of the Seychelles developed the ‘Gender and the Law Manual’ to 
provide parliamentarians, judges, lawyers and law enforcement agencies with legal guidance, 
information and resources on gender sensitivity.101 
Governmental 
Mechanisms 
The Gender Secretariat, housed within the Ministry of Social Affairs, Community Development and 
Sports, is the primary gender mainstreaming machinery in the country. The Secretariat is currently 
developing a climate change and gender action plan, in line with the protocols laid down by the 
South African Development Community (SADC). 
 
4.3 Composite Indices – HDI, GDI, GGI, GGGI, and MPI 
Implementing gender-responsive adaptation action requires situating the project’s results 
framework on a thorough and context-driven baseline. A collation exercise of scores and rankings 
from composite indices, especially due to the lack of decentralized, nationally available data, has 
been included in this assessment to reflect the overall gender performances of the four countries. 
These indices have differing methodologies, and are being employed as indicative (and not 
conclusive) measures of current levels of development, gender equality, poverty, and labour force 
participation.  
As Booysen’s research102 shows, composite indices present both challenges and advantages. For 
example, numerous fallacies have been identified in the methodologies employed in composite 
indexing. These indices are mainly quantitative, and present empirical and aggregate measures of 
 
99 
African Union Commission – AUC & United Nations Office for High Commissioner of Human Rights – UNOHCR (n.a.). 
Development in Laws since the Maputo Protocol. Report. Accessed 12 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Women/WRGS/DevelopmentsinLawsinfographics.pdf 
100 
AUC & UNHCR (n.a.). Development in Laws since the Maputo Protocol. Ibid.  
101 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). Country Profile: Seychelles. Ibid.  
102 
Booysen, F. (2002). “An Overview and Evaluation of Composite Indices of Development” in Social Indicators Research, (Vol. 
59 No. 2). Journal Article.

=== PAGE 195 ===
32 
complex development phenomena, making values apparently objective, at the cost of subjective 
nuances. Yet, these also remain invaluable as useful supplements to income-based development 
indicators, understanding relative degrees of development, simplifying complex measurement 
constructs as well as providing access to non-technical audiences. 
This baseline, at the outset, uses scores of three different UNDP composite indices: Human 
Development Index (HDI), Gender Inequality Index (GII) and Gender Development Index (GDI) as 
points of departure. Secondly, the baseline collates scores from the World Economic Forum (WEF)’s 
Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI) and Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI)’s 
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI), although data for some project countries are unavailable. 
HDI 
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX  
UNDP (2018) – out of 189 countries103 
COMOROS 
MADAGASCAR 
MAURITIUS 
SEYCHELLES 
165 
161 
65 
62 
NOTE: This index measures and combines three basic dimensions of human development (long and healthy life, 
knowledge and decent standard of living) and provides an overall socioeconomic landscape of a country. 
In line with Booysen’s argument, however, the HDI should be treated as indicative, not conclusive. It provides an 
overview of relative degree of development in a particular country but remains a ‘synthetic indicator’. Recent research 
has shown the need to supplement the HDI with other indicators associated with economic and social cohesion, sound 
development strategies, and sustainability in growth models.104 
 
  
GII 
GENDER INEQUALITY INDEX  
 
UNDP (2018) – out of 189 countries105 
COMOROS 
MADAGASCAR 
MAURITIUS 
SEYCHELLES 
- 
161 
- 
- 
NOTE: This index, showing inequality in achievement between men and women in three aspects (reproductive health, 
empowerment and labour market), provides a useful gender baseline in terms of health equity, economic capital and 
financial access, speaking to the gender opportunities of men and women in the countries. It provides a primary 
understanding of the different levels of achievement on basic development indicators between men and women. This 
displays useful features towards the gender status quo hypotheses, which could then be derived in the context of this 
project. GII should be treated as indicative: note that Pernmayer finds that the functional form of the index could be 
unclear, particularly the inclusion of relative performance indicators for women vis-à-vis men, along with absolute 
women-specific indicators.106 
GII scores for Comoros, Mauritius and Seychelles are unavailable as of August 2019.  
 
GDI 
GENDER DEVELOPMENT INDEX  
COMOROS 
MADAGASCAR 
MAURITIUS 
SEYCHELLES 
 
103 
UNDP – United Nations Development Programme (2018). Human Development Reports, ‘Table I: HDI and its Components’. 
Website. Accessed 02 August 2019. Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/HDI 
104 
Bilbao-Ubillos, J (2011). “The Limits of HDI” in Sustainable Development, (Vol. 21 No. 6). Journal Article.  
105 
UNDP (2018). Human Development Reports, ‘Table V: Gender Inequality Index’. Website. Accessed 02 August 2019. 
Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GII 
106 
Pernmayer, I (2013). “A Critical Assessment of UNDP’s Gender Inequality Index” in Feminist Economics, (Vol. 19 No. 2). 
Journal Article.

=== PAGE 196 ===
33 
UNDP (2018) – grouped in 5  
for absolute deviation107 
5 
2 
2 
- 
NOTE: The GDI (UNDP) index shows the ratio of female to male HDI values. GDI expresses values in deviation, hence, to 
facilitate understanding GDI grouped categories have been used (as grouped by UNDP) to show the absolute deviation 
from gender parity in HDI values (1 being the highest, and 5 being the lowest). This further reiterates the results of the 
HDI (UNDP) and GII (UNDP), and shows the real gender gap in human development achievements. Geske Dijkstra and 
Hanmer find that although gender-related development indices have increased attention towards ‘feminization of 
poverty and underdevelopment’, more robust data needs and indicators are required to create aggregate indices that 
are sensitive to contemporary trends in gendered privation, particularly with the categorisation of ‘women’.108 
GDI grouping for Seychelles is unavailable as of August 2019. 
 
GGGI 
GLOBAL GENDER GAP INDEX  
WEF (2018) – out of 144 countries109 
COMOROS 
MADAGASCAR 
MAURITIUS 
SEYCHELLES 
- 
84 
109 
- 
NOTE: The GGGI (WEF) benchmarks 144 countries on their progress towards gender parity on four thematic dimensions 
– economic participation and opportunity, educational attainment, health and survival, and political empowerment. The 
Index takes stock of national gender gaps on economic, political, education- and health-based criteria, and provides 
country rankings that allow for effective comparisons across regions and income groups. 
GGGI rankings for Comoros and Seychelles are unavailable as of August 2019.  
 
 
MPI 
MULTIDIMENSIONAL POVERTY INDEX 
(2019) – out of 101  
countries110 
COMOROS 
MADAGASCAR 
MAURITIUS 
SEYCHELLES 
65 
94 
- 
- 
NOTE: Calculated by the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Institute (OPHI) and UNDP, the global 
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) measures acute poverty in developing countries (covering 76% of the population). 
It complements traditional income-based poverty measures by capturing severe deprivation regarding different 
indicators: education, health, and living standards. The index not only identifies those living in multidimensional poverty, 
but the extent (or intensity) of their poverty. The MPI can support the effective allocation of resources by making it 
possible to target those with the greatest intensity of poverty, addressing SDGs strategically and monitoring tangible 
impacts of policy intervention.111 
MPI scores are calculated for developing countries112 – hence, data is available only for Comoros and Madagascar due to 
Mauritius’ categorisation as an ‘upper middle income’ country by the World Bank with ‘High Human Development’ 
 
107 
UNDP (2018). Human Development Reports, ‘Table IV: Gender Development Index’. Website. Accessed 02 August 2019. 
Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GDI 
108 
Geske Dijkstra, A. & Hanmer, L. C (2002). “Measuring Socio-Economic Gender Inequality: Towards an Alternative to the 
UNDP Gender Index” in Feminist Economics, (Vol. 6, No. 2). Journal Article. 
109 
WEF – World Economic Forum (2018). The Global Gender Gap Report. Report. Accessed 06 August 2019. Available at: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2018.pdf 
110 
UNDP & Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative – OPHI (2019). Human Development Reports, 
‘Multidimensional Poverty Index: Developing Countries’. Website. Accessed 06 August 2019. Available at: 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/mpi_2019_table_1.pdf 
111 
UNDP & OPHI (2019). Human Development Reports, ‘MPI Technical Note’. Technical Note. Accessed 06 August 2019. 
Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr2019_technical_notes.pdf 
112  
See: https://ophi.org.uk/background-to-the-mpi/

=== PAGE 197 ===
34 
according to the UNDP’s HDI rankings, and Seychelles’ categorisation as a ‘high-income’ country by the World Bank with 
‘High Human Development’ according to the UNDP’s HDI rankings.

=== PAGE 198 ===
35 
5 
CONCLUSION: REGIONAL POTENTIAL & WAY 
FORWARD 
This Gender Assessment has identified and expounded upon both explicit and implicit gender and 
socio-economic issues that could be addressed through the project components. The findings from 
the Assessment also form the basis for the Gender Action Plan (Section 5), which will specify this 
proposal’s desired results, corresponding actions, indicators, timelines, responsible parties, and 
budget allocations, through the results framework (Section E of the funding proposal or FP).  
Given mounting evidence that dynamic, long-term planning for the uncertainties posed by climate 
change must be inclusive, gender-responsive and stakeholder-friendly, this project will pioneer 
gender mainstreaming in climate services. Gender equality has also gained priority in the GCF, AFD, 
and other agencies’ portfolios as a part of implementing a holistic social development mandate with 
inclusive engagement. With that policy background this project partakes in the international 
conversation on gender mainstreaming in climate change adaptation efforts.  
If implemented effectively, this project has the potential to become a good practice gender-
mainstreaming guide for future interventions in the Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and 
Seychelles (nationally), the Indian Ocean region (regionally) as well as among other SIDS and LDCs, 
and globally.

=== PAGE 199 ===
36 
6 
 GENDER ACTION PLAN  
This section provides the Gender Action Plan. The first table shows the main outputs and responsibilities expected from the Gender Consultant to be hired 
during the project cycle. The Gender Consultant will also participate in activity 1.4.1, which will conduct a baseline study of access to climate services, 
institutional capacities of NMHSs, and needs of these different institutions. This will be conducted with the aim to build upon the formative research on 
gender mainstreaming presented in Annex 8, and develop agreed-upon and needs-based outputs for the four countries. The gender mainstreaming action 
points will also pertain to regional and national priorities and deliver on greater gender equality in the region. The second table puts forward a gender action 
plan with a gender impact statement and expected outcome for each component. Gender mainstreaming action points are then presented for each activity 
of the expected results, with the required outputs towards identified targets and indicators.   
SUMMARY TABLE OF GENDER TARGETS  
(to be undertaken by the Hydromet Project Gender Consultant) 
COMPONENT 
GENDER TARGET 
COMPONENT 1: CAPACITY BUILDING, 
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT, 
REGIONAL COOPERATION AND PUBLIC-
PRIVATE ENGAGEMENT 
→ 
Include gender-responsive policy inputs in regional and national frameworks developed for climate services  
(with reference to WMO Gender Strategy) 
→ 
Ensure gender capacity building through the design of training modules to assist transition and development plans of 
NMHSs, DRR institutions and relevant sectoral ministries 
→ 
Increase gender parity in new staff and trainees hired for EWS, CS, and hydromet services 
COMPONENT 2: HIGH-QUALITY 
CLIMATE-RELATED DATA, IMPROVED 
MULTI-HAZARD IMPACT-BASED 
FORECASTS AND EWSs, AND CLIMATE 
RISK ASSESSMENTS 
→ 
Ensure gender-engagement training of observers and forecasters, particularly those involved in impact forecasting and 
nowcasting, to increase gender-responsiveness of EWS and CS products 
→ 
Research and include community and social vulnerabilities, particularly gendered impacts and gender-differentiated 
capacities of resilience, in the hazard maps and climate vulnerability maps developed for each country  
COMPONENT 3: ENHANCED USE OF 
CLIMATE SERVICES FOR CLIMATE 
CHANGE ADAPTATION, AND IMPROVED 
CAPABILITIES IN IMPLEMENTING A 
PEOPLE-CENTERED MH-IBF-EWS FOR 
DRR 
→ 
Conduct needs assessments to ensure gender-responsiveness of daily weather bulletins, seasonal forecasts and 
agricultural advisories  
→ 
Ensure gender-responsiveness in EW dissemination, particularly with regard to the limited access women have in public 
spaces (mosques in Comoros), or to information channels (radios in Madagascar) 
→ 
Incorporate time use analysis to ensure effective and meaningful participation of women and other vulnerable groups in 
any trainings and/or information campaigns for EW and CS

=== PAGE 200 ===
37 
COMPONENT 1: CAPACITY BUILDING, INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT, REGIONAL COOPERATION AND PUBLIC-PRIVATE ENGAGEMENT 
GENDER IMPACT STATEMENT: Strengthened institutions reinforced capacity and greater regional cooperation among the four IOC countries and their NMHSs with gender mainstreaming will ensure that a 
standardised gender-responsive approach is pioneered and operationalized for EWS and CS in the region.  
COMPONENT OUTCOME: A standardised mainstreaming approach for greater gender equality, particularly for climate change adaptation through CS, EWS, hydromet, for the IOC countries.  
OUTPUTS: 
1.1:  A REGIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE CENTRE NETWORK AND R/NFCSs ESTABLISHED IN THE SWIO REGION WITH GENDER-RESPONSIVE POLICIES 
1.2:  INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR NMHS OPERATIONS STRENGTHENED AND CIEWS FUND ESTABLISHED TO DELIVER USER-FRIENDLY AND ACCESSIBLE CS 
1.3:  IMPROVED STAFFING CAPACITY AND CAPABILITY OF THE RCC, NMHS AND OTHER RELEVANT INSTITUTIONS WITH A FOCUS ON INCREASED GENDER PARITY 
1.4:  DETAILED DESIGN AND SYSTEMATIC INTEGRATION OF PROJECT ACTIVITIES TO DELIVER GENDER-RESPONSIVE CS, EWS AND HYDROMET SERVICES 
ACTIVITY 
RELEVANCE 
GENDER 
ACTION 
POINT 
 
INDICATOR/S 
 
 
BASELINE 
(VALUE, 
YEAR)  
  
 
TARGET 
(VALUE,  
YEAR) 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE PARTY 
 
MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION 
 
MONITORING 
(UNIT, 
DISAGG.) 
 
ASSUMPTIONS 
 
1.1.1 
 
Develop 
regional and 
national 
frameworks for 
climate services 
(RFCS & NFCS) 
The establishment of the 
RFCS and NFCS will be a 
pioneering effort in the 
Indian Ocean region for 
cohesive climate 
adaptation efforts involving 
the four member countries. 
Without replacing the 
functions of NMHSs, this 
will promote a regional 
methodology based on the 
WMO GCFS.  
 
 
This activity, hence, will 
have a policy-level and 
institution-level action 
point. 
Include gender 
and 
vulnerability 
context 
monitoring in 
the regional and 
national 
frameworks 
developed for  
climate services 
Organise 
specific working 
sessions, 
adapted to 
women and 
girls daily 
activities. When 
possible theses 
specific sessions 
shall be 
animated by 
women expert 
to identify the 
specific needs, 
RFCS with 
gender strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NFCSs, which 
reflect national 
gender 
priorities 
0 
(2019) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
AE PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT (GC) 
through participation in 
sub-activities 1.1.1.1 
(stakeholder 
consultation), 1.1.1.2 
(regional workshop), and 
1.1.1.4 (national 
workshops). 
The GC will refer to WMO 
policies and efforts on 
gender equality and 
mainstream the same in 
the R/NFCSs.  
See: 
https://public.wmo.int/e
n/resources/gender-
equality 
Minutes from 
stakeholder 
consultation, regional 
workshop and 
national workshops 
and specific women 
sessions 
 
 
 
Gender content in the 
RCFS 
 
Gender content in the 
NCFS 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP)  
National 
stakeholders are 
willing to explicitly 
include gender 
strategies within 
the overarching 
R/NFCSs.

=== PAGE 201 ===
38 
ease and 
smooth the 
expression of 
needs and 
expectations  
1.1.2 
 
Design the 
legal, 
institutional, 
financial and 
organisational 
strategy to 
establish the 
RCC within the 
IOC 
The RCC profile generated 
through the preceding 
activity, will lead to the 
establishment of an RCC for 
the SWIO region within the 
IOC. It will provide regional 
services and facilities to IOC 
member states (pertaining 
to activities 2.2.1, 2.2.2, 
2.3.2, 3.3.3, and 3.3.4).  
 
It will carry on the gender-
inclusive policies identified 
for the RCFS and NCFSs, 
ensuring scaled-up gender 
mainstreamed model for 
the region.  
 
This will also, hence, have a 
combined policy-level and 
institution-level action 
point. 
Include gender 
and 
vulnerability 
context 
monitoring in 
the legal, 
institutional, 
financial and 
organisational 
strategy for the 
RCC 
 
 
Gender 
components for 
the RCC 
Strategy – 
which will 
consolidate 50% 
– 50% male and 
female 
representative 
hiring for the 
RCC 
0 
1 
AE PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
through contribution to 
1.1.2.1 (RCC Network 
plan) and 1.1.2.2 
(Validation Workshop) 
 
The GC will include 
gender-, climate change- 
and environment-related 
priorities of each country 
and choose standards 
accordingly towards the 
RCC. This effort will be 
informed by WMO’s and 
SWIOCOF’s multi-hazard, 
gender-responsive 
approach identified in 
2015. See: 
https://www.gfdrr.org/sit
es/default/files/2.a.%20
WMO%20ASG%20CG%20
GFDRR.pdf 
Minutes from 
validation workshop  
 
 
 
 
 
Gender 
mainstreaming 
clauses / priorities in 
the RCC Network Plan 
- organizational, legal 
and financial 
frameworks, policies 
and MoUs – agreed 
upon by national and 
local institutions 
 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
National 
stakeholders are 
willing to explicitly 
include gender 
strategies for the 
RCC 
1.1.3 
Design, define 
strategies and 
operating plans 
for the 
establishment 
of:  
(i) a regional 
laboratory for 
maintenance 
and annual 
calibration of 
equipment as a  
These strategies focus on 
technical capacity 
strengthening.  
Here, gender 
mainstreaming will take the 
form of involvement of 
more women in technical 
capacities, ensuring greater 
gender parity (currently 
favoured towards men) in 
the meteorological sectors 
of the countries. 
 
Ensure gender-
equitable 
participation 
through the 
strategies and 
operation plans 
developed to 
set up the 
calibration and 
maintenance 
lab (WMO 
Regional 
Centre)  
Rapid analysis 
(baseline) 
gender-
disaggregation 
of existing 
personnel in 
each NMHSs 
 
 
 
 
 
Exact 
figures 
N/A, 
annex 8 
study 
suggests 
skewed 
towards 
male  
 
 
 
 
ideal: 
50 – 50 
M/F  
 
min:  
65 – 35 
M/F  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NMHSs to present 
personnel data for 
baseline establishment to  
AE PMU GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline studies 
delivered under 
activity 1.4.1 will 
reflect this 
information, by 
country and by 
gender-
disaggregation 
 
 
 
 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
National 
stakeholders are 
able to share the 
details of NMHSs 
personnel

=== PAGE 202 ===
39 
WMO Regional 
Instrument 
Centre; and,  
(ii) regional 
center for 
specialized 
training 
 
This will, thus, have two 
technical-level action 
points for (i) and (ii). 
 
Ensure 
specialized 
training equips 
new and 
existing 
personnel for 
gender 
mainstreaming  
 
Gender 
mainstreaming 
module to be 
included in 
specialized 
training for new 
and existing 
staff 
 
 
0 
 
1 
 
AE PMU GENDER 
CONSULTANT to develop 
gender module for 
specialized training 
programme 
 
 
Gender module 
content in the 
specialized regional 
training programme 
 
 
Countries are 
willing to agree on a 
regionally 
standardised 
gender training 
module 
1.1.4 
Prepare a 
strategy to 
improve 
Regional 
Numerical 
Weather (NWP) 
and Climate 
Prediction 
(NCP) 
This is a technical activity 
that will ensure the 
harmonization of climate 
products across countries, 
based on WMO standards.  
Given the focus on 
harmonization across the 
range of different 
capacities of the countries, 
it will be important to 
operationalize gender 
mainstreaming actions 
based on WMO’s policy and 
strategy on gender 
equality. 
Within this, gender-
responsive design will 
mainstreamed according to 
WMO strategy. 
 
This will, thus, have a 
technical-level action 
point. 
Inform the NWP 
and NCP with 
gender and 
vulnerability 
context 
monitoring  
Gender 
components in 
NWP and NCP 
0 
1 
AE PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
through participation in 
1.1.4.3 (regional 
workshop) is able to 
onboard NMHSs 
representatives from 
each country, as well as 
external, relevant 
partners towards 
harmonization of gender-
responsive, regional 
climate products 
 
Gender 
mainstreaming 
clauses reflected in 
the NWP and NCP 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
Country 
representatives are 
willing to agree on 
regionally 
standardised 
climate products 
with gender-
responsive 
components 
1.2.1 
Strengthen the 
institutional, 
operational and 
financial 
strategy of 
NMHSs for each 
target country 
This activity focuses on 
development and 
implementation of capacity 
building. Here, gender 
mainstreaming will take the 
form of involvement of 
more women in technical 
capacities, ensuring greater 
gender parity (currently 
Ensure gender 
equitable 
(where possible 
based when 
relevant on  
GbV identified 
practices ) 
participation in 
–  1.1.3 (i)  
–  1.1.3 (i)  
–  1.1.3 (i)  
AE PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT  
Under sub-activities 
1.2.1.1 – 1.2.1.3 the 
staffing needs of the met 
services will be assessed, 
and quick gender analysis 
in terms of 
disaggregation will be 
Baseline studies 
delivered under 
activity 1.4.1 will 
reflect this 
information, by 
country and by 
gender-
disaggregation 
 
NUMBER of: 
existing 
personnel & 
new personnel 
hired, 
disaggregated 
by country and  
by gender 
Availability of 
gender-diverse 
human resource for 
each NMHSs 
 
Countries are 
willing to hire more 
female staff for 
their NMHSs

=== PAGE 203 ===
40 
favoured towards men) in 
the meteorological sectors 
of the country 
 
Hence, this activity will 
have a combined capacity- 
and technical-level action 
point. 
the NMHSs of 
each country 
performed. Adherence to 
gender-equal hiring 
policies will be gradually 
ensured, to improve both 
participation and 
representation, in the 
meteorological services. 
End of project cycle 
numbers for 
personnel in NMHSs 
 
PERCENTAGE: 
change in 
representation 
(whether 
increase 
registered for 
women’s 
representation) 
1.2.2 
Design the 
transition 
support plan of 
each NMHS, 
DRR institutions 
and relevant 
sectoral 
ministries 
(Capacity 
Development 
Plans) 
This activity focuses on 
development and 
implementation of capacity 
building. Here, gender 
mainstreaming will take the 
form of increasing 
awareness regarding 
gender-climate change-
hydromet services nexus 
issues.  
 
The action point for this 
will be at capacity- and 
technical-level.  
Ensure gender 
is 
mainstreamed 
in the Capacity 
Development 
Plans while 
paying 
attention to 
GbV if any 
identified. 
Gender 
components in 
Capacity 
Development 
Plans 
0 
1 
AE PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT  
New training 
programmes will include 
modules on gender-
climate change 
adaptation-hydromet 
services nexus issues. 
These modules will also 
be included in the 
training exercises for new 
recruits under activity 
1.2.1.  
Gender module 
content in the 
training programmes 
and Capacity 
Development Plans 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
National 
stakeholders are 
willing to include 
gender as a part of 
capacity 
development 
planning 
1.2.3 
Review and/or 
strengthen legal 
and regulatory 
materials, 
including the 
potential 
establishment 
of a CIEWS fund 
This activity focuses on a 
regulatory framework that 
establishes the mission and 
mandate of the NMHSs and 
a ring-fenced CIEWS fund. 
 
This activity therefore will 
have both policy-level and 
institution-level action 
point. 
Ensure gender-
sensitive 
grievance 
mechanisms are 
legally 
mandated, with 
access 
guaranteed for 
women and 
prevent from 
GbV if any 
identified  
Grievance 
mechanisms are 
made part of 
the legal and 
institutional 
frameworks 
0 
4 
IOC NMHSs in 
collaboration with AE 
PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT  
 
The GC to specify, based 
on contextualised 
research, how grievance 
mechanisms can be 
designed in each country 
and how they can be 
made accessible 
particularly to women 
Detailed reporting on 
each mechanism 
mandated for the IOC 
country in context, 
and how it can be 
accessed especially by 
women and local 
actors 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
NMHSs agree with 
legal mandate to 
create and 
operationalize 
grievance and 
redressal 
mechanisms  
1.3.1 
Recruit new 
staff members 
for the RCC-
The activity focuses on 
increasing the human 
resources available in each 
Ensure gender-
equitable 
representation 
in the RCC 
More female 
staff hired to 
balance existing 
inequalities that 
Exact 
figures 
N/A, 
annex 8 
ideal: 
50 – 50 
M/F  
 
AE PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT  
Under sub-activities 
1.2.1.1 – 1.2.1.3 the 
Baseline studies 
delivered under 
activity 1.4.1 will 
reflect this 
NUMBER of: 
existing 
personnel & 
Availability of 
gender-diverse 
human resource for 
each NMHSs

=== PAGE 204 ===
41 
Network and 
NMHSs 
NMHSs of the IOC 
countries.  
 
Thus, this activity will have 
a capacity-based action 
point mirroring the actions 
undertaken by the GC for 
activities 1.1.3 (i) and (ii), as 
well as 1.2.1.   
Network and 
NMHSs while 
paying 
attention to 
GbV to direct 
and indirect 
practices. 
favour male 
representation 
in these 
institutions, 
with aim to hire 
at least 1 
qualified female 
candidate per 
country 
study 
suggests 
Higher 
male staff 
currently 
in each 
NHMSs 
 
 
0 
 
 
min: 
65 – 35 
M/F  
 
 
 
 
 
1 
staffing needs of the met 
services will be assessed, 
and quick gender analysis 
in terms of 
disaggregation will be 
performed. Adherence to 
gender-equal hiring 
policies will be gradually 
ensured, to improve both 
participation and 
representation, in the 
meteorological services. 
information, by 
country and by 
gender-
disaggregation 
 
End of project cycle 
numbers for 
personnel in NMHSs  
 
Profile of female, 
qualified candidates 
hired exchanged 
between countries – 
organized by GC  
new personnel 
hired, 
disaggregated 
by country and  
by gender 
 
PERCENTAGE: 
change in 
representation 
(whether 
increase 
registered for 
women’s 
representation) 
 
Countries are 
willing to hire more 
female staff for 
their NMHSs  
1.3.2 
Train new and 
retrain existing 
staff 
The activity focuses on 
increasing the capacity of 
human resources available 
in each NMHSs of the IOC 
countries.  
 
Thus, this activity will have 
a capacity-based action 
point mirroring the actions 
undertaken by the GC for 
activities 1.1.3 (i) and (ii), as 
well as 1.2.1. and 1.3.1. 
Ensure gender-
equitable 
participation in 
trainings while 
paying 
attention to 
GbV to direct 
and indirect 
practices.   
 
 
Ensure risk 
exposure 
component of 
training 
includes 
modules on 
gender and 
social inclusion 
modules  
More female 
staff hired 
under 1.3.1 
(min. 1 / 
country) are 
provided with 
better training 
 
Gender and 
social inclusion 
modules 
included under 
risk exposure 
component 
with a minimum 
of 1 gender 
mainstreaming 
module or 
session per 
training 
Exact 
figures 
currently 
N/A, AE 
PMU GC 
will 
request 
personnel 
records as 
part of 
previous 
activities 
(1.2.1.1 – 
1.2.1.3) 
ideal: 
50 – 50 
M/F  
 
 
 
min:  
65 – 35 
M/F 
AE PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
 
will collaborate with the 
NMHSs to ensure a 
minimum of 1 qualified 
female candidate is hired 
per country.  
 
While designing modules 
the GC will deliver a 
minimum of 1 gender 
mainstreaming session / 
training planned for new 
and existing staff. It will 
be important to tune this 
output towards the 
different and specific 
cultural context of each 
IOC country. 
Training records and 
attendance sheet 
from each NMHSs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Content and records 
of the gender 
mainstreaming 
session or module   
–  1.1.3 (i) 
–  1.2.1 
–  1.1.3 (i) 
–  1.2.1 
1.4.1 
Conduct 
baseline studies 
on how CP-CS 
and MH-IBF-
EWS for hydro-
The goal of this activity is to 
have an increased 
understanding of who has 
access to CP-CS in each 
beneficiary country, how, 
Establish 
implementation 
gender baseline 
for each 
country, 
Updated 
Gender 
Assessment and 
Action Plan 
1 
(Annex 8) 
2 
(Updated 
Report 
and 
Annex 8) 
AE PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT  
to develop a gender 
baseline report as a part 
of the reassessment of 
the baseline, which will 
Gender Report, as 
part of the CONOPS 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
Subject to COVID-
19 and related risk  
 
IOC countries agree 
to validate update 
Gender Assessment

=== PAGE 205 ===
42 
meteorological 
hazards are 
used in each 
beneficiary 
country, and on 
user 
requirements 
for improving 
such services 
and how CP-CS are used in 
decision-making.  
The studies will be 
conducted to assess access 
to, and use of CP-CS at 
baseline in the following 
sectors: agriculture and 
fisheries (Comoros and 
Madagascar); agriculture 
and tourism (Mauritius); 
fisheries and tourism 
(Seychelles); as well as 
access to early warnings for 
tropical cyclones and other 
hydro-meteorological 
hazards in all countries. 
 
Thus, this activity will have 
a research action point 
which will expand the 
intermediary baseline 
presented in Annex 8.113 
building on 
Annex 8 
Organise 
specific working 
sessions, 
adapted to 
women and 
girls daily 
activities. When 
possible, theses 
specific sessions 
shall be, 
animated by 
women experts 
to identify the 
specific needs, 
ease and 
smooth the 
expression of 
needs and 
expectations 
inform the 
implementation stage of 
IOC Hydromet  
The baseline shall be 
developed by mobilizing 
women community 
representatives in Host 
countries in order to set 
the optimum calendar 
and daily time slot 
allowing women and girls 
to participate actively in 
the co-design and co-
implementation of the 
climates products and 
services and when 
appropriate, in 
coordination with 
relevant regional partners 
such as IFRC-PIROI 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
and Action Plan as a 
part of CONOPS 
1.4.2 
Produce a 
detailed design 
of the hydromet 
observational 
networks, 
modelling, 
forecasting and 
service delivery 
systems for 
each NMHS, 
taking a 
This activity seeks to ensure 
harmonization of the 
various systems across the 
SWIO region through the 
preparation of 
implementation plans, 
technical specifications and 
tender documents for 
equipment and services, 
taking a regional approach. 
As such, it is an ideal 
opportunity to ensure the 
Ensure gender 
is 
mainstreamed 
in the technical 
designs 
produced 
through this 
activity. 
 
Ensure gender-
equitable 
Gender 
components in 
the technical 
designs 
produced 
through this 
activity. 
 
 
More female 
representation 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N/A 
(dependa
nt on 
number of 
technical 
specificati
ons 
produced) 
 
 
Ideal: 
AE PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
through contribution to 
technical specification 
and design. 
 
 
 
 
Minutes from 
validation workshop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline studies 
delivered under 
Data for these 
indicators will 
be qualitative 
and collected as 
a part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
National 
stakeholders are 
willing to explicitly 
include gender 
components in the 
technical 
specifications. 
 
 
National 
stakeholders can 
 
113 Understanding and analyses of current levels and accessibility of CP-CS among men and women are crucial to design gender-responsive, inclusive, end-users’ services. Progressive capacity-
building in the provision of gender-mainstreamed early warning systems and climate information services require gender mainstreaming to capture the varying needs and vulnerabilities of 
different interest groups in a community. Apropos of in-country missions and Gender Assessment undertaken during the preparation phase, each country presents different gendered dynamics 
in the usage of CP-CS. In Madagascar, women tend to have limited access to ICTs, such as radio or SMS service. Similarly, in Comoros, women reported constraints in accessing the public sphere, 
such as community mosques or public squares, where early warnings were announced for Cyclone Kenneth. In Mauritius and Seychelles, gender accessibility to CP-CS are better balanced, 
however, information may not often cater to the different household duties or roles played by men and women.

=== PAGE 206 ===
43 
regional 
harmonized 
approach 
(regional and 
national 
CONOPSs) 
integration of gender issues 
from the outset of these 
activities. 
This activity therefore will 
have policy-level and 
institution-level action 
point. 
representation 
in the 
procurement of 
services 
undertaken 
based on the 
tender 
documents 
produced 
through this 
activity. 
in services 
procured to 
balance existing 
inequalities that 
favour male 
representation 
in these 
industries. 
Rapid analysis 
(baseline) 
gender-
disaggregation 
of existing 
service 
providers. 
Exact 
figures 
N/A, 
annex 8 
study 
suggests 
skewed 
towards 
male  
50 – 50 
M/F  
 
min: 6 
5 – 35 
M/F  
NMHSs to present 
personnel data for 
baseline establishment to  
AE PMU GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
activity 1.4.1 will 
reflect this 
information, by 
country and by 
gender-
disaggregation  
share the details of 
personnel engaged 
through 
procurement 
processes to 
provide services. 
1.4.3 
Ensure full 
system 
integration 
from 
observation 
stations to 
delivery of CP-
CS to end-user 
This activity includes the 
development of step-by-
step practices and 
procedures for system 
integration and 
coordination of project 
activities. As such, it is an 
ideal opportunity to ensure 
the integration of gender 
issues from the outset of 
these practices and 
procedures. 
This activity therefore will 
have policy-level and 
institution-level indicator. 
Ensure gender 
mainstreaming 
in the practices 
and procedures 
produced 
through this 
activity. 
Gender 
components in 
the practices 
and procedures 
produced 
through this 
activity. 
0 
N/A 
(dependa
nt on 
number of 
practices 
and 
procedure
s 
produced) 
Ensure gender is 
mainstreamed in the 
practices and procedures 
produced through this 
activity. 
Gender components 
in the practices and 
procedures produced 
through this activity. 
Data for these 
indicators will 
be qualitative 
and collected as 
a part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
– 1.4.2 
 
COMPONENT 2: HIGH-QUALITY CLIMATE-RELATED DATA, IMPROVED MULTI-HAZARD IMPACT-BASED FORECASTS AND EWSs, AND CLIMATE RISK ASSESSMENTS 
GENDER IMPACT STATEMENT: Improved climate data and risk assessments, leading to more precise climate change projections, will provide a ‘gender lens’ to risk exposure in the IOC countries. 
GENDER OUTCOME STATEMENT: Adopting a gender lens to analyse potential risks and hazards will prioritise the identification of gendered vulnerabilities, leading to targeted and effective action. Further, altering 
the skewed gender ratio will not only help representation rates, but also create a bona fide cycle of engaging and empowering women through climate change adaptation processes.  
OUTPUTS: 
2.1:  ENHANCED HYDRO-METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATION AND MONITORING BY MAKING USE OF INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES FOR COST-EFFECTIVENESS AND GENDER-RELEVANCE 
2.2:  REGIONAL FACILITIES FOR MAINTENANCE AND TRAINING ESTABLISHED WITH FOCUS ON INCREASING CAPACITY IN TANDEM WITH GENDER PARITY 
2.3:  SCIENCE-BASED MULTI-HAZARD WEATHER AND CLIMATE RISK INFORMATION GENERATED AND DISSEMINATED TO TARGET CLIMATE-VULNERABLE AUDIENCES IN THE SELECTED SECTORS

=== PAGE 207 ===
44 
ACTIVITY 
RELEVANCE 
GENDER 
ACTION 
POINT 
 
INDICATOR/S 
 
 
BASELINE 
(VALUE, 
YEAR)  
 
TARGET 
(VALUE,  
YEAR) 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE PARTY 
 
MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION 
 
MONITORING 
(UNIT, 
DISAGG.) 
 
ASSUMPTIONS 
 
2.1.1  
Modernise / 
upgrade climate 
observation and 
monitoring 
network 
The project will deliver a 
modernised climate 
observation and monitoring 
network based on a 
capacity gap analysis 
following the WMO 
technical regulations and 
standards.   
Therefore, a technical-level 
action point has been 
identified for this specific 
activity.  
Ensure 
women and 
other 
marginalized 
groups, 
identified 
through 1.4.1 
by the GC, 
benefit from 
improved 
technology in 
the IOC 
countries 
 
 
Gender 
content in the 
CONOPSs 
produced 
under 1.4 
which will 
inform 2.1.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To be 
reassesse
d using 
activity 
1.4.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To be 
determined 
after the 
reassessment 
of the 
baseline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IOC with the support of 
the PMU and the AE PMU 
GENDER CONSULTANT 
 
MoV for this indicator 
is qualitative and will 
be draw from other 
activities, such as 
1.4.1 and 1.4.2 
 
 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP)  
National 
stakeholders are 
willing to explicitly 
include gender 
strategies within 
the overarching 
R/NFCSs.  
2.1.2  
Modernise / 
upgrade the 
information and 
communication 
technology 
system 
The project will deliver a 
modernised information 
and communication 
technology system.   
Therefore, a technical-level 
action point. has been 
identified for this specific 
activity.  
Ensure end 
user access 
through the 
sub-activity 
2.1.2.7 
(service 
delivery 
platform), 
particularly 
for vulnerable 
demographics 
Gender 
training (1 
session / 
country) for 
forecasters, 
nowcasters, 
and observers 
to ensure 
relevance of 
hydromet 
information 
To be 
reassesse
d using 
activity 
1.4.1 
 
 
To be 
determined 
after the 
reassessment 
of the 
baseline 
 
AE PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
through the gender 
modules developed in 
earlier activities for 
training will deliver this 
output.  
 
The GC will ensure that 
the training modules 
reflect the cultural 
Training records / 
attendance sheets  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Satisfaction survey 
conducted in each 
NUMBER of: 
attendants for 
gender training 
Gender training is 
encouraged and 
operationalized by 
country 
stakeholders for 
new and existing 
personnel

=== PAGE 208 ===
45 
for different 
user groups 
specificities of each 
country.  
country after training 
session on gender 
2.2.1  
Establish a 
maintenance 
and calibration 
laboratory 
(WMO Regional 
Instrument 
Centre)  
This technical output builds 
on the strategy and 
planning envisioned under 
activity 1.1.3. Therefore, 
the gender considerations 
from that activity will be 
brought forward to enable 
continuity with activity 
2.2.1. 
–  1.1.3 (i) & 
(ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & 
(ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) 
& (ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & 
(ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & (ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & (ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & (ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & (ii) 
2.2.2  
Refurbish the 
specialized 
training centre 
for the region 
hosted by 
Mauritius 
NMHS (which 
contribute to 
the WMO 
Global Campus) 
This technical output builds 
on the strategy and 
planning envisioned under 
activity 1.1.3. The 
specialized training centre 
will be complementary to 
the WMO Regional 
Instrument Centre 
established through 2.2.1. 
Thus, succeeding 2.2.1, this 
activity too will build on the 
indicator, baseline, target, 
MoV etc. of activity 1.1.3. 
–  1.1.3 (i) & 
(ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & 
(ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) 
& (ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & 
(ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & (ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & (ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & (ii) 
–  1.1.3 (i) & (ii) 
2.3.1 
Downscale and 
calibrated 
meteorological 
forecasts by 
making use if 
numerical 
weather 
prediction / 
ensemble 
prediction 
systems 
(NWP/EPS) and 
applying 
modern 
techniques such 
as artificial 
intelligence  
This will improve the 
production of short-range 
‘day-to-day’ forecasts and 
warnings in each target 
country. Staff members of 
NMHSs, with the support of 
DRM institutions, will be 
trained in probabilistic 
forecasts and on its use to 
produce impact-based 
forecasts (IBF) to translate 
hydromet hazards into 
sector and location-specific 
impacts. 
Therefore, a combined 
technical-level indicator 
and a capacity-building 
action point have been 
Ensure 
women and 
other 
marginalized 
groups, 
identified 
through 1.4.1 
by the GC, 
benefit from 
improved 
technology in 
the IOC 
countries 
 
 
Ensure 
gender-
The needs of 
women and 
other 
marginalized 
groups are 
considered in 
the 
downscaling 
and 
calibration of 
forecasts. 
 
 
 
Rapid analysis 
(baseline) 
gender-
To be 
reassesse
d using 
activity 
1.4.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exact 
figures 
N/A, 
To be 
determined 
after the 
reassessment 
of the 
baseline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideal: 
50 – 50 M/F  
IOC with the support of 
the PMU  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NMHSs to present 
personnel data for 
baseline establishment to  
MoV for this indicator 
is qualitative and will 
be draw from other 
activities, such as 
1.4.1 and 1.4.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline studies 
delivered under 
activity 1.4.1 will 
reflect this 
Data for these 
indicators will 
be qualitative 
and 
quantitative, 
and collected as 
a part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP)  
National 
stakeholders are 
willing to explicitly 
include gender 
strategies within 
systems. 
 
 
 
 
National 
stakeholders can 
share the details of 
NMHSs personnel

=== PAGE 209 ===
46 
identified for this specific 
activity. 
equitable 
participation 
in training 
while paying 
attention to 
GbV direct 
and indirect 
practices. This 
will be 
supported by 
gender-
equitable 
recruitment. 
 
disaggregatio
n of existing 
personnel in 
each NMHSs, 
supplemented 
with analysis 
of access to 
training 
opportunities. 
 
annex 8 
study 
suggests 
skewed 
towards 
male 
 
 
min: 6 
5 – 35 M/F 
 
AE PMU GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
 
information, by 
country and by 
gender-
disaggregation 
 
2.3.2  
Establish 
threshold 
values for 
issuing warnings 
based on 
extreme value 
analysis and 
review of 
historical 
hydrometeorolo
gical events 
This activity will identify 
threshold values for each 
hazard (flooding or 
otherwise) for each country 
by using extreme analysis 
tools, available climate data 
as well as historical 
hydrometeorological data.   
 
Therefore, this activity will 
have a technical action 
point, combined with 
capacity analysis (exposure 
risks). 
Ensure 
threshold 
values reflect 
gendered 
exposure risks 
Harmonized 
national 
thresholds for 
hydromet 
events 
developed to 
reflect 
gendered and 
social 
vulnerabilities   
0 
4 
AE PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT  
will assist IOC and PMU to 
coordinate with NGOs 
and other knowledge 
brokers, as well as using 
the implementation 
gender baseline 
developed under activity 
1.4.1 to ensure 
thresholds reflect on-the-
ground concerns and 
vulnerabilities. 
Baseline studies 
delivered under 
activity 1.4.1 will 
reflect parts of this 
information 
 
 
 
List of NGOs and 
other relevant 
institutions to 
participate in 
workshops organized 
with NMHSs and 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – E – 
FP) 
Success of baseline 
gender study 
conducted under 
activity 1.4.1 to 
capture relevant 
information 
regarding 
thresholds and 
impacts 
 
NGOs and other 
relevant institutions 
are willing to 
participate 
2.3.3  
Develop 
hazards maps 
This activity will create 
hazard maps to be utilised 
by NMHSs and DRM 
institutions. These maps 
will take into account 
climate change impacts on 
return period/intensity of 
selected hazards of the four 
countries.  
 
This will be technical action 
point, combined with 
Ensure hazard 
maps are 
gender-
responsive, 
community-
informed and  
stakeholder-
owned 
Hazard maps 
that 
mainstream 
community 
and gendered 
vulnerabilities 
through 
stakeholder 
consultations  
0 
8 (2 hazard 
maps / 
country) 
IOC NMHSs in 
collaboration with AE 
PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT  
 
The GC to assist with sub-
activity 2.3.3.3, wherein 
communities and 
stakeholders will be 
consulted to understand 
the frequency and 
intensity of the selected 
hazards 
Consultation and 
meeting minutes 
 
 
 
Stakeholder and 
community 
engagement report 
by the GC 
NUMBER of: 
community 
members 
consulted,  
by gender-
disaggregation  
by location and 
by country 
 
 
Communities are 
able to provide 
objective analysis of 
different hazards 
which can be 
harmonized across 
the country  
 
NMHSs show 
interest in 
mainstreaming 
community and 
local stakeholder

=== PAGE 210 ===
47 
capacity analysis (exposure 
to hazards). 
interest in hazard 
maps   
2.3.4  
Develop climate 
vulnerability 
maps  
This activity will be based 
on the hazard maps 
produced under activity 
2.3.3. and will constitute a 
mapping exercise for 
climate-risk vulnerability (of 
people and assets).  
 
This will, therefore, be a 
technical-level as well as at 
capacity-level action point 
like the preceding activities  
2.3.3 and 2.3.2. 
Ensure 
climate 
vulnerability 
maps are 
gender-
responsive 
and 
community-
informed and 
stakeholder-
owned 
Climate 
vulnerability 
maps that 
mainstream 
community 
and gendered 
vulnerabilities 
through 
stakeholder 
consultations 
0 
4 (1 climate 
vulnerability 
map / 
country, each 
reflecting two 
areas within 
the country) 
IOC NMHSs in 
collaboration with AE 
PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT  
 
The GC to assist with sub-
activities 2.3.4.1 – 2.3.4.4, 
towards the development 
of the climate 
vulnerability maps 
Consultation and 
meeting minutes 
 
 
 
Stakeholder and 
community 
engagement report 
by the GC 
NUMBER of: 
community 
members 
consulted,  
by gender-
disaggregation  
by location and 
by country 
 
Vulnerable sections 
of communities are 
able to 
meaningfully 
participate and 
represent their 
needs and interests 
 
NMHSs show 
interest in 
mainstreaming 
community and 
local stakeholder 
interest in climate 
vulnerability maps    
2.3.5  
Undertake risk 
analysis 
incorporating 
hazard, 
exposure and 
vulnerability to 
identify 
potential 
impacts from 
extreme events 
This output will deliver risk 
maps by developing a tool 
that is able to quantify and 
characterize hazards, 
vulnerabilities and 
exposure risks based on 
existing datasets.  
 
This will, therefore, be a 
technical-level action point 
like 2.3.3 & 2.3.4.  
Ensure 
gendered 
vulnerabilities 
are 
considered 
within the risk 
maps, 
mirroring 
activity 2.3.3. 
–  2.3.3 
0 
8 (2 per 
country) 
–  2.3.3 
–  2.3.3 
–  2.3.3 
–  2.3.3 
2.3.6  
Carry out 
downscaling of 
global, regional 
and seasonal 
forecast to 
national level, 
and use them to 
produce 
agrometeorolog
ical products 
This activity will focus on 
the development of 
agrometeorological 
advisories, which are 
climate products that will 
service particularly 
Comoros, Madagascar and 
Mauritius.  
 
This will function both at 
the technical and capacity 
levels, as women are 
Ensure 
agrometeorol
ogical training 
provided 
mainstreams 
gender 
requirements, 
particularly 
needs of 
women 
subsistence 
farmers 
Agrometeorol
ogical 
advisories 
that are 
viable, 
stakeholder-
friendly and 
cover the ‘last 
mile’ 
0 
4 
IOC NMHSs in 
collaboration with AE 
PMU – GENDER 
CONSULTANT  
 
The GC to assist using 
research undertaken for 
reassessment of baseline 
(activity 1.4.1), and for 
sub-activities under 
activities 2.3.2 – 2.3.5.  
Consultation and 
meeting minutes 
 
 
 
Stakeholder and 
community 
engagement report 
by the GC 
NUMBER of: 
community 
members 
consulted,  
by gender-
disaggregation  
by location and 
by country 
 
NMHSs agree to 
incorporate gender 
perspectives 
explicitly into 
agrometeorological 
advisories

=== PAGE 211 ===
48 
heavily (and often 
disproportionately) 
involved in agriculture.  
2.3.7 
Build the 
capacity to 
downscale 
climate models 
for national 
purposes 
This activity will enable the 
development of impact 
assessments of various 
sectors in each country 
based on the downscaled 
climate change projections. 
The climate change models 
and projections as well as 
the sectoral models and 
impact assessments will be 
shared on the UIP, allowing 
for greater information 
sharing at a regional level, 
while tailoring end products 
to local context. 
Ensure 
women and 
other 
marginalized 
groups, 
identified 
through 1.4.1 
by the GC, 
benefit from 
improved 
technology in 
the IOC 
countries 
The needs of 
women and 
other 
marginalized 
groups are 
considered in 
the 
downscaling 
and 
calibration of 
forecasts. 
To be 
reassesse
d using 
activity 
1.4.1 
To be 
determined 
after the 
reassessment 
of the 
baseline 
IOC with the support of 
the PMU  
MoV for this indicator 
is qualitative and will 
be draw from other 
activities, such as 
1.4.1 and 1.4.2 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
National 
stakeholders are 
willing to explicitly 
include gender 
strategies within 
systems. 
 
2.3.8 
Build the 
capacity for 
hydrological 
modelling for 
flood 
forecasting (i.e. 
flood 
propagation 
model)  
This activity will focus on 
increasing knowledge and 
building capacity identified 
gaps in monitoring 
hydrology data, hydrology 
expertise and forecasting 
floods in the four target 
countries through training 
of NHMS staff. 
Therefore, a capacity-
building action point has 
been identified for this 
specific activity. 
Ensure 
gender-
equitable 
participation 
in trainings. 
This will be 
supported by 
gender-
equitable 
recruitment, 
as noted 
above. 
 
Rapid analysis 
(baseline) 
gender-
disaggregatio
n of existing 
personnel in 
each NMHSs, 
supplemented 
with analysis 
of access to 
training 
opportunities. 
 
Exact 
figures 
N/A, 
annex 8 
study 
suggests 
skewed 
towards 
male 
 
ideal: 
50 – 50 M/F  
 
min: 6 
5 – 35 M/F 
 
NMHSs to present 
personnel data for 
baseline establishment to  
AE PMU GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
 
Baseline studies 
delivered under 
activity 1.4.1 will 
reflect this 
information, by 
country and by 
gender-
disaggregation 
 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
quantitative, 
and collected as 
a part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP)  
National 
stakeholders can 
share the details of 
NMHSs personnel  
 
COMPONENT 3: ENHANCED USE OF CLIMATE SERVICES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION, AND IMPROVED CAPABILITIES IN IMPLEMENTING A PEOPLE-CENTERED MH-IBF-EWS FOR DRR 
IMPACT STATEMENT: User-friendly climate services for climate change adaptation will shift the needle on existing gender inequalities exacerbated by climate risks and natural hazards in the region. 
OUTCOME STATEMENT: Strengthened NMHSs staff capacity, knowledge brokers, as well as regional platforms, to deliver on gender-responsive CP-CS, EWS.  
OUTPUTS: 
3.1: PRODUCTION, DISSEMINATION AND UPTAKE OF CP-CS, INCLUDING MH-IBF-EWS, IMPROVED AND GENDER-RESPONSIVE

=== PAGE 212 ===
49 
3.2: SHORT- AND LONG-TERM RISK REDUCTION AND ADAPTATION PLANS IMPROVED OR DEVELOPED BASED ON HIGH QUALITY CLIMATE-RELATED DATA,  
RISK/VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE PROJECTIONS INCLUDING ANALYSES ON GENDERED VULNERABILITIES AND MAINSTREAMING ACTION 
3.3:  TRAINING FOR IMPROVED DISSEMINATION AND PREPAREDNESS INVOLVING USERS AND END-USERS OF CP-CS ESTABLISHED WITH FOCUS ON DISEMPOWERED WOMEN 
ACTIVITY 
RELEVANCE 
GENDER 
 ACTION 
POINT 
 
INDICATOR/S 
 
 
BASELINE 
(VALUE, 
YEAR)  
  
 
TARGET 
(VALUE,  
YEAR) 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE 
PARTY 
 
MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION 
 
MONITORING 
(UNIT, 
DISAGG.) 
 
ASSUMPTIONS 
 
3.1.1  
Set up / update 
protocol to 
produce and 
deliver 
improved daily 
weather 
bulletin, multi-
hazard impact-
based forecasts, 
seasonal 
forecasts, and 
agrometeorolog
ical advisories  
This activity 
addresses the key 
finding of Annex 2 
(FP): the need to 
improve the 
production and 
delivery of daily 
weather bulletins, 
IBF, seasonal 
forecasts, and other 
weather products 
among the 
population of the 
four target 
countries.  
Therefore, three 
combined 
technical-level and 
capacity-level 
action point has 
been identified for 
this specific activity.  
Design weather 
products that are 
user-friendly 
 
Mainstream 
gendered 
interests and 
needs of 
vulnerable 
socioeconomic 
groups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ensure 
communication 
channels chosen 
for dissemination 
are accessible to 
marginalized and 
vulnerable user 
groups 
Targeted 
content in the 
weather 
bulletins, multi-
hazard 
forecasts, 
seasonal 
forecasts, 
agromet 
advisories 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To be 
reassesse
d using 
activity 
1.4.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To be 
determine
d after the 
reassessm
ent of the 
baseline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AE PMU – 
GENDER 
CONSULTANT  
 
The GC to assist 
with sub-activities 
3.1.1.1, 3.1.1.2, 
3.1.1.3. Through 
sub-activity 
3.1.1.4, the GC 
will ensure 
meaningful 
participation from 
key stakeholders 
(particularly 
women involved 
in subsistence 
agriculture) who 
are marginalized.  
The GC to advise 
how  
communication 
channels 
identified through 
3.1.1.5 and 
dissemination 
through 3.1.1.6 
can serve women 
better, given 
limited access in 
Survey report  
 
 
 
Gender report (as 
part of CONOPSs – 
activity 1.4.1)  
 
 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP)  
The project is able to engage with 
marginalized subsects of the 
beneficiaries without cultural or 
socio-political hindrances  
 
 
NMHSs and country partners are 
willing to mainstream gendered 
needs in climate products

=== PAGE 213 ===
50 
certain contexts 
(Annex 8). 
3.1.2  
Set up protocols 
(standard 
operating 
procedures) to 
strengthen MH-
IBF-EWS 
dissemination 
for and uptake 
by key sectors 
and among the 
general public 
This activity will 
build on the 
technical advances 
made under 
component 2 
(instalment of 
modern 
meteorological 
equipment). 
Through this, the 
project will 
undertake in-depth 
end user analysis to 
ensure synergy 
between needs and 
solutions while 
packaging EW and 
CS.  
Therefore, the 
action point 
identified for this 
project combines 
technical and 
monitoring aspects.  
Ensure an end 
user-focused 
dissemination 
channel 
 
 
 
Prioritise 
vulnerable 
socioeconomic 
groups in 
identified 
dissemination 
channels 
 
 
 
 
MH-IBF-EW 
gender-
responsibly 
packaged and 
disseminated 
among targeted 
vulnerable 
groups  
0 
(2019) 
 
 
1 regional 
stregthen
ed MH-
IBF-EWS 
4 national 
stregthen
ed MH-
IBF-EWS 
 
AE PMU – 
GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
 
to bring forward 
gender actions for 
sub-activity 
2.1.2.7 (service 
delivery 
platform), and 
contribute to sub-
activity 3.1.2.2 to 
ensure better 
targetting 
 
Training records / 
attendance sheets  
 
Gender-responsive 
end user satisfaction  
survey and in-depth 
analysis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
Gender training is encouraged 
and operationalized by country 
stakeholders for new and existing 
personnel under previous sub-
activity 2.1.2.7 
 
Target vulnerable groups are able 
to meaningfully participate in end 
user surveys 
3.2.1  
Improve data 
sharing and 
coordination 
with emergency 
services for on-
the-ground 
interventions at 
national and 
local levels 
Through this 
activity, the project 
will strengthen the 
collaboration 
between NMHSs 
and DRM 
institutions. The 
activity will pilot 
two local 
emergency plan per 
country, to 
demonstrate how 
to downscale 
national emergency 
response plans.  
Deliver national 
and local 
emergency 
response plans 
which prioritise 
gendered 
exposure risks  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local 
emergency 
response plans 
includes gender 
and 
vulnerability 
assessments for 
exposure risks 
to improve risk 
mitigation, 
mitigation and 
recovery 
 
 
 
To be 
reassesse
d using 
activity 
1.4.1 
 
4 national 
emergenc
y 
response 
plans  
8 local 
emergenc
y 
response 
plans (2 
piloted 
per 
country)  
AE PMU – 
GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
 
to bring forward 
gender research 
undertaken for 
activity 1.4.1 and 
present a list of 
DRM institutions 
and regional and 
national active 
NGOs as such 
PIROI/CRC/IFRC 
and UN agencies    
with prior and 
GbV trend analysis 
report in the 2 pilot 
sites selected in each 
country 
 
Compilation of 
historical information 
and data on ex-ante, 
during, ex-post GbV 
and disaster for each 
country, to be 
included in 1.4.1 
gender deliverable 
PERCENTAGE 
of: 
people 
experiencing 
GbV, disagg. 
by gender,  
by pilot site 
by each country  
 
 
 
 
 
The GC is able to access 
information about GbV 
prevalence in selected pilot sites 
in a culturally sensitive manner 
 
GbV survivors are willing to share 
information and personal 
experience with the GC

=== PAGE 214 ===
51 
Therefore, the 
action point 
identified for this 
project combines 
technical and 
capacity aspects. 
Mainstream 
gender-based 
violence (GbV) as 
a key issue for 
analysis  
 
Mobilize the 
last-mile 
partners such us 
PIROI/CRC/IFRC 
and its national 
counterparts, 
NGOs and UN 
agencies  
Prevention, 
mitigation and 
redressal 
mechanisms for 
gender-based 
violence are 
identified in 
local emergency 
response plan  
ongoing 
experience with 
gender-
responsive DRM 
and GbV 
 (for example:  
C for C in 
Madagascar, 
consulted for 
Annex 8 
formative 
research, has 
extensive 
experience with 
GbV)  
 
Additional data 
for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
3.2.2  
Develop risk 
matrices for 
each hazard 
with agreed 
risk-levels and 
colour-coded, 
and description 
of related 
impacts and 
response/action
s; test and 
validate in 
selected sites in 
the four 
countries; 
expand and roll 
out nationwide 
 
Activity 3.2.2 builds 
on the preceding 
activity 3.2.1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, the 
action point 
identified for this 
project derives 
from activity 3.2.1.  
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1 
3.2.3 
Develop a 
knowledge and 
decision 
support system 
to support the 
implementation 
This activity will 
develop a web-
based knowledge 
and decision 
support system that 
can provide colour-
coded risk-based 
warnings. Through 
Deliver a gender, 
responsive 
stakeholder-
friendly Common 
Alert Protocols for 
each country 
Knowledge and 
DSS 
mainstreams 
gender and 
socioeconomic 
concerns 
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1 
–  3.2.1

=== PAGE 215 ===
52 
of MH-IBF-EWS 
at regional, 
national and 
local levels 
this, it can support 
the selected 
socioeconomic 
sectors in each 
country 
(agriculture, 
fisheries and 
tourism) and 
therefore the 
stakeholders 
involved in these 
climate-vulnerable 
sector. 
 
Therefore, the 
action point serves 
at a combined 
technical and 
capacity-level. This 
activity will also 
benefit from gender 
action taken under 
activities 1.4.1 and 
3.2.1. 
 
 
User-friendly 
CAPs which go 
the ‘last mile’ 
3.2.4 
Update long 
term climate 
change 
adaptation 
plans 
responding to 
the needs of 
each country 
The project has 
identified that 
Comoros, 
Madagascar and 
Mauritius are 
developing National 
Adaptation Plans 
(NAPs) and 
Seychelles is 
developing a 
Coastal 
Management Plan 
(CMP).  
These long-term 
climate change 
adaptation plan can 
benefit from the 
project’s efforts 
Ensure gender is 
mainstreamed in 
long-term climate 
change 
adaptation plans 
for each country 
taking into 
account direct 
and indirect GbV. 
Gender content 
in NAPs and 
CMP 
0 
(2019) 
3 NAPs 
1 CMP 
AE PMU – 
GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
 
to bring forward 
gender research 
undertaken in the 
preparation 
phase (Annex 8) 
for activity 1.4.1, 
and activities 
3.2.1 and 3.2.2.  
The GC will 
highlight key 
issues to be 
covered in the 
long-term plans 
(summary notes) 
4 summary notes 
highlighting gender-
environment-climate 
change issues for 
each IOC country 
 
 
 
 
4 ToRs for national 
consultants for each 
IOC country 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
Ministry of Environment / 
Climate Change units in each 
country are willing to hire 
national gender consultants for 
updating the long-term climate 
change adaptation plans (i.e. 3 
NAPs and 1 CMP)

=== PAGE 216 ===
53 
towards gender 
mainstreaming as 
well as existing 
work on gender and 
climate change in 
each country.  
 
Thus, the action 
point identified for 
this activity is 
research-oriented.  
and assist 
Ministry of 
Environment / 
Climate Change 
units to develop 
TORs for national 
consultants to be 
hired in the NAPs 
and CMP 
processes  
3.3.1  
Train staff 
members of 
NMHS and in 
the RCC on how 
to package 
climate-related 
information in a 
user-friendly 
way 
This activity will 
organize workshops 
with NMHSs and 
CP-CS users in 
priority areas of the 
GFCS to ensure 
better design of 
climate products 
prepared by the 
NMHSs including 
sector-tailored 
forecasts and EWS. 
 
 
Thus, the action 
point identified will 
deliver on a 
capacity-level.  
Ensure gender 
parity in training 
for NMHSs staff  
ensure that 
gender-based 
violence (GbV) 
dimension is 
taken into 
consideration to  
design and 
package 
appropriate and 
user friendly CP-
CS including for 
women and girl 
 
 
50 – 50 M/F 
representation 
in trainings 
To be 
determine
d through 
activity 
1.1.3 
 
Minimum
15 staff 
trained 
from each 
NMHSs, 
with 50 – 
50 M/F 
represent
ation 
AE PMU – 
GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
will determine, 
using action taken 
under activity 
1.1.3, the gender 
disaggregation of 
personnel 
 
The GC will 
ensure 50 – 50 
M/F 
representation, 
where possible, 
and a minimum of 
35% 
representation 
Training attendance 
sheet 
 
NUMBER of: 
existing 
personnel & 
new personnel 
hired, 
disaggregated 
by country and  
by gender 
 
NUMBER of: 
personnel 
trained 
disagg.  
by country and  
by gender 
 
Availability of gender-diverse 
human resource for each NMHSs 
 
Countries are willing to hire more 
female staff for their NMHSs 
3.3.2 
Train 
knowledge 
brokers – 
including NGOs, 
red 
crescent/cross, 
local leaders 
and extension 
officers – and 
representatives 
of sectors in the 
This activity will 
focus on key 
knowledge brokers, 
which are active 
particularly at local 
level for disaster 
risk prevention, 
mitigation and 
response.  
Thus, the action 
point identified will 
Train local 
knowledge 
brokers to 
consider gender 
needs and to 
develop GBV 
prevention 
programmes 
 
Organize 
workshops with 
special sessions 
50 – 50 M/F 
representation 
in trainings 
 
 
Women are 
prioritised in 
workshops 
through gender-
friendly 
sessions  
To be 
determine
d through 
research 
undertake
n under 
activity 
1.4.1 
Trained 
knowledg
e brokers 
mobilized 
at local 
level  
AE PMU – 
GENDER 
CONSULTANT 
to bring forward 
gender research 
undertaken for 
activity 1.4.1 and 
present a list of 
DRM institutions 
and NGOs with 
prior and ongoing 
experience with 
Training attendance 
sheet 
 
Compendium of 
selected and 
potential knowledge 
brokers, with key 
informant/contact 
from each 
NUMBER of: 
Individuals 
trained, 
disaggregated 
by gender 
by institution  
by location and 
by country and  
 
NGOs and other knowledge 
broker entities are willing to 
participate in training provided 
by the project 
Availability of gender-diverse 
human resource in these entities

=== PAGE 217 ===
54 
GFCS areas 
(public and 
private 
organisations) 
on how to 
interpret and 
use CP-CS for 
decision-
making  
deliver on a 
capacity-level. 
for women and 
other 
marginalized 
groups and 
develop 
awareness 
message on GbV 
against women 
and girls. 
gender-
responsive DRM 
and GbV that will 
be vetted and 
selected as 
knowledge 
brokers  
 
(for example:  
C for C in 
Madagascar)  
3.3.3 
Strengthen the 
User Interface 
Platform (UIP) 
Through this 
activity, the project 
will strengthen the 
existing Regional 
Climate Portal 
developed by IOC 
and hosted by 
Seychelles (SMA).  
The products 
developed under 
output 2.3 will be 
made available on 
this platform. 
The platform will 
have a feedback 
mechanism where 
users of CP-CS can 
review the services 
they receive.  
 
Thus, the action 
point identified will 
be at technical-
level.  
Strengthen UIP to 
establish a 
reliable feedback 
mechanism 
between NMHSs 
and CP-CS users 
UIP information 
is shared at 
trainings, 
consultations  
1 
(2019) 
1 
strengthe
ned 
regional 
UIP 
IOC with support 
of PMU 
MoV for this indicator 
will be collected as a 
part of the main 
activity  
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
N/A 
3.3.4  
Support 
SWIOCOFs to 
ensure the 
active 
participation of 
SWIOCOF is 
convened annually 
by IOC. Under this 
activity, SWIOCOF 
will be reviewed by 
meteorological 
Ensure SWIOCOF 
ties in with 
regional and 
national gender-
responsive FCSs  
 
SWIOCOF is 
user-oriented 
and gender-
responsive 
1 
(2019) 
1 
strengthe
ned 
SWIOCOF 
 
IOC with support 
of PMU AE 
GENDER 
CONSULTANT  to 
review the 
SWIOCOF strategy 
MoV for this indicator 
will be collected as a 
part of the main 
activity  
 
Data for this 
indicator will be 
qualitative and 
collected as a 
part of other 
activities 
N/A

=== PAGE 218 ===
55 
climate services 
users 
expert to ensure 
the platform more 
user-friendly.  
 
Thus, the action 
point identified will 
be at technical-
level. 
 
Ensure gender-
equitable 
participation to 
SWIOCOF 
Ideal 
participan
ts: 
50 – 50 
M/F  
 
min: 6 
5 – 35 
M/F 
and identify 
pathways for 
increasing 
women’s 
participation (e.g. 
SWIOCOF will 
cover themes 
which are of 
interest to 
women) 
SWIOCOF 
participation list  
through the 
main Logical 
Framework 
(Section E – FP) 
 
GENDER DELIVERABLE CHART:  CORE OUTPUTS, PERIPHERAL INPUTS TO BE PROVIDED BY THE GENDER CONSULTANT  
 
The Gender Consultant is expected to be hired for 13,5 months at both regional and national level  to provided beaded expertise (full-time expertise not 
required) and their per diem will be capped at 2000 USD/month . 
TENTATIVE GENDER BUDGET LINE: 32500 (apart for activity costs which will include overhead costs required for travel, gender sessions in training, 
validation workshops etc.)  
DELIVERABLE 
RELEVANT FOR: 
EXPECTED 
Months  
START YEAR 
END YEAR 
COST 
GENDER BASELINE REPORT 
 
This is the core deliverable for the GC. It will be 
delivered through Activity 1.4.1. However, it will 
underscore the project implementation phase as 
it will provide the reassessment of the gender 
baseline. The report will be used to update the 
Gender Action Plan presented in Annex 8. 
 
 
COMPONENT 1:  
1.1.3, 1.2.1, 1.2.2, 1.2.3, 
1.3.1, 1.3.2, 1.4.1, 1.4.2, 
1.4.3; 
 
COMPONENT 2:  
2.1.1, 2.3.8; and,  
 
COMPOENT 3:  
3.1.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 
3.2.3, 3.2.4, 3.3.3, 3.3.4 
4 months  
(mid) 2021 
(mid) 2022 
8,000 USD

=== PAGE 219 ===
56 
GENDER ASSESSMENTS 
 
These will be brief assessments which into 
Activities 2.3.2 – 2.3.7. The GC will assist with 
these assessments towards the threshold values 
being determined, hazard and climate 
vulnerability mapping, risk exposure analyses 
etc.  
 
 
 
COMPONENT 2:  
2.3.1 2.3.2, 2.3.3, 2.3.4, 
2.3.5, 2.3.6, 2.3.7  
 
2 months 
Expected start 
with Output 2.3 
Expected end 
with Output 2.3 
4, 000. USD 
GENDER TRAINING MODULE 
 
This deliverable will feed into the activities with 
training components. The GC will deliver a 
gender module for these trainings highlighting 
the importance of gender analyses for EWS, CS 
and hydromet. Particularly, information on user-
based analyses (for example women’s 
participation in agriculture) and gender-disaster 
management nexus will be highlighted. The GC 
has to tune the training module for each 
country. 
 
 
 
COMPONENT 1: 
1.1.3; 
 
 
COMPONENT 2:  
2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.2.1, 2.2.2; 
and,  
 
 
 
COMPONENT 3:  
3.3.1, 3.3.2 . 
5 months 
Expected start 
with Outputs 
2.1 and 3.3 
Expected start 
with Outputs  
2.1 and 3.3 
10,000 USD 
POLICY NOTES 
 
The GC will assist by developing policy notes for 
the Outputs 1.1 and 1.2. Since these outputs will 
focus on legal frameworks and establishing 
institutional arrangements, the GC will step in to 
ensure gender-responsive policies receive de 
jure verification 
 
 
 
COMPONENT 1:  
1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.4. 
1 month 
Expected start 
with Outputs 
1.1 – 1.2 
Expected start 
with Outputs 
1.1 – 1.2 
2,000 USD 
FIELD ACTIVITY 
 
 
 
1,5months 
(mid) 2021 
(mid) 2024 
3,000 USD

=== PAGE 220 ===
57 
These are days allocated for field activities such 
as workshop facilitation, interviews with key 
stakeholders etc.  
–  
 
EXPECTED COST FOR GENDER CONSULTANT (in USD)  
27,000.

=== PAGE 221 ===
58 
7 
Bibliography 
• 
African Development Bank – AfDB (n.a.). Comoros: Country Gender Profile. 
• 
AFD – Agence Française de Développement (2018). Towards a World in Common: AFD Group 2018 – 2022 
Strategy. Policy Document. Accessed 2 August 2019. Available at: https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2018-09-04-
05-09/afd-group-strategy-2018-2022.pdf 
• 
AFD (2019). ‘Gender Equality’. Official Website. Accessed 2 August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.afd.fr/en/page-thematique-axe/gender-equality 
• 
AFD Gender Profiles (Africa). Accessed 20 January 2020. Available at: https://www.afd.fr/fr/ressources/profil-
genre-afrique?fbclid=IwAR104PGZ_TlhVqDdO2ie3V6KeACfxzckkJyajNAUWBCp93m5_4T0UqqKn-M 
• 
African Union Commission – AUC & United Nations Office for High Commissioner of Human Rights – UNOHCR 
(n.a.). Development in Laws since the Maputo Protocol. Report. Accessed 12 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Women/WRGS/DevelopmentsinLawsinfographics.pdf 
• 
Bilbao-Ubillos, J (2011). “The Limits of HDI” in Sustainable Development, (Vol. 21 No. 6). Journal Article.  
• 
Booysen, F. (2002). “An Overview and Evaluation of Composite Indices of Development” in Social Indicators 
Research, (Vol. 59 No. 2). Journal Article. 
• 
Butterfield, R. (2018) ‘Bringing rights into resilience: revealing complexities of climate risks and social conflict’ in 
Disasters. Journal Article. 
• 
CGIAR CCAFS – Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (2013). ‘Investigating Climate 
Information Services through a Gendered Lens’. Working Paper no. 42.  
• 
DIE – Deutsches Institute für Entwicklungspolitik (2009). “Climate Change Adaptation from a Gender Perspective”. 
Discussion Paper.  
• 
EU & C for C (2018). Rapport Final des Activités du Project – Couvrant la Période du 01er Avril 2016 au 31 Mars 
2018. Project Evaluation Report. . 
• 
GCF – Green Climate Fund and UN Women (2017). “Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects”. 
Policy Document. Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/194568/Guidelines__GCF_Toolkit_Mainstreaming_Gender.pd
f/860d1d03-877d-4c64-9a49-c0160c794ca7 
• 
GCF (2018). Updated Gender Policy and Action Plan. Policy Document.  
Accessed 22 April 2019. Available at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/1087995/GCF_B.20_07_-
_Updated_Gender_Policy_and_Action_Plan_2018_2020.pdf/9bd48527-6e35-a72a-2f52-fd401d16d358 
• 
Gender Links, Young Queer Alliance, Media Watch Organization, and SOS Femmes (2018). Report to CEDAW from 
Mauritius. Shadow Report. Accessed 2 August 2019. Available at: 
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CEDAW/Shared%20Documents/MUS/INT_CEDAW_CSS_MUS_32569_E.pdf 
• 
Gender Links (n.a.). ‘Mauritius: VAW Baseline Research’.  
• 
GermanWatch (2019). Climate Vulnerability Index 2019. Report. Accessed 09 September 2019. Available at: 
https://germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202019_2.pdf 
• 
Geske Dijkstra, A. & Hanmer, L. C (2002). “Measuring Socio-Economic Gender Inequality: Towards an Alternative 
to the UNDP Gender Index” in Feminist Economics, (Vol. 6, No. 2). Journal Article. 
• 
Gokulsing, D. and Tandrayen-Ragoobur, V. (2014), "Gender, education and labour market: evidence from 
Mauritius", International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, Vol. 34 No. 9/10 
• 
Government of Mauritius (2017). Health Statistics Report 2017. Government Report. Accessed 03 September 
2019. Available at: 
http://health.govmu.org/English/Documents/2018/ANNUAL%20REPORT%202017%20FOR%20PRINTING.pdf 
• 
Government of Seychelles, Department of Education and Human Resources Development (n.a.) Streaming in 
Seychelles: from SACMEQ research to Policy Reform. Accessed 22 August 2019. Available at: 
http://www.sacmeq.org/sites/default/files/sacmeq/research/Papers%20from%20the%202005%20International%
20Invitational%20Educational%20Policy%20Research%20Conference/leste.pdf

=== PAGE 222 ===
59 
• 
Government of Seychelles (2013). Seychelles Damage Loss and Needs Assessment Report 2013. Report. Accessed 
09 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/Seychelles_DaLA_2013_Floods.pdf 
• 
IFRC – International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (2015). Unseen, Unheard: GBV in 
Disasters. Report.  
• 
ILO (n.a.). ‘ILOSTAT Technical Note’. Online. Accessed 16 August 2019. Available at: https://www.ilo.org/ilostat-
files/Documents/description_LFPR_EN.pdf 
• 
ILO (2016). Key Indicators of the Labour Market. Report. Accessed 01 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---stat/documents/publication/wcms_498929.pdf 
• 
ILOSTAT (2017). ‘Country Profile: Seychelles’. 
• 
The Madagascar Coalition of Civil Society Organization (2015). CEDAW Shadow Report: Madagascar. Accessed 12 
September 2019. Available at: 
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CEDAW/Shared%20Documents/MDG/INT_CEDAW_NGO_MDG_21897_E.p
df 
• 
Neumeyer, E. & Plümper, T. (2007).’The gendered nature of natural disasters: the impact of catastrophic events 
on the gender gap in life expectancy, 1981 – 2002’ in Annals of the Association of American Geographers (Vol. 97, 
No. 3).  
• 
Nelson. V., Meadows. K., Cannon, T., Morton, J., & Martin, A. (2002) ‘Uncertain predictions, invisible impacts and 
the need to mainstream gender in climate change adaptations’ in Gender and Development. Journal Article. 
• 
The New Humanitarian (2013). ‘Small steps in Madagascar’s fight against GBV’. Online News Report. Accessed 03 
September 2019. Available at: http://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/feature/2013/12/10/small-steps-
madagascar-s-fight-against-gender-based-violence 
• 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development – OECD, Development Centre (2019). ‘What is SIGI?’. 
Official Website. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: www.genderindex.org  
• 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). ‘2019 Results’. Official Website. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: 
www.genderindex.org/countries  
• 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). Country Profile: Comoros. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/KM.pdf 
• 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). Country Profile: Madagascar. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/MG.pdf 
• 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). Country Profile: Mauritius. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/MU.pdf 
• 
OECD, Development Centre (2019). Country Profile: Seychelles. Accessed 08 September 2019. Available at: 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/SC.pdf 
• 
Pernmayer, I (2013). “A Critical Assessment of UNDP’s Gender Inequality Index” in Feminist Economics, (Vol. 19 
No. 2). Journal Article. 
• 
ReliefWeb (2019). ‘Comoros Humanitarian Situation Report – Cyclone Kenneth’. Online Report. Accessed 09 
September 2019. Available at: https://reliefweb.int/report/comoros/comoros-humanitarian-situation-report-no-
2-cyclone-kenneth 
• 
UNDESA – United Nations Department of Economics and Social Affairs (2018). LDC Country Profile: Comoros. Brief 
Report. Accessed 1 August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wpcontent/uploads/sites/45/LDC_Profile_Comoros.pdf 
• 
UNDESA (2018). LDC Country Profile: Comoros. Brief Report. Accessed 1 August 2019. Available at: 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wpcontent/uploads/sites/45/LDC_Profile_Madagascar.pdf 
• 
UNDP – United Nations Development Programme (2018). Human Development Reports, ‘Table I: HDI and its 
Components’. Website. Accessed 02 August 2019. Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/HDI 
• 
UNDP (2018). Human Development Reports, ‘Table IV: Gender Development Index’. Website. Accessed 02 August 
2019. Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GDI 
• 
UNDP (2018). Human Development Reports, ‘Table V: Gender Inequality Index’. Website. Accessed 02 August 
2019. Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GII

=== PAGE 223 ===
60 
• 
UNDP & Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative – OPHI (2019). Human Development Reports, 
‘Multidimensional Poverty Index: Developing Countries’. Website. Accessed 06 August 2019. Available at: 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/mpi_2019_table_1.pdf 
• 
UNDP & OPHI (2019). Human Development Reports, ‘MPI Technical Note’. Technical Note. Accessed 06 August 
2019. Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr2019_technical_notes.pdf 
• 
UNDP & OPHI (2019). Global MPI 2019: Illuminating Inequalities. Report. Accessed 15 August 2019. Available at: 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/mpi_2019_publication.pdf 
• 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime – UNODC (2013). World Drug Report 2013. Accessed 23 August 2019. 
Available at: https://www.unodc.org/unodc/secured/wdr/wdr2013/World_Drug_Report_2013.pdf 
• 
UN-OHRLLS – Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing 
Countries, and Small Island Developing States (2015). Small Island Developing States in Numbers: Climate Change 
Edition 2015. Report. Accessed 16 July 2019. Available at: 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/2189SIDS-IN-NUMBERS-CLIMATE-CHANGE-
EDITION_2015.pdf 
• 
UN Women & Government of Seychelles, Ministry of Family Affairs (2019). Seychelles: National Comprehensive 
Review. Report. Accessed 2 August 2019. Available at: https://www.unwomen.org/-
/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/csw/64/national-reviews/seychelles.pdf?la=en&vs=4554 
• 
UN Women & Union Des Comores, Commissariat National à la Solidarité, à la Protection, et à la Promotion du 
Genre (2014). Rapport Pays sur les Progrès Réalisés dans la Mise en Œuvre de la Plateforme D’Action de 
Beijing+25. Government Report. Accessed 2 August 2019. Available at: https://www.unwomen.org/-
/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/csw/64/national-reviews/comoros.pdf?la=en&vs=2402 
• 
USAID (n.a.). Gender and Information Communication Technology (ICTs). Survey Toolkit.  
• 
Accessed 01 October 2019. Available at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/15396/Gender_and_ICT_Toolkit.pdf  
• 
USAID (n.a.). Gender and Information Communication Technology (ICTs). This was particularly true for Comoros – 
where women (in focus group discussions) revealed the lack of access to technology within the household (for 
example, mobile phones). Further research can identify the sociocultural norms informing this, which remains 
beyond the scope of this assessment.  
• 
WEF – World Economic Forum (2018). The Global Gender Gap Report. Report. Accessed 06  
• 
August 2019. Available at: http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2018.pdf 
• 
Wodon, Q. & Bardasi, E. (2006). “Measuring Time Poverty and Analyzing its Determinants: Concepts and 
Applications to Guinea” in Economics Bulletin (Vol. 10, No. 12). Journal Article.  
• 
The World Bank, Human Development Department – Africa (2010). Labour Markets Conditions in Madagascar. 
• 
The World Bank (2012). Country Partnership Strategy: Seychelles. Policy Document. Accessed 17 August 2019. 
Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/524151468165858183/pdf/669190CAS0P1240Official0Use0Only09
0.pdf 
• 
The World Bank, Development Research Group (2013). ‘Gini Index’. Online Databank. Accessed 20 August 2019. 
Available at: 
‘https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI?end=2017&most_recent_value_desc=true&start=1979&view=
chart 
• 
The World Bank, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management (PREM) – Africa (2014). Face of Poverty in 
Madagascar: Poverty, Gender and Inequality Assessment. Report. Accessed 15 August 2019. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/538821468271809604/pdf/781310PRIORITY0English0Apr900May0
12.pdf 
• 
The World Bank (2015). Mauritius: Inclusiveness of Growth and Shared Prosperity. Report. Accessed 17 August 
2019. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23804 
• 
The World Bank, Development Research Group (2015). ‘Women Left Behind? Poverty and Headship in Africa’. 
Working Paper no. 7331. Accessed 10 August 2019. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/277221468189851163/pdf/WPS7331.pdf

=== PAGE 224 ===
61 
•
The World Bank (2016). Shifting Fortunes and Enduring Poverty in Madagascar. Report. Accessed 15 August 2019.
Available at:http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/413071489776943644/pdf/113582-v2-FINAL-PUBLIC-
7817-Madagascar-Poverty-Report.pdf
•
The World Bank (2016). Shifting Fortunes and Enduring Poverty in Madagascar. 
•
The World Bank & Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery – GFDRR (2016). Disaster Risk Profile:
Mauritius. Accessed 09 September 2019. Available at:
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/mauritius.pdf
•
The World Bank (2017). Mauritius: Addressing Inequality through More Equitable Labour Markets. Report.
Accessed 17 August 2019. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29034 
•
The World Bank (2017). Seychelles: Systematic Country Diagnostic. Report. Accessed 20 August 2019. Available at:
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/27559
•
The World Bank & Union des Comores (2017). Comoros Poverty Assessment.
•
The World Bank, Data Help Desk (2018). ‘Poverty Data: National and International Poverty Lines’. Technical Note
(online). Accessed 07 August 2019. Available at:
https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/193309-should-i-use-national-or-international-
poverty-lin for more.
•
The World Bank (n.a.). ‘Seychelles: Country Overview’. Online. Accessed 17 August 2019. Available at:
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/seychelles/overview.
___________________
