=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 21 for Word
producer: Adobe PDF Library 21.1.177
creationDate: D:20210318162301+09'00'
modDate: D:20210318162301+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
16 – 19 March 2021 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 15 
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
18 March 2021 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum III 
Funding proposal package for FP156 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility (ACGF): Green 
Recovery Program"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation. 
 
It is noted that some modifications have been made to reflect the updated scope of coverage 
for the programme.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
59 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
67 
Secretariat’s assessment 
70 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
86 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
95 
Gender documentation 
96

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility (ACGF): Green 
Recovery Program 
Country(ies): 
Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Philippines 
Accredited Entity: 
Asian Development Bank   
Date of first submission: 
[2020/08/14]  
Date of current submission  
[2021/03/18]  
Version number 
V.7.0

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 1 of 56 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 2 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
 
ACGF – ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility 
ACGF GRP – ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility: Green Recovery Program  
ADB – Asian Development Bank 
AE – Accredited Entity 
AIF – ASEAN Infrastructure Fund 
APR – Annual Performance Report 
ASEAN – Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
ASSC – ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community 
CO2 – carbon dioxide 
COVID – coronavirus-related disease 
DSCR – Debt Service Coverage Ratio 
EE – Executing Entity 
EIA – Environment Impact Assessment 
EMP – Environmental Management Plan 
ESMF – Environment and Social Management Framework 
ESMS – Environment and Social Management System 
ESS – Environment and social safeguards 
FIRR – financial internal rate of return  
GCF – Green Climate Fund 
GDP – Gross domestic product 
GESIAP – gender and social inclusion action plan 
GHG – greenhouse gases 
IEE – Initial Environmental Examination 
IFI – International Financial Institution 
MDB – Multilateral development bank 
MW – megawatt 
NDA – National Designated Authorities 
NDC – Nationally Determined Contribution 
NOL – No-objection Letter 
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
PPP – Public-Private Partnerships 
SDG – Sustainable Development Goals 
SPS – Safeguards Policy Statement 
TA – Technical assistance

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 3 of 56 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or private 
sector 
Public 
 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
Not applicable  
 
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets. For 
each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it. The 
total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☒ 
Energy access and power generation:   
 
☒ 
Low-emission transport:  
 
 
 
☒ 
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:  
 
☒ 
Forestry and land use:   
 
 
 
 
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☐ 
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
 
  
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security: 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution:  
33% 
30% 
25% 
12% 
 
 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  
119 million tCO2eq over 
lifespan 
A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  
 
 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  
300 million USD  
 
GCF financing (revolved to 
provide USD 635 million) + 
USD 3,385 of co-financing 
at sub-project level will 
support total investments of 
USD 4,020 million (see C). 
A.9. Project size 
Large (Over USD 250 
million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
300 million USD 
For multi-country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17. 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒ Grant 
20 million  
 
☒ Loan 
280 million 
☐ Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐ Equity  
 
Enter number 
☐ Results-based  
 
     payment 
 
Enter number

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 4 of 56 
 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
The program 
implementation period is 
between 2021 and 2039. 
 
Disbursement  
GCF loans 
• 1st investment phase 
(from GCF to sub-
projects): 2021-2027.  
• 2nd investment phase 
(revolved GCF principal 
to sub-projects): 2028-
2039 
GCF TA grants: 2021 – 
2030 
 
Repayment of GCF funds 
• Repayment of interest 
on GCF loans: 2021 to 
2050  
• Repayment of GCF 
principal: 2038 to 2050 
A.12. Total lifespan 
The program lifespan (from 
first disbursement to final 
repayment) will be for thirty 
(30) years between 2021 
and 2050. 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
ACGF GRP is a distinct 
ADB-managed program 
implemented under the 
ACGF framework. ADB 
internal approval of ACGF 
GRP is expected in June 
2021. 
 
Individual sub-projects have 
their own approval dates, 
with the first project to be 
approved in Q3 2021.  
A.14. ESS category  
I-1  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
1Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme? 
Yes ☐       No2 ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
Asian Development Bank  
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
 
1 ADB regularly discusses pipeline with GCF management and this program has been part of these conversations. 
  
2 Please note that the program – as a post Covid-19 green jobs and green infrastructure recovery package - has been 
discussed with all countries’ representatives, as a matter of urgency, and is currently not reflected in country programs.

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 5 of 56 
 
 
 
Developing countries in Southeast Asia have historically seen their economic growth paired with increased 
carbonization, illustrating significant challenges in balancing economic growth and low-carbon development. 
Electricity demand in the region has grown at 6% year (one of the fastest in the world), largely supported by a 
doubling in fossil fuel use. Carbon intensive growth in Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia is driven by 
industrialization and expanding urbanization, fossil fuels dominating the power supply, and increasing demand for 
passenger and freight transport. Deforestation and forest degradation continues to destroy critical carbon sinks 
across Cambodia, Indonesia and Lao PDR. Southeast Asia also presents fast-changing climatic vulnerabilities 
because of global warming, including increasing average temperatures estimated at between 0.14°C–0.20°C per 
decade since the 1960s, sea-level rising and erosions of coastline, and increase in extreme weather events.  
 
While progress has been made in the last 5 years to scale up green infrastructure, the global COVID-19 crisis 
has severely affected the momentum on climate action that was gathering pace in 2018-19. ADB estimates 
that Southeast Asia’s economy will contract by 4.4% in 2020. With public budgets being diverted to support COVID 
emergency response, government funds for NDC implementation have been slashed, and across the region 
investment in green infrastructure has slowed or stopped completely. In Indonesia alone, public budgets supporting 
renewable energy projects have been reduced by over 40%. ASEAN countries have committed an estimated USD 
250 billion towards COVID-19 response and recovery, but these programs do not support a green recovery, and 
in fact, some may even support a rebound in emissions. Across the region, subsidies have been provided to fossil-
fuel reliant state utilities and enterprises, and some countries have witnessed a roll-back in environmental 
regulations, threatening increased deforestation.  
 
The ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility: Green Recovery Program (ACGF GRP) is an urgently needed 
and pioneering initiative which aims to embed three integrated objectives into the mainstream of countries’ 
economic recovery planning post the COVID-19 pandemic: a) “green infrastructure development”, b) 
“catalyzing of capital” from all sources – commercial, private and public, and, c) urgent need for upscaling such 
efforts through a programmatic approach developing - rapidly - a large pipeline of projects.   
The program’s integrated approach will mitigate against the slowing momentum, and even reversal, of progress 
towards countries mitigation commitments under the Paris Agreement, resulting from the immense pressure to 
direct government budgets towards relief measures to counteract the COVID-19 pandemic. While aimed at 
ASEAN countries, with no “green deal” yet in evidence across most of Asia, the program also has immense 
replication potential in the region. 
The ACGF GRP proposes to meet the above three objectives through a distinct program, associated with the 
ACGF vehicle, which benefits from both strong country ownership and excellent governance systems, given 
that ACGF, as a part of the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund, is owned by all ASEAN member states along with ADB 
and is managed by a skilled ADB team – one of the first such regionally-owned vehicles in the world.  
The proposed ACGF GRP will integrate a) the structuring of innovative leveraged/blended finance models for 
bankability, which best leverage each unit of ACGF GRP funds to catalyze a multiple of capital from other 
sources into projects, b) adherence to global best practices in selecting and setting targets for “Green and 
Priority Green” sub-projects (building on joint MDBs best practice and EU and CBI Taxonomies, developed 
jointly with European and Asian partners), and c) upscaling of capital market instruments for greater access to 
green capital flows. Through a revolving use of funds the program aims to target at least 20 projects over its 
lifecycle, with an emphasis on working with National Development Banks and GCF Direct Access Entities, 
where feasible.  
The ACGF GRP is designed therefore as a highly additional first regional ”Green Recovery” program for Asia, 
without which catalytic low-emission projects would not be prioritized within development programs in the 
region. The program will kickstart a cycle of low emissions’ climate change mitigation investments in the initial 
years of COVID recovery (starting in 2021). It will capitalize on a very limited time window of opportunity to 
influence stimulus packages, help countries to refocus on NDCs, avoid a rebound in emissions and 
environmental degradation, and stimulate growth by creating ‘green’ jobs. With a strong signaling effect to 
governments across the region it will demonstrate practical action for a green recovery by integrating 
international standards for climate impact, thereby paving the way for the development of longer-term low-
carbon project pipelines and creating grounds for broad paradigm shift in Southeast Asia.

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 6 of 56 
 
There is a limited window of opportunity to influence COVID recovery starting in 2021, when multi-year 
stimulus packages will start being rolled out by governments. Rapid action is needed to signal the importance and 
benefits of a green recovery, as well as to prepare and finance high-impact low-emission projects that create green 
jobs and demonstrate how a green recovery can be pursued in the next 5 to 10 years. Should ASEAN governments 
fail to prioritize low-emission choices within COVID-recovery packages starting in 2021, they risk locking-in 
emissions-intensive project pipelines for the next two to three decades. 
 
The ACGF Green Recovery Program (ACGF GRP) proposes a comprehensive, country-owned, multi-
instrument approach to support countries pursue a low-emission COVID-19 recovery path. The program will 
support developing ASEAN countries to refocus on climate change mitigation as part of COVID-19 recovery, 
strengthening alignment with the Paris Agreement and providing the foundation for more ambitious NDCs by: 
• 
Representing the first substantive green recovery program in Southeast Asia, designed to kickstart 
investments through combined support for innovative project model development and provision of de-
risking loan funds. Revolving use of USD 300 million of GCF funds provide USD 635 million in actual GCF 
technical assistance and loans, to leverage a further USD 3.3 billion of co-financing from ADB and other 
partners to support total sub-projects of over USD 4 billion. 
• 
Mobilizing substantial global green capital flows, both through projects as well as through further 
replication of these across the region at scale, by catalyzing a further USD 4 in additional private / 
commercial finance for every GCF USD 1 spent3, through green bonds, hybrid public-private partnerships 
(PPPs) and other innovative financing models.  
• 
Enabling investments in high climate potential infrastructure, expected to directly reduce 119 million 
tonnes CO2 (lifetime emissions) and create at least 340,000 ‘green’ jobs, demonstrating the benefits of 
a green recovery (with co-benefits in terms of gender and social inclusion), thereby supporting 
implementation of low carbon solutions throughout the economy.  
• 
Supporting governments to prioritize low-emission projects within infrastructure pipelines, especially 
in immediate post-COVID recovery (2021 – 2026), strengthening project pipelines, shaping bankability and 
other enabling environment factors that will facilitate further green investments.  
• 
Transforming ADB’s pipeline for the region (around USD 5 to USD 6 billion committed per year), building 
on ADB’s climate operations, to scale up a more ambitious and transformative generation of high-
performing, low-emission projects while tackling the financing challenges emerging from the COVID-19 
crisis. 
The ACGF GRP is a ring-fenced program managed by ADB and associated with ACGF, a vehicle under the 
ASEAN Infrastructure Fund which is owned by ASEAN governments and ADB. Through clear limits on GCF funds 
usage per sub-project (15% - 25%), mandatory co-financing requirements at the sub-project level, and the 
revolving use of funds, the program will ensure the creation of at least $4 billion worth of projects over 30 years. 
Sub-project level co-financing requirements will be fulfilled by ADB before flow of any GCF funds, ensuring that 
sub-project financing needs are met by ADB, either through its own resources (at a minimum) or from other partner 
financial institutions (if available). 
 
Through its association with ACGF, the ACGF GRP is strongly backed by ministries of finance, who will act as 
focal points for the program in their national contexts. The program will place a special emphasis on working with 
National Development Banks and GCF Direct Access Entities like PT SMI, Development Bank of Philippines etc.  
 
Designed to target the major sources of emissions in the region, the ACGF GRP will support multiple sectors 
targeting a) investments that reduce CO2 emissions from fossil fuels (i.e. renewable energy, energy efficiency in 
industry and buildings, low-carbon transport and green multisector projects), and b) greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions from land-use change (reforestation and sustainable forest management, low-carbon agriculture and 
fisheries). Altogether, ACGF GRP investments will support significant progress towards the SDGs, through the 
installation of at least 800 MW of renewable energy capacity; supporting modal shift to railways and public transport 
models, and supporting the management / reforestation of at least 80,000 hectares of forest land.   
 
3 Private and commercial capital catalyzed given here is additional to the total project costs considered in this proposal, and is for expected 
additional capital expenditures covered by private and commercial actors (see D6).

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7 of 56 
 
 
 
4 ASEAN Secretariat 2019, ASEAN Statistical Leaflet 2019, Jakarta. 
5 ASEAN Secretariat 2019, Key Figures 2019, Jakarta. 
6 Ibid footnote 4. 
7 SE Asia energy-related emissions growth was second only to South Asia. Full analysis given in Annex 2B and based on IEA (2019), CO2 
Emissions from Fuel Combustion 
8 IEA (2019), Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2019 
9 Estoque, R.C., Ooba, M., Avitabile, V. et al. The future of Southeast Asia’s forests. Nat Commun 10, 1829 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09646-4  
10 According to the Harmonized IFI dataset for grid CO2 emission factors (2019 update), Indonesia’s electricity footprint (for firm energy) is 
658 gCO2 / kWh, compared with 470gCO2/ kWh in Malaysia, 489gCO2/kWh in the Philippines, 390 gCO2/kWh in Thailand, and 356 
gCO2/kWh in Viet Nam. 
11 Suwin Sandu, Muyi Yang, Teuku Meurah, Indra Mahlia, Wongkot Wongsapai, Hwai Chyuan Ong, Nandy Putra and S. M. Ashrafur 
Rahman(2019), Energy-Related CO2 Emissions Growth in ASEAN Countries: Trends, Drivers and Policy Implications, in Energies, 
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies.  
12 Paltsev et al. 2018. Pathways to Paris: ASEAN. MIT Joint Program Special Report 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
This section presents aggregated trends for the region, building on country profiles provided in annex 2B.  
 
Together, ASEAN countries account for 8.5% of global population (a combined population of 649 million people)4, 
and the fifth largest GDP in the world5. Prior to COVID-19, the region’s GDP tripled in the last two decades, 
growing at 5.3% per year from 2000 to 2018, as a result of a rapid structural transformation. Within the region, 
socio-economic contexts vary widely, with countries like Cambodia and Lao PDR at the lower end of the lower-
middle income bracket, Indonesia, Philippines, at the higher end, and Malaysia classed as an upper-middle 
income country. Despite progress, poverty persists in the region, especially in lower-middle income members, 
ranging from 9-10% in Indonesia, to 21-24% in Lao PDR and the Philippines, in 20176. 
A. BASELINE: CARBON-INTENSIVE ECONOMIC GROWTH WORSENED BY COVID-19 
Increasing energy-related CO2 emissions. Due to increasing dependence on coal and gas-fired power growth 
of energy-related emissions in Southeast Asia was amongst the fastest in the world between 2007 and 2017, 
relative to other regions7. Energy-related CO2 emissions are driven by rising incomes, coupled with urbanization 
and industrialization. Oil for transport and electricity for buildings together have accounted for almost 50% of the 
increase in final energy consumption in the region since 20008.  Electricity demand across ASEAN countries grew 
at 6% in 2019, amongst the fastest in the world, largely supported by a doubling in fossil fuel use, with coal and 
gas fired generation driving increasing electrification. 
 
Persisting deforestation and loss of carbon sinks. Land-use change and agriculture together contributed over 
half the region’s GHG emissions in 2016 (See annex 2B). The region has 15% of the world’s tropical forests, and 
is also a major deforestation hotspot, with a deforestation rate comparable to only that of Latin America. A recent 
analysis9 estimates that Southeast Asia lost 80 million hectares of forest between 2005 and 2015, with most 
carbon stocks lost in Indonesia (62%), and the remaining in Malaysia (17.4%) and Cambodia (4.6%). In Cambodia 
and Lao PDR, which have relatively low energy-related carbon footprints, land-use change related emissions are 
the major source. In Indonesia, despite producing the most carbon intensive electricity in 201910, most emissions 
still come from land use change, largely driven by deforestation of tropical forests.  
 
Insufficient improvements in immediate pre-COVID period. Recent years have shown an improvement in the 
carbon intensity of growth in most countries; however, these are not sufficient to drive a significant paradigm shift 
to achieve decarbonization of the economy as required by the temperature goals of the Paris Agreement.  Modest 
improvements in energy efficiency and clean energy generation in the last decade are not adequate to redress 
the steady growth in emissions in most ASEAN countries over the past 50 years11. Key issues include: 
 
- 
Future emissions gap expected, despite NDCs. Even if all targets in the NDCs were met12, emissions in the 
region would be approximately 415 mt CO2e higher than what would be needed to meet the goals of the 
Paris Agreement, implying that a further 11% reduction in emissions would be needed.

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8 of 56 
 
 
 
13 https://climateactiontracker.org/countries/philippines/ 
14 Infrastructure investment gap estimated at between 3.8% of gross domestic product (GDP) to 4.1% of GDP (when taking climate change 
into account) between 2016-2020 in selected ASEAN member countries. 
- 
Current NDC implementation not on track. With few exceptions (e.g. the Philippines13), ASEAN countries 
are not on target in the implementation of their NDCs and in aligning their climate actions with the Paris 
Agreement.  
- 
Significant investment gap. Countries in the region require USD 210 billion per year between 2016 and 2030 
to support needed investment in climate-compatible infrastructure, and even before the COVID-19 crisis, the 
region faced a substantial investment gap
14. 
 
Major impact of COVID-19 on low-emission investments in the region. The COVID-19 health crisis has had 
a major impact on the region. ADB estimates that the regional economy will contract by 4.4% in 2020, impacting 
countries’ abilities to implement NDCs: 
 
- 
Public budgets diverted to COVID response. Public budgets are increasingly constrained due to support 
needed for COVID-related emergency response, including cash transfers, SME support programs, support 
for state owned companies and banks, support for health care etc.  Public budgets continue to remain the 
major source of financing for low-emission projects, and in 2020, infrastructure investment in the region has 
slowed and even halted in some cases.  
- 
Risk of high-carbon projects taking precedence in COVID recovery. In a rush to scale up recovery, initial 
examples illustrate the risk of governments prioritizing more ‘shovel-ready’ projects which may not 
necessarily have high climate benefits over climate-positive infrastructure projects, which may take more 
time and resources to develop. In Indonesia, for example, public funding for renewable energy projects has 
been reduced by over 40%, while at the same time, fossil-fuel reliant state-owned utilities across the region 
are being subsidized as part of COVID response. 
- 
Private and commercial financing severely affected. The economic downturn has severely impacted 
commercial banks, and private investors are more risk-averse than ever. Foreign direct investment for 
infrastructure across Asia is expected to continue to drop in 2020, and Belt and Road infrastructure 
investments – which have been a major mobilizer of private finance in the region – are expected to be 
delayed. 
The combined challenge for ASEAN countries of rising emissions and the acute shock of COVID-19 on budgets 
and macro-economic profiles of all countries, means that the full range of interventions (policy-based, capacity 
building and financial resources) is required, and that it needs to come fast, systemic and at scale.  
 
B. COUNTERFACTUAL: REBOUND IN EMISSIONS AND LOCK-IN OF CARBON INTENSIVE 
GROWTH  
No evidence of a ‘green deal’ for ASEAN yet. As illustrated in the European Union and Korea, a ‘green deal’ 
for COVID recovery can support economic growth while reducing emissions. Based on recent estimates, ASEAN 
countries have invested over USD 250 billion in economic recovery and response for COVID-19 (see Annex 2B), 
and these stimulus packages provide a major, time-limited opportunity to promote low-emission growth and 
development. However, as yet, there is no evidence of substantial green recovery actions in the region. In fact, 
some COVID-19 response measures explicitly support activities that could cause a rebound in emissions. Bailout 
packages are being considered for airlines (without specific green conditions), and some countries are supporting 
state-owned power utilities heavily dependent on fossil-fuel power generation.  
 
Limited time window to turn the tide on green recovery. Governments need to prioritize a green recovery in 
the immediate post-COVID period (2021-2026) when infrastructure investments planned in Indonesia, Philippines 
and Malaysia, among other countries, begin to restart as a way of promoting growth and jobs. Without GCF 
support, tentative low-emission projects currently in government pipelines (like the projects presented in this 
proposal) which require additional support to develop and finance, risk remaining tentative or being delayed 
indefinitely. Support to create further ‘finance-ready’ low-emission projects, which could take 8-10 months at a 
minimum, must start as soon as possible for these projects to influence planned stimulus packages and programs.

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9 of 56 
 
 
 
15 Climate Analytics. May 2019. Decarbonising South and Southeast Asia: Shifting energy supply in South Asia and South East Asia to non-
fossil fuel-based energy systems in line with the Paris Agreement long-term temperature goal and achievement of Sustainable 
Development Goals. Retrieved from https://climateanalytics.org/media/decarbonisingasia2019-fullreport-climateanalytics.pdf 
16 Caldecott et al. 2018. Carbon Lock-in Curves and Southeast Asia: Implications for the Paris Agreement. Briefing Paper. 
https://www.smithschool.ox.ac.uk/research/sustainable-finance/publications/Carbon-Lock-in-Curves-and-Southeast-Asia.pdf  
17 Ibid. 
18 Managed by ADB under its Urban Financing Partnership Facility, the Trust Fund supports integration of digital solutions into urban 
projects. https://www.adb.org/site/funds/funds/asean-australia-smart-cities-fund 
Lock-in of emissions intensive investment for the next two decades. Lack of investment in a program such 
as ACGF GRP which supports governments to prioritize low-carbon alternatives would result in a quick rebound 
of GHG emissions and lock-in of non-green infrastructure, such as development of coal-fired electricity 
generation, lack of attention towards nature-based solutions, or investment in transport systems that encourage 
private car usage rather than public transport. NDCs will continue to be insufficiently ambitious, and the region’s 
energy intensity may increase or at least decrease more slowly than in other non-OECD countries.  
 
Continuation of carbon-intensive growth trends. The following trends are likely to continue in the face of the 
COVID-19 crisis, without concerted action through programs like the ACGF GRP:  
 
- 
Continued dependence on coal and gas for electricity, and risk of stranded assets. Many ASEAN countries 
– especially Indonesia and Vietnam – continue to expand their coal plant capacity15. Looking forward, an 
analysis16 of current and planned fossil fuel generation plants in ASEAN countries shows that over 83% 
would be incompatible with a carbon budget commensurate with the 1.5°C temperature goal. If all coal power 
plants are built as planned, Southeast Asia is also expected to see about 70,000 emissions-related deaths 
by 2030, with Indonesia and Vietnam expected to experience the highest number of fatalities17. 
- 
Slow scale up of renewables. Non-hydropower renewable sources for electricity generation have increased 
in past years (to around 20% in 2016), especially driven by geothermal in Indonesia and bioenergy across 
the region, however the major potential for solar PV and wind is only starting to be realized, despite falling 
technology costs.  Across all countries in the region the structure of electricity markets, financial health of 
state-owned utilities, and high cost of capital all affect the bankability of projects. In Cambodia and Lao PDR, 
these factors mean that the risks associated with projects are often too high for investors to engage. 
- 
Major focus on road transport. Rapid increase in vehicle ownership and demand for freight has driven up 
demand for oil by more than 50% since 2000. Vehicle ownership reflects a pattern of mobility increasingly 
focused on road transport, with mass transit systems and electrified transport still relatively underdeveloped. 
- 
Lack of comprehensive public transport systems. Other than capital cities like Bangkok, Jakarta or Manila, 
most secondary cities are yet to develop comprehensive public transport systems, and are heavily reliant on 
taxi systems as well as polluting and inefficient vehicles such as jeepneys (in Philippines) or three-wheelers 
(across many countries). 
 
C. COMPLEMENTARITY WITH OTHER CLIMATE FINANCE MECHANISMS   
 
The ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility (ACGF, a facility of the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund [AIF]) is the 
only regionally-owned green finance initiative focused on developing and scaling up climate-positive projects in 
ASEAN countries. Associated with ACGF, and managed by ADB, the ACGF GRP will build on lessons learned 
during the ACGF pilot phase and will benefit from ADB’s long-term and extensive engagement with ASEAN 
countries at both national and regional levels. The program will enhance ADB’s existing climate operations in 
Southeast Asia to finance a new generation of high-performing, low-emission projects while tackling the financing 
challenges emerging from the COVID-19 crisis.  
The program will operate in an established and changing architecture of climate finance in the region, supporting 
activities that build on existing climate finance mechanisms but are qualitatively different.  The ACGF GRP has 
been designed to use climate finance catalytically (without a reliance on grants) to leverage a broader range of 
financing for high-performing low-emission investments, including from the private sector. In this context, the 
program will complement other ASEAN initiatives focused on infrastructure, such as the Master Plan on ASEAN 
Connectivity 2025, by promoting more low-carbon transport and energy. It will also complement other regional 
initiatives such as the ASEAN Australia Smart Cities Trust Fund18, the Southeast Asia Clean Energy Facility, and 
the UK’s ASEAN Low Carbon Energy Programme, by supporting government-backed projects. It will also

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10 of 56 
 
 
complement other regional cooperation initiatives more broadly, such as the Greater Mekong Subregion Climate 
Change and Environmental Sustainability Program (focused on climate policy and environmental management), 
the USAID Green Invest Asia platform (improving forestry and sustainable agriculture investments), and the Cities 
Development Initiative for Asia (supporting the structuring of city-level projects).    
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) 
The high-level vision of the program is ‘ASEAN countries' post-COVID recovery supports low-emission 
infrastructure development’. Supporting this, the goal statement for the ACGF GRP is: if technical and financial 
support is provided to countries to invest in and build a pipeline of low-emission infrastructure that creates green 
jobs during early years of post-COVID recovery (2021 onwards), then countries will pursue COVID-19 recovery 
while meeting NDC targets and contributing to a 1.5 degree pathway. This will happen only because the ACGF 
GRP specifically targets and mitigates risks related to weak enabling environments, constrained public budgets 
and a lack of private investment, which have been exacerbated by COVID-19.

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11 of 56 
 
 
The theory of change for the program is as follows: 
Assumptions:  
• 
Given: the diversion of budgets towards public health and economic stimulus packages due to COVID-19 
and a significant investment gap for sustainable infrastructure in Southeast Asia; 
• 
And that: private financiers risk appetite for low-emission infrastructure in Southeast Asia is at an all-time 
low due to economic recession, and there is a weakening supply of bankable green projects due to weak 
project structuring and development capacity in both the governments and in the private sector;   
• 
And that: economic growth in most ASEAN countries in the past two decades is directly linked to an 
increase in GHG emissions while at the same time vulnerabilities to the adverse effects of climate change 
have also increased;  
Risks and barriers:  
• 
And considering that: shocks in the financial systems due to COVID-19 jeopardize stability and affect cost 
of capital, impacting debt/capital ratios; diversion of public budgets reduces funds available for NDC 
implementation; the regulatory framework is not aligned with low-carbon trajectories; behavioral barriers 
affect awareness and mindsets to prioritize green business models; low technical capacity and skills may 
reduce quality of action.  
Inputs / activities:  
• 
Then it follows that: financing needs to be targeted towards reversing the current trend towards an 
emissions-intensive recovery from COVID-19, through:  
o 
Loan-based de-risking of investments to enhance bankability and leverage resources in renewable 
energy and energy efficiency, low-carbon transport, low-emission forestry and sustainable agriculture, 
and green sustainable urban environments. 
o 
Grant-based technical assistance and advisory support for building innovative financial structures and 
models for low-emission investments with the aim of building a pipeline of ‘finance-ready’ sub-projects 
and linking these to capital markets. This is achieved through a) support for developing and integrating 
innovative green recovery instruments and models b) developing hybrid ow-carbon PPP structures 
and c) supporting the scale-up of climate bonds to mobilize capital for low-emission projects.   
o 
Grant-based technical assistance to strengthen the enabling environment for low-emission 
infrastructure through building knowledge and capacity, especially at local government level, and 
support for policy reform, through a) support for formulation of green recovery strategies, including 
roadmaps for the issuance of climate bonds b) engagement with investors c) enabling ‘Champions’ for 
green finance and d) supporting capacity building to strengthen project implementation.  
• 
This is accomplished:  through a revolving facility that is programmatic and regional in nature, deploys a 
mix of grant resources and loans, and de-risks climate-positive investments to mobilize further investment 
through additional financiers, including ADB and ASEAN countries, rapidly and at scale;   
Outcomes:  
• 
In order to achieve:  
o 
Prioritization of low-emission investments that result in significant GHG emission reduction and the 
creation of green jobs during the COVID-19 recovery period which support target countries in their 
implementation of activities aligned with the Paris Agreement;  
o 
Building a pipeline of transformative and bankable projects that will catalyze climate innovation 
and contribute to the decoupling of economic growth from carbonization in the region;  
o 
Facilitation of the flow of green finance from a range of sources to low-emission infrastructure that 
supports the mobilization of funds at scale;   
o 
Increased knowledge and technological transfer through the strengthening of capacity of 
governments and state-owned enterprises to structure and develop sound projects.  
Paradigm shift:

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12 of 56 
 
 
• 
Which will result in the following paradigm shift that: ASEAN countries mainstream low-emission actions 
into COVID-19 recovery pathways as a result of a stronger enabling framework, innovative technologies 
and multi-instrument financing, which catalyzes investment from public, private and commercial 
sources, creating significant leverage, scalability and replicability.  
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) 
OVERVIEW 
The ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility Green Recovery Program (ACGF GRP) is designed as a 
comprehensive, country-owned, multi-instrument platform to support countries’ transition to a low-emission 
COVID-19 recovery path. The program will support developing ASEAN countries to refocus on the implementation 
of their green finance pathways within the context of COVID-19 recovery, strengthening alignment with the Paris 
Agreement and providing the foundation for more ambitious NDCs.   
ACGF GRP will be managed by ADB, and associated with ACGF, a facility of the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund 
(AIF) that is owned by ASEAN countries and ADB. ACGF GRPs’ association with AIF, the only country-owned, 
regional infrastructure financing initiative of its kind, demonstrates its backing by finance ministries in the region.  
Design principles - programmatic, catalytic, maximizing climate impact 
The ACGF GRP will help targeted ASEAN developing member countries to prioritize post-COVID infrastructure 
investments that have high climate-positive / green impacts, are bankable and that mobilize private capital. The 
key design features are as follows:  
(i) Programmatic response, which (when compared to project-by-project financing) is critical to rapidly 
finance post-COVID climate projects at the scale needed and capitalize on the window of opportunity 
posed by COVID-19 recovery stimulus packages. The program enables the development of a portfolio of 
sub-projects with common criteria and themes, as well as efficiency in financing administration, while 
maintaining relevant safeguards.  
(ii) Clear focus on transformational, high-potential climate and green sub-projects, by integrating portfolio 
climate performance targets, promoting sub-projects that meet global best practice performance 
thresholds on emissions reductions, and creating performance incentives by linking a higher share of 
financing for sub-projects with higher impact potential, as measured by climate indicators.  
(iii) Combined structuring and financing, which helps to identify low-carbon sub-projects, proactively structure 
innovative technical and financial models to maximize their CO2 mitigation potential early in the project 
cycle and provide catalytic financing for these to improve their bankability. This combined support 
addresses structural gaps across the infrastructure life cycle to create multiple low-carbon projects.  
(iv) Emphasis on bankability, blended and leveraged finance, using innovative approaches (with more 
innovative products introduced over time) for creating bankable financial models over a project’s 
lifecycle, and by capitalizing on ACGF’s pool of existing capital and financing partnerships with other 
development partners, to mobilize private capital from commercial banks, investors and PPPs.  
(v) Emphasis on partnerships with National Development Banks and GCF DAEs, through proactive 
engagement with PT SMI, Development Bank of Philippines, Land Bank Philippines, Cambodia Rural 
Development Bank and other state-backed financing institutions to originate concepts for ACGF GRP 
sub-projects. 
(vi) Providing financing responsive to country context in the face of COVID-19 economic downturn, by linking 
pricing to country socio-economic context (as measured by GDP per capita at purchasing-power-parity 
levels), providing longer grace periods to address expected depressed project revenues in the medium-
term future.   
 
Structure

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13 of 56 
 
 
Through the ACGF GRP, GCF financing of USD 300 million (USD280 million loans + USD20 million technical 
assistance grants) will be used in a revolving structure with principal repayments from the first investment phase 
supporting subsequent investments. Overall, through this revolving structure, USD 635 million of GCF funds (USD 
300 million GCF contribution + USD 335 million revolved GCF loans) will leverage over USD 3.3 billion in ADB 
financing to support 20 low-emission sub-projects with total costs of USD 4 billion.  At a sub-project level, ADB 
will be responsible for mobilizing co-financing for ACGF GRP funded project of up to USD 3.3 billion from its own 
funds through country program allocations, and / or from other development partners, as required and appropriate 
for the sub-project.  
The revolving structure will a)  facilitate maximizing the catalytic effect of GCF financing to support a substantial 
pipeline over a 30-year lifespan b) progressively support higher-performing low-emission sub-projects over time, 
commensurate with increasing climate ambition over time c) progressively utilize more sophisticated innovative 
structures more widely over time. 
 
Structure of ACGF GRP 
 
Components 
Unlocking finance flows at scale into a 
pipeline of low-emission sub-projects is a 
critical need for the region to have a 
meaningful post-COVID green recovery.  
ACGF GRP therefore proposes three 
complementary 
components 
targeting 
project-level city/sector level and national 
level challenges to the flow of capital 
Component 1 focuses on financing priority 
green sub-projects, and Components 2 and 
3 aim to use technical assistance grants in 
creating the access to finance, policy, 
knowledge and capacity enablers that will a) 
ensure the scaling up of capital flows b) 
ensure projects are implemented well to 
deliver the projected climate and other 
impacts.

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14 of 56 
 
 
 
19 Energy-related emissions from fossil-fuel combustion make up just under 40% of the region’s emissions (1.3 billion 
tonnes CO2 in 2016), and within this, 46% comes from electricity production, 26% from transport and the remainder from 
industry and buildings. Land-use change emissions make up an additional 40% of the region’s emissions. See Annex 2B. 
COMPONENT 1:  PROVISION OF LOANS FOR DE-RISKING LOW-EMISSION PROJECTS 
GCF loans will complement ADB financing, and financing from AIF and other development partners (as 
appropriate), to de-risk funds to improve the bankability of low-emission infrastructure projects.  
Sector focus  
The priority focus areas for the program have been identified by an analysis of the climate change baselines in 
the region and an assessment of sectors where financing mechanisms can have most impact. The use of energy 
(electricity production, transport, industry and buildings) and land-use change (forestry and agriculture sectors) 
are responsible for the majority of the region’s emissions19. Commensurate with this, the priority sectors for 
investment in the region are as follows, with every sub-project meeting project-level criteria and performance 
thresholds (as applicable) for GHG reductions and environmental sustainability: 
Table 1: Sectors and sub-sectors included in the program  
SECTOR 
TYPES OF SUB-PROJECT INTERVENTIONSab 
RENEWABLE 
ENERGY & ENERGY 
EFFICIENCY 
• Renewable energy systems 
• Energy efficiency in industry and buildings 
• Energy efficiency in transport 
• Energy efficiency in agriculture sectors 
• Energy storage and transmission to support increased renewable integration into the grid 
LOW-CARBON 
TRANSPORT 
• Public transport systems: light rail, metro rail, bus rapid transit  
• Modal shift and inter-urban railway development  
• Active transport systems (including cycling and walking)  
• Electric vehicle infrastructure 
SUSTAINABLE 
AGRICULTURE AND 
NATURAL 
RESOURCES 
• Reforestation and mangrove management 
• Agro-forestry projects that promote restoration 
• Energy efficiency / reduce energy consumption / carbon intensity of agriculture and fisheries 
• Integration of renewable energy in agriculture and fisheries  
• Carbon sequestration (contribute to increasing the carbon stock in the soil or avoiding soil carbon loss) 
• Reducing non-CO2 emissions from livestock management 
URBAN AND 
MULTISECTOR 
• Brownfield energy efficiency improvement in water & wastewater systems and low-carbon / energy efficient 
greenfield water & wastewater systems  
• Renewable energy in water supply and waste-water systems 
• Waste management: Separate collection and transport of source-segregated waste streams, material 
recovery from waste stream, waste-to-energy from mixed residual municipal waste or similar 
a This list is consistent with the Joint MDBs-IDFC Common Principles for Climate Mitigation Finance Tracking taxonomy of eligible sectors 
b All sub-projects must meet project-level eligibility criteria (see below) and performance thresholds (as applicable) for GHG reductions and 
environmental sustainability. 
Portfolio-level performance targets and metrics 
The following program-level targets will guide the allocation of investments: 
(i) GHG reduction: sub-projects approved with the potential to reduce 119 million tonnes CO2 (lifetime 
emissions) 
(ii) Performance: 45% of sub-projects over time will classify as ‘Priority Green’, meeting global best practice 
thresholds for GHG reductions 
(iii) Green jobs: 340,000 green jobs created by ACGF GRP sub-projects  
(iv) Gender and social inclusion:  80% of sub-projects will directly advance gender and social inclusion

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15 of 56 
 
 
 
20 ADB will mobilize all co-financing needs for sub-project to ensure the project reaches financial close, demonstrated by standard ADB 
formal documentation. These needs will either be fulfilled by ADB’s own resources, or if feasible and required by the sub-project, by ASEAN 
Infrastructure Fund / ACGF and other partner financial institutions will be sought. In all cases, a minimum of 30% of ADB co-financing will 
be required for every sub-project.   
(v) Leverage: Ratio of GCF funds to other funds (1:6) 
 
Project-level eligibility criteria and requirements 
All ACGF GRP sub-projects must meet the following eligibility criteria, based on indicators and thresholds set out 
in the ACGF Investment Principles and Eligibility Criteria (see below and Annex 23): 
(i) 
Countries: ADB development member countries in the Southeast Asia region i.e. Cambodia, Indonesia, 
Lao PDR, Malaysia, and Philippines.  
(ii) 
Borrowing entities: sovereign or sovereign-guaranteed entities (e.g. government owned entities, special 
purpose vehicles (SPVs) or state-owned enterprisesPP concessionaire SPVs, etc.) 
(iii) 
ACGF GRP financing: no more than 15% or USD 25 million for a ‘Green project’ or 25% or USD 40 million 
for a ‘Priority Green project’, with the maximum allocation per sub-project limited to USD 50 million per 
sub-project. 
(iv) 
Co-financing: confirmed co-financing for total sub-project costs, including at least 30% co-financing from 
ADB own funds20, with the remaining co-financing from ADB own funds, AIF/ACGF and other financing 
sources, as relevant and appropriate for the sub-project.   
(v) 
Climate additionality / impact: Classification as a ‘Green’ or ‘Priority Green’ project according to ACGF 
Investment Principles and Eligibility Criteria, with every project a) meeting a minimum threshold for climate 
finance b) demonstrating a reduction in GHG emissions against a baseline or meeting global best practice 
performance thresholds (for Priority Green projects) and c) demonstrating a contribution to another 
environmental objective. 
(vi) 
Bankability: Potential for support to improve financial viability / sustainability & bankability as a result of 
ACGF GRP support, with each project assessed for an average loan life debt service coverage ratio, 
greater than 1.05 and a positive net present value calculated over the subproject’s lifecycle;   
(vii) Private capital catalyzation: Potential to catalyze resources from private, commercial or institutional 
sources, of at least 10% (of estimated capital expenditure at the outset) at any time over the first 8 years, 
as part of capital expenditure or operations and maintenance.  
(viii) Green jobs: Potential to create direct and indirect green jobs in support of COVID-19 economic recovery 
In addition, the following requirements will apply to all sub-projects: 
(ix) 
Safeguards: Compliance with ADB’s safeguards policies as outlined in the ACGF GRP environmental and 
social management framework (see Annex 6). 
(x) 
Risk Assessment: Each qualified project would be screened per ADB’s standard operational and due 
diligence guidelines including for legal, financial and integrity risks (see Section F). 
 
A stepwise approach will be followed to establish climate performance and additionality through the 
application of the ACGF Investment Principles and Eligibility Criteria (see Table 2): 
• 
Screening of eligible ‘climate change mitigation’ activities against a detailed taxonomy embedded in 
established climate finance tracking systems within ADB. ADB systems build on Joint MDBs-IDFC 
Common Principles for Climate Mitigation Finance Tracking, including the taxonomy of eligible sectors, 
which outlines which activities (under a project) can be classified as climate change mitigation activities. 
This taxonomy is updated by the joint MDBs group to take account of changes to technologies and 
investments, and the latest update also integrates criteria for Paris Alignment. Annex 23 and additional 
documents provide more information on these.    
• 
Selection of ‘high climate impact’ sub-projects using climate finance thresholds. As the ACGF GRP 
considers projects across a range of development sectors, climate finance thresholds (60% for a green

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16 of 56 
 
 
 
21 The use of climate finance thresholds is unique to the ACGF approach. The thresholds (60% for a green project and 90% for a priority 
green project) are based on an assessment of historical ADB projects in Southeast Asia, and typical climate finance shares per project. 
project and 90% for a priority green project)21 are used to select sub-projects that address mitigation as a 
“core” goal (vis-à-vis a co-benefit). Climate finance is assessed for all ADB projects during project 
preparation, based on a rigorous and detailed climate change assessment which outlines and justifies 
which components classify as climate finance or not. These assessments are conducted by project teams 
and reviewed by experts in ADB’s Sustainable Development and Climate Change department.   
• 
Assessment of potential climate impact. Potential GHG reductions from sub-projects are then assessed, 
building on ex-ante estimates prepared during sub-project preparation. Priority Green sub-projects are 
expected to represent best practice in their sub-sector by meeting any one of the following: a) achieving 
international best practice thresholds (e.g. EU Sustainable Finance Taxonomy or Climate Bond Initiative 
criteria – see Table 3), b) demonstrating a 10% improvement in performance against other similar low-
emission projects, or c) demonstrating a clear alignment with a 1.5 degree pathway. Project-level GHG 
assessments follow methodologies established in the joint IFI working groups on GHG emissions tracking, 
as well as existing ADB guidelines. 
• 
Assessment of potential ‘other green’ impact. Broader environmental additionality of sub-projects is 
established through assessment against additional green indicators, with all sub-projects expected to 
demonstrate contributions to improved land, air or water quality; enhanced resource efficiency of or 
sustainable management or protection of natural resources, ecosystems or biodiversity. 
Table 2: ACGF Criteria for Green and Priority Green infrastructure  
 
Green projects 
Priority Green projects 
Definition 
Must show (i) a demonstrable contribution to climate change mitigation, and (ii) a contribution to environmental 
sustainability. One of the primary objectives of the project must be to reduce GHG emissions. 
Climate change 
mitigation criteria 
Eligible investments would qualify as climate change 
mitigation finance as per the Joint MDBs-IDFC 
Common Principles for Climate Mitigation Finance 
Trackinga 
 
They should: 
(i) be included in the list of eligible categories and/or 
activities (in the Common Principles), 
(ii) demonstrate a reduction in GHG emissions 
against a baseline scenario, and  
(iii) at least 60% of the total project cost should qualify 
as climate financeb 
Additional screening criteria:  
(i) At least 90% of the total project cost should qualify as 
climate financeb 
And any one of the following:  
(ii) alignment with a long-term low-emission pathway in 
the country 
(iii) an improvement in performance compared with other 
similar investments in the country or region (e.g. 10% 
additional reduction in GHG emissions vs. other 
similar projects), or 
(iv) meet international best practice thresholds for similar 
investments (e.g. as given in the EU Sustainable 
Finance Taxonomy or other) 
Environmental 
sustainability 
criteria 
Demonstrate a quantitative (through the use of relevant, project-specific indicators) or qualitative assessment of 
contribution toward an (i) improvement of air quality, (ii) improvement of water quality, (iii) promotion of healthy 
ecosystems and biodiversity, or (iv) promotion of more efficient use of resources. 
a MDBs and IDFC. 2015. Common Principles for Climate Mitigation Finance Tracking. Version 2. 15 June. 
https://www.eib.org/attachments/documents/mdb_idfc_mitigation_common_principles_en.pdf. 
b This is to ensure priority is given to efforts to promote investments where the principal aim is reducing emissions. 
 
Table 3: Non-exhaustive selection of Best Practice Thresholds 
Category 
Activity 
Potential thresholds 
EU Sustainable Finance Taxonomy 
CBI Climate Bond Taxonomy 
Renewable 
Energy 
All renewable energy 
technologies (in general) 
Net GHG reductions 
No threshold 
Geothermal 
Direct emissions less than 100 g CO2e/kWh 
(life cycle emissions) 
Direct emissions less than 100 g 
CO2/kWh 
Hydropower 
Direct emissions less than 100 g 
COc2e/kWh (life cycle emissions) 
Direct emissions less than 
100gCO2/kWh 
Lower-carbon 
and efficient 
Transmission and 
distribution systems 
Direct connection of low carbon electricity 
generation below the threshold of 100 g 
CO2e/kWh, measured on LCE basis 
Infrastructure supports the integration of 
renewable energy or energy efficiency 
systems and their load-balancing

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17 of 56 
 
 
energy 
generation 
Energy efficiency 
Energy efficiency 
improvements in existing 
commercial, public and 
residential buildings 
At least 30% reduction in emissions 
compared to the baseline performance of the 
building before the renovation 
A substantial reduction in g CO2/m2 
because of upgrade or retrofit 
Vehicle energy efficiency 
in passenger vehicles 
Direct emissions are below 50 g CO2e/p-k 
Vehicle meets universal g CO2/p-km 
threshold based on International Energy 
Agency Mobility Model data 
Vehicle energy efficiency 
in freight vehicles 
Low-emission heavy-duty vehicles with 
specific direct CO2 emissions of less than 
50% of the reference CO2 emissions of all 
vehicles in the same sub-group are eligible. 
Vehicle meets universal g CO2/p-km 
threshold based on International Energy 
Agency Mobility Model data 
Transport 
Urban transport modal 
change 
No threshold for “zero direct emissions” 
activities (e.g., light rail transit, metro, tram, 
trolleybus, bus, and rail). Direct emissions 
are below 50 g CO2e/p-km 
Public walking and cycling, Bus rapid 
transit systems – no threshold 
Railways (passenger) 
Direct emissions are below 50 g CO2e/p-km 
Passenger transport system meets 
universal g CO2/p-km threshold 
Railways (freight) 
Emissions (g CO2/t-km) are 50% lower than 
average reference CO2 emissions of heavy 
duty vehicles.  
Transport meets universal g CO2/t-km 
threshold 
Sustainable 
agriculture and 
natural resources 
Reforestation and 
mangrove management 
 
Demonstrate maintenance and/or increase of 
carbon sinks + compliance with SFM 
practices disclosed every 5 years & 
independently verified + no conversion of 
natural land after 2008 
Demonstrated sequestration potential + 
FSC/ PEFC certification / established 
management plan + Free Informed Prior 
Consent standards (e.g. ILO, FSC, FAO 
etc.) 
Sustainable forest 
management 
Demonstrate maintenance and/or increase of 
carbon sinks + compliance with SFM 
practices disclosed every 5 years & 
independently verified + no conversion of 
natural land after 2008 + regenerate 
harvested forests 
No natural land conversion after 2010 + 
FSC / PEFC certification + meeting Free 
Informed Prior Consent standards (e.g. 
ILO, FSC, FAO etc.) 
Reduce energy 
consumption / carbon 
intensity of agriculture and 
fisheries 
Reduction in GHG emissions over specified 
period (i.e. 2020-2030: 20%; 2020-2040: 
30%; 2020-2050: 40%) / essential 
management practices in place + above and 
below ground carbon stocks to be increased 
over 20-year period + no conversion of high 
carbon stock ad after 2008.  
No conversion of high carbon stocks 
land + no clearing of woody vegetation 
over 3m in height + meet climate-
aligned GHG emission reduction over 
investment period (i.e.24% by 2030, 
36% by 204, 47% by 2050) 
CBI = Climate Bonds Initiative, CO2e = carbon dioxide equivalent, g = gram, GHG = greenhouse gas, kWh = kilowatt-hour, LCE = Life-cycle 
emissions, m2 = square meter, p-km = passenger per kilometer, t-km = ton-kilometer. 
Note: this table serves as an illustration of thresholds available and is not an exhaustive list of all the thresholds available in the EU Taxonomy on 
Sustainable Finance and the Climate Bond Taxonomy. 
 
 
Financing approach and terms 
The program will support loans to low-emission projects that will enable these to cross a predefined bankability 
threshold to attract private sector and commercial funds in the long term. 
The proposed funding terms offered by the program consider the following issues: 
• 
Climate performance, with a higher quantum and proportion (per project) of GCF funds for sub-projects 
that meet global best practice thresholds for emissions reductions (classified as Priority Green), thereby 
supporting their development and implementation over time.  
• 
Balancing minimum concessionality and delivering climate benefit through the use of loans (rather than 
grants), with clear competitive advantage of the pricing of GCF funds relative to other external public

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18 of 56 
 
 
 
22 E.g. interest rate for ADB’s Ordinary capital resources (OCR) loans which do not necessarily promote low-emission investments are as 
follows: Philippines and Indonesia would be around 1.6%, based on a 15-year fixed LIBOR rate of 1.1% + 50bps spread. For Cambodia or 
Lao PDR, ADB’s loans to concessional lending countries are priced at 1% during the grace period and 1.5% during the amortization period. 
See https://www.adb.org/what-we-do/public-sector-financing/lending-policies-rates. 
23 For example, sovereign loans in USD or EUR are subject to a) fees by the government (e.g. sovereign guarantee fee) and b) currency 
exchange fees, with currency swaps only available for short periods such 5 years or 10 years (depending on the country). This means that 
the final pricing (of sovereign loans) to the projects in local currency is often significantly higher (5%-7%), and in cases, at par with 
sovereign bond yields or even market priced commercial funds.  
sources, to incentivize governments to re-prioritize the financing of low-emission projects during COVID-
19 recovery 
• 
Country socio-economic context, with lower pricing for ADB-concessional lending countries (i.e. 
Cambodia and Lao PDR), where mobilizing commercial funds for green infrastructure projects can be 
more challenging.  
• 
COVID-recovery context: Longer loan grace periods are included to reflect a post-COVID recovery period 
with delayed construction (in 2021/2022) and depressed revenues from projects in initial years. 
The proposed terms for GCF financing are as follows:  
Table 4: Proposed lending terms for GCF funds in the ACGF Green Recovery Program 
Countries 
Currency 
Interest 
rate 
(fixed)i 
Tenor 
(years)ii 
Grace 
period 
(years)iii 
Principal 
repayment 
period 
(years) 
Fund usage limitsiv 
Green 
projects 
Priority Green 
projects 
Cambodia and Lao PDR  
USD 
0% 
15 
8  
7 
USD25 
million or 15% 
of overall 
project cost 
USD40 million 
or 25% of 
overall project 
cost 
Indonesia, Philippines 
USD 
0.50% 
15 
7 
8 
Malaysia 
USD 
1.00% 
15 
6 
9 
i This is the pricing offered to borrower governments. It includes GCF service fees as follows: for Cambodia and Lao PDR, no service fees during 
the first phase of investments, while a 0.25% service fee will be charged for sub-projects in the second; for Indonesia and Philippines, 0.25% 
service fees; for Malaysia 0.25% services fees during the first phase of investments,  while a 0.50% service fee will be charged for sub-projects in 
the second phase.  
ii Commitment charge of 25 basis points would apply on undisbursed loan amounts.  
iii During the grace period, interest payments would be made but not principal repayment. 
iv Portfolio level funding cap: in line with prudential norms, financial support from GCF funds will be capped at USD 50 million per sub-project 
 
The pricing proposed is based on extensive discussions with ASEAN governments during the ongoing 
implementation of the ACGF pilot phase in 2019-2020, and takes into account the following issues: a) Considering 
increasing fiscal deficit concerns, governments are looking to limit sovereign guarantees to all but the most 
competitive sources of finance which can demonstrate development impact and leverage / crowding of other 
sources; b) Limited revenue models in projects, especially resulting from the COVID-19 crisis, require 
competitively priced funds22 especially if attempting to usher in untested or new technologies which are required 
to promote a transformational shift for a sector; c) Funds need to be more competitive than local currency funds 
available domestically in many countries (e.g. Indonesia, Philippines, Malaysia etc.) in order to incentivize the 
scaling up of low-carbon alternatives23.  
The pricing offered is competitive for sovereign operations and compares well with the rates offered by similar 
development and multilateral institutions active in Asia. The interest rates that are being proposed strike the right 
balance between ensuring the viability of the project and the implementation of the climate actions that are 
proposed. They also strike the right balance between the incentives that are offered and the ability to attract (i.e. 
crowding in rather than crowding out) further private sector investments. These parameters have driven the basis 
of the calculation to apply the appropriate pricing while maintaining minimum concessionality.  
Funding instruments and use of funds 
Funds will be provided, alongside ADB sovereign loans, to borrower governments, for financing specific sub-
projects, either directly or through a financial intermediary. In either case, provision of funds will be to sub-projects 
that comply with the eligibility criteria and conditionalities given here.

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19 of 56 
 
 
The most likely use of funds will be to cover capital costs of a project to improve the financing cost (i.e.  weighted 
average cost of capital), however, over time, new products and models will also be explored to meet the needs 
of sub-projects.  
• 
Debt products: In the first phase of investments, 100% of GCF funds would be lent to Green and Priority 
Green sub-projects to finance capital expenses, in the form of senior debt 
• 
Completion guarantees / convertible debt: In the second phase of investment, GCF funds would still be 
lent to sovereign governments or against sovereign guarantees, but based on the specific project’s 
requirements, these funds could be used in sub-projects to support government entities to provide 
completion guarantees (wherein when a guarantee is called, it is a debt in the project’s or the project 
sponsor’s books) or debt products that could be converted to equity prior to exit (with a premium). 
Incremental costs supported by GCF will be calibrated to cover the additional costs of actions needed to 
implement low-carbon infrastructure in the target countries, from the established baseline (which is country 
specific). Where justified, GCF financing will cover for the higher cost of investing in transformative climate 
mitigation technologies; to tackle existing externalities, barriers and risks of investing in green infrastructure, thus 
raising the level of the ambition in this program.  
Priority investments and project pipeline 
The indicative sub-project pipeline for the program is given in in Table 5, drawn from firm and expected projects 
in ADB’s country operations business plans and pipelines. For the first investment phase (2021 to 2027), four 
sub-projects have been initially identified, with a likely larger demand for funds beyond these, considering ADB’s 
lending pipeline to the countries in the proposal is around 3-4 billion per year. The identified projects include 2 
‘shovel-ready’ projects (i.e. those where feasibility studies have been completed or are close to completion) with 
high likelihood of being financed by the program in 2021. Beyond this, an additional 2 project concepts have been 
identified (included in ADB’s country pipelines), which could also qualify for support from the program in 2022 and 
2023, subject to the completion of feasibility studies and full screening against eligibility criteria.  A larger projects 
pipeline for the program is currently being built for 2022 and 2023, and may possibly include urban and inter-
urban railway projects in Indonesia and Philippines, a renewable energy project in Indonesia, and a water 
resources efficiency / management project in Cambodia. 
Note, several sub-projects shown here risk being delayed due to COVID-19 or not prioritized as part of COVID 
recovery, and GCF support through the ACGF GRP will be important to ensure these projects are financed and 
implemented as planned. 2022 and 2023 sub-projects, especially, will also benefit from technical assistance to 
improve the climate impact potential early in the project cycle, starting in 2021. Annex 2 includes project reports 
(for the firm sub-projects), and project concepts (for the long-list sub-projects). 
Table 5: ‘Firm’ sub-projects with a high likelihood of financing in 2021 / early 2022 
Project 
Readiness & status 
SDG Indonesia One Green Finance Facility (Total project cost: 150 USD million) 
This project aggregates and will finance a pipeline of pre-identified small-scale subnational and city climate change 
mitigation projects including micro-hydro, waste-to-energy, and electric vehicles, mobilizing significant private 
capital.  The Facility is focused on ‘shovel’ ready sub-projects (as outlined in the project documentation in Annex 
2A1) that will allow for a swift and effective disbursement of funds to the end beneficiary. As part of Indonesia’s 
flagship SDG Indonesia One platform the project will support PT SMI in scaling up their green finance operations 
and contribute significantly to Indonesia’s mitigation targets.   
Expected approval: 
Q2 2021. Feasibility 
completed, project 
documents being 
prepared for internal 
approval. 
Philippines: Davao Public Transport Modernization Project (Total project cost: 358 USD million) 
The project will support the City of Davao to invest in a sustainable and modern public transport system, by 
developing a high priority bus system to replace the use of jeepneys, tricycles and other vehicles. The project will 
develop the infrastructure for the bus system, strengthen the city’s traffic management system, and put in place 
performance-based models to improve the efficiency of bus operations. The project will improve urban mobility, 
reduce emissions, incorporate health-related measures (in response to COVID-19), and support replicable models 
to mobilize private investment for public transport. 
Expected approval: 
Q4 2021. Feasibility 
study ongoing 
(completion delayed 
due to COVID-19 
lockdown).

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20 of 56 
 
 
Table 6: Pipeline sub-projects which may qualify for support in 2022-2023 
Project 
Total project 
cost (USD 
million) 
Expected 
approval 
Cambodia: Blue Carbon Project  
The project will set up a catalytic green financing model to support ‘blue’ carbon sequestration in four 
coastal provinces in Cambodia. The project will pilot the model to mobilize financing from banks, micro-
finance institutions, food companies and SMEs, for investments in restoration and replanting of 11,770 ha 
of mangrove forest and improving the energy efficiency of marine and coastal fisheries value chains and 
infrastructure. The project will also support improved management of coastal and marine ecosystems by 
local community fisheries entities. The project is expected to result in substantial carbon savings of 1.6 
mtCO2e over its lifetime. 
125 
Q4 2021 
Cambodia: Energy Efficiency Sector Development Program 
The project will support the Government of Cambodia a) draft and enact a portfolio of policies and 
regulations on energy efficiency, and b) finance projects to improve the energy efficiency, with a possible 
focus on space cooling in the services sector, residential sector and public lighting. The project will be an 
important step to unlocking energy efficiency market potential in Cambodia. 
80 
2022 
 
 
COMPONENT 2: DEVELOPMENT OF REPLICABLE AND INNOVATIVE CLIMATE FINANCE 
MODELS AND STRUCTURES  
With ASEAN still only a small part of global green finance flows (as evidenced by its small share of global green 
and sustainable bonds and green debt), in order to ramp up access to green finance, countries – not just at the 
sovereign level but also at sub-sovereign levels - need to build three financing instruments: a) green and 
sustainable bonds (issued by government entities); b) hybrid PPP models for renewable energy and 
sustainable cities (hybrid denoting greater de-risking models over traditional PPP models); c)  innovative green 
recovery financing mechanisms (such as green securitization).  
Component 2 will mainstream the above financing instruments at a) city or municipal government, b) state-
owned enterprises (SOEs), and c) sovereign sectoral ministries in targeted countries, and help generate a 
pipeline of investments in the region that demonstrate the potential of innovative financing mechanisms and 
instruments – such as green bonds and hybrid PPPs - to raise capital at scale. Based on the financing needs of 
each investment, financing provided under Component 1 will be used to de-risk these investments to realize their 
GHG reduction potential.  
Approaches and methodologies will differ depending on each country and will need to address the common 
barriers faced by low-emission projects in accessing financing: a lack of well-defined underlying revenue streams, 
lack of credit worthiness and track record of state-backed project sponsors, high perception of risk by private 
investors and a lack of prioritization of low-emission alternatives by governments.  
Activity 2.1 Scaling up Green and Sustainable Bonds (for sovereigns, cities and SOEs) 
There is a major need to scale up green and sustainable bonds from governments, cities and SOEs, across all 
the countries covered in this proposal. Green bond issuances across ASEAN are increasing but are still only a 
minor share of global issuances of green bonds (3% of global green bonds issuances in 2019). Within the region, 
issuances have been led by Singapore and Indonesia, with less activity seen in other countries. So far, few 
issuances have come from governments and sovereign-backed entities, and only two issuances have been at 
the municipal level. To this end, ACGF GRP will aim to support the development of roadmaps for the issuance 
of at least 4 green and/or sustainable bonds (including project bonds where possible), helping to mobilize 
access to capital market resources for sponsors and projects supported under Component 1.  
Investor and Country Appetite Prioritization:  An origination and prioritization effort will be undertaken rapidly 
with all countries in the proposal to identify an initial shortlist of city, sovereign, and SOE entities to support in

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21 of 56 
 
 
development of bond roadmaps.  This prioritization will link to and support sub-sectors, cities and SOEs targeted 
to receive financing under Component 1.  Key factors will include credit ratings or shadow credit ratings, financial 
positions, underlying green-eligibility of projects to be financed, local regulations, credit enhancement potential 
and investor interest in sector or country. This effort will build on work already commenced by the ACGF team in 
its work in supporting bonds issuance in Thailand in 2020, as well as on the work done by ASEAN governments, 
ADB and other partners (such as the ASEAN International Capital Markets Forum, Climate Bonds Initiative and 
Asia Sustainable Finance Initiative (ASFI) to develop green bonds.  
Sub-activity 2.1.1 Policy Enablers Roadmap Development (Early stage countries) 
At least 2 green bond enabler roadmaps will be developed for prioritized countries, city governments or sectoral 
ministries which focus on the key policy, institutions, capital markets, or other country or sector level enablers 
needed to scale up the process of bond issuance and mitigate existing constraints. This is anticipated to be 
needed for countries at an earlier stage of green capital markets development (e.g. Cambodia and Lao PDR).  
This work will link to and focus on sub-sectors, cities and SOEs targeted to receive financing under Component 
1.   
Such roadmaps will include proposed a) locally relevant and implementable green finance frameworks including 
taxonomies, b) green bond standards or principles to be adopted, c) mapping of potential green bond 
opportunities (potential issuers or projects), d) policy and regulatory inputs for meeting existing gaps, e) credit 
enhancement funds or functions to be set up by governments to enable bond issuance, f) knowledge and capacity 
development proposals for various stakeholders (e.g. securities and exchange commissions, stock exchanges, 
cities and SOEs), g) credit rating program to be implemented for priority government entities.  
Regulators and potential issuers will also be supported to develop green frameworks and standards to ensure 
transparency around use of proceeds from potential bond issuances. Support will also be provided for ‘second 
opinion’ studies by independent third-party providers (e.g. CICERO) to validate these frameworks, which is 
important to ensure confidence from potential investors. As needed, workshops and training events will be held 
to build awareness and capacity among regulators, cities and SOEs.  
Sub-activity 2.1.2 Bond Issuance Roadmaps (Transaction-specific for Advanced Countries) 
Support will be provided to develop roadmaps for at least 2 green bond transactions in countries with more 
developed green finance ecosystems (e.g. Indonesia, Malaysia, and Philippines), targeted at potential bond 
issuers whether sectoral ministries, city governments or SOEs.  This work will link to and focus on sub-sectors, 
cities and SOEs targeted to receive financing under Component 1.   
The roadmaps to be developed will be issuer specific and will include a) development of likely green bond size 
and term sheet, b) identification of underlying green projects for funding from bond proceeds, c)  assessment 
and recommendations on entity or project’s business model and revenue streams, d) due diligence findings and 
recommendations on financial management and other systems relevant to credit ratings agencies, e) 
development of bond specific green frameworks to be applied to verify use of proceeds, f) support to local ratings 
agencies to assign a credit rating, g)  support to structure and market the potential bond to investors, and h) 
verify green bonds frameworks through ‘second opinions’ by third-party providers. As needed, targeted trainings 
will be held to build capacity among staff in municipal governments and SOEs to prepare for green bond 
issuances.   
Activity 2.2 Innovative Green Finance Recovery Mechanisms (for low-emission projects) 
Support will be provided to develop and pilot innovative green financing mechanisms for low-emission projects 
that help to leverage public finance (through support provided in Component 1) and mobilize private finance.  
Sub-activity 2.2.1 Rapid assessment studies to embed green recovery financing 
The aim of this exercise is to embed cutting-edge financing strategies in potential ACGF GRP sub-projects which 
can reduce government funding and leverage in a high multiple of private capital funds into high-impact climate 
interventions or projects. This is a different approach to public-private partnership (PPP) structures where

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22 of 56 
 
 
strategic management of a project passes to the private sector, and instead focuses on how government owned 
projects might be able to attract capital from various sources, which would allow for rapid ramping up across a 
sector.  
An initial origination exercise (with knowledge sharing on innovative mechanisms and models) will be undertaken 
to identify a short list of entities and projects (at city government, SOEs, sector ministries) where innovative green 
finance mechanisms can be developed. Initial assessments suggest Indonesia, Malaysia, and Philippines would 
be the likely countries for such mechanisms.  
Rapid assessment studies will be conducted for at least 7 projects to assess the potential to embed green 
securitization, blended finance and other green recovery financing mechanisms into projects. These will identify 
a) types of private, institutional and commercial financers that could be engaged within the project structure, b) 
innovative financing models that could be structured to mobilize private capital, c) required credit enhancement 
support from national and subnational governments, d) further groundwork needed to pilot a potential financing 
approach.  
This assistance will target potential ACGF GRP sub-projects that a) have a pre-identified government champion 
or sponsor and b) support transformative climate action as defined in the ACGF Investment Principles & Eligibility 
Criteria. Project or project concepts will be selected through a multi-pronged engagement approach targeting a) 
governments, cities and SOEs b) ADB sector and country teams and c) existing ACGF knowledge and financing 
development partners (e.g. AFD, KfW, EIB, GGGI etc.). NDAs will also be consulted, and potential projects from 
GCF country programs could also be considered for support. 
Sub-activity 2.2.2 Structuring ‘finance-ready’ projects in difficult markets / sub-sectors  
In addition to rapid studies for projects at an early stage of development, further support will be provided to 
structure at least 4 ‘finance-ready’ low-emission ACGF GRP sub-projects. This support will specifically 
target projects in sub-sectors and markets where mobilization of private climate finance is less in evidence (e.g. 
low-emission agriculture, reforestation and sustainable forest management, energy efficiency in cities, waste 
management etc.). In such projects traditional PPP approaches will not work (low revenues, high risks, 
government to retain strategic interest), hence necessitating innovative finance models.  
Activities will include a) upstream support to validate the underlying business model and climate case b) 
development of financing products to address barriers and incentivize climate impact; c) analysis of baselines, 
and ex-ante assessment of climate impacts of projects; d) development of project level targets and performance 
measures, and project-specific green frameworks (as relevant); e) financial and technical structuring of projects.  
Selection of projects to be supported will be based on the following factors: a) projects must meet ACGF 
Investment Principles & Eligibility Criteria b) projects must be from a sub-sector or market where there is little 
evidence of private investment to date c) projects must demonstrate potential demand for financing under 
Component 1 of the program. Projects could be selected from those supported by rapid assessment studies 
under the program, or through direct engagement with governments, cities and SOEs. NDAs will also be 
consulted, and potential projects from GCF country programs could also be considered for support. 
Activity 2.3 Scaling up hybrid Public-Private Partnership structures (PPPs) for renewable 
energy and sustainable cities  
Despite efforts to mainstream PPP by ADB and other development agencies, growth of these have been slow 
across most of Asia, with a further slowing expected due to the economic downturn spurred by COVID-19, 
resulting in a depression in revenue models and higher risk perceptions. Addressing these challenges calls for 
hybrid PPP models for city and renewable energy projects which have some potential for developing PPP 
potential (existing revenue streams) but which are associated with credit or risk perception issues. Hybrid PPP 
structures essentially require greater risk mitigation by governments, extending not just to capital expenditure 
(traditional PPPs) but also to some aspect of operations (first loss or revenue guarantees etc.) and climate risks.  
Under Activity 2.3, support will be provided to develop at least 4 hybrid PPP structures for ACGF GRP sub-
projects.  This support would be separate to sub-projects supported under Activity 2.2. Building on ADB’s

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23 of 56 
 
 
experience in supporting clean energy PPPs, this will specifically target hybrid PPP structures that better 
leverage public funds to mobilize strategic PPP investments in projects (strategic management by developers 
plus financing from private capital sources such as commercial banks).  
This support will be targeted to the following technologies: wind power, solar power, biomass-based power, 
waste-to-energy, and battery storage, low-carbon transport, and waste management.  Support would cover the 
whole project cycle: concept, developing a bankable structure, bidding and selection of a private investor. Key 
activities for each project could include:  
• 
Conducting project feasibility. Studies would be carried to conceptualize the project and establish its 
feasibility including, technical, commercial, legal, regulatory requirements and outcomes, potential 
climate impact and possible PPP operational and financial model. 
• 
Preparation of tender documents and marketing.  Preparation of tender documents and market sounding 
would be carried out to establish the interest of potential participants in the project. This would include 
risk analysis, commercial, financial and contractual structuring in line with the proposed implementation 
structure, as well as preparation of various tender and project documentation. 
• 
Tendering of projects. A competitive bidding would be carried out to support the government in selection 
of developer to implement the project. This phase may involve various activities such as carrying out pre-
qualification of bidders, responding to bidder queries, assisting with the tender process and evaluating 
the proposals of bidders.    
• 
Project Agreement signing. Assistance in negotiations with the winning bidders, finalizing of project 
agreements and signing of project agreements. 
• 
Supporting financial closure. Assistance will be provided to help in signing of the financing agreements 
and for project to reach the financial close. 
COMPONENT 3: POLICY, KNOWLEDGE AND CAPACITY BUILDING SUPPORT  
In addition to building transactions and models, it is equally important to support a) upstream awareness and 
knowledge building across ASEAN governments to build the required awareness and dialogue for upscaling 
green finance projects into government planning, and b) downstream implementation capacity to ensure that 
innovative projects being developed under ACGF GRP achieve the climate targets set, thereby serving as 
demonstration projects for replication. Component 3 will support both these aspects as follows:  
Activity 3.1 Promoting national Green Finance Recovery strategies 
With the aim of building “Green Finance Recovery (post COVID-19) Strategies” for ASEAN governments which 
will aim at mainstreaming green finance into planning for economic recovery, activities will be undertaken with 
all ACGF GRP countries as follows:  
• 
Sub-activity 3.1.1. Knowledge and awareness raising through ASEAN Green Finance Investor 
Roundtables: Held annually, these roundtables will be held as a platform to bring together key public 
sector stakeholders (e.g. finance ministries, regulators, securities and exchange commissions, energy 
and transport ministries, national development banks) with regional and international institutional 
investors, asset managers, commercial banks etc. The aim will be to show both demand side green 
‘financeable’ projects as well as supply side funds available for a country or sector or for green bonds. 
This should spur development of larger pipelines of both projects and green bonds as well as provide 
policy inputs especially from sharing of advanced green finance strategies.   
• 
Sub-activity 3.1.2. National Green Financing Strategies: With inputs from the above roundtables, the 
ACGF team will also undertake dialogues with sovereign governments and larger local governments (e.g. 
megacities such as Jakarta or Manila or related provincial governments) to identify a phased 
development of green recovery strategies for highest priority requests. Similar to the work currently 
underway by the ACGF team in the Philippines (Green Investment Opportunities report) and Thailand 
(Green Finance Strategies) this should lead to at least 2 national / local green finance recovery 
strategy reports which combine a) recommendations for green financing vehicles (e.g. pooled derisking

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24 of 56 
 
 
facilities) or instruments (green bonds or blue credits), b) possible projects pipeline, c) legislative and 
regulatory inputs, d) partnership recommendations (e.g. with Luxembourg Green Stock Exchange etc.)  
• 
Sub-activity 3.1.3. Targeted training through the ACGF 6 Champions program: training of at least 75 
local government officials on innovative finance and green principles will be delivered through the 
ACGF ‘6 Champions’ program. The program will provide a deeper understanding of innovative finance 
approaches in climate projects and is targeted to mid- to senior-level government officials and project 
sponsors. The program combines concept presentations with practical hands-on training in the 
development of innovative finance models for pre-identified climate-positive investments.   
Where relevant, analytical and capacity building work under Activity 3.1 will proactively identify opportunities to 
integrate gender and social inclusion aspects, e.g. through analysis that underpins national strategy development 
or in the identification of green finance champions to be targeted through the ACGF ‘6 Champions’ program.  
Activity 3.2 Ensuring effective projects 
Experience from sovereign low-emission projects demonstrate that implementation capacity at city / sector / sub-
project sponsor level has a major role to play in ensuring the planned design and impacts of low-emission projects 
are realized. Without adequate implementation, innovative project structures integrating new high-performing 
technologies or approaches can fail to reach intended targets, which in turn can cause governments and other 
stakeholders to reject future projects with similar modalities. Common capacity gaps in cities and SOEs in 
Southeast Asia include: a lack of capacity and systems to a) implement innovative financing structures which 
may be new to the context of application, b) monitor and verify climate impacts during project implementation, 
and c) effectively apply international gender, environment, and social safeguards standards, especially in 
complex projects (i.e. those involving several sectors, or different financing instruments), and in early stages of 
implementation.    
Activity 3.2 will be critical to ensure that sustainable, transformative impacts expected from ACGF GRP sub-
projects are delivered as envisioned. ACGF GRP will develop and finance a pipeline of transformational climate 
projects which are expected to integrate climate technologies and / or innovative financing mechanisms that are 
new to the country or city context, and which will require adequate capacity to monitor and implement. In addition, 
gender, social and environmental safeguards requirements under the ACGF-GRP also call for additional capacity 
(than would otherwise be required for standard ADB projects), especially to identify and proactively support 
women’s employment and inclusion of vulnerable groups into program implementation.  
In response, Activity 3.2 will support capacity building on these issues as part of the initiation and 
implementation stage (i.e. post financial close) of at least 4 low-emission ACGF GRP sub-projects 
receiving financing under Component 1, under one or more of four areas:  
• 
Sub-activity 3.2.1. Institutional Systems Development (for climate impact monitoring, linking to monitoring 
of NDCs): Set up and implementation of monitoring systems to track and verify climate impacts, 
conducting baseline studies and data collection as needed, and building internal technical capacity on 
monitoring and verification. Monitoring systems will be aligned with and link to sector and national level 
monitoring under the NDCs. Such support will be especially important for projects in agriculture or forestry 
sectors, where baseline assessments require significant resources.  
• 
Sub-activity 3.2.2. Capacity Development (for integrating low-emission technologies & innovative 
financing approaches): Targeted training for project sponsor staff to build skills, capacity and knowledge 
on applying low-carbon technologies, and to implement innovative financing approaches and engage 
potential private, institutional or commercial actors. This assistance could support a) mobilization of 
experts to be embedded in sponsor organizations to help set up operations and b) targeted training and 
‘on-the-job’ capacity building for relevant staff. Depending on the project need, training could be extended 
to technology suppliers to strengthen the value-chain for green technologies in the project, or to target 
SMEs or MSMEs in a particular sector to enable better engagement in projects engaging with SMEs (e.g. 
green tourism projects).   
• 
Sub-activity 3.2.3. Safeguards Frameworks Implementation (for effective safeguards implementation):  
Targeted training for project sponsor staff to build awareness of ADB and GCF safeguards

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25 of 56 
 
 
(environmental and social) requirements, and to strengthen skills, capacity and knowledge on monitoring  
and implementation of management plans related to environment, resettlement and indigenous people. 
This will include development of initial ‘model’ annual ESMS monitoring reports.   
• 
Sub-activity 3.2.4. Capacity development for effective mainstreaming of gender and social inclusion 
issues: Support to implement project-level requirements of the ACGF GRP GESIAP, including technical 
and vocational training to foster women’s and girl’s participation in implementation of green technologies. 
As required, support could also be provided for integration of financial inclusion approaches targeting 
women, vulnerable groups or ethnic minorities/indigenous groups.  
Selection of projects to be supported will be based on the following factors: a) projects must be receiving financing 
under Component 1 of the program b) the need for additional capacity building support (under the three areas 
identified above) beyond what is provided by ADB for a standard project must be justified. Provision of support 
will be needs-based (with specific capacity gaps identified through a needs assessment), with support provided 
for the first two years of program implementation only.  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
The ACGF GRP is designed as an ADB-managed program associated with the ACGF, a facility under the ASEAN 
Infrastructure Fund (AIF). The AIF is owned by ASEAN countries and ADB, and administered by ADB. ADB will 
be the Executing Entity for all three components of the ACGF GRP. The ACGF GRP will play an instrumental role 
in scaling ACGF up as a long-term regionally owned green financing vehicle for ASEAN countries.  
A. ACGF GREEN RECOVERY PROGRAM OPERATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 
Executing entity 
As Executing Entity for the ACGF GRP, ADB will be responsible for the overall Program (Funded Activity), 
particularly the provision of loans as de-risking funds for low emissions sub-projects (Component 1), and the 
provision of technical assistance support for the development of innovative climate finance models and structures, 
as well as policy, knowledge and capacity building support (Components 2 and 3).  
Following the GCF Board approval, ADB and GCF will enter into a program-specific legal agreement (the “Funded 
Activity Agreement” or “FAA”) in accordance with the AMA, which will set out the specific details concerning GCF’s 
provision of and ADB’s administration of the GCF funds.  
GCF funds for the ACGF GRP will be ring-fenced within an ADB GCF Trust Fund which was created pursuant to 
the AMA, and as such benefit from the same privileges and immunities as ADB’s resources. Usage of GCF funds 
will be based on criteria outlined in this proposal which will be included in dedicated Program Implementation 
Guidelines to be developed during inception. These guidelines will complement the program Term Sheet and 
FAA, and include further guidance on implementation arrangements, sub-project selection and prioritization, 
monitoring and evaluation, and reporting. 
Component 1: legal arrangements  
Under Component 1, ADB will offer concessional loans to sovereign borrowers to be funded by GCF. For each 
ACGF GRP sub-project, ADB will sign separate loan agreements with the sovereign borrowers for each source 
of financing (i.e. ADB’s own resources and GCF funds), and through this, each project will be implemented in 
compliance with ADB policies and ACGF GRP requirements. Depending on the structure of the sub-project, the 
ADB will also enter into project-level agreements with relevant borrower’s agencies for the implementation of sub-
projects. Such agencies may include financial intermediaries, such as National Development Banks and 
potentially, GCF Direct Access Entities, where feasible. If additional co-financing from AIF and other partner 
financial institutions are also included, these will be provided in parallel to the ADB and GCF funded loans. Loans 
funded by GCF funds are expected to be pari passu with the ADB loans, except for the interest rate and tenor 
applicable to the GCF funds.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26 of 56 
 
 
 
GCF loans will be used to support projects implemented by governments, or government-owned entities based 
on the terms and conditions agreed with ADB in each respective project’s loan agreements and project 
administration manual (PAM). Each potential project will be identified during ADB’s country programming process, 
prepared in accordance with ADB’s internal policies and procedures, and evaluated against the criteria presented 
in this proposal and agreed with GCF, to determine eligibility for funding under the program.  ACGF GRP sub-
projects will be fully administered by ADB and likewise benefit from ADB’s project preparation, due diligence 
processes, project administration, and monitoring and evaluation systems.  Each project will be presented for 
approval to the ADB Board on a transaction-by-transaction basis, which approval shall include the provision of 
GCF funds to be administered by ADB. 
Component 1: Flow of funds

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27 of 56 
 
 
 
24 Here the proposal uses ‘Executing Entity’ as per the GCF definition.  
First phase of sub-projects. The first phase of investment (i.e. the period during which GCF funds will be 
disbursed by ADB to sub-projects) will run from 2021 to 2027. During this period, sub-projects will be identified in 
accordance with ADB’s country programming process, and selected using the criteria presented in this proposal. 
Disbursement requests from ADB to GCF are expected to be made on an annual or semi-annual basis, and will 
be based on expected ADB approval dates for projects in the ACGF GRP pipeline, in accordance with each 
individual project’s projected disbursement plans and timelines. Funds will be disbursed by GCF into the ADB 
GCF Trust Fund, and subsequently deployed to approved sub-projects in accordance with ADB policies and 
procedures.  
 
Payments of interest and principal from GCF funded sub-projects in the first phase of investment will be repaid 
back to ADB, into the ADB GCF Trust Fund.  Interest income from the first phase of investment will be returned 
to GCF, whereas principal repayments will be retained in the ADB GCF Trust Fund, for investment in a second 
phase of sub-projects.  
Second phase of investment. The second phase of investment will run from 2028 to 2039, as soon as principal 
repayments are received from the first phase of investment. For the second phase of investment, repayments of 
GCF principal from the first phase will be used to extend loans to new sub-projects that have been identified in 
accordance with ADB’s country programming process, and selected using the criteria presented in this proposal. 
Funds will be deployed to approved sub-projects in accordance with ADB policies and procedures.  Payments of 
interest and principal for GCF funded loans from the second phase of investments will be repaid back to the ADB 
GCF Trust Fund, and the principal, interest payments, and any unused funds or income will be subsequently 
returned to GCF. 
Component 2 and 3: legal arrangements & flow of funds 
ADB, in its capacity as the Accredited Entity and Executing Entity, shall be responsible for the provision of 
technical assistance support as outlined under Components 2 and 3. GCF grants will be provided to the 
ADB GCF Trust Fund and implemented by ADB, either through a Technical Assistance Framework 
Agreement or a stand-alone Technical Assistance Agreement. Technical assistance activities for project 
structuring, project implementation and knowledge and capacity building will be implemented by the existing 
ADB team that administers the ACGF/AIF, and the ACGF Project Structuring Team. Activity 2.3 will be 
implemented by the Office of Public Private Partnerships.  
B. KEY STAKEHOLDERS  
ADB 
ADB signed the GCF Accredited Master Agreement (AMA) with the GCF on 17 August 2017. As a GCF AE, ADB 
and GCF have entered into several project-specific legal agreements which are under implementation, delivering 
climate impacts throughout ADB’s developing member countries. In Southeast Asia, ADB has an extensive 
background in supporting climate change projects through its country program and regional cooperation activities. 
ADB committed USD3.9 billion in climate finance in Southeast Asia between 2016 and 2019 from own funds as 
well as external resources. The ACGF GRP will build on and extend ADB’s climate operations in the region to 
develop and finance a new generation of high potential low-emission projects that will serve as a demonstration 
for the region. 
In its capacity as AE and Executing Entity24, ADB will administer loans and technical assistance funds from GCF 
under the ACGF GRP as follows: 
• 
Provide loans as per the ACGF GRP terms and requirements, alongside loans using ADB own funds and 
other ADB-administered parallel financing (as appropriate), applying the same duty of care and due 
diligence for all sources.

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28 of 56 
 
 
• 
Carry out such management and administration of the GCF funds for loans and technical assistance in 
accordance with its policies, procedures and practices, and with at least the same degree of care as it 
uses in the administration of its own funds or other donor funds, taking into account the provisions of the 
AMA.  
• 
Assign the ADB staff designated as ACGF Unit Head as focal point for the program (with alternate being 
the AIF Administrator), with dedicated staff resources within the ADB Southeast Asia Department to 
manage the ACGF GRP as part of extended implementation arrangements for AIF and ACGF. 
• 
Oversee and manage the dedicated ACGF Project Structuring Team, staffed by full-time and intermittent 
experts, including an additional three to four experts specifically engaged for the ACGF GRP, with the 
following responsibilities:  
o 
originate sub-projects and develop a pipeline for ACGF GRP funding, provide support to structure 
sub-projects and identify financing partners;  
o 
provide climate expertise to develop green frameworks and targets for sub-projects;  
o 
identify and screen potential sub-projects, review project documentation and ensure the project 
meets the program’s criteria;  
o 
verify and monitor project and facility impacts and prepare annual performance reports to GCF; 
o 
implement ACGF GRP technical assistance activities on policy, knowledge and capacity building; 
o 
manage and monitor procurement and contracts. 
• 
Work closely with other ACGF financing partners to identify additional parallel financing sources for sub-
projects if needed. 
 
In its capacity as administrator of the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund: 
• 
At a broad policy level, ADB will report to ASEAN countries through the Finance Ministers’ track or other 
channels as relevant on progress made on the ACGF more broadly (including ACGF GRP).  
Role of ASEAN governments through AIF & ACGF 
 
ACGF GRP is a distinct ADB-managed program focused on green recovery, which is also intrinsically linked to 
and leverages the strengths of the ACGF vehicle under the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund (background below). The 
linkages between ACGF GRP and ACGF/AIF are as follows:  
• 
The ACGF GRP will build on the institutional structure of the ACGF/AIF (i.e. the AIF Board of Directors 
representing ASEAN ministries of finance and ADB) which ensures strong country engagement and 
ownership. Members of the AIF Board will serve as focal points for the program in each country, ensuring 
a transparent and country-owned process in the identification, development, and financing of projects.  
• 
ACGF GRP will build on ACGF implementation arrangements, and will be managed by a dedicated 
ADB/AIF team which is linked to sector and country teams, and will leverage the country-driven project 
origination process used for ACGF/AIF, ensuring implementation efficiencies and effectiveness.  
• 
ACGF GRP will build on best practices in selecting green projects established under ACGF using the 
three parameters in the ACGF Investment Principles and Eligibility Criteria (green impact, bankability, 
private sector mobilization) (See Annex 23 for an overview of the criteria). 
 
Within this context, finance ministries, as members of the board of the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund, will serve as 
focal points for the ACGF GRP in their own countries. In this context, ADB will: 
• 
Update the AIF Board on potential GCF support for eligible sub-projects through the ACGF GRP, during 
biannual board meetings and progress reports; 
• 
Share information with the board on progress made related to the ACGF GRP; and 
• 
Support AIF Board members to coordinate with NDAs to ensure that potential ACGF GRP sub-projects 
are aligned with GCF country programs. 
 
Background to AIF & ACGF 
The ASEAN Infrastructure Fund (AIF) was established in 2011 as a regional infrastructure financing vehicle by 
ASEAN countries and ADB, and is managed and administered by ADB. It is run by a Board of Directors, 
representing all ASEAN member state governments, generally from respective Ministries of Finance, and ADB, 
currently chaired by Indonesia (2019-2021). In 2018, the AIF Board of Directors approved the creation of the 
ACGF, with financing of 15% of AIF’s equity, with the intention of piloting an approach to finance green

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 29 of 56 
 
 
 
25 The Criteria were developed through extensive consultations with major European development partners, 
incorporate elements from leading global efforts on green finance (e.g. EU Sustainable Finance Taxonomy) and 
are aligned with ASEAN government priorities for climate action. 
infrastructure in the region. The ACGF was launched on the 4th of April 2019 in Chiang Rai, Thailand by ASEAN 
finance ministers in the margins of the ASEAN Finance Ministers Meeting. ADB and other development partners 
made high-level commitments towards the co-financing of ACGF projects, bringing the total co-financing expected 
to be mobilized for ACGF to USD 1.4 billion.  
Since 2019, significant progress has been made on implementation of ACGF: 
• 
Development of an operations plan and finalization of the ACGF Investment Principles and Eligibility 
Criteria25 to determine the screening and selection of projects based on three aspects a) climate impact 
and contribution to other environmental objectives b) financial bankability and c) potential to mobilize 
private investment.  
• 
Identification and support for structuring of 22 projects to integrate innovative financial models, and 
embedding of climate targets in project design.  
• 
Approving of 3 projects qualifying under the ACGF Investment Principles and Eligibility Criteria for 
inclusion in the ‘firm’ AIF financing pipeline, with total project cost of USD 1.4 billion, including USD 40 
million from AIF, USD 823 million from ADB, USD 410 million from other development partners and the 
remainder from governments.  
• 
Through ADB technical support for the ACGF, support for 2 major international roundtables on green 
finance between ASEAN governments & institutional investors, and initiation of a virtual ‘COVID-19 Green 
Recovery’ webinar series in 2020.  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
GCF support through the ACGF Green Recovery Program (ACGF GRP) is critical to promote low-emission 
projects for post-COVID recovery period and to support countries avoid a lock-in of emissions intensive growth 
for the next two decades.   
1) Presenting a strong signal for a green recovery in Southeast Asia by capitalizing on a limited 
window of opportunity, starting in 2021 
In the post-COVID context, there is a high risk that fiscal stimulus programs and the consequent acceleration of 
economic recovery takes place along a non-sustainable pathway, leading to lock in of high-carbon infrastructure. 
GCF’s central position in the international climate finance architecture serves to give direction and provide 
incentives for countries to move forward in seeking a programmatic as well as operational alignment with the 
Paris Agreement.  
The ACGF GRP is seeking to overcome the risk of ASEAN countries reverting to a business-as-usual trend by 
utilizing support provided by a sizeable GCF contribution which leverages ADB’s substantial country programs in 
the region, as well as applying robust standards to support countries prioritize infrastructure projects with 
significant potential to reduce emissions. Representing the first substantive green recovery program in Asia, 
the ACGF GRP will kickstart investments in the post-COVID context through combined support for innovative 
project model development and provision of de-risking loan funds.  
There is a limited window of opportunity to influence COVID recovery starting in 2021, when multi-year stimulus 
packages will start being rolled out by governments. Through GCF support under the ACGF GRP, rapid support 
will be provided for structuring ‘finance-ready’ projects and providing de-risking loans to enable the financing and 
implementation of low-emission projects. With GCF support starting in 2021, tentative low-emission projects 
currently in government pipelines (like the projects presented in this proposal) which require additional support to 
develop and finance, will be implemented as planned. Support to increase ‘financeability’ of 2022 and 2023 sub-
projects will help raise the profile and benefits of these projects to governments, allowing them to be included in 
planned stimulus packages and programs.

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 30 of 56 
 
 
 
26 https://www.aiib.org/en/news-events/media-center/blog/2020/First-Came-Cancellations-Then-Came-Stimulus-Tracking-
Infrastructure-Sentiments-Through-COVID-19-Using-Big-Textual-Data.html 
2) Deliver significant direct climate benefits through the application of GCF-aligned standards and 
norms. 
This will deliver emissions reductions of 119 million tonnes CO2 emissions over the lifetime of the program, as 
well as direct and indirect co-benefits linked to the implementation of activities that are also fully aligned with the 
SDGs. GCF standards and criteria supports increased ambition and use of performance thresholds that would 
otherwise not be followed within development-focused, economic recovery programs. GCF support will accelerate 
the greening of ACGF infrastructure investments and support more replicable project models to be demonstrated. 
The volume of GCF financing allowed per project has been set to particularly incentivize Priority Green projects, 
which are expected to contribute to environmental outcomes in the longer term. With GCF financing, ACGF 
projects will help to reduce GHG emissions and contribute to other environmental objectives, such as reducing 
air and water pollution, improving solid waste management, and promoting sustainable natural capital 
management. 
3) Catalyze global green capital flows, both through directly funding projects as well as their 
replication, through the innovative use of funds  
The program will help incentivize green projects in a post-COVID period by covering the incremental costs of 
addressing climate change mitigation, in a consistent and swift way. Enabling the ASEAN infrastructure sector 
to access the rapidly growing global market for green and/or sustainability bonds will demonstrate to 
governments that there are funding alternatives for their infrastructure programs that allow them to avoid long-
term infrastructural lock-in. Without this, the potential is high for a situation to develop where unsustainable 
infrastructure development starts to accelerate to drive the recovery, but without ADB and GCF support to make 
it “green”. GCF funding will be critical to reduce risks related with green technologies and solutions during early 
stages of project cycles and to provide governments and other stakeholders with the required training to access 
green and sustainable financing structures. This is especially important considering potential revenue shortfalls 
faced by infrastructure projects in the region due to the economic impacts of COVID-19 and related shutdowns.  
4) Strengthen the economic recovery of ASEAN countries through the creation of ‘green jobs’ 
Market and country data show that the suspension and cancellation of infrastructure projects across all sectors 
in Asia peaked in late March 2020 during the height of the COVID crisis26. As the recovery commences at full 
speed and public resources are being earmarked for infrastructure programs to lead it, the GCF can intervene to 
rapidly provide a high volume of flexible funding to spur low-carbon projects. This will allow countries to deploy 
and train their workforce towards decent jobs that contribute to preserve or restore the environment and deliver 
sustainable long-term growth. Achieving sustainability of the projects within this facility and the shifting of the 
employment paradigm towards green jobs are inextricably linked, as the ACGF GRP foresees the creation of 
340,000 green jobs, amplifying the concept of the ‘Just Transition’ in ASEAN member states.  
5) Assist governments in prioritizing and strengthening pipelines of low carbon infrastructure as 
well as in shaping bankability and other enabling factors to facilitate further ‘green’ investments.  
The close combination of technical assistance grants (for capacity building, knowledge creation and policy 
dialogue) and loans to support low-emission infrastructure investment will enhance the enabling environments 
within which projects are developed. Early identification of low-carbon alternatives (e.g. waste-to-energy with 
integrated recycling and recovery, rather than standard incineration), coupled with technical advisory support to 
integrate best performing technologies within the designs of projects (e.g. electric vehicles, energy efficient street 
lighting) and to identify business models to mobilize private investment climate will build the capacity of countries 
to develop and finance a strong pipeline of green projects. 
This is achieved through policy dialogue and technical capacity building, as well as by providing the support to 
develop green pipelines hand-in-hand with countries. GCF financing will help create more bankable projects by

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 31 of 56 
 
 
 
 
providing lower-cost financing for capital investment projects than would be possible without GCF support. An 
analysis of financing options for the 6 identified projects in the pipeline for the program demonstrates that the 
blended interest rate available to projects would be – on average – 24% lower with GCF support than without. 
This is especially important when considering that USD funds are subject to sovereign guarantee and currency 
conversion fees, and the final cost to project sponsors in the region can increase by 4-7%, depending on the 
country. 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
GCF financing support has an impact beyond financing the targeted projects that are included in this application. 
By supporting one of the few green de-risking initiatives in the region, it brings an explicit focus to the need for 
more such vehicles nationally which could better leverage and use government funds. The leveraging of GCF 
resources alongside ADB funds and other sources will create the critical mass of fund volumes to achieve impacts 
and a more de-risked nature which will then open the way for mainstreamed private sector and climate support. 
The combination of de-risking with incentive financing, and project origination and structuring will also create 
demonstration projects that are both bankable and green for replication in sectors hitherto without many such 
models, and hence support the ‘greening’ of overall infrastructure pipelines in ASEAN countries. Sustained 
integration of climate actions along recognized international standards will support green loan and green bond 
development within the region. During and beyond its role in ACGF, the GCF contribution will help unlock the 
much-needed volumes of public and private green finance in the region in order to steer investments and job 
creation towards systematic sustainability. In a sense, the GCF is bridging a gap towards a more sustainable 
future, ensuring both sustainability and replicability.  
From an institutional sustainability perspective, the capacity building, technical assistance and policy dialogue 
components will strengthen the counterparts’ capacity to then undertake similar green projects with a decreasing 
level of external support, reinforcing policy making and pipeline building.  The ACGF GRP will also play an 
instrumental role in supporting the scale-up of the ACGF as a regional green financing vehicle for Southeast Asia. 
As also pointed out in the risk table, in order to minimize any potential risk arising from low capacity in processes, 
including for environmental and social sustainability, gender and social inclusion, and procurement, the program 
foresees training for borrowers and project developers to strengthen legal, institutional and technical proficiencies 
that will outlast the program implementation period itself.

=== PAGE 35 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 32 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF 
funding (i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
300 (635 revolved funds) 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
280  
+ 335 (revolved funds) 
15 years 
6 / 7 / 8 years 
0 / 0.5 / 1.027 % 
(ii) 
Subordinated 
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) 
Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity return 
 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) 
Grants 
20  
 
 
 
(vii) 
Results-based 
payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
Enter amount 
Options 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currenc
y 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
ADB 
Senior 
Loans 
3,385 
(estimated) 
million 
USD ($)  
Varies by 
project 
country28  
 
Varies 
by 
project29
% 
pari passu 
Click here to enter text. 
Options 
Enter 
amount 
Options  
Enter 
years 
Enter 
years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
4,020 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page) 
 
As a program, GCF funds in the ACGF GRP will support 20 projects over the 
lifetime of the program, through two cycles of investment. Overall, USD300 million 
GCF funds are expected to support projects with a total project cost of USD 4,000 
million. 
 
At a sub-project level, GCF funds will be complemented by co-financing from ADB, 
with loan amounts and terms varying by sub-project.  
 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
 
27 These include interest rates and service fees, and will apply to all sub-projects in the first investment phase – see Table 
4. For sub-projects in the second investment phase, pricing of 0.25% will be applied for CAM and LAO and 1.25% will be 
applied for MAL. 
28 For Group A countries (CAM and LAO): 32 years tenor, 8 years grace period. For other countries supported by ADB 
Ordinary Capital Resources (OCR) i.e. INO, PHI and MAL: tenor varies by projects, subject to an average loan maturity of 
19 years (note, tenor and maturity are different). See https://www.adb.org/what-we-do/public-sector-financing/lending-
policies-rates.  
29 For Group A countries (CAM and LAO): 1% during grace period, 1.5% during amortization. For other countries supported 
by ADB Ordinary Capital Resources (OCR) i.e. INO, PHI and MAL: under the LIBOR-based lending model, interest rate 
would be 6month LIBOR + 50 bps, maturity premium (of applicable) and commitment fee of 15 bps.  See 
https://www.adb.org/documents/overview-libor-based-loans-sovereign-and-sovereign-guaranteed-borrowers

=== PAGE 36 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 33 of 56 
 
 
 
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
million 
USD ($) 
GCF financing 
ADB financing 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million USD 
($) 
Financial 
Instrume
nt 
Component 1:  
Provision of loans 
for de-risking low-
emission projects 
Loans for low-emission 
projects 
4,000 
280  
+ 335 
(revolved 
financing) 
Senior 
Loans 
3,385 
Senior 
Loans 
Component 2: 
Development of 
innovative climate 
finance models 
and structures 
Activity 2.1: Scaling up 
Green and Sustainable 
Bonds (for sovereigns, 
cities and SOEs) 
1.83 
1.83 
Grants 
 
 
Activity 2.2: Innovative 
Green Finance Recovery 
Mechanisms (for low-
emission projects) 
3.76 
3.76 
Grants 
 
 
Activity 2.3 Scaling up 
hybrid Public-Private 
Partnership structures 
(PPPs) for renewable 
energy and sustainable 
cities 
6.65 
6.65 
Grants 
 
 
Component 3: 
Policy, knowledge 
and capacity 
building support 
Activity 3.1 Promoting 
national Green Finance 
Recovery strategies 
2.23 
2.23 
Grants 
 
 
Activity 3.2 Ensuring 
effective projects 
3.26 
3.26 
Grants 
 
 
Management & 
monitoring 
Project management of TA 
components 
0.95 
0.95 
Grants 
 
 
Monitoring & evaluation 
1.32 
1.32 
Grants 
 
 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
4,020 
300 (635 revolved 
financing) 
3,385 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☐      No ☒ 
A portion of GCF financing will be extended as technical assistance grants to help build awareness, 
knowledge and further policy dialogue on green finance in ASEAN countries, with the specific aim of 
supporting increased transactions and building capacity to better identify, structure and implement low-carbon 
project opportunities. Capacity building activities will include: a) under Activity 3.1, targeted training on 
innovative finance through the ACGF ‘6 Champions’ program will be provided to identify and support green 
finance leaders, and provide a deeper understanding of innovative finance approaches in climate projects; b) 
under Activity 3.2, targeted capacity building to help governments i) monitor, verify and evaluate climate and 
other sustainability aspects of the project; ii) integrate advanced climate technologies and interventions during 
project implementation; iii) effectively implement ADB and GCF safeguards on environment, involuntary 
resettlement and indigenous peoples and iv) integrate gender and social inclusion aspects into projects.

=== PAGE 37 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 34 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The ACGF GRP has been designed to support substantial CO2 reductions from across multiple sectors: 
• 
Through the revolving use of GCF funds, the program will finance 20 sub-projects over its lifetime (in 
two phases of investment), thereby maximizing the impact of scarce GCF resources for a longer pipeline 
than would be possible with a single use of GCF funds.  
• 
Through the use of ACGF criteria, promotion of the use of international best practice performance 
thresholds for emissions reductions, and the focus on the major drivers of emissions in the region, the 
program ensures that only projects with substantial CO2 reductions are supported.  
• 
By setting a portfolio level performance target (45% Priority Green investments over the lifetime of the 
program), the program considers the need to support governments to prioritize low-emission projects, 
while increasing ambition over time. As a result, the first phase of investments will support a higher share 
of Green projects and the second phase of investments will support a higher share of Priority Green 
projects, with a balance of Green and Priority Green projects being supported over the program lifetime.  
The expected mitigation impact is 119 million tonnes CO2eq saved over the lifetime of the program. This is a 
conservative estimate based on identified investments in the first phase of investment (with estimated emissions 
savings of 23.5 million tCO2e over individual lifespans) and projected emission savings from the overall portfolio. 
For the first phase of investments, estimates from identified investments in the pipeline were augmented with 
estimates from 2 stylized projects in ADB’s pipeline in 2022 and 2023 to ensure a coverage of the types of sub-
sectors targeted by the program. In scaling up projected emissions savings the following assumptions have been 
made a) taking into account ADB’s historical lending and planned pipelines, the mix of project sectors / subsectors 
will remain largely the same, b) abatement potential is assumed to remain the same over time, as it is expected 
that higher emissions savings over time from Priority Green projects will be largely offset by improvements in 
country emissions profiles (due to implementation of NDCs). 
Table 7: Emissions reductions and green jobs created (identified + stylized projects) 
Project 
Impact potential 
Emissions 
reductions 
(tCO2eq lifetime) 
Green jobs 
created 
SDG Indonesia One Green Finance Facility   
15.4 million  
77,000 
Philippines: Davao Public Transport Modernization Project 
3.4 million  
9,000 
Cambodia: Blue Carbon Project 
1.6 million 
13,000 
Cambodia: Energy Efficiency Sector Development Program 
3.0 million  
5,000 
Stylized project: sustainable transport (inter-urban rail) project in Philippines 
1.3 million 
tbc 
Stylized project: renewable energy project in Indonesia 
4.2 million 
tbc 
At the project level, the calculation methodology for each identified investment is based on project parameters 
and design data from ongoing and completed feasibility studies and best estimates based on comparable projects 
(see Annex 22). GHG calculation methodologies follow ADB guidelines on GHG accounting for projects, and 
savings are estimated against a baseline or Business-as-usual scenario. For example, potential emission savings 
from the renewable energy and energy efficiency projects in the pipeline are based on the current grid emission 
factors, taken from the harmonized IFI grid emission factors for countries. The impact potential for projects will be 
documented in the feasibility studies and ADB loan approval documents, and where possible, green indicators 
and targets will be included in the monitoring frameworks for individual projects.   
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The program has been designed with the aim of supporting a strategic and transformational shift in the way 
countries invest in infrastructure, in the limited time window for planning and rolling out post-COVID recovery. As

=== PAGE 38 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 of 56 
 
 
 
 
much of the investment need for the region is for new infrastructure, by supporting low-emission projects, the 
program will help ASEAN countries achieve transformational planning and programming and avoid locking-in 
emissions in the longer-term.  
The program design includes a strong focus on scaling up and replicating low-emission infrastructure 
investments in developing ASEAN member countries, beyond the individual investments that will be supported 
by ACGF GRP, through the following: 
• 
Demonstration of best practice. By supporting best available technologies and encouraging projects to meet 
international thresholds for mitigation impact potential, environmental performance, procurement, financial 
fiduciary standards and risk assessments, every ACGF GRP project is expected to serve as demonstration, 
build knowledge and strengthen awareness among governments, project developers and commercial 
financers.  
• 
‘Pathfinder’ investments. The demonstration effect is expected to be higher in low-income countries, such 
as Cambodia and Lao PDR, where a green project may be the first of its type in a city or province. For 
example, the Cambodia Blue Carbon project will enhance blue carbon by restoring and replanting 11,770 
hectares of mangrove forests while addressing key challenges to the marine fisheries sector through a first-
of-its-kind catalytic green financing model to mobilize funds. Given the critical need for nature-based 
approaches for agriculture and natural resources projects, there is significant potential to replicate such 
schemes in other countries in Southeast Asia.  
The program will also strengthen institutional structures to have long-term impacts, through:   
• 
Innovative financing to change the way governments invest. The traditional use of public or sovereign 
guaranteed funds for infrastructure in the region means that investments typically receive full financial 
support by governments or by development partners. In the case of ACGF, the inclusion of criteria on 
mobilization and bankability, and by structuring the program as a revolving and multi-instrument vehicle, will 
help illustrate to governments the efficient use of capital and appropriate project design for mobilizing private 
investment. The SDG Indonesia One Green Finance Facility, for example, aggregates a pipeline of smaller 
projects for financing by public and private actors, and will use ADB and GCF loans in a range of instruments, 
including debt and equity. The project will serve as a template for other vehicles under the SDG Indonesia 
One platform.   
• 
Developing a green finance vehicle for the region. The ACGF GRP will be play an instrumental role in 
supporting the scale-up of the ACGF as a regional green financing vehicle for Southeast Asia, by 
demonstrating how the ACGF GRP model will work in financing a pipeline of projects against common 
criteria and standards. In the long-term, AIF shareholders can build on this experience to institutionalize 
ACGF. 
Technical assistance funds will contribute strongly to the creation of an enabling policy environment, by: 
• 
Supporting countries develop and define national financing strategies for a green recovery, which also 
demonstrate national level backing for ACGF GRP sub-projects. 
• 
Building capacity of government officials through the ACGF 6 Champions to better understand and apply 
innovative climate finance in their work, thereby increasing their awareness and appetite for such projects 
in the future. 
• 
Developing and embedding innovative finance models and creating context-specific environments for these. 
For example, Activity 2.3 will scale up hybrid public-private partnership vehicles, especially for renewable 
energy projects, which will be critical in developing the enabling conditions for private investment. For 
example, public sector financing – including from ACGF GRP – could be used to help build the ancillary 
infrastructure for a solar or wind project, and with targeted technical assistance for the government in 
structuring and carrying out a competitive tendering process, significant private investment could be 
harnessed.

=== PAGE 39 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 of 56 
 
 
 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The ACGF GRP has been designed to support low-emission projects within the context of sustainable economic 
development, especially during the COVID-19 recovery period. At a broad level, the program directly supports 
the following Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including: Affordable and Clean Energy (6); Decent Work 
and Economic Growth (7); Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure (8); Sustainable Cities and Communities (10); 
Life on Land (14); Life underwater (15). 
 
Economic co-benefits, including green jobs  
The program will support post-COVID recovery by investing in green infrastructure that supports jobs and 
economic growth. Based on an assessment of projects in the ACGF pipeline, and the assumptions presented 
under Impact Potential above, the program is estimated to create 340,000 green jobs. Beyond this, the program 
will support a range of broader economic benefits through specific investments such as enhanced trade and 
competitiveness, and supporting small- and medium-enterprises development. 
 
Environmental co-benefits  
The program design specifically emphasises the selection of projects that meet both climate and broader 
environmental objectives, using project-level criteria that incorporate both elements. ACGF investment criteria 
require all projects to demonstrate a reduction in emissions as well as a demonstrated contribution to an additional 
environmental objective.  Specifically, the program is expected to: 
(i) 
improve air quality (through more sustainable urban transport systems and public transport); 
(ii) 
improve water quality (through development of energy-efficient urban water supply and sanitation 
systems, waste management systems); 
(iii) 
promote healthy and climate-resilient ecosystems and biodiversity (through reforestation and 
restoration of mangroves, promoting sustainable forest management, sustainable agriculture 
practices to preserve soil carbon etc.); and 
(iv) 
promoting more efficient use of resources, (through reducing the use of energy, encouraging 
integrated waste management approaches etc.). 
 
Contribution to environmental objectives will be monitored by the program based on project level reports, and 
reported to GCF through annual performance reports. 
 
Social co-benefits and gender-sensitive development 
Overall, the program will support projects in water and waste, and on energy, with expected co-benefits in terms 
of enhanced access to energy, improved access to water supply, and improved access to sanitation and hygiene 
infrastructure.  
 
Beyond this, ACGF GRP has been designed to strongly support sub-projects achieve co-benefits in terms of 
gender and social inclusion: 
 
• 
At a program level, ACGF GRP has adopted a gender and social inclusion target (80% of projects directly 
advance gender and social inclusion [GESI] by 2039) to help ensure the portfolio overall supports these 
issues. 
• 
The program GESIAP will help guide action at the sub-project level, including preparation of gender 
assessments and action plans, promotion of opportunities for women’s economic empowerment, and 
promotion of equitable participation in trainings and promotion of green jobs for women and vulnerable 
groups.  
 
At a sub-project level, potential environment and social risks will be mitigated through the application of the 
program ESMF which is aligned with the ADB Safeguards Policy Statement (SPS), and through this, will be 
appraised to identify and mitigate any direct, indirect, cumulative, and induced risks and impacts such as: a) 
adverse impacts/risks on the environment; b) adverse impacts and risks of involuntary resettlement; and c) 
adverse impacts on indigenous peoples and their communities that may arise from the implementation of 
subprojects.

=== PAGE 40 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 of 56 
 
 
 
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Vulnerability of economies due to COVID-19 
The COVID-19 health crisis has severely impacted the ability of governments to implement NDCs. Pre-COVID, 
the overall financing need for green infrastructure in developing ASEAN member states was estimated at USD210 
billion per year between 2016 and 2030 to support needed investment in climate-compatible infrastructure. Post-
COVID, government are facing a major slowdown, with the region’s GDP expected to contract by 4.4% in 2020, 
from an increase of 4.4% in 201930. The impact of COVID-19 is estimated to generate losses ranging from 
USD163 billion to USD253 billion (4.6% to 7.2%), for short and long containment scenarios, respectively, and job 
losses could range from 11.6 million to over 18.4 million31. Country-level estimates paint a more dire picture, with 
most countries in the region expected to record negative GDP growth in 2020, and to face a fiscal deficit (see 
Table 8).  
Table 8. COVID-19 indicators (as of 31 July 2020) 
Source: ADB from aggregated sources (see Annex 2B, page 9 for full list) 
The ACGF GRP has been designed to take this into account by a) providing loans at low interest rates and with 
longer grace periods (reflecting lower expected revenues from projects in the next 4-5 years) b) revolving funds 
to maximize low-interest funds over more projects c) prioritizing projects that can deliver low-emission 
development while creating substantial green jobs and d) supporting countries develop green financing strategies 
for COVID-19 recovery.   
Country context and climate profile 
The program has also been designed into take into account very different country contexts and emissions profiles. 
Country per capita incomes range from around 5000 USD in Cambodia to over USD 18,000 in Malaysia. In 
countries like Indonesia or Philippines, low-emission projects have so far relied mostly on public or sovereign-
backed funding, with many not being realized due to a lack of prioritization in public budgets. In countries like 
Cambodia and Lao PDR, such investments have relied exclusively on increasingly scarce bilateral and multilateral 
donor grants, and to a lesser extent on concessional MDB loans. The ACGF GRP has been designed to use 
climate finance catalytically (without a reliance on grants), with pricing differentiated by country context, to 
leverage a broader range of financing for high-performing low-emission investments, including from the private 
sector.  
Emissions wise, larger economies like Indonesia and Malaysia have increasing energy-related emissions 
footprints, while deforestation and forest degradation contribute to losses in carbon sinks across the region. The 
program has therefore been designed to finance mitigation projects from the four main sectors that can address 
this (i.e. energy, transport, multi-sector, urban and agriculture & natural resources).   
Barriers to financing for low-emission projects 
Country 
No. of Cases 
(as of 22 June 
2020) 
GDP forecast 
(Worse) / Fiscal 
balance (%) 
Job losses (million) 
Poverty estimates 
(pre-/post-COVID-
19) (%) 
Economic 
measures  
(USD billion) 
Cambodia 
130 
-5.5/-12.8 
0.37 
28.0/43.6 
2.1 
Indonesia 
46,845 
-0.7/-6.3 
1.8 
9.4/11.2 –13.0 
64.3 
Malaysia 
8,587 
-4.0/-4.7 
2.4 
(MIER worst case 
estimate) 
0.4 
(2016)/NA 
35.5 
Philippines 
30,682 
-5.3/-8.1 to -9 
4.3 (Q2 2020) 
16.6/20.7 
19.8 
 
30 ADB. 2020. Asian Development Outlook (ADO) 2020: What Drives Innovation in Asia? 
https://www.adb.org/publications/asian-development-outlook-2020-innovation-asia. 
31 ADB 2020. An Updated Assessment of the Economic Impact of COVID-19, No.133, May 2020.

=== PAGE 41 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 of 56 
 
 
 
 
Specific barriers to accessing public and private climate finance are as follows:  
• 
Costs: Grid-connected renewables, sustainable transport, or low-carbon waste management projects are 
not new to the region, however there is still a perception among governments that these entail higher up-
front costs than conventional alternatives. For example, many governments still do not prioritize electric 
vehicles despite their prevalence in neighboring countries, such as China. 
• 
Projects: There is a major shortage of bankable, green projects, despite an increase in green bonds and 
other green financing instruments in the region.  
• 
Capacity: Governments, state-owned enterprises, and city governments lack the capacity to develop and 
structure green projects that commercial financers would be willing to invest in. This is seen, for example, 
in weaknesses in public-private partnerships processes and frameworks for transport projects, or in the 
case of the gaps in the design of solar or wind tenders in the region. 
The program has been defined to overcome these barriers by a) providing financial structuring support combined 
with financing (targeted to country contexts) specifically aiming to de-risk projects – together this should help 
create a pipeline of bankable projects; and b) developing champions in key ministries and municipal governments 
to help drive forward the green finance agenda in individual countries.  
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
As ACGF GRP is associated with ACGF, a vehicle owned and driven by ASEAN governments, the program is 
well aligned with regional and national policies related to infrastructure, environment, and climate change. At a 
regional level, the program aligns with the ASEAN’s commitment to tackling climate change, whereby ASSC 
Blueprint 2025 provides for strategic measures in order to move ASEAN towards “Sustainable Climate”, including 
strengthening efforts to reduce GHG emissions from main activities of development, facilitating the development 
of comprehensive and coherent responses to climate change challenges, and mainstreaming climate change risk 
management and GHG emission reduction in sectoral planning. It also supports other regional green policies, 
such as the ASEAN Regional Strategy on Sustainable Land Transport, the ASEAN Sustainable Urbanisation 
Strategy, clean energy commitments under the ASEAN Plan of Action for Energy Cooperation, and the Master 
Plan on ASEAN Connectivity 2025.  
At a national level, the ACGF and the program supports commitments made by ASEAN countries in their 
NDCs/INDCs, are where available, is in line with the participating countries’ GCF country programs (i.e. Indonesia, 
Lao PDR, Philippines) indicating as priority sectors projects in sustainable energy, transport, agriculture and 
natural resources. The country profiles (see Annex 2B) also detail the existing climate policies and needs in each 
participating country which the program aims to respond to. The program is in accord with each of the participating 
countries’ climate commitments, as detailed within their NDCs, and summarized in Table 8 below.  
Table 8: Nationally Determined Contributions Emissions Reduction Targets 
Country 
Emissions Reduction Targets 
Cambodia 
Reduce GHG emissions 27% from baseline emissions by 2030 with international support  
Indonesia 
Reduce GHG emissions 26% by 2020, and 29% by 2030 from BAU levels, and 41% by 2030 with international support 
Lao PDR 
Identified a number of actions which it intends to undertake in order reduce its future GHG emissions, subject to the 
provision of international support 
Malaysia 
Reduce GHG intensity of GDP by 35% by 2030 from 2005 level, increase to 45% reduction with enhanced international 
support 
Philippines 
Reduce GHG emissions by 70% from BAU level by 2030 with the condition of international support 
To achieve the above targets, infrastructure is noted as a priority across most ASEAN NDCs. Sectors prioritized 
for mitigation include transport, energy and water sectors; reforestation and forest management, maintenance of 
carbon sinks; as well as developing / improving infrastructure in the waste, water and agricultural sectors.  
The program is also well aligned with green / climate targets in each ASEAN country’s respective socio-economic 
development planning. For example, Malaysia’s 11th Plan (2016-2020) aims to reduce GHGs emission intensity 
of GDP by up to 40%.

=== PAGE 42 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 of 56 
 
 
 
 
ASEAN has recently put an emphasis on promoting green jobs regionally; the organization signed the ASEAN 
Declaration on Promoting Green Jobs for Equity and Inclusive Growth of ASEAN Community in 201832. The focal 
areas include renewable energy, agriculture, construction, energy, forestry, manufacturing, transport, waste 
management organization, tourism, industry and technology. This objective has been of particular importance in 
Malaysia, who has pledged to increase green employment domestically and in ASEAN countries33.At present, the 
highest proportion of green jobs in ASEAN countries are concentrated in renewable energies, specifically liquid 
biofuels, which make up 53 percent of employment in renewable, large-scale hydropower, which makes up 19% 
of employment, and solar photovoltaic, which accounts for 14% of current employment. 
Accredited entity: ADB 
The ADB, as Administrator of the AIF and ACGF, has been an active partner to the ASEAN member countries 
in their infrastructure development goals. As an ADB-managed vehicle, ACGF projects will be part of ADB 
Country Partnership Strategies, and will be discussed through an annual whole-of-government country planning 
process.  
National Designated Authority and GCF Focal Points  
Non-Objection letters (NOLs) have been received by all target countries of the program. ADB has officially 
coordinated with and met with each target country’s NDAs and relevant GCF Focal Points through e-mail and 
videoconference meetings to explain the program proposition and the benefits that it could provide for each 
respective country, and collate feedback on the program design. The NDAs and GCF focal points for the 
participating countries were provided with summary notes on the program. The NDAs and GCF focal points have 
likewise committed to coordinate with the relevant sector ministries, as appropriate.  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
ADB’s economic and financial requirements for projects, coupled with the substantial mitigation impact of the 
program, ensures that the program overall is effective, and will support financially sound investments. Overall, 
the main indicators are as follows: 
• 
Overall, USD 300 million GCF funding will deliver mitigation benefits at USD2.5 per tCO2eq (GCF 
contribution / expected lifetime emission reductions).  
• 
If taking into account revolving use of GCF funds, USD 635 million of GCF funding will deliver mitigation 
benefits at USD 5.3 per tCO2eq (GCF contribution + revolving use of GCF funds / expected lifetime 
emission reductions).  
• 
Taking into account total project costs, the program will support projects that will deliver climate change 
mitigation benefits at an estimated USD33.6 per tCO2e (total project costs / expected lifetime emission 
reductions), based on an assessment of the ACGF pipeline and the assumptions described under Impact 
Potential above34. 
Leverage and co-financing  
The program will use USD 300 million from GCF and will revolve USD 280 million out of this to support 20 projects 
in two cycles of investment. This will result in an effective use of USD 635 million of GCF funds (USD 300 million 
GCF contribution + USD 335 revolved GCF funds) to leverage USD 4,000 million in total project costs, including 
USD 3,385 million from ADB (efforts will be made to leverage funds from AIF and other partners). Overall, the 
ratio of co-financing of the program is as follows:  
• 
Total project costs to GCF contribution: 6.3: 1  
• 
Cofinancing from ADB to GCF contribution: 5.3: 1 
Mobilization of private and commercial funds 
The program has been designed to de-risk projects and catalyze private investment, either for capital expenditure 
or for operations and maintenance. From an analysis of the first four identified projects, USD1 GCF capital is 
expected to catalyze USD 4 in private finance (for capital expenditures). Note, in addition to capital costs, private 
 
32 ASEAN. November 12 2018. ASEAN Leaders Commit to promote green jobs. Retrieved from https://asean.org/asean-
leaders-commit-promote-green-jobs/ 
33 Ibid. 
34 This is comparable to abatement costs of other multi-sector programs

=== PAGE 43 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 of 56 
 
 
 
 
finance for operations and maintenance expenditure is also likely to be mobilized as a result of projects, but has 
not been included in the above estimates.  
Financial and Economic criteria and analysis  
All ACGF GRP projects will be financially viable, after support from the program. ACGF Investment Criteria 
includes bankability criteria, and with GCF financing, projects are expected to cross a bankability threshold 
(e.g. a cumulative Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of 1.05 to 1.15). 
 
All projects will also benefit from ADB’s requirements for financial management and analysis. For each project, 
financial analysis will be prepared in accordance with ADB’s Financial Management and Analysis of Projects 
guidelines. In particular: 
• 
The estimated investment and operations costs, as well as cash inflows, will be clearly presented and will 
be reasonable. 
• 
The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) calculated on a real basis consistent with the ADB Financial 
Management and Analysis of Projects guidelines will be greater than the weighted average cost of capital. 
• 
The FIRR will be robust under various sensitivity scenarios. 
For all the proposed projects, the total economic benefits will exceed the total economic costs when analyzed in 
accordance with ADB’s 2017 Guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Projects.

=== PAGE 44 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes 
as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both. 
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development 
 
35 Lifetime emissions savings are based on expected annual savings multiplied by expected life of the project. This varies by 
project e.g. 20 years for a wind power project, 15 years for an electric vehicle project, 10 years for street lighting etc.  
36 GCF funds will be revolved, and a total of USD 635 million of GCF funds will be used (USD 615 million for loans, USD 20 
million for TA grants).  
37 Leverage ratio is calculated using the effective use of GCF funds after loan funds have been revolved i.e. USD 615 
million. 
E.2. Core indicator targets 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A. 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
and cross-cutting only) 
Annual 
3.7 million t CO2 eq35 
Lifetime 
119 million t CO2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) 
(a) Total project financing 
4,000 million   USD    
(b) Requested GCF amount  
300 million USD36 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
119 million  t CO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
33.6  USD / t CO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq 
removed (e = b / c) 
2.5 USD / t CO2eq  
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross-cutting only) 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
3,385 million   USD 
(g) Public source co-financed 
3,385 million   USD 
(h) Private source finance leveraged  
_____   Choose an item. 
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b)37 
6.3   
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
5.3  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
_____  
Note: In addition to the above, the program is expected to catalyze USD 4 in private and 
commercial finance for every USD 1 of GCF funds in capital expenditures beyond the 
total project costs estimated here.  
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
Click here to enter text.Click here to enter text.% of female 
Indirect 
Click here to enter text. 
Click here to enter text.% of female 
 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
Click here to enter text.  (Expressed as %) of country(ies) 
Indirect 
Click here to enter text.  (Expressed as %) of country(ies)

=== PAGE 45 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. Fund-level impacts 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target3839 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
M1.0 Reduced emissions through 
increased low-emission energy 
access and power generation 
M1.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided - gender-
sensitive energy access 
power generation 
ACGF GRP Annual 
Reports;  
Validation through 
national statistics, 
other official sources 
(at sub-project level)  
0 
1,000,000 
33,000,000 
Impact estimates are based on aggregate 
performance of a pipeline of 20 sub-
projects, including both known and 
hypothetical sub-projects. Hypothetical 
pipeline is based on country mitigation 
needs + assessment of ADB historical and 
projected operations in each country and 
sector. Lifetimes for each sub-project is 
project and technology specific. Full details 
can be found in Annex 22. 
 
The final target is defined as the ex-ante 
GHG impact expected over lifetime of the 
projects. in D.1.  
 
Mid-term target is defined as cumulative 
GHG savings expected to be achieved by 
mid-term point; assumes all pipeline 
projects signed and operational.  
 
Final target is cumulative GHG savings 
expected till 2039 + projected savings for 
the remainder of the project life as of the 
end of the implementation period of the 
project, assumes all pipeline projects 
signed and operational.  
 
Sub-project level validation of estimates 
will be through ADB project level 
monitoring systems. 
M2.0 Reduced emissions through 
increased access to low-emission 
transportation 
M2.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided - low emission 
gender-sensitive 
transport 
ACGF GRP Annual 
Reports;  
Validation through 
national statistics, 
other official sources 
(at sub-project level) 
0 
1,700,000 
26,200,000 
M3.0 Reduced emissions from 
buildings, cities, industries and 
appliances 
M3.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) reduced or 
avoided - buildings, 
cities, industries, and 
appliances 
ACGF GRP Annual 
Reports;  
Validation through 
national statistics, 
other official sources 
(at sub-project level) 
0 
1,300,000 
14,600,000 
M4.0 Reduced emissions from 
land use, reforestation, reduced 
deforestation, and through 
sustainable forest management 
and conservation and 
enhancement of forest carbon 
stocks 
M4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) reduced or 
avoided (including 
increased removals) - 
forest and land use 
ACGF GRP Annual 
Reports;  
Validation through 
national statistics, 
other official sources 
(at sub-project level) 
0 
 
1,500,000 
45,000,000 
 
38 Mid-term evaluation will take place in 2027, and final evaluation will take place in 2039/40 (one year after the completion date of the program) 
39 Impact estimated here is a result of GCF financing as well as co-financing.

=== PAGE 46 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 Mid-term evaluation will take place in 2027, and final evaluation will take place in 2039/40 (one year after completion date of the program) 
41 Impact estimated here is a result of GCF financing as well as co-financing. 
 
 
E.4. Fund-level outcomes 
Expected Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target4041 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
M6.0 Increased number 
of small, medium and 
large low-emission 
power suppliers 
M6.3 MWs of low-
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated as a result 
of GCF support 
ACGF GRP Annual Reports, 
ADB project RRP 
documents, project 
completion reports; external 
/ independent sources (e.g. 
press releases)   
Existing electricity 
generation from 
renewable sources 
in project areas. 
300 
800 
This assumes the expected project pipeline 
will be delivered as is projected (see B2), 
and takes into account no. of RE projects 
expected, assumed country, assumed size 
of sub-project.  
M7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
M7.1 Energy 
intensity/improved 
efficiency of buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances as a result 
of Fund support 
ACGF GRP Annual Reports, 
ADB project RRP 
documents, project 
completion reports; external 
/ independent sources (e.g. 
press releases, statistical 
summaries)   
To be determined 
during baseline 
studies at sub-
project level. 
Improvement 
in appliances – 
at least 10% 
(500,000 MWh 
/ year saved) 
Improvement 
in appliances – 
at least 10% 
(500,000 MWh 
/ year saved) 
This assumes the expected project pipeline 
will be delivered as is projected (see B2), 
and takes into account no. and type of 
energy efficiency projects expected 
(improving appliances, city-level projects, 
EE in public buildings), assumed country, 
assumed size of sub-project. 
M8.0 Increased use of 
low-carbon transport 
M8.1 Number of 
additional female and 
male passengers using 
low-carbon transport 
as a result of Fund 
support  
ACGF GRP Annual Reports, 
ADB project RRP 
documents, project 
completion reports; external 
/ independent sources (e.g. 
press releases)   
To be determined 
during baseline 
studies at sub-
project level. 
8,000,000 
20,000,00 
This assumes the expected project pipeline 
will be delivered as is projected (see B2), 
and takes into account no. of public 
transport projects expected, assumed 
country, assumed size of system. 
M9.0 Improved 
management of land or 
forest areas contributing 
to emissions reductions 
M9.1 Hectares of land 
or forests under 
improved and effective 
management that 
contributes to CO2 
emission reductions  
ACGF GRP Annual Reports, 
ADB project RRP 
documents, project 
completion reports; external 
/ independent sources (e.g. 
press releases)   
To be determined 
during baseline 
studies at sub-
project level. 
20,000 
80,000 
This assumes the expected project pipeline 
will be delivered as is projected (see B2), 
and takes into account no. of agriculture / 
natural resources / forestry projects 
expected, assumed size of reforestation 
(based on similar projects in the region).

=== PAGE 47 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 
42 Mid-term evaluation will take place in 2027, and final evaluation will take place in 2039/40 (one year after completion date of the program) 
43 This is an estimated baseline across all ADB projects in Southeast Asia in 2020, however, the program-specific baseline will be confirmed during the 
program baseline assessment. 
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target42 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
Financing provided to improve 
bankability of gender-sensitive, 
low-emission investments 
GCF financing approved for ACGF GRP 
sub-projects (USD million) 
ADB RRP documents, 
ACGF GRP annual reports 
0 
USD 280 
million 
USD 615 
million 
GCF re-invested funds 
estimated at USD 335 
million.  
 
Based on volume of known 
and projected pipeline and 
calculated at two points 
(2027; 2039).  
ADB co-financing mobilized for ACGF 
GRP sub-projects (USD million) 
ADB RRP documents, 
ACGF GRP annual reports 
0 
USD 1,570 
million 
USD 1,815 
million 
This is based on projected 
pipeline and projected 
disbursements as included in 
the program financial model. 
Share of ACGF GRP sub-projects 
classified as ‘Priority Green’ 
ADB RRP documents, 
project-level climate 
assessments, ACGF GRP 
annual reports, ACGF 
Project Information Memos 
0 
20% 
45% 
Assumes program target will 
be delivered as expected, 
based on projected program 
pipeline given in financial 
model.  
Share of ACGF GRP sub-projects 
approved that directly advance gender 
equality and social inclusion 
ADB RRP documents, 
project-level gender 
assessments, ACGF GRP 
annual reports 
64%43 
45% 
80% 
Assumes program target will 
be delivered as expected, 
also takes into account 
current integration of gender 
issues in ADB projects. 
COVID-19 recovery supported 
through the creation of green 
jobs 
Green jobs created over program lifetime 
(Number of jobs) 
ADB RRP documents, 
project completion reports, 
ACGF GRP annual reports 
0 
100,000 
340,000 
Direct and indirect job 
creation in ‘Green’ and 
‘Priority Green’ sub-projects. 
Capital mobilized from a range 
of sources for replicable low-
emission investments 
Program leverage ratio 
ADB RRP documents, 
ACGF GRP annual reports 
0 
1:6 
1:6 
Program leverage ratio 
calculated from financial 
mode based on an assumed 
investment pipeline.  
Innovative green finance 
mechanisms piloted and 
established 
Green bonds issued with support from 
the program for ACGF GRP target cities / 
sector governments / SOEs (Number of 
bonds) 
ACGF GRP annual reports, 
strategy documents, press 
releases 
0 
2 
4 
No. of bond issuances 
expected based on budget 
allocation, projected demand 
from sovereign issuers, as 
well as ADB experience in 
implementing AIF and ACGF.

=== PAGE 48 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 
44 This will be documented through follow-up surveys with participants. 
45 This will be measured through (a) systems established (e.g. number of GESIAPs improved, no. of GHG monitoring frameworks established) (b) outcomes demonstrated (demonstrated 
improvement in GHG monitoring capacity, demonstrated improvement in understanding of gender and social issues in project sponsor agency). 
PPP projects developed with high 
potential to reach financial close 
(including support from ACGF GRP) 
(Number of PPPs) 
ADB concept notes, ACGF 
Project Info. Memos, ACGF 
GRP annual reports 
0 
2 
4 
No. of PPP transactions 
based on (a) current pipeline 
of potential hybrid PPPs in 
the region (b) budget 
allocation.    
Bankable projects identified 
and structured, including PPPs 
Early-stage projects with embedded 
innovative finance models, documented 
in concept notes, for ACGF GRP pipeline 
(Number of projects) 
ADB concept notes, ACGF 
Project Info. Memos, ACGF 
GRP annual reports 
 
0 
5 
7 
Based on ADB experience in 
implementing AIF and ACGF, 
and other similar initiatives. 
‘Finance-ready’ late-stage projects 
identified and included in ACGF GRP 
pipeline (Number of projects) 
0 
3 
4 
Enabling environment for low-
emission investment improved 
due to strengthened capacity 
and policies. 
National COVID recovery plans / 
programs embedding green financing 
strategies (Number of plans / programs) 
ACGF GRP annual reports, 
strategy documents, press 
releases 
0 
2 
2 
Based on ADB experience in 
implementing AIF and ACGF, 
and other similar initiatives, 
and observed capacity needs 
in low-carbon projects. 
Investors identified / engaged for 
transactions / projects as a result of 
investor roundtables (Number of projects)  
ACGF GRP annual reports, 
roundtable reports 
0 
4 
6 
Green finance ‘champions’ (men and 
women) demonstrating increased 
understanding44 of green finance 
(Number of champions) 
ACGF GRP annual reports, 
training reports 
0 
53 
75 
Enhanced climate monitoring, 
safeguards, gender and social inclusion 
performance demonstrated in ACGF 
GRP sub-projects (No. of projects)45 
ACGF GRP annual reports, 
project reports 
0 
3 
4 
E.6. Activities  
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Component 1: Provision of loans for de-risking low-emission projects 
1.1 ACGF GRP loans to 
low-emission projects 
Origination of a 
pipeline of 
projects, 
screening and 
project selection, 
engagement with 
client 
governments, 
advancing loans, 
- Origination of sub-project pipeline through engagement with ADB 
sectors, countries, strategic partners, city governments etc. 
- Screening of potential sub-projects (including those developed 
through support provided in C2) 
- Engagement with parallel finance partners to secure potential 
financing (if applicable) 
- Sub-project preparation and due diligence, including assessment of 
economic and financial viability, legal and financial due diligence, 
gender assessments, safeguards assessments and due diligence 
- 
Long list project pipelines 
- 
Shortlisted project pipeline 
- 
Loan documents 
- 
Project Information Memos documenting screening 
process and criteria 
- 
Funds committed per project 
- 
Loan agreements signed 
- 
Funds disbursed 
- 
Investments undertaken

=== PAGE 49 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring 
progress, 
reporting, 
evaluation of 
impacts  
- Development of loan agreements and negotiations with 
governments 
- Loan signing and loan effectiveness 
- Monitoring of progress, and evaluation at the end of the 
implementation period. 
- 
Project progress reports 
- 
Project completion reports 
- 
Project evaluation reports 
Component 2: Development of replicable and innovative climate finance models and structures 
2.1 Scaling up Green 
and Sustainable Bonds 
(for sovereigns, cities 
and SOEs) 
Supporting scale 
up of green 
bonds through 
roadmaps and 
bond transaction 
support 
- 2.1.1 Policy Enablers Roadmap Development (Early stage 
countries) 
- 2.1.2 Bond Issuance Roadmaps (Transaction-specific for Advanced 
Countries) 
- 
Green bond roadmap reports 
- 
Green bond standards study reports 
- 
Green bonds issued 
- 
News releases on green bond transactions supported 
- 
Second-opinion reports & third-party verification reports 
/ certificates for bond transactions 
- 
Funds mobilized through green bonds 
2.2 Innovative Green 
Finance Recovery 
Mechanisms (for low-
emission projects) 
Integrating 
innovative 
finance models 
into project 
concepts and 
structures 
- 2.2.1 Rapid assessment studies to embed green recovery financing 
- 2.2.2 Structuring ‘finance-ready’ projects in difficult markets / sub-
sectors 
- 
Rapid assessment studies (RAS) reports 
- 
Project feasibility reports and documents 
- 
ADB project RRPs 
- 
Project due diligence documents 
- 
Climate baselines and assessments 
- 
ACGF Project Information Memorandums 
2.3 Scaling up hybrid 
Public-Private 
Partnership structures 
(PPPs) for renewable 
energy and sustainable 
cities 
Development of 
hybrid-PPP 
models for low-
emission projects 
- Conducting Project Feasibility, Preparation of Tender Documents 
and Marketing, tendering of Projects, Project Agreement Signing, 
Supporting Financial Closure 
- 
Project feasibility reports 
- 
Tender documents and marketing materials, marketing 
events  
- 
Project agreements 
- 
Financing agreements and contracts 
- 
Evaluations of bidder proposals  
Component 3:  Policy, knowledge and capacity building support 
3.1 Promoting national 
Green Finance Recovery 
strategies 
Policy, 
knowledge and 
training on 
financing for 
green recovery 
- 3.1.1. Knowledge and awareness raising through ASEAN Green 
Finance Investor Roundtables 
- 3.1.2. National Green Financing Strategies 
- 3.1.3. Targeted training through the ACGF 6 Champions program 
- 
Green recovery financing strategy reports 
- 
Green recovery financing model concept papers  
- 
Knowledge dialogues organized 
- 
Training events organized 
- 
Investor roundtables organized 
3.2 Ensuring effective 
projects  
Capacity building 
and institutional 
strengthening for 
improved 
implementation 
of low-emission 
projects 
- 3.2.1. Institutional Systems Development (for climate impact 
monitoring, linking to monitoring of NDCs) 
- 3.2.2. Capacity Development (for integrating low-emission 
technologies & innovative financing approaches) 
- 3.2.3. Safeguards Frameworks Implementation (for effective 
safeguards implementation):   
- 3.2.4.Capacity development for effective mainstreaming of gender 
and social inclusion issues 
- 
On-the-job training provided 
- 
Assessments conducted to support gender & 
safeguards implementation 
- 
Additional experts supported to supplement project 
implementation capacity 
- 
Climate baselines and frameworks for projects

=== PAGE 50 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 of 56 
 
 
 
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
A. MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
 
Monitoring and evaluation will be based on the results framework presented in this document, in line with 
GCF policies, and based on ADB systems for progress monitoring, reporting and evaluation.  
 
The main parameters that will be monitored and reported at program and sub-project level will include: 
• 
Emission reductions from GCF impact areas (i.e. fund-level impacts, see E3) 
• 
Sector-relevant outcomes that will deliver emissions reductions e.g. clean energy generated or 
increased use of low-carbon transport (i.e. fund-level outcomes, see E4) 
• 
Program performance across the three components e.g. ACGF GRP financing approved, co-
financing mobilized, number of green bonds issued etc. (see E5). 
• 
Program activities (see E6).  
• 
Program performance on safeguards and gender and social inclusion. 
 
In addition, a wider set of project and sector-specific variables will be monitored at sub-project level, as defined 
in the sub-project’s Design and Monitoring Framework (DMF). 
 
Program level: from ADB to GCF 
 
As AE and EE for the program, ADB will be responsible for monitoring the implementation and results of the 
program as part of overall management. Monitoring will cover financial and technical aspects of program 
implementation, based on the results framework. The implementation of the ESMF and GESIAP will also be 
monitored.  
 
At the start of the investment period and TA period, a baseline assessment will be conducted (in 2021-2022) 
for indicators included in the results framework, and a monitoring system will be established to collect and 
collate information from projects.  
 
Dedicated monitoring capacity for the ACGF GRP will be included in the ACGF PST, and this expert will work 
with ADB project and country teams to monitor progress on sub-projects, and at the program level. Dedicated 
communications experts will also support the development of annual reports. Where needed, ACGF PST will 
provide guidance to ADB officers in charge of monitoring sub-project implementation on monitoring specific 
program impacts (e.g. CO2 emissions). 
 
Program level: reporting 
 
ADB will prepare program-level Annual Performance Reports (APRs) in the format specified by GCF 
detailing:  
a) activities conducted during the year, status of implementation, potential issues and solutions  
b) progress against targets and indicators given in this proposal (see above) 
c) implementation of the ESMF and the GESIAP.  
 
In the APRs will include further details about each sub-project approved, including rationale, description and 
screening against the criteria set out in this proposal. Impact potential estimates will be supported by a 
methodology note.  
 
In addition to APRs, results from the ACGF GRP will also be featured in a broader ACGF Annual Report. 
These will be publicly available reports, documenting results, lessons learned, and impact stories from sub-
projects, targeting ASEAN governments, development partners and other stakeholders. The reports will be 
made available on the ADB and ACGF website. 
 
Project-level monitoring & reporting: from sub-projects to ADB

=== PAGE 51 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At a sub-project level, ADB project monitoring systems will be followed to track implementation progress and 
monitor outputs. As per standard ADB policies, every project will have in place a specific Design and 
Monitoring Framework (DMF) that will monitor impacts, outcomes, outputs and inputs. DMFs for ACGF GRP 
sub-projects will incorporate specific indicators that feed into program-level monitoring. During the loan 
implementation period, executing / implementing agencies of individual projects will prepare the following 
reports (these reports are disclosed in ADB website as per ADB Access to Information Policy): 
a) semi-annual progress reports which provide:  
i. 
progress achieved by output as measured through the indicator's performance targets in the 
project level DMF,  
ii. 
key implementation issues and solutions and 
iii. 
updated implementation plan;  
b) consolidated audited and entity financial statements;  
c) semiannual environmental and social monitoring reports, including projects’ environmental 
management plans; and  
d) a Project Completion Report within 6 months of physical completion of the project.  
 
In addition to standard ADB monitoring, all projects under the ACGF GRP will be required to prepare 
independently validated progress reports during the loan implementation period (construction and up to five 
years of operations) to verify emissions reductions.  
 
B. EVALUATION 
 
A mid-term review of the program will be conducted in 2027 to a) take stock of emerging results from the 
technical assistance activities, b) portfolio distribution, projected impacts and implementation of the first 
phase of investments under the program c) performance on safeguards and gender and social inclusion. 
This will be an independent review, undertaken by an external team engaged for this purpose. Based on the 
review, an updated Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan (GESIAP) will be prepared and finalized. 
 
A final program evaluation will be conducted after the end of the implementation period (2040/2041) to 
evaluate program results and impacts.

=== PAGE 52 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
In this annex we provide a summary of the ADB’s risk framework and approach for the implementation of its 
operations, as well as tables with the analysis of risk specific to the implementation of the ACGF GRP at program 
level. The complex nature of the program – which is multi-country and multi-sector, involving a large number of 
stakeholders – will require the regular monitoring of risks.  However, the level of key risks that have been defined as 
potentially affecting the performance of the program, are generally moderate and expected to be mitigated to a 
substantial degree by the design of the program, as well as ADB’s established operational tools and control 
mechanisms.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1: Implementation delays due to COVID-19 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Projects face implementation delays due to COVID-19 related lockdowns and travel restrictions. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Individual projects may face delays in a) conducting feasibility studies (which in turn could delay disbursements from 
GCF for the first phase of investment) b) initiating implementation of detailed design, and c) initiating construction due 
to COVID-19 related shutdowns. At a project level, ADB is already responding to this issue on ongoing projects, and 
is working with client governments to a) conduct meetings using virtual platforms, including for loan negotiations and 
b) mobilize local consultants to conduct aspects of feasibility studies that need on-the-ground work. The presence of 
country missions also helps ADB to work with governments to mitigate the impact of delays where possible.  
Selected Risk Factor 2: Lack of prioritization by governments of low-carbon projects 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Borrower governments fiscal burden may not allow for external borrowing, and / or governments may choose to 
invest in non-green projects with external financing. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The program has been designed to mitigate this risk by a) using government financing more efficiently to mobilize 
capital, and therefore reduce the burden on public budgets, and b) support governments prioritize low-carbon projects 
through policy dialogue, targeted technical assistance, and funding for low-emission projects. The potential and 
opportunities for green financing for COVID recovery will also be raised with governments during ADB country 
programming discussions, as part of ACGF origination and project identification processes. 
Selected Risk Factor 3: ESS alignment 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Beneficiaries’ limited capacity to comply with national regulations and/or ADB and GCF environmental and social 
policy requirements. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
In order to identify and effectively address potential impacts from projects funded by the program, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is in place, in compliance with ADB Safeguards Policy Statement (SPS 
2009), which will apply to any project that utilizes GCF funds through the program. ADB will apply its Safeguard 
Policy Statement (SPS 2009) and other relevant policies for all sub-projects. In addition, it will employ IFC 
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHS 2007) to support assuring adequate measures are in place in 
subprojects. All ADB risk categories (A, B and C) of projects will be considered and the ADB safeguards

=== PAGE 53 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 of 56 
 
 
 
 
requirements will apply to minimize potential risks. Training will be provided both for borrowers and project 
developers as may be required for subprojects. 
Selected Risk Factor 4: Procurement 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Lack of compliance with procurement rules and / or limited capacity in procurement issues 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
All procurement to be financed under the program must be carried out in accordance with ADB’s procurement policy 
and regulations. As required, and on a project-by-project basis, ADB will support procurement processes and offer 
procurement training. 
Selected Risk Factor 5: Financial  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Lack of ability of borrowers to meet repayment of debts from the program  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
All loans from the program will be aligned with ADB and ACGF sovereign loans and thus be covered by the similar 
sovereign guarantees. As such the credit or loan default risk on repayment of program loans is low and related only 
to risks of the sovereign itself. To further ensure that underlying subprojects of the program are financially sustainable 
themselves and don’t create a further burden on the sovereign government, the program and ACGF explicitly focus 
on developing financially bankable models at the subproject level itself, which is a criteria for lending from ACGF. 
This therefore double ensures that credit risk will not be a major issue for the program. 
Selected Risk Factor 6: Financial 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Forex 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Volatile local currencies versus the USD loans from the program create financial viability stresses on underlying 
projects. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
All lending including from the program and ADB will be assessed for financial risks in project specific financial models 
which include local currency to USD likely long-term swap rates. This should provide adequate comfort that project 
financials are able to cope with any future currency volatility. In addition in most sovereign loan projects, the 
sovereign government assumes currency risks before passing on loans to projects in local currency. This also 
provides adequate comfort on this risk, with sovereigns better able to match currency outflows and inflows.   
Selected Risk Factor 7: Lack of co-financing or parallel financing for sub-projects 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Co-financing from ADB does not materialize which results in a financing gap for sub-projects 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
At a minimum, ADB co-financing will be identified for every project due to a) projects being selected from ADB 
country pipelines with pre-identified allocations from ADB country programs b) sub-project eligibility criteria requiring 
at least 30% co-financing from ADB. There is minimal risk of a lack of ADB financing for sovereign projects in the 
region – ADB has significant sovereign operations in Southeast Asia, with annual commitments of over USD 5 billion 
per year, in 2018 and 2019, and an estimated USD 11 billion in 2020. In addition, ADB’s projected pipeline in the 
region as documented in country operations business plans, is estimated at over USD 11 billion, per year between 
2021 and 2023.

=== PAGE 54 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 of 56 
 
 
 
 
In addition to ADB co-financing, several partners have signed MOUs and letters of commitment to proactively work 
with the ACGF PST to identify parallel financing for ACGF projects, and these arrangements will benefit sub-projects 
under the ACGF GRP as well. In addition, at a corporate level, ADB has signed framework agreements with several 
development partners to facilitate financing for projects, and regularly works with partners to consider financing 
opportunities. These mechanisms will be fully leveraged for ACGF GRP sub-projects if needed.  
Selected Risk Factor 8: Money laundering, terrorist financing and prohibited practices 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Prohibited practices 
Low 
Low 
Description 
GCF financing through ACGF GRP results in money laundering, terrorist financing or other prohibited practices.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
GCF financing will be provided as loans to sovereign and sovereign-backed entities, and no funds will be provided as 
direct distribution of goods or cash transfers, which reduces the risk of this financing being used to support prohibited 
practices. As GCF funds will be provided alongside co-financing from ADB, ADB Integrity Principles and associated 
due diligence will apply at sub-project level, which will also mitigate this risk. 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
The ACGF GRP Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed to 
ensure that environmental and social risks and impacts from all sub-projects under the program will be 
minimized and mitigated to acceptable levels (see Annex 6). As a program managed by ADB, ADB’s 
safeguards policies and requirements as outlined in ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS) will be 
followed for every sub-project that receives funds from ACGF GRP.  
As per ADB SPS, every sub-project will be initially reviewed for technical and financial merit before being subject 
to safeguards screening, review and assessment. The ESMF presents the roles, responsibilities, and procedures 
in place to avoid, minimize, and mitigate any direct, indirect, cumulative, and induced: 
a) 
adverse impacts and/or risks on the environment;  
b) 
adverse impacts and risks of involuntary resettlement; and  
c) 
adverse impacts on indigenous peoples 46  and their communities that may arise from the 
implementation of sub-projects.  
 
All sub-projects under the ACGF GRP will be processed by ADB, and will be subject to meeting the objectives 
and requirements of ADB’s SPS. In addition, and as required as per ADB’s SPS, ADB will employ IFC 
Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines to ensure adequate measures are in place in projects.47 
As per ADB’s SPS, ADB will not finance sub-projects that do not comply with its safeguard policy statement, nor 
will it finance sub-projects that do not comply with the host country’s social and environmental laws and 
regulations, including those laws implementing host country obligations under international law. In addition, ADB 
will not finance activities on the prohibited investment activities list (SPS Appendix 5). All ADB safeguard 
categories (A, B and C) of sub-projects will be considered and the ADB safeguards requirements will apply to 
avoid, minimize, mitigate, and compensate potential risks and impacts.  
In the implementation of this ESMF and ADB’s SPS, ADB will work with borrower governments to ensure that all 
potential ACGF GRP sub-projects will:  
i. 
be screened, categorized, and properly appraised in terms of their environmental and social impacts and 
risks in line with ADB’s SPS and agreed actions, if any, are identified to fulfill gaps.  
ii. 
be reviewed and evaluated against national policies, laws, regulations and standards on environment, 
health, safety; involuntary resettlement and land acquisition; indigenous peoples and physical cultural 
 
46 It is noted that countries use a range of terminology to refer to indigenous people. 
47 International Finance Corporation. Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines. 
www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines

=== PAGE 55 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 of 56 
 
 
 
 
resources; and meaningful public consultation;  
iii. 
address gender and development issues, including through meaningful consultation where relevant 
(including women and tailored to the needs of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups);  
iv. 
establish a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) to receive and facilitate resolution of the affected 
people’s concerns and grievances regarding the project’s environmental and social safeguards 
performance;  
v. 
include in contracts with civil works contractors, subcontractors and other providers of goods and services 
provisions to employ local labor wherever possible, and to ensure compliance with ADB’s social 
safeguards requirements and international core labor standards, as defined in ADB’s Core Labor 
Standards Handbook.48 
 
The interim ESS standards currently applied by the GCF are the International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
Environmental and Social Performance Standards. As an accredited entity of the GCF, ADB’s SPS and 
procedures at an institutional level are aligned with GCF ESS standards.  
Table 9. Summary of ADB Safeguards Requirements for environment, involuntary resettlement 
and indigenous peoples 
Category (Risk 
Rating) 
Environmental Safeguards 
Involuntary 
Resettlement 
Safeguards 
Indigenous Peoples Safeguards 
Category A  
(with potential 
significant impacts) 
Comply with (i) Safeguard Requirements 
1 of the ADB SPS (2009) and (ii) 
national laws. Prepare EIA (with EMP). 
Retain qualified and experienced 
external experts to verify 
compliance.  
Comply with (i) Safeguard 
Requirements 2 of the ADB 
SPS (2009), including RP 
preparation with social 
assessment, submission, & 
actions (as deemed relevant 
by ADB) 
Comply with (i) Safeguard Requirements 3 of the 
ADB SPS (2009), and (ii) national laws. Prepare 
and follow processes as deemed relevant by ADB.  
Broad community support as outlined in the ADB 
SPS (2009) must be obtained. Meaningful 
consultation must be conducted and documented. 
Prepare an IP Plan (IPP) 
Category B  
(with less significant 
impacts) 
Comply with (i) Safeguard 
Requirements 1 of the ADB SPS 
(2009) and (ii) national laws.  
Produce an IEE (with EMP). 
Disclose IEE prior to project 
approval. 
Comply with (i) 
Safeguard Requirements 
2 of the ADB SPS (2009) 
and (ii) national laws.  
Prepare an RP with 
social assessment. 
Comply with (i) Safeguard Requirements 3 of the 
ADB SPS (2009), and (ii) national laws. Prepare 
and follow processes as deemed relevant by ADB 
SPS (2009). Broad community support must be 
obtained. Meaningful consultation must be 
conducted and documented. 
Prepare an IP Plan (IPP). 
Category C (with 
minimal or no 
impacts) 
Review environmental implications. 
Comply with national laws. 
Assess if there are any IR 
impacts and prepare a 
Due Diligence Report 
(DDR).  
Comply with national 
laws 
Comply with (i) Safeguard Requirements 3 of 
the ADB SPS (2009), and (ii) national laws.  
Assess if there any IP impacts and prepare a 
DDR. Comply with national laws 
Category FI 
Investments have potential for 
environmental and social risks 
(Category A and B): establish an 
environment and social 
management system (ESMS) as 
part of overall FI management 
system. For any sub-project with 
significant risks, ADB clearance of 
EIA required before subproject 
approval.  
Investments have 
potential for involuntary 
resettlement  (Category A 
and B)  risks: establish an 
environment and social 
management system 
(ESMS) as part of overall 
FI management system. 
For any sub-project with 
significant risks, ADB 
clearance of RP required 
before subproject 
approval.  
Investments have potential for indigenous 
peoples (IP)  risks (Category A and B): 
establish an environment and social 
management system (ESMS) as part of 
overall FI management system. For any sub-
project with significant risks, ADB clearance of 
IPP required before subproject approval.  
ADB = Asian Development Bank; EIA = environmental impact assessment; FI = Financial Intermediaries; IEE = initial environmental 
examination; IPP = indigenous peoples plan; IR = involuntary resettlement; RP = resettlement plan; EMP = environmental 
management plan. 
 
48 ADB, ILO. 2006. Core Labor Standards Handbook. Manila.

=== PAGE 56 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 of 56 
 
 
 
 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
A program-level gender and social inclusion action plan (GESIAP) has been prepared (see Annex 8) to  
integrate aspects of gender-sensitive development into the design of the ACGF GRP. As an ADB-managed 
program, the ACGF GRP GESIAP builds on existing ADB systems to integrate gender mainstreaming and 
social inclusion into sovereign projects.  
 
At a corporate strategy level, ADB is committed to support gender equality through gender-inclusive project 
designs in at least 75% of its sovereign and non-sovereign operations by 2030. ADB’s Gender and 
Development Framework Policy 49  is supported by a four-tier gender mainstreaming categorization 
framework with associated targets applying to sovereign operations (see Table 10). Targets for ADB 
operations require that at least 71% of projects must have gender elements in the project concept/design 
(classified as SGE/GEN or EGM by ADB “at entry”) by 2024 and at least 50% are categorised under ADB’s 
gender mainstreaming categories directly addressing gender equality  (GEN or EGM). 
Table 10. ADB gender mainstreaming categorization framework  
Category  
Description 
Gender Equity Theme 
(GEN) 
A project is assigned GEN if (i) the project outcome directly addresses gender equality and/or 
women's empowerment by narrowing gender disparities through access to social services (e.g. 
education, health, and water supply/sanitation); and/or economic and financial resources and 
opportunities (e.g. employment opportunities, financial services, land, and markets), and/or basic 
rural and urban infrastructure (e.g. rural electrification, rural roads, pro-poor energy distribution, and 
urban services for the poor); and/or enhancing voices and rights (e.g. decision making processes 
and structures, political empowerment, and grievance mechanisms) 
Effective Gender 
Mainstreaming (EGM) 
A project is assigned EGM if the project outcome is not gender equality or women's empowerment, 
but project outputs are designed to directly improve women’s access to social services, and/or 
economic and financial resources and opportunities, and/or basic rural and urban infrastructure, 
and/or enhancing voices and rights, which contribute to gender equality and women's 
empowerment. 
Some Gender Elements 
(SGE) 
A project is assigned SGE if by its nature it is likely to directly improve women's access to social 
services; and/or economic and financial resources and opportunities, and/or basic rural and urban 
infrastructure, and/or enhance their voices and rights, but that included little, if any gender analysis 
and few or no specific design features; or is unlikely to directly improve women’s access to social, 
economic or financial resources or opportunities, but significant efforts were made during project 
preparation to identify potential positive and negative impacts on women. 
No Gender Elements (NGE) 
Project has no gender elements in place. 
 
ACGF GRP GESIAP builds on ADB targets, and adopts a program level target of ‘80% of ACGF GRP projects 
directly advance gender equality and social inclusion in infrastructure through economic empowerment activities, 
increased access to services, and enhanced participation in decision making processes or institutions’, by close 
of the facility (i.e. 2039). Due to the multi-sector nature of the program, cross-sectoral actions (with associated 
targets and indicators) are included in the GESIAP to enable broad mainstreaming of gender and social inclusion 
across the program: 
 
• 
ACGF GRP sub-projects prepare and implement a gender equality and social inclusion action plan 
(GESIAP) 
• 
ACGF GRP sub-projects include green jobs for women and vulnerable groups, applying core labor 
standards including pay equity and flexible working conditions, as well as female friendly worksites and sex-
suitable personal protective equipment 
• 
Equitable participation of females and males in green technology technical and vocational training activities 
and certification  
 
49 ADB Gender and Development

=== PAGE 57 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 of 56 
 
 
 
 
• 
Support for women’s economic empowerment in ACGF GRP sub-projects through (where applicable) 
business skills training and access to financial inclusion programs 
• 
Programs implemented through financial intermediaries deliver tangible benefits to women and vulnerable 
groups through improving their access to decision making in financial management and leadership roles.   
• 
ACGF grant funded policy, knowledge and capacity building events advance gender equality and social 
inclusion 
 
The ACGF GRP GESIAP will be implemented by ADB as GCF AE as well as Executing Entity (EE) for the ACGF 
GRP. At a program level, ADB will monitor the implementation of the GESIAP, based on monitoring by ADB sub-
project teams. This role will be included in the functional responsibilities of the team managing the ACGF GRP in 
ADB Southeast Asia Department. In this role, ADB staff managing the ACGF GRP will work closely with gender 
specialists that monitor gender and social inclusion across ADB’s overall portfolio in Southeast Asia as well as 
sub-project specific gender experts. 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
ADB systems for financial management, audit and procurement will apply for all sub-projects supported by 
GCF funds under the ACGF GRP.  
Financial Management and Audit. Details of every projects’ financial accounting, disbursement procedures 
and auditing requirements will be developed during preparation of each project, in accordance with ADB’s 
policies on Financial Management and Analysis of Projects and will be included their respective project 
administration manuals. The loan proceeds for all ACGF GRP projects will be disbursed in accordance with 
ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time), and detailed arrangements 
agreed upon between the respective governments and ADB. Public disclosure of the audited project’s 
financial statements, including the auditor’s opinion on the subproject financial statements, will be guided by 
ADB’s Access to Information Policy 2018.  
Procurement. Procurement of consulting services to support the execution of the technical assistance grant 
will be in accordance with ADB’s Procurement Guidelines (2017, as amended from time to time).  All 
procurement for ACGF GRP projects will also be done in accordance with ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
and Procurement Regulations for ADB Borrowers (2017, as amended from time to time), and will be done 
by the Implementing Agencies for each project. To the extent possible, ADB staff will support procurement 
processes and offer procurement training. Procurement plans for the respective projects shall be in 
accordance with their respective project administration manuals. A detailed procurement plan for use of GCF 
grants for technical assistance will be included in Annex 10.  
Implementation of the program, particularly on the projects, shall conform to all applicable ADB policies, as 
amended from time to time, including those concerning anticorruption measures, anti-money laundering, 
counter terrorist financing, safeguards, gender, procurement, consulting services, and disbursement. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 58 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 of 56 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s)  
☒ 
Annex 2 
 
Pre-feasibility / feasibility study  
2.A. Project reports and project concepts 
2.B. Assessment of climate and COVID-19 baseline for Southeast Asia 
☒ 
Annex 3 
ACGF GRP Financial Model V1 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones  
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category I1:  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan  
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan   
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request  
☐ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  GHG emissions reduction model 
☒ 
Annex 23  ACGF Eligibility Criteria and additional documentation

=== PAGE 59 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 60 ===
MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
GEDUNG R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO LANTAI 2, JALAN DR. WAHIDIN NOMOR I, JAKARTA 10710
TELEPON (021) 3441484; FAKSIMILE (021) 3848049; LAMAN FISKAL.KEMENKEU.GO.ID
Ref
:
S-124/KF/2020
16 Oktober 2020
Sifat
:
Sangat Segera
Lampiran
:
satu berkas
Yth.
Mr. Yannick Glemarec Executive Director Green Climate Fund Songdo Business District  Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004 Republic of Korea
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund
175, Art center-daero
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 406-840
Republic of Korea
 
Subject
:
Funding Proposal for the GCF by Asian Development Bank regarding ASEAN 
Catalytic Green Finance Facility (ACGF) “Green Recovery Program” for post-
COVID Infrastructure
 
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
We refer to the program of ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility (ACGF) “Green Recovery
Program” for post-COVID Infrastructure in Indonesia as included in the funding proposal submitted
by Asian Development Bank (ADB) to us on 21 September 2020.
The undersigned is the Chairman of Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance as the National
Designated Authority of Indonesia.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the program as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Indonesia has no-objection to the program as included in the funding
proposal;
(b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Indonesia’s national
priorities, strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the program as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to program as included in
the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within
the scope of the program.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
 
 
Yours Faithfully,
Kepala Badan Kebijakan Fiskal
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditandatangani secara elektronik
 
Febrio Nathan Kacaribu
Chairman

=== PAGE 61 ===
cc:
Kepala Pusat Kebijakan Pembiayaan Perubahan Iklim dan Multilateral
Director of Center for Climate Finance and Multilateral Policy

=== PAGE 65 ===
29 October 2020  
 
MR. YANNICK GLEMAREC  
Executive Director  
Green Climate Fund Secretariat  
Songdo, Republic of Korea  
 
 
Dear Mr. Glemarec:  
 
RE: FUNDING PROPOSAL ON ASEAN CATALYTIC GREEN FINANCE FACILITY 
(ACGF) “GREEN RECOVERY PROGRAM” FOR POST-COVID INFRASTRUCTURE 
BY THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
This letter refers to the project ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility (ACGF) “Green 
Recovery Program” for post-COVID infrastructure under the funding proposal submitted by 
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) to the NDA on 03 September 2020. 
 
The undersigned is the National Focal Point and duly authorized representative of the Climate 
Change Commission (CCC) as the National Designated Authority to the GCF of the 
Philippines.  
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, 
we communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the proposal, signifying that:  
 
a. The Government of the Philippines has no-objection to the project as included in 
the funding proposal; 
 
b. The project, as included in the funding proposal, is in conformity with the 
Philippines’ national priorities, strategies and plans; and  
 
c. In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the project, as 
included in the funding proposal, is in conformity with relevant national laws and 
regulations.  
 
We confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project, as included 
in the funding proposal, has been duly followed. We also confirm that our no-objection applies 
to all projects and activities to be implemented within the scope of the program. 
      
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.  
 
 
Very truly yours,  
 
 
 
RACHEL ANNE S. HERRERA  
Commissioner, Climate Change Commission

=== PAGE 66 ===
cf:  
MR. ANOUJ MEHTA 
Unit Head, Green and Innovative Finance and the ACGF 
Southeast Asia Department 
Asian Development Bank

=== PAGE 67 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic programme information 
Programme title 
ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility (ACGF): Green 
Recovery Program 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category I-1 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Philippines* 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Thursday, November 12, 2020 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Bahasa Indonesia, Burmese, Khmer, Lao, Malay, 
Thai, Vietnamese 
Explanation on language 
Languages of disclosure are working languages in the 
Program’s participating countries. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/651616/acgf-environmental-social-mgt-
framework.pdf 
Bahasa Indonesia: 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/652096/acgf-environmental-social-mgt-
framework-id.pdf

=== PAGE 68 ===
Burmese: 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/652181/acgf-environmental-social-mgt-
framework-my.pdf   
 
Khmer: 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/652101/acgf-environmental-social-mgt-
framework-km.pdf  
 
Lao: 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/652186/acgf-environmental-social-mgt-
framework-lo.pdf*  
 
Malay: 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/652106/acgf-environmental-social-mgt-
framework-ms.pdf 
Other link(s) 
www.adb.org/acgf 
Remarks 
As ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
1 programme is contained in ‘ACGF Green Recovery 
Program Environmental and Social Management 
Framework’.  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, November 13, 2020 
Place 
Hard copies will also be made available in ADB Resident 
Missions that are currently operating: 
 
Cambodia Resident Mission (CARM) 
No. 29, Suramarit Boulevard (St. 268) Sangkat Chaktomuk, 
Khan Daun Penh, Phnom Penh, Cambodia P.O. Box 2436 
 
Lao Resident Mission (LRM) 
Corner of Lanexang Avenue & Samsenthai Road P.O. Box 
9724 Vientiane, Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 
Thailand Resident Mission (TRM) 
23rd Floor, The Offices at Central World, 999/9 Rama 1 Road, 
Pathumwan Bangkok 10330, Thailand 
 
Viet Nam Resident Mission (VRM)

=== PAGE 69 ===
3rd Floor, CornerStone Building, 16 Phan Chu Trinh Str., 
Hoan Kiem Dist, Hanoi, Viet Nam 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Tuesday, March 16, 2021 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
*Subsequent to the disclosure of the form to the Board and active observers on 14 November 
2020, the following updates have been made: Thailand and Vietnam have been deleted as they 
have been removed from the Program. In addition, the link to all languages
(https://www.adb.org/documents/asean-catalytic-green-finance-facility-environmental-social-
mgt-framework), in which the ESMS has been made available, has been replaced with a link for 
every language (except for Thai and Vietnamese) for ease of access.

=== PAGE 70 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 70 
 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP156 
Proposal name: 
ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility (ACGF): Green Recovery 
Program 
Accredited entity: 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
Country/(ies): 
Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 
Malaysia, Philippines 
Project/programme size:  
Large 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The programme is designed as the first 
regional ‘green recovery’ programme for Asia 
to kick-start a cycle of low-emission climate 
change mitigation investments to support 
economic recovery following the coronavirus 
disease 2019 pandemic 
Subprojects are currently not finalized in the 
pipeline, and could have high environmental 
and social safeguards risks; an environmental 
and social management framework has been 
prepared to mitigate such risks and ensure 
that all subprojects comply with GCF policies 
on environmental and social safeguards and 
gender  
Using a revolving funds model, the 
programme is expected to target at least 20 
high-impact, low-emission subprojects, and 
use leveraged and blended finance models to 
catalyse increased capital from public and 
private sources for such investments 
The programme currently has all co-
financing listed as parallel financing; actual 
co-financing amounts will be identified for 
each subproject at the preparatory stage and 
subprojects will require at least 30% co-
financing from the Asian Development Bank 
as included in the subproject eligibility 
criteria. Additional financing opportunities 
will also be identified during the project 
preparation phase for subprojects and will 
use existing Asian Development Bank 
framework agreements and country pipelines 
to actualize co-financing 
The programme has strong country 
ownership, leveraging the outreach of the 
ASEAN Infrastructure Fund, which is owned 
by all countries in South-East Asia and which 
works directly with countries’ key line 
agencies and ministries; the programme also 
aims to work with national development 
banks and GCF direct access entities, where 
feasible, thereby further increasing country

=== PAGE 71 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 71 
 
 
 
ownership at all governance levels; all no-
objection letters have been received for 
targeted countries, confirming the 
willingness of countries to be part of the 
programme 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XVII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background 
3. 
South-East Asia is one of the highest energy-intensive regions in the world, and with 
rapid urbanization and industrialization, coupled with increasing dependency on coal- and gas-
fired power plants, an increasing trend in carbon emissions has been recorded in the region. 
Most of these emissions are related to transport, construction and electricity use in buildings. In 
addition, land-use changes and agriculture have contributed to over half of the region’s 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. It has been estimated that countries in the region require over 
USD 200 billion per year between 2016 and 2030 to support the necessary investments in 
climate-compatible infrastructure and development; this gap is further widening owing to 
limited public budgets and the high risk associated with large public climate projects. Against 
this backdrop, coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has had a major impact on the region; it is 
estimated that the regional economy will shrink by 3.8 per cent in 2020, affecting the countries’ 
abilities to implement their climate targets and plans. As a result of the growing health crisis, 
public budgets are already constrained and being diverted to support the COVID-19 emergency 
response, through mostly cash transfers and supporting healthcare systems. This has further 
slowed and even halted infrastructure investments for supporting low-emission projects.   
4. 
The climate-related objective of this programme is to support the target countries in 
implementing low-emission, climate-compatible projects in South-East Asia and help them to 
implement their nationally determined contributions (NDCs). At present, there is no evidence of 
substantial green recovery actions in the region, and carbon-intensive growth trends continue 
to be seen. Without integrating climate considerations into key projects, there is a risk of 
rebounding or locking in of GHG emissions in non-green infrastructure, such as development of 
coal-fired electricity generation, inefficient modal transport systems and unsustainable land-use 
practices that cause emissions. The programme therefore aims to initially support at least 20 
subprojects in five countries with a potential reduction in emissions of 119 million tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2eq). Forty-five per cent of the subprojects would classify as 
‘Priority Green’, meeting global best practice thresholds for GHG reductions for areas such as 
renewable energy and energy efficiency, low-carbon transport, reforestation and urban.  
5. 
The programme has requested USD 300 million in total GCF financing (USD 280 
concessional loans for supporting low-emission subprojects and USD 20 million grants in 
technical assistance). At the subproject level, GCF funds will be complemented by parallel 
finance from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) (at least 30 per cent of co-financing will be 
provided by ADB as included in the eligibility criteria for subprojects) and, where feasible and 
depending on subproject demand, by alternative investment fund loans, as well as loans from 
other financiers (e.g. AFD, KfW, European Investment Bank) with loan amounts and terms 
varying by project (parallel co-financing). Overall, GCF funding of USD 300 million is expected to 
support sub-projects with a total project cost of USD 4,000 million. The programme’s 
environmental and social safeguards risk is categorized as I-1; an environmental and social

=== PAGE 72 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 72 
 
 
 
management framework and a gender action plan consistent with GCF policies are available to 
mitigate such risk in the subprojects.  
2.2 
Component by component analysis 
Component 1 – Provision of loans for de-risking low-emission projects (total: USD 4 billion; GCF 
USD 280 million or 8.4 per cent) 
6. 
GCF loans will complement financing from the ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility 
(ACGF) and ADB, and financing from other development partners (as appropriate), to de-risk 
funds to improve the bankability of low-emission infrastructure projects. GCF loans will be used 
in a revolving structure with repayments from the first investment phase supporting 
subsequent investments in order to: a) maximize the catalytic effect of GCF financing and 
support a substantial pipeline of 20 subprojects between 2021 and 2050; b) progressively 
support higher-performing low-emission subprojects over time, commensurate with increasing 
climate ambition over time; and c) progressively utilize more sophisticated innovative 
structures more widely over time. Subprojects will be selected through predefined project-level 
eligibility criteria and requirements, which include at least 30 per cent co-financing from ADB. 
The focus of the subprojects will be on climate additionality and impact, and bankability to 
catalyse resources from private, commercial and institutional sources. Another key 
consideration in the selection of subprojects will be the potential to generate green jobs in 
support of post-COVID economic recovery.  
7. 
GCF loans will be provided to sovereign borrowers on proposed lending terms (see table 
3 in the funding proposal). The pricing proposed is based on extensive discussions with the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) governments during the ongoing 
implementation of the ACGF pilot phase in 2019–2020, and takes into account the following 
issues: a) given their increasing fiscal deficit concerns, governments are looking to limit 
sovereign guarantees to all but the most competitive sources of finance which can demonstrate 
development impact and leverage/crowding of other sources; b) limited revenue models in 
projects, especially resulting from the COVID-19 crisis, require competitively priced funds, 
especially if attempting to usher in untested or new technologies which are required to promote 
a transformational shift for a sector; c) funds need to be more competitive than the local 
currency funds available domestically in many countries (e.g. Indonesia, Philippines, Malaysia) 
in order to incentivize the scaling up of low-carbon alternatives.  
8. 
Funds will be provided, alongside ADB sovereign loans, to borrower governments for 
financing specific subprojects, either directly or through a financial intermediary. In either case, 
provision of funds will be to subprojects that comply with the eligibility criteria and 
conditionalities as stated in the funding proposal. The most likely use of funds will be to cover 
capital costs of a project to improve the financing cost (i.e. weighted average cost of capital); 
however, over time, new products and models will also be explored to meet the needs of 
subprojects. 
9. 
The indicative subproject pipeline for the programme is provided in the funding 
proposal, which is drawn from confirmed and expected projects in ADB’s country operations 
business plans and pipelines. For the first investment phase (2021–2027), two ‘shovel-ready’ 
sub-projects have been identified (i.e. those where feasibility studies have been completed or 
are close to completion) with a high likelihood of being financed by the programme in 2021. 
Beyond this, an additional two project concepts have been identified (already included in ADB’s 
country pipelines), which could also qualify for support from the programme in 2022 and 2023, 
subject to the completion of feasibility studies and full screening against eligibility criteria. 
Component 2 – Development of replicable and innovative climate finance models and structures 
(total: USD 12.24 million; GCF USD 12.24 million or 100 per cent)

=== PAGE 73 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 73 
 
 
 
10. 
There is a great need to scale up green and sustainable climate finance models and 
structures in the countries covered under this project. This component will mainstream 
innovative financing instruments (green sustainable bonds, hybrid public–private partnership 
models and green securitization) at city or municipal governments, state-owned enterprises 
and sovereign sectoral ministries in targeted countries, and help to generate a pipeline of 
investments in the region that demonstrate the potential of innovative financing mechanisms 
and instruments – such as green bonds and hybrid public–private partnerships – to raise capital 
at scale. Based on the financing needs of each investment, financing provided under component 
1 will be used to de-risk these investments to realize their GHG reduction potential. The 
component will carry out rapid assessment studies to assess the potential of such instruments 
to mainstream them in subprojects.  
Component 3 – Policy, knowledge and capacity-building support (total cost: USD 5.49 million; GCF 
USD 5.49 million or 100 per cent) 
11. 
In addition to arranging transactions and developing models, it is equally important to 
support a) upstream awareness- and knowledge-building across ASEAN governments to reach 
the required level of awareness and dialogue for scaling up green finance projects into 
government planning; and b) downstream implementation capacity building to ensure that 
innovative projects being developed under the ACGF Green Recovery Program achieve the 
climate targets set, thereby serving as demonstration projects for replication. Component 3 will 
support both these aspects. 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria 
3.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
                               Scale: High 
12. 
The programme will deliver emission reductions of 119 MtCO2eq over its lifetime. This 
is a conservative estimate based on the identified investments in the first phase of investment 
(with estimated emission savings of 29 MtCO2eq over individual lifespans) and projected 
emission savings from the overall portfolio. The impact potential for projects will be 
documented in the feasibility studies and ADB loan approval documents, and, where possible, 
green indicators and targets will be included in the monitoring frameworks for individual 
projects. 
13. 
A project-specific approach is used to estimate the emission reductions of the individual 
interventions. C-NET has not yet reviewed the estimates for the individual interventions, but the 
overall approach for a bottom-up estimate for the portfolio is acceptable as it seems that the 
estimates have followed the approach of the clean development mechanism and other 
established methodological standards. The selection of the projects will be based on the 
taxonomy applied by multilateral development banks for climate projects and is deemed 
acceptable in the context of this programme. A complete annex 22 (see para. 39 below) has not 
yet been developed and, hence, the impact analysis is not yet finalized.  
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential     
 
 
          Scale: Medium to High 
14. 
The programme has been designed with the aim of supporting a strategic and 
transformational shift in the way countries invest in infrastructure in the limited time window 
for planning and rolling out post-COVID recovery. As much of the investment need for the 
region is for new infrastructure, the programme, by supporting low-emission projects, will help 
selected ASEAN countries to achieve transformational planning and programming and avoid 
locking in emissions in the longer term. The programme design includes a strong focus on

=== PAGE 74 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 74 
 
 
 
scaling up and replicating low-emission infrastructure investments in selected ASEAN countries, 
beyond the individual investments that will be supported by the ACGF Green Recovery Program. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
                               Scale: High 
15. 
The programme will contribute to direct and indirect co-benefits linked to the 
implementation of activities that are also fully aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals. 
GCF standards and criteria will accelerate the greening of ACGF infrastructure investments and 
support more replicable project models that can be demonstrated. The volume of GCF financing 
allowed per project has been set to particularly incentivize Priority Green projects, which are 
expected to contribute to environmental outcomes in the longer term. With GCF financing, ACGF 
projects will help to reduce GHG emissions and contribute to other environmental objectives, 
such as reducing air and water pollution, improving solid waste management and promoting 
sustainable natural capital management. The programme is also estimated to create 340,000 
green jobs.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
                 Scale: High 
16. 
The COVID-19 health crisis has severely impacted the ability of governments to 
implement NDCs. Pre-COVID, the overall financing need for green infrastructure in developing 
ASEAN member States was estimated at USD 210 billion per year between 2016 and 2030 to 
support the necessary investment in climate-compatible infrastructure. Post-COVID, 
governments are facing a major slowdown, with the region’s gross domestic product expected 
to contract by 3.8 per cent in 2020, from an increase of 4.4 per cent in 2019. The impact of 
COVID-19 is estimated to generate losses ranging from USD 163 to 253 billion (4.6 to 7.2 per 
cent), depending on the length of the containment scenario, and job losses could range from 
11.6 million to over 18.4 million. 
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
  
 
              
        Scale: High 
17. 
The programme is well aligned with green/climate targets in each ASEAN country’s 
respective socioeconomic development planning. At the regional level, the programme aligns 
with ASEAN’s commitment to tackling climate change, whereby ASEAN Socio-Cultural 
Community Blueprint 2025 provides for strategic measures in order to move ASEAN towards 
‘Sustainable Climate’, including strengthening efforts to reduce GHG emissions from the main 
development activities, facilitating the development of comprehensive and coherent responses 
to climate change challenges, and mainstreaming climate change risk management and GHG 
emission reduction in sectoral planning. It also supports other regional green policies, such as 
the ASEAN Regional Strategy on Sustainable Land Transport, the ASEAN Sustainable 
Urbanisation Strategy, clean energy commitments under the ASEAN Plan of Action for Energy 
Cooperation and the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity 2025. At the national level, ACGF and 
the programme supports commitments made by ASEAN countries in their NDCs/intended 
NDCs, are where available, is in line with the participating countries’ GCF country programmes 
(i.e. Indonesia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Philippines), indicating as priority sectors 
projects in sustainable energy, transport, agriculture and natural resources. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
18. 
GCF funding will deliver mitigation benefits at USD 2.5 per tCO2eq (total project 
costs/expected lifetime emission reductions). For the first set of subprojects in the pipeline the 
cost of abatement is estimated to be USD 6 per tCO2eq saved. Taking into account total project

=== PAGE 75 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 75 
 
 
 
costs, the programme will support projects that will deliver climate change mitigation benefits 
at an estimated USD 34 per tCO2eq (total project costs/expected lifetime emission reductions), 
calculated on the basis of an assessment of the ACGF pipeline.  
19. 
The programme will use GCF funding of USD 300 million and will revolve USD 280 
million out of this to support 20 projects in two cycles of investment. This will result in an 
effective use of USD 635 million of GCF funds to leverage USD 4,000 million in total project 
costs, including USD 215 million from the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund, USD 2,310 million from 
ADB, USD 480 million from other development partners and USD 380 million from ASEAN 
governments. 
20. 
The programme has been designed to de-risk projects and catalyse private investment, 
either for capital expenditure or for operations and maintenance. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
21. 
Environmental and social risk category and safeguards instruments. The ACGF is a 
facility that provides loans funded from the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund’s (AIF) equity and 
combines this with co-financing and technical assistance from the AE and other development 
partners to promote green infrastructure. The environmental and social (ES) risks and impacts 
of the program will mainly come from Component 1 (De-Risking Funds for Low Emission 
Projects) which would finance infrastructure on: (a) renewable energy systems, energy 
efficiency in industry and buildings, energy efficiency in transport, energy storage and 
transmission; (b) urban transport systems, modal shift and inter- urban railway development, 
public transport systems, bicycle lanes and walkways, and electric vehicle infrastructure; (c) 
sustainable agriculture and natural resources projects such as reforestation and mangrove 
management, low-carbon value chain development, sustainable fisheries and oceans health; 
and, (d)  green multisector, urban projects including water and wastewater treatment, 
sanitation, waste management systems and pollution control.  
22. 
The programme falls under Category I1 (high level of intermediation), under the GCF ES 
risk categorization system. The Program under Component 1 would extend loans and grants to 
a wide variety and scales of infrastructure projects and physical interventions. These projects 
and interventions are expected to involve limited to significant adverse ES risks and impacts 
which in totality can be diverse, due to the range of types of infrastructure in the portfolio. Some 
of the projects to be financed may potentially involve unprecedented or irreversible ES impacts. 
To guide in the assessment and management of ES risks and impacts of this program, it will 
implement the AE's existing environmental and social management system which is based on its 
Safeguards Policy Statement (SPS). The AE has submitted an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) which describes how the SPS will be applied to the program. 
23. 
Compliance with GCF’s Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) Standards. All 
subprojects to be funded/supported by the Program will be managed under the existing AE’s 
environmental and social management system. The AE has the proven capacity and experience 
to manage ES risks and impacts of infrastructure projects. Its SPS fully covers all the GCF's ESS 
Standards. The E&S risks and impacts and how they will be managed are further described 
below.  
24. 
ESS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts. The Program’s ESMF and the AE’s SPS adequately meet ESS1. As per the ESMF, all 
projects under the program will be subjected to the AE’s safeguards policies and requirements 
as outlined in the ADB Safeguards Policy Statement (SPS). The AE will work with borrower

=== PAGE 76 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 76 
 
 
 
governments to ensure that all potential ACGF GRP projects will be screened and categorized, 
and undergo the required ES assessment, environmental and social planning (i.e. preparation of 
Environmental and Social Management Plan, Resettlement Action Plan  and Indigenous Peoples 
Plan, etc.), and be reviewed and properly appraised in terms of their compliance with the SPS 
requirements. The objectives, scope and requirements of safeguards on environment are 
described in detail in the AE's Safeguards Requirement 1 (SPS Appendix 1). The SR1 has 
provisions for the information disclosure, consultations and participation, grievance redress 
mechanism, monitoring and reporting, unanticipated impacts, biodiversity conservation and 
sustainable natural resource management, pollution prevention and abatement, occupational 
health and safety, community health and safety and physical cultural resources. 
25. 
ESS2: Labour and Working Conditions. Infrastructure projects under the program 
would involve hiring of workers by contractors during construction and employment of 
workers for the infrastructure facility during operation. The risks relating to labor and working 
conditions may therefore be significant. The SPS (Safeguard Requirements 1) requires the 
borrower/client to: (1) provide workers with a safe and healthy working environment, taking 
into account risks inherent to the particular sector and specific classes of hazards in the 
borrower’s/client’s work areas, including physical, chemical, biological, and radiological 
hazards; and, (2) take steps to prevent accidents, injury, and disease arising from, associated 
with, or occurring during the course of work. The borrower/client is also required to apply 
preventive and protective measures consistent with international good practice, as reflected in 
internationally recognized standards such as the World Bank Group’s Environment, Health and 
Safety Guidelines.  
26. 
In terms of labour policy and management, based on the Prohibited Investment 
Activities Lists (Appendix 5 of SPS), The program will not finance projects or activities involving 
harmful or exploitative forms of forced labor or child labor. The AE will also work with 
borrower governments to ensure that all potential ACGF GRP projects will include, in contracts 
with civil works contractors, subcontractors and other providers of goods and services 
provisions to employ local labor wherever possible and to compliance with the AE’s social 
safeguards requirements and international labor standards, as defined in the AE’s Core Labor 
Standards Handbook. The Handbook provides a comprehensive reference for good labor 
practices, including basic worker's rights.  
27. 
ESS3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution. Projects to be supported under the Program 
must demonstrate not only "climate additionality" but also "green additionality" which means 
they are expected to demonstrate contributions to improved land, air or water quality; 
enhanced resource efficiency of or sustainable management or protection of natural resources, 
ecosystems or biodiversity. Aside from this aspirational objective which should be part of the 
project design, the SPS requires that during the design, construction, and operation of the 
project the borrower/client will apply pollution prevention and control technologies and 
practices consistent with international good practice, as reflected in internationally recognized 
standards. The SPS Safeguard Requirements 1 covers requirements of: pollution prevention, 
resource conservation, and energy efficiency, wastes, hazardous materials, and pesticide use 
and management. The AE's Prohibited Investment Activities Lists also include: production of or 
trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host country laws or regulations or 
international conventions and agreements or subject to international phaseouts or bans, such as 
(a) pharmaceuticals, pesticides, and herbicides, (b) ozone-depleting substances, (c) 
polychlorinated biphenyls and other hazardous chemicals, (d) wildlife or wildlife products 
regulated under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna 
and Flora, and (e) transboundary trade in waste or waste products; and, production of, trade in, 
or use of unbonded asbestos fibers. 
28. 
ESS4: Community Health, Safety and Security. The AE’s SPS adequately covers ESS4. 
The infrastructure projects to be funded under the program could pose risks to health and

=== PAGE 77 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 77 
 
 
 
safety of host communities during construction due to exposure to construction traffic and 
other hazards at construction sites, diseases, gender-based violence (GBV), and increase in 
criminality associated with labor influx. The SPS requires the borrower/client to identify and 
assess the risks to, and potential impacts on, the safety of affected communities during the 
design, construction, operation, and decommissioning of the project, and will establish 
preventive measures and plans to address them in a manner commensurate with the identified 
risks and impacts. 
29. 
ESS5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement. Infrastructure projects under 
the program would likely involve land acquisition by government and hence may have 
involuntary resettlement impacts.  As per ESMF, ADB will screen all projects to determine 
whether or not they involve involuntary resettlement. For a project involving involuntary 
resettlement, a resettlement plan will be prepared that is commensurate with the extent and 
degree of the impacts. The degree of impacts shall be determined by (i) the scope of physical 
and economic displacement, and (ii) the vulnerability of the affected persons. The Safeguard 
Requirements 2 (Involuntary Resettlement) in the SPS provides for the scope, objectives and 
requirements of involuntary resettlement safeguards. SR2 also provides an outline of the 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). 
30. 
ESS6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources. Proposed renewable energy projects or sustainable agriculture, fishery and forestry 
projects may be located in sites near or within areas of natural habitat which may or may not be 
officially declared protected. The AE's SPS requires that borrower/client will assess the 
significance of project impacts and risks on biodiversity and natural resources as an integral 
part of the environmental assessment process. The assessment will focus on the major threats 
to biodiversity, which include destruction of habitat and introduction of invasive alien species, 
and on the use of natural resources in an unsustainable manner. The borrower/client will need 
to identify measures to avoid, minimize, or mitigate potentially adverse impacts and risks and, 
as a last resort, propose compensatory measures, such as biodiversity offsets, to achieve no net 
loss or a net gain of the affected biodiversity. The Safeguard Requirements 1 of SPS include 
detailed provisions for assessing and mitigating impacts on natural habitat including on 
modified natural habitat, critical natural habitat and legally protected areas. 
31. 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples. The ESMF outlines 
anticipated risks to indigenous peoples in priority sector projects. In particular, renewable 
energy systems, low carbon urban transport and green multisector urban may affect indigenous 
peoples who are present in those cities. Sustainable agriculture and natural resources projects 
have anticipated risks to indigenous peoples and their ancestral areas. To mitigate these risks 
the AE utilizes its SPS to screen projects and provides templates and guidance for the 
preparation of indigenous peoples plans. The screening includes a distinct risk screening 
category for indigenous peoples, and the need for the conduct of social due diligence by the 
borrower. The ESMF recognizes that a range of terminology may be present to refer to 
indigenous peoples that could include indigenous ethnic minorities, indigenous cultural 
communities, aboriginals, hill tribes, minority nationalities, scheduled tribes, or tribal groups 
which is in line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy (IP Policy) scope of application, noting 
also that such application is not limited by the absence of legal recognition or identification of 
indigenous peoples by a state nor by the legal status of titling of indigenous lands, resources and 
territories. The borrower  will  design  and  implement  projects  in  a  way  that  fosters  full 
respect for Indigenous Peoples’ identity, dignity, human rights, livelihood  systems,  and  
cultural  uniqueness  as defined by the Indigenous Peoples themselves so that  they (i)  receive 
culturally appropriate social and economic benefits, (ii) do not suffer adverse impacts as a result 
of projects, and (iii) can participate actively in projects that affect them. In line with the IP 
Policy, the AE should ensure free, prior and informed consent has been properly sought and 
meaningful consultation has been undertaken. In line with the IP Policy, the AE should ensure

=== PAGE 78 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 78 
 
 
 
that due diligence has been undertaken to ensure compliance with the indigenous peoples 
policy. A representation will be provided in the secretariat conditions to this effect. 
32. 
ESS8: Cultural Heritage. Infrastructure projects to be funded by the program could be 
located near and/or affect cultural heritage structures or sites. The AE’s SPS provides 
safeguards for Physical Cultural Resources defined as movable or immovable objects, sites, 
structures, groups of structures, and natural features and landscapes that have archaeological, 
paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other cultural significance.  It 
requires borrowers/clients to be responsible for siting and designing the project to avoid 
significant damage to physical cultural resources, and any such resources to be affected by the 
project, shall be identified, and qualified and experienced experts will assess the project’s 
potential impacts on these resources using field-based surveys as part of the environmental 
assessment process. The detailed provisions for Physical Cultural Resources are discussed in 
the Safeguard Requirements 1 of SPS, including the requirement to consult with affected 
communities and the relevant national or local regulatory agencies and the measures to avoid 
or mitigate impacts as part of the environmental planning process.  
33. 
Implementation arrangements. The program will be managed by the AE which also 
serves as the Executing Entity (EE). It has inhouse safeguards staff in its Southeast Asia regional 
department to manage and operate the program and will be supported by long-term 
consultants. At the program level, the AE will monitor portfolio level safeguards implementation 
and performance and will work closely with Environment and Social Safeguards Specialists that 
monitor ADB’s overall portfolio in Southeast Asia. At the sub-project level, borrower 
governments will undertake the social and environmental assessments, carry out meaningful 
consultations with affected people and communities, prepare and implement safeguard plans, 
monitor the implementation of these plans, and prepare and submit monitoring reports to the 
AE. Monitoring of safeguards compliance during project implementation will be carried out by 
Environment and Social Safeguards Specialists based in country missions as well as focused on 
specific sectors. 
34. 
Stakeholder Engagement and Grievance Redress Mechanism. The AE has conducted 
stakeholder engagements in the preparation of the project which includes in-country 
consultation with the target countries’ representatives from finance, climate change, natural 
resources, environment, forestry and other sectors. Coordination meetings have also been done 
with each participating country’s NDAs and relevant GCF focal point persons. For the projects 
that will be supported under the program, the AE's SPS requires the borrower/client to carry 
out meaningful consultation with affected people and other concerned stakeholders, including 
civil society, and facilitate their informed participation. Consultation will be carried out in a 
manner commensurate with the impacts on affected communities. However, since the details of 
subproject disclosure is not yet agreed upon with the AE, it is recommended that inclusion in 
the funded-activity agreement (FAA) of provisions dealing with matters relating to 
environmental and social safeguards requirements (including disclosure and communications 
process of environmental and social safeguards documentation for category A and B subprojects 
and relevant provisions in relation to consideration of health and safety as regards 
infrastructure) to the extent deemed applicable to the Funded Activity and to the satisfaction of 
the Secretariat, be included. The consultation process and its results are to be documented and 
reflected in the environmental assessment report. In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples 
Policy, the Secretariat’s indigenous peoples focal point will be available for assistance at any 
stage, including before a claim has been made. The AE has submitted a Stakeholder Engagement 
Plan (SEP) for the Program based on these requirements. The AE’s SPS requires 
borrower/client to submit to ADB the all safeguard instruments including monitoring reports 
for disclosure on its website. 
35. 
The AE's SPS requires that the borrower/client establish and maintain a grievance 
redress mechanism (GRM) to receive and facilitate resolution of affected peoples’ concerns and

=== PAGE 79 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 79 
 
 
 
grievances about the borrower's/client's social and environmental performance at project level. 
It should address affected people's concerns and complaints promptly, using an understandable 
and transparent process that is gender responsive, culturally appropriate, and readily accessible 
to all segments of the affected people. The GRM will be accessible by the affected stakeholders 
throughout the project implementation phase.  On top of any project-specific grievance 
mechanism, the AE also maintains its own Accountability Mechanism. The ADB Accountability 
Mechanism is an independent forum and process whereby people adversely affected by ADB-
financed projects can voice and seek a resolution of their problems, as well as report alleged 
violations of ADB’s operational policies and procedures. The Accountability Mechanism is the 
“last resort” for dealing with problems and noncompliance that were not prevented or solved at 
the project and operational levels. 
4.2 
Gender policy 
36. 
 The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan. 
37. 
The gender analysis indicates the existence of enabling environment to promote gender 
equality and women’s empowerment in particular in Cambodia with limited information on 
policy, legal and regulatory frameworks in the other countries. Brief descriptions of markers of 
gender inequality and inclusion in the target countries have been provided in the gender 
assessment, such as access to services and information. Generally, gender inequality is deep 
seated with women disproportionately affected owing to societal and cultural norms, beliefs 
and perspectives. Women tend to participate in the labour force in low productivity/low value 
agriculture and service sectors. There are lower rates of female enrolment in education, lower 
rates of pay for women for the same work as men, and high rates of maternal mortality in most 
of the beneficiary countries. The assessment also discusses the intersectionality of gender issues 
and other social issues such as disability and poverty.  
38. 
The gender assessment, which was carried out based on desk reviews of available 
information, indicates that gender inequality issues may vary in the different countries for 
sectors that will be targeted by the programme. On energy, poor indoor air quality and related 
mortality negatively affects mainly women in most of the countries due to the gender role of 
cooking using traditional biomass such as wood, charcoal or dung. However, clean cooling is 
available to most of the population in Malaysia due to access to electricity. Renewable energy 
generation generally makes up a smaller proportion of total energy use for most of the 
countries. 
39. 
Regarding, low carbon urban transport systems, gender norms, perceptions and 
concerns of safety and cultural norms may operate to discourage public transport use, 
particularly for women, it may limit women’s access to public transport, for instance in 
Indonesia. On the other hand, women may be the predominant users of public transport as is 
the case in Lao PDR. Large segments of the national populations tend to rely on agriculture and 
forests for their livelihoods and food security. A common theme is the invisibility of women. 
Societal, legal and cultural norms and practices regarding the role of women and men operate to 
limit women’s roles in formal decision-making, participation and access to critical resources 
such as land. Sanitation, water and waste management systems challenges are on the increase 
particularly in informal settlements due to increased consumption and urbanisation and women 
bear the brunt of associated illnesses. 
40. 
The AE has provided a programme-level gender action plan that includes activities to 
contribute to women’s empowerment with corresponding indicators, targets, timelines, budget 
and gender expertise. Entry points to address some of the gender issues outlined in the gender 
assessment in the areas of the programmes intervention such as job creation and technical and 
vocational training on green technology are included. In addition, the programme will also 
promote capacity building for effective mainstreaming of gender and social inclusion in green

=== PAGE 80 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 80 
 
 
 
finance recovery strategies. Gender and social inclusion is one of the portfolio-level 
performance targets with 80% of sub-projects expected to directly advance gender and social 
inclusion. At the sub-project level, the AE will ensure that gender equality and social inclusion 
action plans are prepared and implemented following additional gender assessments. 
41. 
Regarding responsibilities, the AE will engage a gender specialist based on its gender 
categorisation framework to develop the sub-project level gender equality and social inclusion 
action plans and deliver capacity building activities. In addition, project teams will collect sex-
disaggregated data as part of project monitoring, contributing to the sub-project and 
programme-level action plans; and ADB will monitor the implementation of the action plan. 
Costs for the implementation of the gender action plan have been incorporated into the 
programme’s budget, through the programme management costs. 
42. 
However, there is limited gender sensitive/responsive activities in the gender action 
plan on activities that are directly related to sectors such as low-emission transport and 
renewable energy that will be supported by the programme though the funding proposal 
presents priority investments and a sub-project pipeline. Additionally, benefits such as 
additional passengers using low-carbon transport as listed in the logical framework of the 
funding proposal but have not been reflected in the gender action plan. The AE is recommended 
to ensure that additional gender analyses at the sub-project level for each of the five countries 
integrate the needs and priorities of women and men. This should include opportunities to 
address them, in the priority areas of intervention of the programme as identified through 
stakeholder engagement. The program level gender action plan will need to be updated based 
on the findings of the assessments and midterm review, and reflect expected benefits and 
impacts from individual sub-projects to be implemented in different sectors by aggregating 
actions from the individual sub-project level gender action plans. This should include and 
indicators, targets with baseline, timelines, responsibilities and budget for their 
implementation.  
43. 
GCF and AE did not reach an agreement in the term sheet on the provisions required to 
enable compliance by the AE with the GCF’s updated gender policy requirements. A 
representation and a covenant will be provided in the secretariat conditions to this effect.  
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium) 
44. 
The programme is intended to finance low-emission projects in five Asian countries. It 
will have two phases and is expected to finance more than 20 projects. GCF is requested to 
provide loans of USD 280 million and grants of USD 20 million. GCF financing is expected to 
mobilize total financing of USD 4 billion under the subprojects. GCF loan reflows from phase I 
will be revolved to fund phase II. Hence, effectively GCF is providing financing of USD 580 
million for the programme.  
45. 
ADB will provide at least 30 per cent of the financing and arrange the balance from 
various sources.  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(low) 
46. 
ADB will act as the accredited entity (AE) and executing entity for the programme. It has 
experience of working in the countries in the region and with the government sector, which is 
expected to benefit the project.

=== PAGE 81 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 81 
 
 
 
47. 
ADB will screen the subprojects as per its standard policies and procedures covering the 
legal, financial and integrity risks. It will mobilize financing at the subproject level and will 
monitor and report to GCF through the annual performance report.  
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium) 
48. 
Impact risks: the AE has estimated an impact potential of 119 MtCO2eq over the lifespan 
of the subprojects. However, the actual quantum of impact may vary based on the following: 
(a) 
Phase II financing contingent on phase I reflows: the AE has proposed that the reflows 
from phase I (to be financed over 2021–2027) be revolved to finance phase II. Of the 
total mitigation impact, 58 per cent is estimated from phase I subprojects and 42 per 
cent from phase II subprojects. The financing for phase II and consequently the impact 
of phase II is dependent on phase I reflows from the countries. The AE expects these 
loans to have low repayment risk given that these loans will be either to sovereign or 
sovereign-guaranteed borrowers; and 
(b) 
Co-financing: The AE has estimated that for each subproject, GCF financing will be up to 
20–40 per cent of the project cost. It is recommended that the AE ensure that the 
commitment of total financing for each subproject is in place before making GCF 
resources available for the respective subproject.   
49. 
Reporting period of the AE: the disbursement for phase II subprojects will be over 
2028–2039. The impact of those subprojects will be generated over the respective project life 
over 2027–2056. However, the AE will report the impact only until 2039. Thus, GCF will not be 
able to obtain confirmation of the actual impact generated by the projects over their full 
operating life. 
50. 
Credit risk: the AE has proposed that the project be financed either through sovereign 
loans or through financing the entities which will be guaranteed by the sovereign borrowers. 
The countries in the programme have varied credit profiles and include the least developed 
countries, and sub-investment grade and investment grade rated countries. However, the GCF 
long-term concessional financing structure is expected to support the countries in repaying the 
loans under the programme. It is recommended that the sovereign guarantee for the loans be 
executed before disbursement of GCF resources to the respective project. 
51. 
Concessionality: the AE has proposed concessional debt financing for phase I and phase 
II of the programme. However, the need for suitable concessional financing for phase II projects 
can be better assessed closer to the implementation of phase II (2027 onward), depending upon 
the prevailing macroeconomic conditions of the countries, technological developments and 
countries’ performance under the phase I projects. It is recommended that the AE review the 
suitability of the terms of phase II financing closer to the implementation of that phase.  
4.3.4. 
The GCF portfolio concentration risk (low) 
52. 
In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal exposure is estimated as not material on the basis of the 
limits provided in the Board-approved risk appetite statement.  
4.3.5. 
Compliance (medium) 
53. 
The Recipient Countries – Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, 
Malaysia, and The Philippines – are not subject to United Nations Security Council (UNSC) 
restrictive measures.  
54. 
The AE will also act as the Executing Entity (EE) for this programme, thereby centrally 
managing all financial and technical aspects of the implementation.

=== PAGE 82 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 82 
 
 
 
55. 
Given the aforementioned implementation arrangements as well as the financial 
product and the main beneficiaries – loans to sovereign-backed entities – the AE determines 
that both the probability and impact for money laundering (ML), terrorist financing (TF) and 
prohibited practices (PP) risks are low.  
56. 
The Secretariat notes that one of the recipient countries – Cambodia– is placed on the 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) list of jurisdictions with strategic deficiencies in their 
regimes to combat ML, TF and proliferation financing, thus recommends applying enhanced due 
diligence (EDD) in all programme activities pertinent to these two jurisdictions. 
57. 
The Secretariat has conducted a review of the programme in accordance with relevant 
GCF Board approved policies and does not find any material issue or deviation with respect to 
compliance issues.  
4.3.6. 
Summary risk assessment and recommendation  
58. 
The AE is to review the suitability of the terms of phase II financing closer to the 
implementation of that phase. 
 
Summary risk assessment 
Overall programme 
Medium 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability 
Low 
Project-specific execution 
Medium-high 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
59. 
ADB will play the dual role of accredited entity (AE) and executing entity (EE) in the 
program. In its capacity as AE and EE, ADB will administer loans and technical assistance funds 
from GCF under the ACGF GRP and work closely with other ACGF financing partners to identify 
additional parallel financing sources for sub-projects.  
60. 
Amongst its responsibilities as AE and EE, ADB will provide loans as per the ACGF GRP 
terms and requirements, alongside loans using ADB own funds and other ADB-administered 
parallel financing, applying the same duty of care and due diligence for all sources. ADB will also 
carry out such management and administration of the GCF funds for loans and technical 
assistance in accordance with its policies, procedures and practices, and with at least the same 
degree of care as it uses in the administration of its own funds or other donor funds, taking into 
account the provisions of the AMA.   
61. 
ADB will oversee and manage the dedicated ACGF Project Structuring Team, staffed by 
full-time and intermittent experts, including an additional three to four experts specifically 
engaged for the ACGF GRP to originate sub-projects and develop a pipeline for ACGF GRP 
funding, provide support to structure sub-projects and identify financing partners; provide 
climate expertise to develop green frameworks and targets for sub-projects; identify and screen 
potential sub-projects, review project documentation and ensure the project meets the 
program’s criteria, verify and monitor project and facility impacts and prepare annual 
performance reports to GCF; implement ACGF GRP technical assistance activities on policy, 
knowledge and capacity building; and manage and monitor procurement and contracts.

=== PAGE 83 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 83 
 
 
 
62. 
In line with the AMA, GCF funds for the ACGF GRP will be ring-fenced within an ADB GCF 
Trust Fund and as such benefit from the same privileges and immunities as ADB’s resources. 
GCF loans will be used to support projects implemented by governments, or government-owned 
entities based on the terms and conditions agreed with ADB in each respective project’s loan 
agreements and project administration manual (PAM). Each potential project will be identified 
during ADB’s country programming process, prepared in accordance with ADB’s internal 
policies and procedures, and evaluated against the criteria presented in this proposal and 
agreed with GCF, to determine eligibility for funding under the program.  ACGF GRP sub-
projects will be fully administered by ADB and likewise benefit from ADB’s project preparation, 
due diligence processes, project administration, and monitoring and evaluation systems. Each 
project will be presented for approval to the ADB Board on a transaction-by-transaction basis, 
which approval shall include the provision of funds using GCF and AIF/ACGF funds to be 
administered by ADB. GCF grants on the other hand will be implemented by ADB, either through 
a Technical Assistance Framework Agreement or a stand-alone Technical Assistance 
Agreements. Technical assistance activities for project structuring, project implementation and 
knowledge and capacity building will be implemented by the existing ADB team that 
administers the ACGF/AIF, and the ACGF Project Structuring Team. 
63. 
ADB systems for financial management, audit and procurement will apply for all 
projects supported by GCF funds under the ACGF GRP. Details of every projects’ financial 
accounting, disbursement procedures and auditing requirements will be developed during 
preparation of each project, and will be included their respective project administration 
manuals, and ADB shall ensure that these are in accordance with ADB’s policies on Financial 
Management and Analysis of Projects. 
64. 
ADB will be responsible for monitoring the implementation and results of the program 
as part of overall management. Monitoring and evaluation will cover financial and technical 
aspects of program implementation, based on the results framework in line with GCF policies, 
and based on ADB systems for progress monitoring, reporting and evaluation. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
65. 
The programme is an investment and de-risking facility aimed at supporting resilient 
low-carbon infrastructure development in countries across Asia. The project is expected to lead 
to total emission reductions of 119 MtCO2eq over the project lifetime.  
66. 
The project has developed a logframe in line with the GCF results management 
framework and performance measurement framework. However, it is noted that the values 
related to financing may require further adjustments as the current presentation may lead to 
misinterpretation. The assumptions under the impact indicators require further elaboration and 
references to the methodologies applied. For outcome indicators, indicator M7.1 has not been 
selected although it is deemed to be relevant.   
67. 
Project result indicators have been developed and allow for tracking the programme’s 
delivery of results.  
68. 
Annex 5, implementation timetable, has been developed in line with the GCF 
requirements.  
69. 
Annex 17, providing a breakdown of the impacts and investment per country, has also 
been developed.  
4.6 
Legal assessment

=== PAGE 84 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 84 
 
 
 
70. 
The accreditation master agreement was signed with the AE on 17 August 2017 and 
became effective on 6 September 2017. 
71. 
The AE has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and has the capacity and authority to implement the programme. It is 
recommended that, prior to submission of the funding proposal to the Board (a) the AE will 
have obtained all its internal approvals and (b) the Fund will have received a certificate or legal 
opinion from the AE in form and substance satisfactory to GCF confirming that all final internal 
approvals by the AE have been obtained and that it has the authority and capacity to implement 
the programme.  
72. 
The proposed programme will be implemented in Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's 
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, and the Philippines, countries in which GCF is not provided with 
privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not protected against 
litigation or expropriation in these countries, which risks need to be further assessed. In this 
context, the Secretariat:  
(a) 
Submitted a draft privileges and immunities agreement to the Government of Cambodia 
in April 2017. The agreement is currently under government review; 
(b) 
Submitted a draft privileges and immunities agreement to the Government of Indonesia 
on 7 December 2015. The agreement is currently under government review; 
(c) 
Submitted a draft privileges and immunities agreement to the government of the Lao 
People's Democratic Republic on 21 February 2019. The agreement is currently under 
the government’s review; 
(d) 
Has not yet submitted a draft privileges and immunities agreement to the Government 
of Malaysia; and  
(e) 
Submitted a draft privileges and immunities agreement to the Government of the 
Philippines on 28 January 2016. The final formatted version of the privileges and 
immunities agreement was sent to the Government of the Philippines on 19 March 2020 
and is currently in progress for signing and ratification. 
73. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and the Independent Integrity Unit 
have both indicated that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities 
and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF be 
made only after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in 
the countries, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
74. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board be 
made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Submission by the AE to GCF of a certificate or legal opinion, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval, confirming that the 
AE has obtained all final internal approvals needed by it and has the capacity and 
authority to implement the proposed programme; 
(b) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the AE has 
provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all final internal 
approvals, whichever is later; and 
(c) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 85 
 
 
 
(d) 
Satisfaction of the following condition prior to execution of the Funded Activity 
Agreement: 
(i) 
The Accredited Entity and the GCF Secretariat shall agree on a process to: (i) 
enable communication of any comments, including from GCF Board members 
and active observers, on Category A and B Sub-Projects relating to the Sub-
Project disclosure package to the Accredited Entity and (ii) take into account 
such comments in the finalization of the relevant Sub-Project disclosure package 
(the “Communication Process”). 
(e) 
Inclusion of the following covenants in the Funded Activity Agreement:  
(i) 
In accordance with the Communication Process, disclose in locations convenient 
to affected peoples and provide to the Fund, via electronic links in the Accredited 
Entity’s website, and/or other websites as relevant, in English, and such local 
language understandable to affected people if relevant, safeguard instruments 
for Sub-Projects classified as Category A or Category B pursuant to the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework submitted by the Accredited 
Entity to the Fund before Funding Proposal approval. The safeguard instruments 
shall be provided for Category A Sub-Projects at least one hundred and twenty 
(120) calendar days, and for Category B Sub-Projects at least thirty (30) calendar 
days, prior to the Accredited Entity’s Board approval of the relevant Sub-Project 
in order to allow the Fund to disclose and announce to the public and, via the 
Secretariat, to its Board and Active Observers. In connection with providing such 
instruments to the Fund, the Accredited Entity and the Fund shall follow the 
procedure set out in the Communication Process;  
(ii) 
Undertake and/or put in place all adequate measures and dedicate the necessary 
financial, human and other resources in order to ensure that the Funded Activity 
complies at all times with the recommendations and requirements of the Gender 
and Social Inclusion Action Plan “GESIAP” provided by the Accredited Entity to 
the Fund before the Approval Decision, which shall comply with the Accredited 
Entity’s own gender policies, standards, and procedures that enable it to comply 
with the Fund’s Updated Gender Policy; and 
(iii) 
Ensure that (i) the infrastructure Works to be implemented as part of the 
Funded Activity are designed, constructed, operated and decommissioned in 
accordance with Good International Industry Practices1 and any other applicable 
standards taking into consideration local norms and standards and local 
conditions, and taking into consideration health and safety risks to third parties 
or affected communities, and (ii) the quality of such infrastructure Works is in 
accordance with international best practices taking into consideration local 
norms and standards and local conditions. 
(f) 
Inclusion of the following representation and warranty in the Funded Activity 
Agreement:  
(i) 
In the preparation of the Funding Proposal and throughout the term of the FAA, 
the Accredited Entity has carried out all due diligence as necessary to ensure 
that the Funded Activity is at all times in compliance with its own gender and 
indigenous peoples policies, standards, and procedures, that enable it to comply 
with the Fund’s Updated Gender Policy and the Indigenous Peoples Policy. 
 
1 “Good International Industry Practices” means the exercise of professional skill, diligence, prudence, and foresight 
that would reasonably be expected from skilled and experienced professionals engaged in the same type of 
undertaking under the same or similar circumstances globally or regionally.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 86 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP156 
Proposal name: 
ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility (ACGF): Green Recovery 
Program 
Accredited entity: 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
Country/(ies): 
Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 
Malaysia, Philippines 
Project/programme size: 
Large 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential   
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1. 
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), established in 1967, is a regional 
intergovernmental organization of 10 countries in Southeast Asia: Brunei Darussalam, 
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the 
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam. ASEAN promotes intergovernmental 
cooperation and facilitates economic, political, military and educational cooperation and 
integration among its member countries and other countries in Asia. ASEAN countries are home 
to 649 million people (8.5 per cent of the global population), representing the fifth-largest gross 
domestic product (GDP) in the world.  
2. 
Within the region, socioeconomic contexts vary widely. As per the World Bank 
classification, Cambodia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic are categorized at the lower end 
of the lower-middle-income bracket, while Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand 
are at the upper end. Malaysia is classified as an upper-middle-income country, while Brunei 
Darussalam and Singapore are high-income countries. Despite the region’s remarkable 
economic progress, poverty remains persistent in lower-middle income countries, ranging from 
9–10 per cent in Indonesia, to 21–24 per cent in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and the 
Philippines (2017). 
3. 
Southeast Asia is highly vulnerable to climate change. According to a study by the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB), the mean temperature in the region increased by 0.1–0.3 °C per 
decade between 1951 and 2000, rainfall trended downward from 1960 to 2000, and sea levels 
rose by 1–3 mm per year. Heat waves, droughts, floods and tropical cyclones have also become 
more intense and frequent. It is projected that annual mean temperature will rise 4.8 °C on 
average by 2100 from 1990. The mean sea level is also projected to rise by 70 cm by 2100 in 
Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam. The ADB estimates that the economic loss 
caused by climate change in the region could reach 11 per cent of GDP by 2100 due to the 
projected impacts on agriculture, tourism, health, ecosystems, and labour productivity as well as 
the costs of higher incidence of natural disasters and catastrophic risks. 
4. 
The region has reported a rapid increase in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of almost 3 
per cent per year, resulting from the economic growth in the last two decades. Currently, per 
capita emissions in the region are close to the world average. Rapid industrialization and 
urbanization in the region have accelerated the use of fossil fuels and increased GHG emissions. 
Oil for transport and electricity for buildings together have accounted for almost 50 per cent of

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 87 
 
 
the increase in final energy consumption in the region since 2000.1 Electricity demand in the 
region has grown by 6 per cent per year, one of the fastest rates in the world, largely supported 
by a doubling in fossil fuel use. Carbon-intensive growth in Indonesia, Malaysia and the 
Philippines has been supported mainly by fossil fuels in power generation and in passenger and 
freight transport. It is estimated that GHG emissions from the energy sector in 2050 could be 
300 per cent higher than in 2010. 
5. 
At the same time, carbon emissions from land-use change have increased. Land-use 
change and agriculture together contributed over half of the region’s GHG emissions in 2016. 
Deforestation and forest degradation have reduced critical carbon sinks across Cambodia, 
Indonesia, and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic.  
6. 
As per ADB estimates, the region’s GHG emissions could increase by at least 60 per cent 
from 2010 to 2050. This would exceed the goals of the Paris Agreement by about 415 MtCO2eq 
even if all targets in the nationally determined contributions (NDCs) were met.2 The estimation 
requires the region to achieve a further reduction of 11 per cent in GHG emissions. 
7. 
The ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility – Green Recovery Program (ACGF GRP) is a 
programme to be established in association with ACGF to provide financial and technical 
assistance to public sector climate change mitigation projects in participating countries.  
8. 
ACGF is a regionally owned green finance initiative focused on developing and scaling up 
climate-positive projects in ASEAN countries. It is a facility of the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund 
(AIF) owned by ASEAN governments and the ADB. Current co-financing partners of ACGF are 
the ADB, Agence Française de Développement, AIF, European Investment Bank, European 
Union, KfW and the Republic of Korea. 
9. 
The five participating countries in ACGF GRP are Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Additional countries may be further added 
during the program’s implementation and referred to the GCF Board.  
10. 
The ADB is the accredited entity (AE) and executing entity of the programme. 
11. 
ACGF GRP will be funded entirely by GCF with a USD 280 million loan, and a USD 20 
million grant. The GCF loan has a tenor of 30 years.  
12. 
The programme consists of three components. Component 1, to be funded with a GCF 
loan of USD 280 million, will provide senior loans (or guarantees, subsequently) to mitigation 
subprojects in renewable energy, energy efficiency, low-carbon transport, sustainable 
agriculture and natural resources, and the urban and environment sectors (waste management, 
water supply and wastewater systems). Borrowing entities will be either sovereign or 
sovereign-guaranteed entities. The eligible subprojects are categorized as either “green” or 
“priority green,” depending on which, the loan amount will be determined. 
13. 
Component 2, with a GCF grant of USD 12.2 million, will implement three technical 
assistance activities to support component 1. The activities will include technical support for the 
development of financial products (e.g. green and sustainable bonds), and funding structures 
and mechanisms (e.g. securitization) not yet broadly observed in the region to help subprojects 
under component 1 mobilize funding. 
14. 
Component 3, with a USD 5.5 million grant, will support governments in mainstreaming 
green finance into planning for economic recovery post-COVID-19. Under this component, two 
national/local green finance recovery strategy reports that include a pipeline of possible 
subprojects will be prepared. Recommendations for green finance modalities based on inputs 
 
1 International Energy Agency. 2019. Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2019. Available at 
<https://www.iea.org/reports/southeast-asia-energy-outlook-2019>. 
2 Paltsev S, Mehling M, Winchester N, Morris J and Ledvina K. 2018. Pathways to Paris: ASEAN. MIT Joint Program 
Special Report. Available at <https://globalchange.mit.edu/sites/default/files/P2P-ASEAN-Report.pdf>.

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 88 
 
 
received at ASEAN Green Finance Investor Roundtables will be presented, and knowledge of 
potential subprojects and available financing will be disseminated. ASEAN Green Finance 
Investor Roundtables is a forum where public and private sector stakeholders including 
ministers, regulators, banks and investors participate. Under this component, training on green 
finance and principles will be provided to at least 75 local government officials. 
15. 
Component 3 will further support capacity enhancement of critical stakeholders of four 
subprojects under component 1. It will assist implementation of monitoring systems to track 
and verify climate impacts, capacity-building training for project sponsors on technologies, 
financing, safeguards, gender mainstreaming and social inclusion. 
16. 
The GCF loan of USD 280 million will be used in a revolving structure with principal 
repayments from the initial investments (first investment phase) funding subsequent 
investments (second investment phase). Through this revolving structure, the AE estimates that 
a USD 335 million loan will be made available in the second phase. In total, GCF will provide USD 
615 million in the form of debt (or guarantees) to subprojects during the programme’s tenor 
(first and second phases). The AE estimates that the total cost of subprojects financed by ACGF 
GRP will reach USD 4 billion by capping the GCF loan amount at 15–25 per cent of the total cost 
of each subproject. The balance of USD 3.4 billion will be co-financed by the AE (or other 
partner financial institutions, if available). 
17. 
Through the revolving use of the GCF loan, the programme will finance 20 subprojects 
over its lifetime. The AE assumes country breakdown with respect to GCF funding to be between 
15–21 per cent each, except for 4 per cent for Malaysia. In terms of the sectors, energy is 
expected to represent 33 per cent of the total portfolio, followed by low-carbon transportation 
(30 per cent), natural resources (25 per cent), and multi-sector (12 per cent). With the 
programme’s intervention, at least 800 MW of renewable capacity will be created, and 100,000 
ha of forestland will be restored. 
18. 
The AE estimates the programme’s mitigation impact to be 118.9 MtCO2eq saved over 
the programme’s lifetime of 30 years. The estimation includes six potential subprojects that 
have been identified for the first phase with estimated emissions savings of 29.1 MtCO2eq over 
individual lifespans. In addition, the AE has estimated emission savings of 89.8 MtCO2eq based 
on a subproject portfolio prepared taking into account country and sector breakdowns assumed 
in the participating countries. Subprojects and their mitigation impacts will be estimated and 
monitored in accordance with the guidelines of the AE and the Joint MDB Methodology for 
Climate Mitigation Finance Tracking. 
19. 
The AE further estimates that the GCF funding for 20 subprojects will generate 340,000 
jobs during the programme’s lifetime. 
20. 
The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) rates the impact potential of the 
programme as high. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
          Scale: Medium to High 
1.2.1. 
Potential for scaling up and replication 
21. 
The potential for the scaling up and replicability of a financing facility such as ACGF GRP 
is largely dependent on the availability of concessional funding. ACGF GRP is a facility to be 
associated with ACGF to fund climate change mitigation subprojects in the region. Although 
ACGF GRP is funded by GCF in its entirety, the funding will be provided to subprojects with co-
financing from the AE or other institutions. GCF is required to structure the loan price and tenor 
concessional to ACGF GRP to incentivize governments and project sponsors to use ACGF GRP 
loans and implement climate change mitigation subprojects, which remain perceived as risky 
and costly in the region.

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 89 
 
 
22. 
Subprojects implemented with ACGF GRP concessional financial assistance are expected 
to demonstrate that climate change mitigation interventions can be technically and financially 
feasible in the region. The proposed technical assistance will support development of financial 
instruments and modalities to attract funding from private sector financiers. Moreover, it will 
further assist governments and project sponsors to enhance understanding and knowledge of 
low-emission technologies and financial instruments. Successful implementation of subprojects 
with the best available technologies and innovative financial instruments could encourage 
governments and the private sector to replicate similar project concepts and structures in the 
sector and region with less public sector assistance and concessional funding. 
1.2.2. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
23. 
The subprojects financed by ACGF GRP will be demonstrational with respect to 
technologies and funding modalities. Thus, they will promote an enabling environment for 
climate change mitigation investments in the region. The programme will support the financing 
of at least 20 subprojects in renewable energy and energy efficiency, low-carbon transport, 
sustainable agriculture and natural resources, and the environment, in a region where climate 
change mitigation interventions are scarce. The programme will also include technical 
assistance grants to introduce new financial products and modalities, such as green bonds, to 
attract private sector finance to fund the subprojects. At least two green bond transactions are 
targeted to launch to fund subprojects under component 1. 
24. 
The programme will further support the creation of an enabling environment with 
capacity-building and knowledge dissemination among government officials and project 
sponsors. Training will be provided on mitigation impact monitoring and verification, low-
emission technologies, and innovative financing schemes, as well as on safeguards and gender 
mainstreaming. 
1.2.3. 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
25. 
The programme aims to enhance the regulatory framework and policies critical for the 
promotion of climate change mitigation investments in the region under component 3. With a 
technical assistance grant of USD 5.49 million, the programme will support preparation of at 
least two national/local green finance recovery strategy reports. These will, among others, 
combine recommendations for financing vehicles or modalities to fund climate change 
mitigation projects, such as green bonds or blue credits, and possible project pipelines, together 
with legislative and regulatory inputs. Using actual project cases in the programme, at least 75 
local government officials will be trained on innovative financial modalities in climate change 
investments and green principles. 
26. 
The programme will support the building of government capacity in relation to the 
implementation of four climate change mitigation subprojects financed under component 1. The 
support will include the setting up and implementation of monitoring systems to track and 
verify climate impacts, and training for project sponsors to build knowledge on applying low-
carbon technologies and innovative financial schemes. The training will also include project 
sponsors to build awareness of AE and GCF safeguards requirements, and for capacity 
development for effective mainstreaming of gender and social inclusion. 
27. 
The independent TAP rates the paradigm shift potential of the programme as 
medium/high.  
1.3 
Sustainable development potential   
 
   
        Scale: High 
1.3.1. 
Economic co-benefits

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 90 
 
 
28. 
The programme will promote job creation and sustainable economic growth through 
investing in low-emission infrastructure in the region. Based on an assessment of the 
subprojects in the pipeline as well as the programme pipeline, the AE estimates that the 
programme will create 340,000 jobs. The AE further estimates that a range of broader economic 
benefits can be realized, such as enhanced trade and competitiveness, and the supporting of 
small and medium-sized enterprises. 
1.3.2. 
Environmental co-benefits 
29. 
The programme will promote investments in low-emission subprojects in land-use 
change and agriculture, and infrastructure, not only in renewables and energy efficiency but 
also in transportation, water and water sanitation, and solid waste management. Accordingly, 
the programme is expected to contribute to the improvement of air and water quality, and the 
promotion of climate-resilient ecosystems and biodiversity in the region. 
1.3.3. 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
30. 
With its gender and social inclusion action plan, the programme aims to achieve a target 
whereby 80 per cent of subprojects will directly advance gender and social inclusion by 2039. 
The action plan will assist subprojects in the preparation of gender assessments and action 
plans, and in promoting opportunities for women’s economic empowerment, including by 
equitable participation in training activities, and the creation of jobs for women and vulnerable 
groups.  
31. 
The independent TAP considers the programme’s sustainable development potential to 
be high. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient   
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High  
1.4.1. 
Economic and social development level of the countries and the populations 
affected 
32. 
Despite the region’s remarkable economic progress, poverty remains persistent in 
lower-middle-income countries, ranging from 9–10 per cent in Indonesia, to 21–24 per cent in 
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and the Philippines (2017). In 2020, as a consequence of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, the GDP of the region is projected to have decreased by 3.8 per cent, 
compared with an increase of 4.4 per cent in 2019. Economic losses in the region ranging from 
USD 163 billion to USD 253 billion (from 4.6 per cent to 7.2 per cent of GDP) are estimated for 
short- and long-containment scenarios, respectively. It is estimated that from about 11.6 million 
to over 18.4 million jobs will be lost.3  
1.4.2. 
Absence of alternative sources of financing 
33. 
A large investment gap exists for climate-compatible infrastructure in the region. The 
infrastructure investment demand in selected ASEAN member countries represented 3.8–4.1 
per cent of GDP in the period 2016–2020. The ADB estimates that Southeast Asia will require 
USD 184 billion per year in infrastructure investments between 2016 and 2030. The estimation 
further increases to USD 210 billion per year if additional costs are included to ensure all new 
infrastructure is climate compatible. Despite such considerable demand, the current investment 
 
3 Asian Development Bank. 2020. An Updated Assessment of the Economic Impact of COVID-19. ADB Brief No. 133. 
Available at <https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/604206/adb-brief-133-updated-economic-
impact-covid-19.pdf>.

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 91 
 
 
in sustainable and climate-resilient infrastructure in the ASEAN region remains limited to 
USD 40 billion.  
34. 
Public sector funding is the major source of financing for infrastructure in ASEAN 
countries. Of the annual investment of USD 40 billion, about 75 per cent is funded with public 
finance, and 25 per cent from private finance, largely commercial loans. In Indonesia and the 
Philippines, investments in low-emission infrastructure projects have relied mainly on public or 
sovereign-backed funding. In Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, such 
investments have relied almost exclusively on bilateral and multilateral donor grants, and to a 
lesser extent on concessional loans from multilateral development banks.  
35. 
Alternative sources of funding to finance low-emission infrastructure are limited in the 
region. Public sector capacity to finance such infrastructure is heavily constrained due to 
COVID-19. Most funding from public financial institutions and donor countries is directed to the 
health sector. Foreign direct investment for infrastructure across Asia continues to drop. Private 
sector funding will be limited, especially as an economic slowdown is envisaged as a result of 
the COVID-19 pandemic. On the other hand, the demand for infrastructure investments in the 
region is estimated to exceed USD 200 billion annually. 
36. 
The independent TAP is of the opinion that alternative sources of funding to GCF to 
provide the proposed amount of concessional funding for a long tenor are absent. 
1.4.3. 
Need to strengthen institutions and implement capacity 
37. 
The region (especially countries with lower levels of GDP) remains behind in investing 
in low-emission infrastructure. Governments and state-owned enterprises lack the capacity to 
develop and structure climate change mitigation projects that are financially and technically 
feasible. As per the assessment by the AE, there remains a perception among governments that 
low-emission infrastructure investments entail higher upfront costs than do conventional 
alternatives. 
38. 
The programme aims to address the market needs by providing not only financial 
structuring support but also concessional funding, and by creating a pipeline of subprojects that 
are financially and technically feasible. Training will be provided to key stakeholders, including 
government officials and project sponsors, to help enhance the knowledge and skills required to 
effectively develop, implement and monitor climate change mitigation projects with innovative 
financing schemes. 
39. 
The independent TAP views the needs of the programme recipients as high. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.5.1. 
Existence of a national climate strategy 
40. 
All six participating countries have committed to a national climate strategy in their 
respective NDCs. In most of these NDCs, sectors prioritized for mitigation include: transport, 
energy and water; reforestation and forest management; maintenance of carbon sinks; 
wastewater; and agriculture. Cambodia has committed to reducing its emissions from energy, 
transport, industry and other sectors by 3.1 MtCO2eqby 2030, compared to baseline emissions 
of 11.6 MtCO2eq. Indonesia has committed to an unconditional GHG emissions reduction target 
of 29 per cent by 2030 below business as usual, and a conditional 41 per cent reduction. The 
NDC of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic does not include an overall mitigation target, but it 
does include mitigation measures, such as reforestation and sustainable forest management, 
small-scale renewable energy generation, improving access to the grid (to reduce use of 
biomass for cooking), low-carbon transport (increased public transport, and improved road

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 92 
 
 
network), and hydropower development. Malaysia has committed to a reduction in its GHG 
emission intensity per GDP of 45 per cent by 2030 relative to 2005, which consists of a 35 per 
cent unconditional and a 10 per cent conditional commitment. In its intended nationally 
determined contribution, The Philippines aims to achieve a GHG emission reduction target of 70 
per cent in all climate pollutants by 2030, subject to a range of support via international 
agreement.  
1.5.2. 
Coherence with existing policies 
41. 
At a regional level, the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community Blueprint 2025 (2016) lists 
strategic measures in order to move ASEAN towards “Sustainable Climate”. The measures 
include, among others: strengthening human and institutional capacity in implementing climate 
change adaptation and mitigation; facilitating the development of comprehensive and coherent 
responses to climate change challenges; strengthening the efforts of governments, the private 
sector and communities in reducing GHG emission from the main activities of development; and 
leveraging on the private sector and communities to gain access to new and innovative 
financing mechanisms to address climate change.  
42. 
Various sector measures are also described for enhancing sustainable development and 
climate change mitigation and adaptation in regional policies, such as the ASEAN Regional 
Strategy on Sustainable Land Transport, the ASEAN Sustainable Urbanisation Strategy, clean 
energy commitments under the ASEAN Plan of Action for Energy Cooperation, and the Master 
Plan on ASEAN Connectivity 2025.  
1.5.3. 
Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver 
43. 
The AE has extensive lending and technical assistance operations in the region. It 
committed USD 3.9 billion in climate finance in the region from own funds as well as external 
resources in the period 2016–2019. In 2020, the AE provided over USD 5 billion towards ASEAN 
countries’ COVID-19 response. The AE country programme for the participating countries 
places climate change mitigation as a priority in the next 3–5 years. The recent track record of 
the AE in climate finance in the region includes renewable energy, sustainable transportation, 
and capital market development (i.e. energy green bond). 
44. 
ACGF GRP will be established in association with ACGF, a facility launched in 2019 under 
AIF, which is owned by ASEAN member countries plus the ADB; and administered by the ADB. 
Since its inception, ACGF has endorsed three climate change projects in the transportation and 
energy sectors. 
1.5.4. 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
45. 
The AE has coordinated and discussed the proposed programme with each participating 
country’s national designated authority. Coordination and dialogue with respect to subprojects 
will take place with relevant stakeholders, including civil society organizations, during the 
development and implementation of subprojects. 
46. 
No-objection letters for the programme have been issued by all six participating 
countries, and attached to the funding proposal. 
47. 
The independent TAP views country ownership of the programme as high. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
  
        Scale: High 
1.6.1. 
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency regarding financial and non-financial aspects

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 93 
 
 
48. 
The GCF concessional loan of USD 280 million to the programme will revolve and enable 
an additional USD 335 million to be lent to subprojects during the tenor of the programme.  
49. 
Based on the AE estimation of GHG emission reduction of 118.9 MtCO2eq by the 
programme, the cost is estimated to be USD 2.5/tCO2eq against a GCF contribution of USD 300 
million, which includes a USD20 million technical assistance grant. Taking into account the total 
project cost of USD 4 billion, the programme will support subprojects that will deliver climate 
change mitigation benefits at an estimated cost of USD 34/tCO2eq. 
50. 
The GCF loan will be provided to climate change mitigation subprojects through ACGF 
GRP at a price of 0.0–0.75 per cent per annum, depending on the economic context of the 
participating countries. The proposed pricing is set to be competitive against local market 
funding. It also takes into account the increasing fiscal deficits that governments are facing, and 
the limited revenue generation of climate change mitigation subprojects, especially as a 
consequence of the COVID-19 crisis.  
51. 
ACGF GRP loans to subprojects will be subject to various fees such as government 
guarantee fees and currency exchange fees. As per the estimation by the AE, the all-in cost of 
sovereign guarantee loans to projects in local currency often reaches 5–7 per cent, and, in cases, 
will be at par with sovereign bond yields or even market-priced commercial funds. 
52. 
The independent TAP considers that the estimated cost of GHG reductions of 
USD2.5/tCO2eq against GCF financial contribution of USD 300 million is notable. The proposed 
pricing can be justifiable, taking into account the economic slowdown projected in the region as 
a consequence of the COVID-19 crisis, and additional financial costs to be incurred by the 
subprojects accessing ACGF GRP loans. 
1.6.2. 
Amount of co-financing  
53. 
There is no co-financing to GCF loan at ACGF GRP. However, the AE estimates that the 
programme will mobilize USD 4 billion, including the original GCF contribution of USD 300 
million (first investment phase) plus USD 335 million to be mobilized through revolving the 
original contribution (second investment phase). The AE commits to cap ACGF GRP loans to 
subprojects at 15–25 per cent of the cost of subprojects, and to mobilize the balance of USD 
3,385 million from its own resources or other institutions. In all cases, the own contribution of 
the AE will not be lower than 30 per cent of the investment costs. 
54. 
Accordingly, the co-financing ratio of the programme at the subproject level is estimated 
to be 1:11.3 against the original GCF contribution of USD 300 million (first investment phase). If 
the USD 335 million to be mobilized through revolving the original contribution (second 
investment phase) is included, the co-financing ratio is estimated to be 1:5.3. This estimated co-
financing ratio is regarded as high. 
1.6.3. 
Programme/project financial viability and other financial indicators  
55. 
All subprojects to be financed by ACGF GRP will be screened against financial and 
economic criteria of the AE, including financial ratios such as a debt service coverage ratio. The 
AE will also apply its financial management and analysis of project guidelines in assessing 
investment and operational costs as well as financial and economic returns. 
56. 
GCF concessional loans to ACGF GRP and subprojects will benefit from sovereign 
guarantees from respective participating country governments. 
1.6.4. 
Industry best practices  
57. 
The programme will promote industry best practices in climate change mitigation 
investments in the region by demonstrating the technical and financial feasibility of subprojects

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 94 
 
 
in adopting the best available mitigation technologies and innovative financing modalities. A 
technical assistance component of the programme will support the development of financial 
products (such as green and sustainable bonds), and funding structures and mechanisms (such 
as securitization) not yet broadly observed in the region to help subprojects under component 1 
mobilize funding. The technical assistance will also enhance the capacity of subproject sponsors 
in climate change impact monitoring, application of low-carbon technologies and innovative 
financial schemes, safeguard requirements, and gender mainstreaming. 
58. 
The independent TAP rates the efficiency and effectiveness of the programme as high. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
59. 
The independent TAP recommends that the Board endorse the proposed programme as 
presented. 
60. 
The programme will support the participating country governments in refocusing and 
revitalizing public sector interventions in climate change mitigations to meet the targets in their 
respective NDCs.

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.28/02/Add.03/Rev.01 
Page 95 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP 156) 
Proposal name: 
ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility (ACGF): Green Recovery 
Program 
Accredited entity: 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
Country/(ies): 
Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Philippines 
Project/programme size:  
Large 
 
Impact potential 
Thank you for the assessment. We concur with ITAP review. 
Paradigm shift potential 
Thank you for the assessment. We concur with ITAP review. 
Sustainable development potential 
Thank you for the assessment. We concur with ITAP review. 
Needs of the recipient 
Thank you for the assessment. We concur with ITAP review. 
Country ownership 
Thank you for the assessment. We concur with ITAP review. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
Thank you for the assessment. We concur with ITAP review. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
We would like to acknowledge iTAP’s assessment and confirm that it reflects the objectives, 
design and expected outcomes of the program. We appreciate the constructive approach 
taken to reviewing and providing suggestions for refining the program, with subsequent 
revisions reflected in the Full Proposal.

=== PAGE 96 ===
Updated: 17 March 2021 
Gender and Social Inclusion 
Assessment and Action Plan 
ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility - Green Recovery 
Program (ACGF GRP) 
Gender documentation for FP156

=== PAGE 97 ===
2 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
I. 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................... 3 
II. 
Country analysis ................................................................................................................................................... 4 
 
Cambodia ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
 
Indonesia ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 5 
 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic .......................................................................................................................................................... 7 
 
Malaysia ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 8 
 
Philippines ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 10 
 
In summary .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 11 
III. 
 Integrating gender and social inclusion in the ACGF GRP ................................................................................. 12 
 IV. 
ACGF GRP Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan ....................................................................................... 15 
 
ADB’s policy framework on gender equality and social inclusion ......................................................................................................... 15 
 
Principles underpinning the ACGF GRP GESIAP .................................................................................................................................... 16 
 
ACGF GRP Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan (GESIAP)............................................................................................................... 18 
 
Implementation, Monitoring and Reporting on the GESIAP ................................................................................................................. 20 
 
Costs associated with implementation of the GESIAP .......................................................................................................................... 21

=== PAGE 98 ===
3 
 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. 
The ASEAN Catalytic Green Finance Facility Green Recovery Program (ACGF GRP) is an innovative, multi-
instrument, country-owned platform designed to scale up low emissions investments as part of COVID-19 economic 
stimulus. By investing in low emissions green1 infrastructure specifically targeting post-COVID-19 recovery, the 
program will help countries avoid a rebound in emissions and environmental degradation, while stimulating 
economic growth by creating green jobs.  
2. 
This document presents an analysis of gender and social inclusion issues that are being reflected in the design 
of the ACGF GRP. Section II presents a snapshot of challenges faced by different individuals and groups of people in 
the countries included in the ACGF GRP. Based on this baseline, Section III presents key priorities for the ACGF GRP, 
while Section IV presents the Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan. 
3. 
In the context of this document, gender equality: “refers to the equal rights, responsibilities and opportunities 
of women and men and girls and boys. Equality does not mean that women and men will become the same but that 
women’s and men’s rights, responsibilities and opportunities will not depend on whether they are born male or 
female. Gender equality implies that the interests, needs and priorities of both women and men are taken into 
consideration, recognizing the diversity of different groups of women and men. Gender equality is not a women’s 
issue but should concern and fully engage men as well as women”2.  
4. 
In the context of this analysis, social inclusion acknowledges that different individuals and groups face different 
opportunities and barriers. The opportunity to access, participate in and/or benefit from ACGF development 
projects will be affected by an individual or group’s sex, age, whether they might have a disability, be an Indigenous 
person or from a minority ethnic or religious group, or find themselves categorized as an informal sector or migrant 
worker. These elements do not operate in isolation, so this analysis uses a range of publicly available metrics to 
highlight the possible intersections (intersectionality) and shed light on plural identities that can compound 
disadvantage and influence the capacity of individuals and/or groups to engage in ACGF investment projects. 
5. 
Identifying the different ways men and women, and vulnerable groups, live and work helps to understand the 
risks and benefits of the infrastructure investment. Empowering women and vulnerable groups to participate in 
green infrastructure financing, planning, design, construction and management maximizes the potential for success 
and sustainability of the investment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Green infrastructure, for the purposes of the ACGF Green Recovery Program, is defined as infrastructure with significant climate benefits 
that also has a demonstrable contribution to other environmental objectives such as reduced pollution, increased resource use efficiency and 
management of natural capital. 
2 UN Women, Concepts and definitions

=== PAGE 99 ===
4 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
  
 
 
II. 
COUNTRY ANALYSIS 
 
 
6. 
Gender inequality and social exclusion is complex and determined by diverse norms and values across the 
region. Such disadvantage is not heterogenous, within a country a high proportion of women may be found in the 
workplace or formal leadership roles at the same time as high rates of girl child sexual exploitation or gender-based 
violence. The country analysis draws out individual indicators of gender inequality such as gender based stereotypes, 
drudgery, gender based violence, human trafficking and labour migration and highlights some intersectional 
dimensions of inequality and exclusion referenced to the priority project areas under the ACGF GRP. This is a 
synthesized analysis based on desk top research to inform projects developed under the ACGF GRP and not intended 
to be exhaustive. The impact of the Covid-19 pandemic has exacerbated existing inequalities, women were already 
vulnerable prior to the pandemic due to insecure employment, lack of social protection, and gender norms that 
restrict their mobility and productivity because of home and care responsibilities3. This is an additional overlay not 
yet present in the statistics reported in this analysis.  
 
Cambodia 
7. 
A policy framework to support gender and climate change is in place in Cambodia. The National Climate Change 
Strategic Plan provides for mainstreaming of gender into climate activities with a specific emphasis to reduce gender 
vulnerability to climate change impacts. Complemented by the Ministry of Women’s Affairs Master Plan on Gender 
and Climate Change 2018-2030 and the National Strategic Disability plan 2019-2023, an overarching policy enabling 
environment for gender equality and disability inclusion exists. 
8. 
Renewable energy: Renewable energy comprises 61 per cent of total energy consumption in Cambodia but less 
than one quarter of the population has access to clean fuel for cooking4. 82 per cent of Cambodia’s population 
(principally women) use traditional biomass such as wood, charcoal or dung for cooking. This contributes to poor 
indoor air quality.  
9. 
Low Carbon urban transport systems: Cambodia’s urban transport sector can be characterized as a private 
oriented system, with motorcycles the most popular choice. Public transport is principally via bus and rail accounts 
for less than 10 per cent of passenger movements. Women are more likely to walk, use or ride pillion on a motorcycle 
or use a bus for transport. Cambodia’s road transport fatality rate is high and road crashes impose a heavy burden 
on the national economy. The annual economic cost of road crashes in 2013 was calculated at more than $300 
million and much of the care burden for the injured, due to gender norms falls to women and girls. 
10. Sustainable agriculture and natural resources: Almost two-thirds of Cambodia’s population depend on 
agriculture, forest products and fisheries for their livelihoods, and face regular seasonal food shortages5. Domestic 
cooking is the largest driver of wood consumption in Cambodia and a significant contributor to deforestation6. 
Annual river flooding events are exacerbated by deforestation and add to food insecurity. Poor maternal and child 
nutrition is reflected in the high rate of stunting (32 per cent) of children under 5 years. Food and water shortages 
 
 
3 Covid 19, economic crisis and gender equality in Asia 
4 The Energy Report 
5 Borgen Project (2018), Food shortages 
6 Promoting sustainable cooking stoves

=== PAGE 100 ===
5 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
also drive affected households into drought-related debt that can leave families, particularly women and girls 
vulnerable to labour exploitation and human trafficking.  
11. Green multi-sector urban projects: With 1 in 4 people not able to access safely managed drinking water, and 
low rates of sanitation and waste collection and recycling, Cambodian women and girls suffer of the harshest 
drudgery in Southeast Asia7. High rates of water borne diseases and illness are attributed to poor water and 
sanitation infrastructure, and diarrhea is the second leading cause of preventable death for children under 5 years 
in Cambodia.  
12. Markers of gender inequality and exclusion: Women’s workforce participation in Cambodia at 82 per cent is 
one of the highest in ASEAN8 – but women work overwhelmingly in the low productivity/low value/low paid 
agriculture and services sector. Rates of gender-based violence are high. A UN multi-country study reporting that 
rates of economic abuse were higher in Cambodia than in other countries in the study. Noting that this may reflect 
a bias towards male breadwinners, the report argues deep seated gender inequality is revealed through the number 
of men in the study reporting on participating in gang rape for “fun” or “entertainment”9. Lower rates of female 
enrolment in education, lower rates of pay for women for the same work as men10, high rates of maternal mortality 
and childhood stunting, as well as trafficking of women and girls for labour or sexual servitude also speak to deep 
gender inequality. Cambodia is rated in the top ten of countries with a high prevalence of modern slavery11 and has 
the lowest rate in the region of women holding bank accounts12. 
13. Intersectional dimensions of inequality and exclusion: Cambodia also has one of the highest rates of disability 
in the world, caused primarily by preventable illness and disease. While landmine injuries continue to occur, 
transport-related injuries are now a significant cause of disability13. For women with a disability, 2 years of schooling 
is the average compared to 4 years for men with a disability14.  
 
Indonesia 
14. Renewable energy: Indonesia is listed in the top 5 of the world’s most polluted countries, particularly due to 
its investment in coal fired power stations, petrol and diesel consumption and extensive land clearing. Widespread 
use of biomass for cooking fuel in rural areas due to lack of access to electricity, means indoor air quality is also poor. 
Mortality due to household and ambient air quality is the highest in the region at 112.4 per 100,00015. Environmental 
air pollution accounts for 29 per cent of deaths in Indonesia16, of whom the majority women and children.  
15. Low carbon urban transport systems: 60–80 per cent of ambient air pollutants in metropolitan cities are 
attributed to vehicular emission, with transport overall contributing to nearly 13 per cent of greenhouse gas 
emissions in Indonesia. Motor vehicle numbers are expected to double between 2010 and 2035 and traffic 
congestion in Jakarta is internationally infamous17. Jakarta reports the worst air quality in all of Southeast Asia – 
 
 
7 Wateraid Cambodia 
8 Womens World Banking 
9 Partners for Prevention, (2015),“Why do some men use violence against women and how can we prevent it?”. 
10 Asia Foundation 
11 2018 Global Slavery Index 
12 World Bank, Global Findex database 
13 Disability in Cambodia KaR (2005), “Poverty reduction & Development in Cambodia: Enabling disabled people to play a role”. 
14 UNESCO (2018), “Education and Disability: Analysis of data for Asia Pacific countries”  
15 World Bank 
16 WHO (2015) Indonesia Climate and Health Profile 
17 New York Traffic

=== PAGE 101 ===
6 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
poor air quality is associated with negative birth outcomes for women and increased risk of respiratory and 
cardiovascular disease18. 
16. Mass urban transport systems are not widespread, with motorcycle taxis and buses from small commercial 
vehicles the most common form of public transport. Gender norms and religious beliefs that limit women’s physical 
contact with men not from their family prevent women from using motorcycle taxis19. 
17. Sustainable agriculture and natural resources: Similar to other ASEAN countries complex patterns of natural 
resource management by different ethnic groups and between men and women are observed20. A common theme 
emerging from non-government actors working with women in sustainable agriculture and resource management 
is the invisibility of women’s management and labour in formal policies, practices and consultations. Gender norms 
around the importance of boys and girls education operate to exclude women where policies for participation in 
consultation mandate a high school level of education (66 per cent of women have only primary education, 
compared to 52 per cent of men)21. Cultural practices and legal norms about land ownership and men emphasize 
male heads of households for consultation, compensation or decision-making processes excluding not only women’s 
voices in those households, but also female-headed households and households with an absent adult male head 
working overseas22. 
18. Green multi-sector urban projects: A 2017 presidential regulation commits Indonesian cities to reduce waste 
by 30 per cent and divert 70 per cent of waste to landfills. Formal waste collectors and informal street recycling 
pickers are part of the existing management ecosystem and gender norms operate to exclude women from the 
higher value of waste products. Women are confined to scavenging at waste dumps, with both women and men 
reporting that women do not have the ability to lift heavier recycled loads, while gender norms determine that 
women should not have or have limited capacity to engage with strangers as required in the street recycling role23.  
19. Gender norms also affect ability to cope with urbanization pressures and climate impacts. The flooding of 
Jakarta in January 2020 revealed distinct gender preferences in the clean-up phase with men preferring to remain 
in the flooded location or close by to protect property, while for women, who would spend more time in the property, 
return was affected by concern for health effects from post-flood mould build up.  
20. Markers of gender inequality and exclusion: Indonesia records the highest level of female entrepreneurs 
operating micro, small and medium enterprises24 in the region, yet women’s labour force participation is conversely 
one of the lowest in the region. Only a third of women have a bank account, with the majority operating outside the 
formal financial system, without access to formal credit and protections25. Mobile phone ownership is high at 77 per 
cent26 although only 20 per cent of women have access to the internet27. 33 per cent of women aged 15-64 years 
reported experiencing gender-based violence in their lifetime28. Similar to Cambodia, Indonesia is also reported to 
 
 
18 Climate change and women's health: Impacts and policy directions 
19 Female Sharia Law Taxi 
20 Fair Enough? Women, men, communities and ecological justice in Indonesia 
21 Asia Foundation, Achieving gender justice 
22 Hearing women's voices managing natural resources 
23 The Role of Gender in Waste Management 
24 OECD 
25 USAid 
26 USAid 
27 Digital literacy and young girls in Indonesia 
28 UNFPA Indonesia

=== PAGE 102 ===
7 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
have thigh rates of modern slavery with many women subjected to sex trafficking and forced domestic servitude 
within Indonesia and to Malaysia29. 
21. Intersectional dimensions of inequality and exclusion: Disability affects around 4.3 per cent of the population, 
with the prevalence higher in women. While women with a disability are reported to have 2.3 years of education 
while men with a disability have on average 1.5 years, this does not appear to be a determinant for labour market 
participation. Men with a disability are more likely than women to be employed, it is likely that gender norms about 
appropriate work for women also operate as an additional exclusionary factor for women with a disability30.  
 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
22. Renewable energy: Despite high levels of access to electricity from hydropower across Lao PDR, only 5.6 per 
cent of the population has access to clean fuel for cooking, with firewood representing the predominant fuel for 
cooking. Time use studies identify that women spend twice as much time as men, and walk longer distances, 
collecting firewood for household use31. Poor indoor air quality results in women, who spend more time indoors 
than men, bearing the burden of cardiovascular and respiratory disease at three times the rate of men32.  
23. Low Carbon urban transport systems: Private vehicles are the principal public transport in Lao PDR’s largest 
urban centres, with a bus system redevelopment project underway in Vientiane developing better intra-city 
connectivity and institutional capacity building. Women are reported to be the predominant users of public bus 
transport33. 
24. Sustainable agriculture and natural resources: 70 per cent of the population rely on natural resources for food 
security and livelihoods although there are differences in agricultural products and forestry-based activities 
depending on geography and ethnicity. Malnutrition is a significant issue with Lao PDR recording with the highest 
rates of childhood stunting (which can impair brain function) in South East Asia. 
25. While women have equal rights to land ownership, cultural customs among the various ethnic groups still 
operate; women comprise only 13 per cent of registered agricultural landholders. Lack of formal land ownership 
rights in practice impacts upon the ability of women to participate in formal decision-making and access credit.  
26. The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry is implementing the Strategy for Gender Equality in the Agriculture 
and the Forestry Sector (2016–2025) with an aim of equality of access for women and men in various ethnic groups 
to natural resources, agricultural land, shelter, development funds and technical support. The Vision until 2030 
policy has targets for women to hold at least 30 per cent of managerial leadership positions in the sector. 
27. Green multi sector urban projects: There are estimated to be around 6000 premature deaths annually from 
poor quality water, lack of sanitation and waste management across Lao PDR– only 26 per cent of households in 
urban areas have access to safely managed drinking water34. Regular flooding in urban areas brings increased risks 
of water borne disease and illegal dumping due to sub-optimal municipal waste management increases 
contamination threats. Women bear the burden for ill family members. 
 
 
29 US Department of State, Country narratives 
30 Disability what can we learn? 
31 World Bank Lao PDR Country Gender Assessment 
32 Morawska et al., “Association Between Indoor Air Pollution Measurements and Respiratory Health in Women and Children in Lao PDR”, 
(2010) International Journal Of Indoor Air and Health, 25-35. 
33 ADB Transport sector gender tool kit 
34 Abundant Water Lao PDR

=== PAGE 103 ===
8 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
28. Markers of gender inequality and exclusion: Lao PDR has the highest maternal mortality rate in the region, with 
non-Lao speaking rural women at greatest risk due to lack of access to health services35. Gender inequality is 
reflected in traditional Lao phrases such as “men are the net, women are the basket; The husband should lead, the 
wife should follow; A woman without a husband is like a ring without a stone. There is nothing of worth in it”36. These 
reinforce stereotypes that men are heads of the household and decision-makers.  
29. Women are reported to work longer hours than men, spending seven hours a day on productive tasks and 
childcare, compared to 5.7 hours spent by men37. Women hold a quarter of the seats in the Lao Parliament, but only 
5 per cent of decision-making roles in government38 and only 32 per cent of Lao women hold a bank account39. 
Young women from ethnic minorities are the majority of irregular migrants to Thailand and China, vulnerable to 
forced prostitution40. Lao PDR records a high prevalence of modern slavery at 16.8 per cent41. 
30. Intersectional dimensions of inequality and exclusion: Geographic location and ethnicity compound poverty 
and inequality. Rural women and girls have a significantly lower literacy rate at 73 per cent as compared to rural 
men and boys (86 per cent), urban women and girls (90 per cent), and urban males (96 per cent)42. Minority ethnic, 
rural households report the very highest levels of malnutrition and food insecurity, and lack of access to health 
services. Migration in Lao PDR is female dominated; women constitute 59.2 per cent of internal migrants. Significant 
numbers of ethnic women, constrained by both their status as women and as members of an ethnic minority, 
migrate to work in the sex industry. These women often expect to return home to get married and work in the 
agriculture sector43. 
 
Malaysia 
31. Renewable energy: Clean cooking is accessible to 97 per cent of the population. Renewable energy makes up 
only 5 per cent of total energy consumption. A policy for self-consumption solar is the only domestic focus and there 
are no standalone programs to facilitate vulnerable household access.  
32. Low Carbon urban transport: 76 per cent of Malaysia’s population is located in urban areas. For women and 
people with a disability, lack of seamless connectivity between modalities and “last mile’ connections, as well as 
unsafe walking and cycling environments are major barriers to equality and inclusion even where low carbon urban 
transport has been implemented44. In Malaysia, as in  many other Southeast Asian countries, car ownership is a 
status symbol so gender norms governing women’s roles, perceptions of safety and cultural norms about status that 
apply to both men and women, operate to discourage public transport use in general.  
33. Sustainable agriculture and natural resources: The replacement of natural forests with oil palm and timber 
plantations is a feature of the Malaysian landscape45. Similar to Indonesia, men and women lose access to forests 
and land to make way for plantations. Oil palm and timber plantations employ women in lower skill and casual roles, 
at lower rates of pay and less involvement in workplace decision-making46. For indigenous women, particularly in 
 
 
35 Unicef.2020. The Situation of Children and Women Laos PDR 
36 CUSO International submission to UNWomen VAW  
37 World Bank 
38 UNDP Lao PDR 
39 Women in Lao PDR 
40 ADB Country Gender Assessment (2012) 
41Global Slavery Index 
42 2015 UNESCO Data set 
43 UNDP Lao PDR 
44Transport matters; The Borneo Post 
45High resolution global maps of 21st Century Forest Cover Change 
46 Centre for International Forestry Research

=== PAGE 104 ===
9 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
East Malaysia, replacement of forests with plantations, has reduced availability of forest products traditionally used 
for housing, clothing, food and medicine. 
34. Green multi sector urban projects: Liveability of cities and waste management are critical issues for Malaysia 
given rapid urbanisation and increased consumption. Only 24 per cent of waste is recycled47 with the remainder in 
landfills, often dumped in fields and rivers, or destroyed through open burning. Liveability issues such as ability to 
walk in safety in clean public spaces affect women who spend more time in the home and local neighbourhoods. 
Poor waste management practices are starting to impact water security48. Failure of water security mechanisms has 
the potential to negate the gains made by safe piped water which significantly alleviated women’s time poverty 
given their gender roles as managers and major users of household water.  
35. A national energy efficiency action plan was promulgated in 2015, covering commercial, industrial and 
domestic usage. Energy efficiency is rated at 4.2 per cent, lower than the global average of 5 per cent. The focus of 
the policy is to increase the uptake of energy efficient appliances as well as improvements in building energy 
efficiency. There are no specific loans or programs to encourage women or vulnerable households to transition to 
more energy efficient dwellings or appliances. An industry driven green building accreditation scheme is in operation.  
36. Markers of gender inequality and exclusion: Workforce participation rates for women are relatively low for the 
region at 54 per cent 49. Despite the highest household internet usage in the region, half of female-headed 
households have no IT equipment or connection to the internet. Child marriage rates have increased – driven by 
poverty and cultural norms50. 
37. Gender norms mean women are overwhelmingly the caregivers for household or family members with long 
term disability. Strong links have been identified between the provision of such care and poverty51.  
38. Intersectional dimensions of inequality and exclusion: A race-based affirmative action policy to address inter-
ethnic social and economic disparities has operated in Malaysia for 50 years. Although inter-ethnic income 
differentials have significantly reduced52, pockets of poverty persist for all races. For indigenous Malaysians, 13 per 
cent of the population, poverty rates are reported to be significantly higher than the national average 53 as 
indigenous women and children are invisible in national statistics, as they are reported within a larger cohort54.  
39. Migrant workers from Indonesia, Myanmar and Nepal represent approximately 20 per cent of the labour force. 
Poverty among this group is reported to be higher and while leave, medical coverage and working hour regulation 
is mandated by law, there is limited enforcement. Female migrants make up about 20 per cent of the migrant cohort 
overall, working often as domestic helpers. These female workers are specifically excluded from the protections of 
the employment law55.  
 
 
47 The Edge markets 
48 Selangor Water Crisis 
49 Thee Edge, “Retain women in the workforce”  
50 South China Morning Post 
51 National Health and Morbidity Survey (2019) 
52 Beyond stereotypes, understand ethnic inequality malaysia 
53 Statement by UN Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty & Human Rights 
54 Khor, et al “Do Not Neglect The Indigenous Peoples When Reporting Health and Nutrition Issues of the Socio-Economically Disadvantaged 
Populations in Malaysia” British Medical Journal. 
55 Statement by UN Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty & Human Rights

=== PAGE 105 ===
10 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
 
Philippines 
40. Renewable energy: Renewable energy comprises 40.7 per cent of total energy consumption in the Philippines, 
with ambitious targets to increase this laid out in the National Renewable Energy Program (NREP)56. There is no 
reference to gender or women in the program. 
41. Only 45 per cent of the population has access to clean cooking57, despite 93 per cent of the population having 
access to electricity58. This contributes to poor indoor air quality, and the health impacts are felt by women and 
children who spend more of their time indoors than men59. 
42. Low Carbon urban transport systems: The majority of the Philippines’s transport infrastructure is in Manila60, 
with the rest of the archipelago reliant on private transport. Women report sexual harassment in public spaces and 
around public transport hubs as a regular occurrence61.  
43. Sustainable agriculture and natural resources: Agriculture remains a significant employment sector with 33 per 
cent of men and 17 per cent of women working across agriculture and natural resource management and 
harvesting62. Deterioration of soils and loss of biodiversity are attributed to over-cultivation, poor land management 
and industrialization63. An FAO study found women farmers did not equally benefit from agricultural investment or 
extension opportunities due to societal and cultural norms prevalent across the country that applied gender-neutral 
practices and approaches64. In addition, societal and cultural norms regarding the role of women and men limit 
women’s roles in formal decision-making, for example, that the husband is the traditional head of the family, 
thereby having the first chance to apply for a land title65. 
44. Green multi sector urban projects: Half of the Philippines population is urbanised with predictions this will 
increase to 84 per cent by 205066. Only half the urban population have access to safely managed drinking water 
services and sanitation services67, and informal settlements are a feature of urban fringe areas, comprising around 
1 per cent of the population68. Women in these settlements are more vulnerable to sexual and domestic violence69. 
45. Similar to other Southeast Asian countries, growing volumes of waste due to increasing consumption and 
demand for pre-packaged goods, together with lack of recycling, are contributing to pollution and environmental 
degradation. Recycling or “picking” of waste occurs with women operating around 30 per cent of “junk” or recycling 
shops, dealing with goods at the lower end of the recycling value chain70.  
46. Markers of gender equality and exclusion: The Philippines is the highest performing ASEAN country in the 
World Economic Forum’s Gender Gap Report (the WEF Report), ranked 13th out of 149 countries. Principally due to 
its empowerment of women in politics, women are also represented in civil service decision making roles. Overall 
 
 
56 Renewable energy and energy security in the Philippines 
57 IRENA Energy Profile: Philippines 
58 ADB basic statistics  
59 WHO 2017 Household air pollution 
60 ADB 2017 Transport connectivity 
61 UNWomen Philippines 
62 FAO (2018) Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture 
63 UN 2019 Balancing Act for Philippine farmers 
64 FAO (2018) Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture 
65 FAO (2018) above 
66 UNHabitat 
67 ADB Basic Statistics 2020 
68 UNHabitat  
69 World Bank Philippines Urbanization Review 
70 Gender in Waste Management

=== PAGE 106 ===
11 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
attitudes to women’s empowerment within the family are also consistently higher than elsewhere in the region71 
and 81 per cent of women aged 15-49 report making their own informed decisions regarding sexual relations and 
contraception72. However, the Philippines Commission for Women notes societal norms dictate that “men are the 
leaders, pursuers, providers, and take on dominant roles in society while women are nurturers, men’s companions 
and supporters, and take on subordinate roles in society”73. 
47. Gender norms operate as a barrier to workforce participation for women in the Philippines. The labour force 
participation rate for women aged 15+ is 46 per cent74 and a Department of Labour and Employment survey reveals 
that 30 per cent of working women report that household or family duties prevent them participating in the labour 
market75. 55 percent of married women and girls aged 15-49 years report experiencing intimate partner violence in 
the preceding twelve months76. Nationwide it is estimated that only 30 per cent of such assaults are reported, with 
women in minority ethnic or religious groups even less likely to report such crimes77.  
48. Intersectional dimensions of inequality and exclusion: Large pockets of inequality remain with around 25 per 
cent of the population living below the poverty line, including 10 million women, principally indigenous women and 
those living in conflict affected areas78. Child labour also affects children in poor families with up to 20 per cent of 
children aged 5-17 years working. Boys represent about 60 per cent of child labourers79. The Philippines is also 
regarded as a hub for child sexual exploitation including cyber exploitation with poverty and being out of school as 
risk factors80. Around half of people with a disability are recorded as being in work with men more likely to work 
than women81. 
 
 
In summary  
49. The unique economic development and ethnic and cultural diversity of each country adds to the complexity of 
gender inequality and vulnerability assessments. Indonesia, Malaysia, and Philippines have the highest rates of GDP 
per capita, underpinned by high rates of urbanisation. The correlation between higher GDP and gender equality is 
reflected at the top line gender and social statistics; the higher GDP is associated with lower rates of maternal 
mortality and higher female education achievement and literacy. It is the deeper detail though where disparities 
emerge – for example contrast the increasing prevalence of obesity in the female population aged 18+ in Malaysia 
and the rates of stunting for children under 5 years (associated with lack of maternal/child nutrition) in Lao PDR.  
 
 
 
71 World Bank Gender indicators 
72 World Bank DataBank 
73 OECD Social institutions and gender index 
74 World BankDataBank 
75 East Asia Forum 
76 UNWomen Violence against Women database Philippines 
77 OECD gender index 
78 UNDP Philippines, Country Information 
79 UNICEF 
80 UNICEF above 
81 Employment of Persons with Disability

=== PAGE 107 ===
12 
  
 
III. 
 INTEGRATING GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION IN THE ACGF GRP  
 
 
 
50. This section identifies gender and social inclusion entry points in the four priority areas for investment under 
the ACGF GRP. 
Renewable energy  
51. Large scale renewable energy projects provide opportunities for direct employment for women and for men. 
Quotas for female recruitment, together with gender sensitive workplaces including part time work, separate male 
and female toilets, and PPE designed for women’s body shapes all contribute to a gender equality workplace and 
successful retention of staff. 
52. Land acquisition processes and project design for large scale renewable energy projects are also opportunities 
to advance women’s participation in consultation and decision-making. Preliminary decisions about projects, their 
location, related land acquisition transactions and operation of infrastructure are mostly the domain of men, as 
gender norms and cultural practices mean women may not hold formal title to land, authority to negotiate, or have 
decision-making roles within local authorities negotiating compensation. Yet women engage with land and access 
energy in ways different to men.  
53. From a consumer perspective, energy access improves productivity. Routine domestic drudgery can be 
alleviated, and time taken to perform menial tasks reduced. The World Bank calculated that switching to an 
improved cookstove can save an average 4.7 hours per week in fuel collection and 25 minutes less to cook a meal82. 
This has significant health benefits for women and their children, particularly as it removes indoor air pollutants. 
Additionally, time efficient cooking appliances provide more time for income earning activities, study by the 
women/children or leisure. Pro poor, gender sensitive subsidies can remove barriers to electricity access 83. 
Combined with low/no collateral credit programs to support the purchase of energy efficient appliances including 
televisions and smart phones, renewable energy projects can reduce the costs of energy access and use, also 
improve access to information for women and their families. Digital payment systems also support increased digital 
literacy and financial inclusion. 
54. Employment in renewable energy infrastructure construction extends beyond construction to operations and 
maintenance. With gender sensitive PPE and workplace facilities, supportive management can lead changes to 
traditional gender norms on appropriate work roles for women. Traineeships help construction companies develop 
their pool of skilled workers, useful beyond the initial construction project the worker is trained in. Scholarships, in 
partnership with the private sector and local universities, combined with paid internships or alternatively 
traineeships during project construction work, offer pathways for economic empowerment for individual women. 
Internationally, the employment of women in the renewable energy workforce has already accelerated past the 
traditional oil and gas workforce84 and gender sensitive recruitment and employment policies will propel the sector 
in Southeast Asia to gender parity in employment.  
55. Opportunities for women’s entrepreneurship activities related to renewable energy abound. Sale of solar 
panels or energy efficient appliances are one example where financial barriers to market entry can be removed or 
 
 
82 World Bank Databank 
83 Gender and Renewable Energy Entry Points  
84 Renewable Energy, A Gender Perspective

=== PAGE 108 ===
13 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
smoothed to encourage female entrepreneurship. Business skills training for women and disadvantaged groups is 
also an entry points for economic empowerment of women and poverty alleviation. Other entry points such as 
education for construction workforces on sexual health, gender equality and people trafficking. 
Low Carbon urban transport systems 
56. Transport systems provide a pathway to empowerment for women and girls, where the transport meets the 
timing of their need for mobility and is safe and accessible. Separately mapping men’s and women’s existing 
movements and speculative future movements in proposed new modalities, gives an insight into the different ways 
women and men, and people with disability, currently engage with public transport and identify how they may want 
to use public transport in the future. Women tend to use public transport during off peak times, when there are 
fewer services available, they may make “chained” trips with multiple purposes for example in one trip taking 
children to school, attending work and shopping for food. Considering these aspects provides critical data to inform 
gender sensitive and inclusive service design, as well as pricing policy, leading to improved efficiency and 
sustainability. 
57. Participatory methods in consultation (such as female specific consultation and quotas for overall female 
participation in consultation) inform designers and operators of the different user needs for accessibility, 
affordability, safety and appropriate timetabling and enhance sustainability of the design. Built infrastructure such 
as ramps, rest benches and secure lighting to enhance security, and ticketing systems that provide low-cost multiple 
short trips, as well as women only carriages and female staff can all address the urban travel needs of women and 
other vulnerable groups. 
58. Entrepreneurship opportunities can be created by reserving a percentage of high traffic vendor spaces in urban 
transport infrastructure for entrepreneurship or community activities for women and disadvantaged groups.  
Sustainable agriculture and natural resources 
59. The use of natural resources is determined by who can access them and who can manage them. Across 
Southeast Asia women have less access to formal management of land and natural resources.  
60. Supporting women’s improved land tenure security and resource access – through participation in resource 
management committees or local governance regimes, as well as access to processing and marketing opportunities 
encourages women and men to remain with family and networks and reduces the vulnerability across the region to 
migration and its related threats. 
61. Ensuring equal access to training on cultivation of resources improves the ecosystem and can provide a buffer 
for food security challenges (e.g. planting mangroves encourages more fish) as well as identify new income sources. 
Additional value can be captured, through providing opportunities to understand and connect to ecotourism 
initiatives, value chains or logistic supply chains.  
62. Targets and quotas for female participation in institutional natural resource managment or technical roles offer 
an entry point. Their successful implementation in the Philippines Forestry Department has changed stereotypes 
about appropriate roles for women85. 
Green Multi Sector Urban Projects 
63. Access to safe water and modern hygiene and sanitation infrastructure is limited for the urban poor. Up to 100 
million people in in urban and rural South East Asia are without sanitation, with the largest cohorts in Lao PDR and 
 
 
85 FAO, Gender Assessment of Agriculture & Rural Sector Philippines

=== PAGE 109 ===
14 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
Cambodia. Improving access to safely managed water and sanitation will have an immediate benefit in improving 
health outcomes, including for women who need it in ways different to men (pregnancy and menstruation).  
64. Even in cities with well-established urban infrastructure increasing urbanisation is stretching capacity and 
leading to a resurgence in public health issues from water-related diseases such as dengue and leptospirosis86. 
Improved water management and sanitation will improve health outcomes and alleviate women’s time poverty 
reducing the burden to care for ill family members.  
65. The ADB operational plan for accelerating gender equality also identifies sectoral gender entry points 87.  
 
 
 
86 Institute Pasteur Rise in disease 
87 Accelerating Gender Equality Operational Plan

=== PAGE 110 ===
15 
  
 
 IV. ACGF GRP GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN 
 
 
 
ADB’s policy framework on gender equality and social inclusion 
66. As an ADB-managed program, the ACGF GRP GESIAP builds on existing ADB systems to integrate gender 
mainstreaming and social inclusion into sovereign projects.  
67. Accelerating progress in gender equality in Asia and the Pacific is one of seven operational priorities for ADB 
under its Strategy 2030. ADB recognizes that gender equality is critical in its own right, and to help realize 
socioeconomic development. Strategy 2030 holds that, to achieve a prosperous, inclusive, resilient, and sustainable 
region, it is imperative that ADB contributes to the efforts of accelerating gender equality outcomes in the region in 
five areas: economic empowerment, human development, decision making and leadership, time poverty reduction, 
and resilience to external shocks. ADB is committed to support gender equality through gender-inclusive project 
designs in at least 75% of its sovereign and non-sovereign operations by 2030.  
68. A Gender and Development Framework Policy 88 , is supported by a four-tier gender mainstreaming 
categorization framework with associated targets applying to both sovereign and non-sovereign operations. It is 
supported by a formal monitoring and evaluation framework. Under the ADB gender categorisation framework, a 
project is classified as one of the following89:  
a. Gender Equity Theme (‘GEN’) where the project explicitly includes gender equality outcomes or 
empowerment outcomes. A project is assigned GEN if (i) the project outcome directly addresses gender 
equality and/or women's empowerment by narrowing gender disparities through access to social services 
(e.g. education, health, and water supply/sanitation); and/or economic and financial resources and 
opportunities (e.g. employment opportunities, financial services, land, and markets), and/or basic rural and 
urban infrastructure (e.g. rural electrification, rural roads, pro-poor energy distribution, and urban services 
for the poor); and/or enhancing voices and rights (e.g. decision making processes and structures, political 
empowerment, and grievance mechanisms);  
b. Effective Gender Mainstreaming (EGM): A project is assigned EGM if the project outcome is not gender 
equality or women's empowerment, but project outputs are designed to directly improve women’s access 
to social services, and/or economic and financial resources and opportunities, and/or basic rural and urban 
infrastructure, and/or enhancing voices and rights, which contribute to gender equality and women's 
empowerment.  
c. Some Gender Elements (SGE): A project is assigned SGE if by its nature it is likely to directly improve 
women's access to social services; and/or economic and financial resources and opportunities, and/or basic 
rural and urban infrastructure, and/or enhance their voices and rights, but that included little, if any gender 
analysis and few or no specific design features; or is unlikely to directly improve women’s access to social, 
economic or financial resources or opportunities, but significant efforts were made during project 
preparation to identify potential positive and negative impacts on women. 
d. No Gender Elements (NGE): the project is assigned NGE if it is not expected to provide direct/tangible 
benefits to women, although there may be indirect benefits for women. 
 
 
88 ADB Gender and Development 
89 ADB Gender mainstreaming guidelines

=== PAGE 111 ===
16 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
69. Targets for ADB operations require that at least 71% of projects must have gender elements in the project 
concept/design (classified as SGE/GEN or EGM by ADB “at entry”) by 2024 and at least 50% are categorised under 
ADB’s gender mainstreaming categories directly addressing gender equality (GEN or EGM).  
70. Projects that are categorized are supported by gender assessments, and where the potential for positive 
impacts for women are identified, are monitored through the project design and monitoring framework. Projects 
that are categorized as EGM and GEN require a gender action plan at approval. Project quarterly and annual review 
reports incorporate progress and achievements under the gender action plan. Monitoring and tracking of progress 
and support is conducted by resident missions and ADB headquarters, together with the project administration unit. 
An overall assessment of the design, implementation and performance of individual projects is completed at project 
end.    
71. ADB due diligence processes prior to project approval require a poverty and social analysis identifying gender 
and inclusion issues. The poverty and social analysis must identify the gender and inclusion issues  to be addressed 
by the project (with indicators and targets included in the project design and monitoring framework and in the 
gender action plan) and those issues to be addressed by other actors. International and national gender advisors 
support projects classified as GEN and EGM and as necessary may also be engaged to support SGE projects.  
72. A project performance management system supports implementation, with annual implementation 
monitoring reports assessing progress against indicators and targets. Annual monitoring reports during 
implementation provide opportunities to identify mitigation activities and remedial action where required.  Regular 
ADB review missions support the monitoring process and assist in mitigating risks. Gender advisors participate in 
these missions. 
 
Principles underpinning the ACGF GRP GESIAP 
73. The ACGF GRP GESIAP is a portfolio or program GESIAP, articulating gender related activities and high-level 
gender indicators and targets in recognition of the diversity of sub-projects that could be funded by the ACGF 
GRP.   
74. The ACGF GRP will support gender equality and social inclusion across the four priority project areas through a 
focus on  
• 
Green jobs in construction, operation, and maintenance of infrastructure with opportunities for skills 
training, upskilling and certification for women. Green construction jobs across the four low carbon 
investment modalities provide an opportunity to shift traditional norms around “appropriate work” for 
women and girls, men and boys while providing entry points to engage male workers on gender equality, 
violence against women and diversity.  
• 
Participatory and gender sensitive consultation processes for infrastructure design, construction and 
service planning and delivery builds community support for infrastructure investment and improves 
sustainability. Participatory processes help development partners understand the full range of issues 
associated with infrastructure investments. Effective participatory processes not only empower women 
and improve social inclusion, they operate as important risk management tools for investors to ensure a 
comprehensive assessment of benefits and impacts are identified.   
• 
Leading by example on gender equality and social inclusion with ACGF learning and knowledge sharing 
events building capability in gender analysis and social inclusion in the finance and green infrastructure 
sector. Gender mainstreaming in green infrastructure financing and green infrastructure delivers a double 
sustainability dividend – not only reducing emissions but improving gender equality and social inclusion. 
ACGF GRP’s ambition to provide a new generation of high performing, low emissions projects to support

=== PAGE 112 ===
17 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
Covid-19 recovery will not only empower women through equal participation as presenters and 
participants in knowledge sharing but encourage participating governments and investment partners to 
strengthen their own gender equality and social inclusion efforts.  
 
 
Renewable energy
Low Carbon urban 
transport
Multi Sector Urban 
development
Sustainable 
agriculture/natural 
resources
• 
Create jobs in construction & related areas, support skill development & technical certification 
• 
Support inclusion & women’s leadership and participation in designing green recovery financing, setting policy 
and managing green assets  
• 
Deepen gender & social inclusion learning in institutions and utilities across ASEAN countries

=== PAGE 113 ===
18 
 
ACGF GRP Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan (GESIAP) 
 
Impact: ASEAN countries' post-COVID recovery supports low-emission, climate-resilient infrastructure 
development 
Outcomes: 
• 
Financing provided to improve bankability of low-emissions investments 
• 
COVID-19 recovery supported through the creation of green jobs 
• 
Capital mobilized from a range of sources for replicable low-emissions investments 
• 
Bankable projects identified and structured, including PPPs 
• 
Enabling environment for low-emissions investment improved due to strengthened capacity and 
policies. 
 
Program level gender outcome and target: Strengthened gender analysis capacity, responsiveness, 
monitoring and evaluation. 
• 
By close of facility, 80% of ACGF GRP projects directly advance gender equality90 and social inclusion in 
infrastructure through economic empowerment activities, increased access to services, and enhanced 
participation in decision making processes or institutions. 
 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
    
Responsibilities 
Costs 
Component 1: De-risking funds for low-emissions projects 
1.1 ACGF GRP loans to low-emissions projects 
1. ACGF GRP sub-
projects prepare and 
implement a gender 
equality and social 
inclusion action plan 
(GESIAP) informed by 
a gender and social 
assessment91 
• Number of GESIAPs prepared 
• Target 80% of projects, Baseline – 
64% 
• Interim target 45% 
 
Interim: by Q4/  
2027; 
By 2039, 
monitored 
annually  
Facility manager 
monitors gender 
performance 
across portfolio 
 
Sub-project 
gender advisor 
carries out 
assessment as 
part of ADB sub-
project processing 
team 
Included in 
AE fee  
 
 
90 This would include projects classified as SGE, EGM or GEN according to ADB’s Gender and Development Framework Policy 
91 In accordance with ADB Gender Mainstreaming Guidelines

=== PAGE 114 ===
19 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
2. ACGF GRP sub-
projects include green 
jobs for women and 
vulnerable groups, 
applying core labour 
standards including 
pay equity and flexible 
working conditions, as 
well as female friendly 
worksites and sex-
suitable PPE 
• Number of green jobs for women 
and vulnerable groups across the 
program 
Target: 30% green jobs for women 
and vulnerable groups  
Interim target: 9% 
Baseline:0 
Annually, 
measured at 
ADB sub-
project 
approval and 
completion92 
Interim by 2027 
Government 
counterpart and 
sub-project 
gender advisor  
These will 
be included 
in project 
budget 
3. Equitable 
participation of 
females and males, 
including from 
vulnerable groups, in 
green technology 
technical and 
vocational training 
activities and 
certification  
Women, (including 10% from 
indigenous/minority ethnic groups) 
represent half of trainees in projects 
incorporating traineeships (with 
certification or professional 
accreditation)  
Target 50%; Baseline:0 
Interim target: 15%  
By 2039, 
measured at 
ADB sub-
project 
approval and 
completion  
Interim by 2027 
Government 
counterpart and 
sub-project 
gender advisor 
These will 
be included 
in project 
budgets 
4. Support for 
women’s economic 
empowerment in 
ACGF GRP sub-
projects through 
(where applicable) 
business skills training 
and access to financial 
inclusion programs 
• Number of low emissions projects 
that deliver financial inclusion 
programs for women and business 
skills programs for women-owned 
enterprises 
Target: 30% of projects 
Interim target: 20% 
Baseline: 0 
By 2039, 
reported 
annually 
Interim By 2027 
 
 
 
Sub-project 
Gender Advisor  
 
5. Programs 
implemented through 
financial 
intermediaries deliver 
tangible benefits to 
women and 
vulnerable groups 
through improving 
their access to 
decision making in 
financial management 
and leadership roles.   
 
• Number of financial intermediaries 
implementing ACGF GRP finance 
activities that develop and 
implement workforce gender 
equality strategies  
Baseline 0 
Target 2 
 
• Percentage of women in financial 
management and leadership roles in 
financial intermediaries 
implementing ACGF GRP financed 
activities 
Baseline: 0 to 5% of roles across 
board and senior management  
Target: At least 10% of roles across 
board and senior management 
 
By end of sub-
project loan 
implementation 
period, 
reported 
annually 
FI counterpart 
These will 
be included 
in project 
budget 
Component 3:  Policy, knowledge and capacity building support 
 
 
92 Project completion reports record overall target achievement

=== PAGE 115 ===
20 
 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan 
6. ACGF grant funded 
policy, knowledge and 
capacity building 
events advance 
gender equality and 
social inclusion 
• Female participation in ACGF GRP 
events including women as 
speakers/facilitators 
Baseline: 30%93;  
Target: 50% of events 
 
• Gender & social inclusion analysis  
incorporated in national/local green 
finance strategy development 
Baseline:0; Target 1 
• Female participation in ACGF 6 
Champions program (demonstrating 
increased understanding94 of green 
finance)  
Baseline: 0; Target:30% 
• No. of sub-projects supported with 
gender-related capacity building 
activities (such as technical & 
vocational training to foster 
women’s and girl’s participation in 
implementation of green 
technologies, either as standalone 
activity or mainstreamed within 
broader activity) 
Baseline:0; Target: 4 
Annually 
Facility manager 
monitors gender 
performance 
across portfolio 
 
Included in 
ACGF GRP 
costs 
 
 
Implementation, Monitoring and Reporting on the GESIAP 
75. The ACGF GRP GESIAP will be implemented by ADB as GCF AE as well as Executing Entity (EE) for the ACGF 
GRP.  
76. Program-level GESIAP. At a program level, ADB will monitor the implementation of the GESIAP, based on 
monitoring by ADB sub-project teams. This role will be included in the functional responsibilities under the team 
managing the ACGF GRP in ADB Southeast Asia Department. In this role, ADB staff managing the ACGF GRP will 
work closely with gender specialists that monitor gender and social inclusion across ADB’s overall portfolio in 
Southeast Asia as well as sub-project specific gender experts.  
77. Annual Performance Reports from ADB to GCF and the ACGF Annual Report will capture progress under this 
program-level GESIAP, including on advancing gender equality through specific sub-projects.  
78. The program-level GESIAP will be reviewed and updated during the mid-term review in 2027 to reflect more 
information available on the sub-projects to be included under the portfolio.  
79. Project-level gender assessments and action plans. As per usual ADB project preparation processes, a 
gender specialist will be recruited for all EGM and GEN investments to develop individual gender equality and 
 
 
93 Activities to date - ACGF GRP Annual Report 
94 This will be measured through follow-up surveys with participants.

=== PAGE 116 ===
21 
ACGF Green Recovery Program – Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan
social inclusion action plans and deliver capacity building activities.  For SGE investments, the project team will 
work with ADB gender specialists at HQ and in the resident missions/country offices to implement and monitor 
gender-related project commitments. Where needed, a Gender/Gender and Social Specialist will be engaged by 
each sub-project early in project design and implementation. 
80.
ADB project teams will routinely collect sex disaggregated data as part of project monitoring systems.
Costs associated with implementation of the GESIAP 
81.
Costs of implementing the GESIAP include a) costs at the program / portfolio level and b) costs at the sub-
project level.
82.
At (a) portfolio level, the costs of monitoring gender performance of the program level and integrating
program gender targets into sub-projects is estimated at around 15% of overall program management costs to
be covered by the GCF Accredited Entity fees (approximately USD800,000 to USD 900,000 across the 20-year
lifetime of the program).  For (b), at the sub-project level, the costs of undertaking the gender assessments and
developing the GESIAP will be covered by project level budgets for preparation and implementation.
83.
In addition to (a) and (b), the program includes a specific budget to support capacity building and
preparation of knowledge products on gender and social inclusion for ACGF GRP sub-project, under Activity 3.2,
estimated at USD 800,000 (see Annex 4).
___________________________
