=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
creationDate: D:20201019185856+09'00'
modDate: D:20201103183003+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum X 
Funding proposal package for FP150 
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
3 November 2020 
Meeting of the Board 
9 – 13 November 2020 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional Agenda Item 11 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a) 
A funding proposal summary titled “Promoting private sector investment through large scale adoption 
of energy saving technologies and equipment for Textile and Readymade Garment (RMG) sectors of 
Bangladesh” submitted by the Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL); 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point(s);  
c) 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure; 
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment; 
e) 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment; and  
f) 
Gender documentation of the funding proposal. 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated authority(ies) 
or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the 
funding proposal titled titled “Promoting private sector investment through large scale adoption of energy saving 
technologies and equipment for Textile and Readymade Garment (RMG) sectors of Bangladesh” submitted by  the 
Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to 
Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged 
or commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                               1 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point(s)                      156 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure                                                                                       157 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                           159 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                169 
assessment 
Gender documentation                                                                                                                                   171

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Promoting private sector investment through large scale 
adoption of energy saving technologies and equipment 
for Textile and Readymade Garment (RMG) sectors of 
Bangladesh 
Country(ies): 
Bangladesh 
Accredited Entity: 
Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) 
Date of first submission: 
2020/01/23 
Date of current submission 
2020/10/18 
Version number 
V.04

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 1 OF 155 
Contents 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
•
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
•
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
•
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
•
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
•
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 2 OF 155 
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
A.1. Project or
programme
Programme 
A.2. Public or private
sector
Private 
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)
Not applicable Not applicable 
A.4. Result area(s)
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☐
Energy access and power generation:
☐
Low-emission transport:
☒
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:
☐
Forestry and land use:
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☐
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
 
 
☐
Health and well-being, and food and water security:
☐
Infrastructure and built environment:
 
☐
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution: 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
100% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
A.5. Expected mitigation
impact
14.53 million t CO2eq 
A.6. Expected adaptation
impact
Not applicable 
Not applicable 
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance)
340.50 million USD 
A.9. Project size
Medium (Upto USD 250 
million) 
As per GCF policy, each sub-
project will be within the 
IDCOL accreditation scope. 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested
256.48 million USD
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒Grant
6.48 million 
☒Loan
250 million 
☐Guarantee 
Enter number
☐Equity
Enter number 
☐Results-based
payment
Enter number 
A.11. Implementation
period
12 years ; considering last 
disbursement for any sub-
project loan under this 
programme will take place 
at Year 12 as per project 
implementation timetable 
A.12. Total lifespan
21 Years 
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval
Within 03 months after 
signing of FAA. 
A.14. ESS category
B 
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before?
Yes ☒    No ☐
A.16. Has Readiness or
PPF support been used
to prepare this FP?
Yes ☒ 
No ☐
A.17. Is this FP included
in the entity work
programme?
Yes ☒    No ☐
A.18. Is this FP included
in the country
programme?
Yes ☒ 
No ☐
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence
Yes ☒    No ☐

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 155 
A.20. Executing Entity
information
Component 1, 2 & 4 : AE i.e.Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) is 
also the EE 
Component 3: Local Financial Institution (LFIs) will be the EEs namely- South East 
Bank Limited, City Bank Limited, BRAC Bank Limited and IDLC Finance Limited or any 
other eligible LFIs as per selection criteria. IDCOL may also be the EE in some cases 
when it lends directly to the RMG manufacturers. 
Component 5: Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) as EE. 
Sustainable Renewable Energy Development Authority (SREDA), GoB will be the 
Implementing Partner for this component and a beneficiary, although not an EE. 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
CO2 emissions per capita of Bangladesh increased from 0.18 metric tons in 1997 to 0.47 metric tons in 2014, 
having an average annual growth rate of 6%.1 The rising trend is a ramification of current economic 
growth due to industrial expansion. In order to support the present industrial and economic growth, 
energy production is soaring in the country, causing a higher fossil fuel emission2. 
The industrial sector in Bangladesh accounts for 47.8% 3 of the commercial energy consumption, 
predominantly in the form of natural gas and electricity. Among this the textile sector is the second largest 
energy consuming industrial sub-sector with 12.40%4 consumption after Garment sector (15.40%). The  
GoB’s  Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan states that manufacturing industries in Bangladesh 
are not efficient in energy use because of continuous usage of old/ mal-maintained machines and poor 
energy management. The impetus towards efficient end use of energy in the industrial sector is lagging 
mostly due to inadequate financial incentives and lack of technical expertise. If the current industrial energy 
intensity persists then considering the economic growth outlook in the medium to long term, it can be assured 
that GoB will face difficulties to manage the rising energy demand, and subsequently achieve GHG emission 
reduction targets   under the UN Paris climate accord.  
Hence, the proposed programme aims to support business establishments in the textile and RMG sector 
with financial and market resources to avail investment opportunities for energy saving technology upgrades. 
The intervention will create a favorable market environment and scalable business model for investment in 
energy efficiency improvements, leading to sizeable energy savings and accompanying with greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions reductions. It will substantially contribute to achieving Bangladesh’s Nationally 
Determined Contribution (NDC); i.e. 15% GHG emission reduction compared to the Business-As-Usual 
scenario by 2030 with international support, under the Paris Agreement. Furthermore, the program also 
contributes to the GoB target to achieve 10% of energy consumption reduction in the industry sector by 2030 
and 20% improved energy intensity by 2030. 
Overall the proposed program will comprise an integrated package of concessional financing for textile & 
RMG borrowers, and technical assistance for creation of enabling environment by covering areas such as 
capacity building, awareness, support in loan disbursal and monitoring and evaluation of the program 
parameters. The Programme comprises of five interrelated and closely coordinated components: 
1 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.ATM.CO2E.PC?locations=BD 
2 https://tradingeconomics.com/bangladesh/fossil-fuel-energy-consumption-percent-of-total-wb-data.html 
3 Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan up to 2030 by SREDA, Power Division 
4 Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan up to 2030 by SREDA, Power Division

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 155 
•
Component 1: USD 133.00 million financing for Energy Saving Equipment & Technology for
Textile sector
•
Component 2: USD 3.05 million GCF Technical Assistance (TA) to develop enabling environment
for EE investment in textile sector
•
Component 3: USD 200.00 million financing for Energy Saving Equipment & Technology for RMG
sector
•
Component 4: USD 2.30 million GCF Technical Assistance (TA) to develop enabling environment
for EE investment in RMG sector
•
Component 5: USD 1.15 million GCF Technical Assistance (TA) to strengthen regulatory &
institutional framework at the national level to overcome the operational constraints related to
implementing EE&C in the country
In case of Component 1, 2 & 4:  IDCOL will be the Executing Entity for Component 1, 2 & 4. Under 
Component 1, IDCOL will make GCF funds available in the form of concessional loans to the end borrower 
who are in this case the private textile manufacturing entities. The end borrower will seek disbursements 
from IDCOL in both USD and BDT for energy efficient equipment & technology in line with the capacity 
proposed to be deployed every year over the programme implementation period. Under Component 2, 
IDCOL will also be responsible for execution of activities under Technical Assistance (TA). 
Just like component 2, component 04 will be executed by IDCOL which consists of activities proposed as 
Technical Assistance to promote access to information & resources and to build capacity for successful 
implementation of Component 03 to bring about a systemic change in the RMG sector. 
In case of Component 3, IDCOL will channelize funds from GCF in the form of loan, to the Executing 
Entities (EEs) i.e. LFIs viz. BRAC Bank, City Bank, South East Bank and IDLC or any other eligible LFIs as 
per selection criteria to reach the ultimate end borrowers who are in this case the private garments 
manufacturing entities. In some instances, IDCOL will lend directly to the RMG manufacturers. The 
Accredited Entity (AE), IDCOL will receive fund from GCF and channel it to Executing Entities (EEs). The 
EEs will seek disbursements from IDCOL for energy efficient equipment & technology according to their loan 
application pipeline every year over the program implementation period. The transaction throughout the 
channel will be in USD.  
Component 05: This component will address the policy level issues for creation of enabling environment 
for energy efficiency financing of the country. It will target to strengthen regulatory & institutional framework 
at the national level to overcome the operational constraints related to implementing EE&C in the country. 
Sustainable and Renewable Energy Development Authority (SREDA) under Ministry of Power, Energy & 
Mineral Resources, GoB, will be the implementing partner of this component. 
Under Component 01 and 03, GCF funding in the form of concessional senior loans will support the end 
borrowers of textile and RMG sector respectively, by deploying a credit line to ensure that long term 
concessional financing is available in the market to overcome the barriers of high up-front costs, and longer 
payback periods, to promote private sector investment in EE equipment. Even though the implementation 
modality and the addressed sectors of Component 01 and 03 will be different as mentioned above, but the 
overall objective will be the same which is to progress investment opportunities for energy saving technology

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 5 OF 155 
 
upgrades in the country. Furthermore, GCF non-reimbursable resources (technical assistance), comprising 
under Component 02 and 04 aims to improve market perception about energy efficiency and provide support 
to the relevant stakeholders at all stages of implementing energy efficient measures. It is envisaged to create 
an interface between energy efficiency equipment suppliers or manufacturers and the decision makers 
behind the investment for energy efficiency i.e. Textile & RMG end borrowers, thereby helping disseminate 
the information related to energy efficiency and resolve any queries that the unit owners may have. Policy 
makers will also be apprised the barriers to implementing energy efficiency measures and provide guidance 
in developing enabling policies, regulations to help overcome these barriers. It is envisaged that without such 
enabling activities, a concessional line of financing would not help in generating interest among the 
stakeholders in undertaking energy efficiency measures. Also, given that the energy efficiency market in 
Bangladesh is in its infancy, such support activities would be critical to enable market transformation and 
galvanize the equipment procurement decisions of Textile & RMG units. Hence, the TA is viewed to be a 
critical component to ensure greater uptake of energy efficiency measures during the programme duration 
in the two sectors, as well as ensure sustainability of energy efficiency market for both the sector beyond the 
programme duration. 
 
The programme overall is expected to reduce or avoid about 14.53 MtCO2eq of GHG emission reductions 
over the lifetime of the investments in both the sectors. The programme is first of its kind for the country 
considering specific focus on mitigation thorough energy efficiency of two largest energy intensive industries 
i.e. textile & RMG. The other ongoing and past programmes on EE have a broader focus targeting various 
energy intensive industries of the country. The paradigm shift potential for the proposed programme lies in 
the project’s focus on overcoming technical & financial barriers for the private sector (including the Local 
Financial Institutions), by providing know-how & capacity building and finally by creating an enabling 
environment to promote EE&C investments in textile and RMG  sector of Bangladesh. Nationwide impact 
will also be achieved by implementing component 05, by Government owned institution SREDA, to 
strengthen regulatory & institutional framework at the national level to overcome the operational constraints 
related to implementing EE&C in the country.

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 6 OF 155 
 
 
 
5https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Bangladesh%20First/INDC_2015_of_Banglades
h.pdf 
6 Bangladesh’s EE&C Master Plan 2030 (March 2015) 
7 Source: Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan up to 2030 (JICA website, 2015) 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate rationale and context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Climate rationale: Describe the climate change problem the proposal is expected to address. Describe the mitigation 
needs (GHG emissions profile) and/or adaptation needs (climate hazards and associates risks based on impacts, 
exposure, and vulnerabilities) that the proposed interventions are expected to address. 
Climate rationale: 
Global warming is the most alarming phenomenon of the present time and to combat it, it is high time to take 
all possible measures in every sector.  Bangladesh submitted its INDC to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in September 2015.  Bangladesh ratified the Paris Agreement 
on 21 September 2016 and its NDC can now be found on the UNFCCC’s interim NDC Registry 5. 
Bangladesh’s NDC describes its plans for tackling greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions through a progressive 
approach to developing its economy on a low carbon pathway. In the NDC, Bangladesh committed to reduce 
GHG emissions in the power, industry and transport sectors by 5% below ‘business-as-usual’ GHG 
emissions by 2030 using only domestic resources, or by 15% below ‘business-as-usual’ GHG emissions by 
2030 if sufficient and appropriate support is received from developed countries. 
Energy consumption, especially in the industrial sector is a significant factor for the GHG emissions which 
makes it imperative to help in the adoption of environment friendly practices by the industries on a priority 
basis. In Bangladesh, the industry sector accounts for 47.8% 6  of the commercial energy demand, 
predominantly in the form of natural gas and electricity. However, as per GoB’s Energy Efficiency & 
Conservation Master Plan 2030, most of this commercial energy is inefficiently consumed and utilised for 
economic activities.  Implementation of energy efficiency and conservation (EE&C) measures within the 
industrial sector can help reduce the energy consumption in the sector by 30%. This is exemplified by the 
diagram below which gives the break-up of energy consumption in various industrial sub-sectors under 
business-as-usual (BAU) scenario and an EE&C scenario which take in to account maximum energy 
efficiency potential for the industrial sector7:

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 7 OF 155 
 
 
 
8 SREDA Energy Balance 2016-17 
 
 
 
 
While the energy savings opportunity is present across the various industrial sub-sectors, the Textile and 
RMG sector in particular provides substantial scope of savings. The textile and RMG sectors combined 
accounts for approximately 27.80% of the energy consumption in the industrial sector. 
The RMG sector being the most energy intensive consumes 15.4% and textile sector being the second most 
energy intensive consumes 12.4%8 of the total industrial energy demand (1,701 kTOE/year). 
45%
2%
1%
3%
6%
13%
30%
Present day energy consumption 
pattern
Others
Chemical
Cold Storage
Cement grinding
Steel & re-rolling
Fertilizer
Textile & Garment
31%
35%
2%
0%
2%
4%
8%
18%
Energy consumption pattern 
considering EEC pathway
EEC Potential
Others
Chemical
Cold Storage
Cement grinding
Steel & re-rolling
Fertilizer
Textile & Garment
Figure 1: Energy consumption pattern under 
baseline scenario 
Figure 2: Energy consumption under EE&C 
scenario

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 8 OF 155 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Energy consumption by sectors (source: SREDA energy balance 2016-17) 
The feasibility study conducted for the textile sector suggests, the larger textile units are typically 10 to 15% 
more energy efficient than the ‘small and medium’ units with efficiency being as high as 50% in some cases. 
Hence, under Component 01, IDCOL based on successful due diligence may consider financing a segment 
of small and medium units as part of the programme. 
The RMG sector also showed similar trend, in terms of energy efficiency, small factories having small-scale 
investment are more oriented towards increasing revenues and short-term profits, rather than undertaking 
initiatives which will help improve productivity and increase profits in the long run. Expenses on energy 
efficiency is seen as an additional financial burden and is rarely undertaken. Therefore, under Component 
03, IDCOL will encourage the LFIs (Executing Entities) to increase awareness among the RMG unit through 
consultation and to create access to concessional finance for small and medium units on its successful due 
diligence. 
The proposed programme aims to support entrepreneurs and business establishments in the textile and 
RMG sector, with financial and market resources to avail investment opportunities for energy saving 
technology upgrades. The programme will create a favorable market environment and scalable business 
model for investment in energy efficiency improvements, leading to sizeable energy savings and 
accompanying greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reductions of 14.53 million tCO2 over the 20-year lifetime 
of the project investments. 
Also describe the most likely scenario (prevailing conditions or other alternative) that would remain or continue in the 
absence of the proposed interventions. Include baseline information. The methodologies used to derive the climate 
rationale should be included in the feasibility study. 
 
 
 
 
Chemical
13%
Chemical 
fertiliser
17%
Cement 
3%
Steel
4%
Brick
5%
Pulp and paper
1%
Textile and Spinning
17%
Garment
21%
Sanitary and 
tiles
2%
Others
17%

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 9 OF 155 
 
 
 
9 http://www.btmadhaka.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Basic-Data-of-BTMA-2018.pdf 
10 Ibid  
11 https://www.thedailystar.net/business/news/textile-sector-needs-tk-10000cr-investment-1700014 
Snapshot of Textile Industry in Bangladesh 
The modern story of the growth of textile industry in Bangladesh starts with the establishment of the 
Bangladesh Textile Mills Corporation (BTMC) on March 26, 1972 set up with the point of observing, planning 
and controlling the exercises of nationalized factories of Bangladesh and building up and growing new 
enterprises. BTMC began its formal program with 74 nationalized factories from 1 July, 1972. 
In addition to BTMC, Bangladesh Textile Mills Association (BTMA) is the prime national trade organization 
representing Yarn, Fabric Manufacturers and Textile Product Processors mills of the country under private 
sector and private sectors are registered under BTMA. BTMA has been registered in 1983 and at present, 
1476 Member Mills are now listed under BTMA. 
Table 1: Composition of Bangladesh's textile sector9 
Types of Factory 
Numbers 
Installed Capacity 
Annual Capacity 
Yarn Manufacturing Mills 
 
430 
Spindles 13.17 Million 
Rotors 0.231 Million 
2943 Million Kgs 
Fabric Manufacturing Mills 
 
802 
Shuttle-less Loom & 
Shuttle Loom:          
52169 Million 
3707 Million Mtrs. 
Dyeing-Printing-Finishing Mills 
244 
N/A 
Fabric Processing: 3448 
Million  Mtrs 
Woven Dyeing: 2480 Million 
Mtrs 
Yarn Dyeing:  396 Million Kgs 
Knit Dyeing:    572 Million Kgs 
Total 
1476 
 
 
 
Textile industries are the one of the fastest growing and amongst the most important industries of 
Bangladesh and contributes to a significant portion of the nation’s economy, employment and global profile. 
Textile sector contributes more than 13% of Bangladesh’s GDP while also supporting  86% of the country’s 
export in the form of the final clothing/garment  (from Textiles & Textile related products10), which is a 
testament to the huge importance of the sector in the country’s growth. The export of clothing/garment in 
Bangladesh based on the textile production has increased from USD 24 bn to USD 33 billion from 2014-
2019 with an average annual growth of ~8%. 
 
Even though textile sector is a growing industry in Bangladesh, however it is still not self-sufficient in terms 
of serving the demand of the local garments sector. The local textile millers can meet 85 percent of 
the demand from the knitwear sector and 35 percent from the woven sector, according to data from the 
BTMA.  Bangladesh needs USD 1.17 billion additional investments in the primary textile sector to reduce its 
import dependence for fabrics for the export-oriented garment sector11. 
 
The industry (along with the garment industry) is one of the largest employers in the country, generating 
more than 65% of the country’s industrial employment and employing over 4 million. Out of this a significant 
proportion of employees is women, with textile and garment  overall having around equal number of men 
and women employed but textile in particular has around 20-30% female employment according to the 
feasibility study. Thus any improvement in the conditions in this sector will play an important role in the

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 10 OF 155 
 
 
 
12 Ibid (6) 
gender empowerment as well. In general, the state of the textile industry impacts indirectly the well-being of 
10-12 million people in Bangladesh12. 
 
 
Textile sector energy baseline 
Energy in the textile industry is mostly used in the forms of electricity, as a common power source for 
machinery, cooling and temperature control systems, lighting, office equipment, etc.; diesel oil as a fuel for 
boilers which generate steam; liquefied petroleum gas; coal; and natural gas. 
A breakdown of the processes is done to study the various process deployed in textile units and examine 
energy consumed in each process. 
 
Table 2: Break down of processes in textile units 
 
Each of the listed processes are energy consuming. The textile units comprise a large number of machines 
which together consume a significant amount of energy from the grid, diesel and natural gas. 
The energy consumption for each process of the sub processes is presented in the graph below. 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Energy consumption per deployed process in textile units 
Feasibility study shows that spinning and weaving are quite energy intensive. However, largest share of 
energy is consumed in dyeing and drying which uses energy for boiling, cooling and steaming of water. 
 
Spinning
•Yarn Fabrication
•Blending
•Cleaning, carding 
and combing
Weaving
•Drawing 
•Roving 
•Twisting and 
Spinning
Knitting
•Starching  and 
Chemical 
treatment for 
tensile strength
Dyeing and drying 
•Chemical 
treatment and 
coloring
•Drying and 
steaming 
Fiber Production
21%
Spinning
18%
Twisting
1%
Textured yarn  production
1%
Weaving
12%
Knitting
6%
Dyeing 
25%
Garment 
manufacturing 
9%
Others
7%

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 11 OF 155 
 
 
 
13 Rural Electrification Board  
14 Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan up to 2030 
(http://sreda.gov.bd/files/EEC_Master_Plan_SREDA.pdf) 
15 Annex …… 
16 RMG Sector towards a Thriving Future.The Daily Star. 2 February 2016. Available online: 
https://www.thedailystar.net/supplements/25th-anniversary-special-part-2/rmg-sector-towards-thriving-future-
210886 (accessed on 10 October 2018). 
EE&C Master Plan for 2030, indicates in the energy blends for the textile sector that the natural gas in the 
highest consumed fuel in textile in comparison to other sources i.e. Grid/REB13 and diesel remain negligible. 
However, the actual consumption of electricity from Grid is 92 toe/annum and that of natural gas is 1,586 
toe/annum14.Some of the small yarn producing textile units solely rely on electricity from the REB. As the 
feasibility study conducted under the PPF also include the non-registered small units, the energy blend ratio 
is a representation of the actual scenario. 
The feasibility study15  indicates that a number of small and medium units utilizes diesel and oils which isn’t 
registered in national statistics while natural gas continue to be the most consumed out of the rest of the 
energy sources. Figure 02 compares the energy mix indicated in SREDA’s Energy Efficiency and 
Conservation Master Plan 2030, prepared in 2015 with the data identified during the feasibility study of this 
programme. Even though Natural Gas remains the dominant source of energy but its share has declined by 
almost 22%, whereas diesel share has increased by 2440 % and share of grid electricity has declined by 
75%. This indicates that the textile industry is increasing its carbon footprint (diesel has highest emission 
factor) in order to maximize production with the available and affordable sources of energy and thus energy 
efficiency transformation of the sector becomes imperative. 
 
analysis of energy blends as emerged from National statistics and Survey conducted 
 
Figure 5: Comparative analysis of energy blends as emerged from National statistics and Survey conducted 
Growth of Textile sector and GHG emission: 
As of 2018, Bangladesh holds second place 16after China in apparel export. The expansion of the textile 
industry in Bangladesh is conceivable mainly due to cheaper labor. However, others factors are also closely 
linked, such as supportive business conditions, freightage facilities, and so on. There are organizations such 
as the Bangladesh Textile Mills Association (BTMA), Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters 
Association (BGMEA) and Bangladesh Knitwear Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BKMEA) which 
focus on reinforcing and promoting the entire apparel industry sector. They take measures including ensuring 
an amicable atmosphere for business, educating the laborers, making an effort for the betterment of the 
laborers’ social compliance, and building relationships among the concerned stakeholders, with the focus of 
1
93.57
5.43
25.4
73.23
1.37
0
20
40
60
80
100
Diesel  (%)
Natural Gas (%)
Electricity (%)
Secondary data (SREDA)
Primary data (Survey)

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 12 OF 155 
 
 
 
17 Finance Division, Ministry of Finance-Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh. Available online: 
https://mof.gov.bd/ (accessed on 15 October 2018). 
18 Source: Statement by BGMEA (Textile Today, 2019) 
expanding the trade income of Bangladesh. The country is aiming now to achieve $50 billion in RMG exports 
by 202117. Figure 6 illustrates the yearly apparel export of Bangladesh in United States dollars (USD). 
Yearly apparel export of Bangladesh in United States dollars (USD) from 2014-2018 
 
Figure 6:  Yearly apparel export of Bangladesh in United States dollars (USD) from 2014-2018 
With a yearly average growth of 8% in the textile export, energy demand of this sector is exponentially rising. 
The historical trend analyzed in the feasibility study identified that the total industrial energy consumption 
(KTOE) is progressing at a CAGR of 8%, which is mainly driven by the rise in the energy demand in the 
textile sector. In such case improved energy efficiency will play a critical role, along with sustainable energy, 
thereby minimizing the anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emission by the industry as a major energy 
user. 
Snapshot of RMG Industry in Bangladesh 
The roots of the RMG sector in Bangladesh, lies in late 1970s with the success of garment manufacturers 
in catering to export market. The sector gradually became fragmented and formation and institutionalization 
of the Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA), one of the largest trade 
associations in the country, in 1983 helped in structuring the sector and increase its contribution to the 
country’s economy, as well as ensure all legitimate rights and privileges of the garment workers leading to 
the betterment of the society and environment. 
The sector, which comprises over 4500 factories, has been a leading contributor to the economy, accounting 
for 11% of the country’s GDP in 2017-1818. It is the largest exporting industry in Bangladesh and has 
experienced phenomenal growth over the last three decades – contribution in total export increased from 
4% in 1983-84 to 84% in 2017-182, amounting to USD 30.62 billion. The sector has witnessed a growth of 
nearly 7.3% CAGR in last 5 years i.e. 2013 to 2018. 
 
 
 
 
24.5
26.6
28.6
29.2
32.92
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Billion US
Apparel export value from 2014 to 2018 from Bangladesh (billion 
USD)

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 13 OF 155 
 
 
 
19 Source: Information disseminated by BGMEA 
20 Source: Statement by BGMEA President (BGMEA website, 2019) 
21 Source: As per presentation provided by BGMEA representative  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7:  Bangladesh RMG sector export contribution 
 
While the sector continues in its growth trajectory, there are a number of hurdles in the horizon which need 
to be overcome to reach USD 50 billion export by 2021 set by the national body for garments manufacturers 
in Bangladesh - Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA). These 
impediments include rising energy costs, increasing worker wages, low worker productivity, graduation from 
LDC status of Bangladesh and increased demand of sustainable production practices from customers. 
The sector plays a key role in employment generation and in the provision of income to the poor – it employs 
nearly 4.4 million workers19. The sector has also played a significant role in the socio-economic development 
of the country with women comprising nearly 80% of the total workforce in the sector20. It also plays a pivotal 
role to promote the development of linkage small scale industries, since 99% of the accessories like dyeing, 
printing, zippers, labels are manufactured in Bangladesh 21 . This had helped open up employment 
opportunities through indirect economic activities, thereby contributing to the country’s overall socio-
economic development, woman empowerment and poverty alleviation. 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
1983-84
1989-90
1995-96
2001-02
2007-08
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
1983-
84
1989-
90
1995-
96
2001-
02
2007-
08
2012-
13
2013-
14
2014-
15
2015-
16
2016-
17
2017-
18
Value (USD Mn)
32
624
2547
4584
10700
21516
24492
25491
28094
28150
30615
% of total export
4%
32%
66%
77%
76%
80%
81%
82%
82%
81%
84%
Contribution of RMG sector in export market of Bangladesh

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 14 OF 155 
 
 
 
22 Source: Information derived from EE & Conservation Master Plan upto 2030 (DANIDA, 2017) 
 
 
 
 
RMG Sector Energy Baseline 
The garments sector combined accounts for about 15% of total energy consumption in Industry sector of 
Bangladesh i.e. 2107kTOE/yr22 which translates to 7.5% of the country’s total emissions i.e. 6.7 MtCO2 
approximately. The energy is consumed in a set of production processes which include fabric production 
(only in case of weaving, knitting), design, pattern production, grading, fabric relaxing, marking, spreading, 
laying, cutting, sewing, wet processing, spot cleaning/laundry, fusing, pressing and packaging. Based on the 
end products, the combination of processes may vary for specific units. In order to understand the energy 
related features of the sector, a survey of 20 units was conducted along with energy audit of 4 units. Based 
on the information generated from the survey, the share of energy consumed in RMG across type of process 
is given below: 
 
 
 
The energy consumption in the sector is skewed towards use of natural gas, with grid electricity having a 
minor share. Diesel is mostly used to generate electricity as a back-up and its use depends on non-
availability of grid electricity. As per discussions with stakeholders, small RMG units use diesel generators 
to fulfil power needs. In large units, there are captive natural-gas power plants that supply electricity. While 
natural gas is used in its primary form as boiler fuel, diesel is almost exclusively used for backup (in most 
cases) or primary power generation. 
 
In order to enhance the understanding of on-ground realities of RMG sector in Bangladesh and assess 
energy efficiency opportunities in the context of Bangladesh RMG sector, a series of walkthrough audit and 
Steam
28%
Motor 
Driven 
system
28%
Facilities
18%
Fired 
heater
20%
Process 
cooling
4%
others
2%
FIG 08: ENERGY SHARE ACROSS RMG 
PROCESSES
Natural 
gas, 74%
Electricity, 
15%
Diesel, 
11%
Figure 09: ENERGY MIX ACROSS RMG 
SECTOR

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 15 OF 155 
 
 
detailed energy audit had been undertaken. Energy survey was conducted in a total of 20 units, while 
detailed energy audit conducted in 4 units. The findings from the studies as well as audits have been 
presented below. 
In order to provide the idea of the manufacturing of RMG products, a brief description of production 
processes of a standard RMG unit has been explained. 
 
Figure 10: Flow-chart of the manufacturing processes in RMG sector

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 16 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 03: Brief Description of RMG unit Processes 
Operation 
Process description 
Method 
Fabric 
production 
• 
Weaving: Involves interlacing two or more yarn 
systems crosswise and vertically. Woven textiles are 
used in all textile sectors (apparel, home textiles, and 
technical textiles). On the weaving machine (loom) the 
weft yarn is inserted into the lengthwise-oriented warp 
yarns (shed). 
• 
Knitting: In knitting, fabric is formed by interlocking or 
intermeshing loops of one or more sets of yarns. 
Knitting is performed using one of two processes: weft 
or warp knitting. Each of these processes is done on 
several different types of machines. 
• 
Nonwovens: Fabrics made of fibers without 
intermediate yarn processing are called nonwovens. 
Nonwovens are essentially sheet or web structures 
made by bonding and/or interlocking fibers, yarns, or 
filaments using mechanical, thermal, chemical bond, 
or solvent means. 
Automatic/ 
manual 
Design/sketch 
• 
First step to manufacturing involves designing the 
product containing measurement defining a particular 
style 
Automatic/ 
manual 
Pattern design 
• 
A sample pattern is prepared based out of the style 
concept developed from design/sketch. 
• 
Pattern provides the design template on the basis of 
which multiple iterations of a particular style will be 
produced. 
Automatic/ 
manual 
Sample 
• 
A sample garment is produced from the first pattern to 
analyze pattern fit and design by a panel of designers, 
pattern makers and sewing specialists. 
• 
Any modifications, if required, are incorporated in the 
pattern 
Manual 
Production 
Pattern 
• 
Pattern design is used for creating production patterns 
which will be used for mass production. 
Automatic/ 
manual 
Grading 
• 
Patterns are created based on all (S M L XL XXL or 
size 10, 12, 14, 16) or else there are standard patterns 
of and so on for different figure and sizes. 
Automatic/ 
manual

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 17 OF 155 
 
 
Fabric 
Relaxing 
• 
“Relaxing” refers to the process that allows the 
material to relax and contract prior to being 
manufactured. 
• 
Relaxing process allows fabrics to shrink so that 
further shrinkage during customer use is minimized. 
Automatic/ 
manual 
Marking 
• 
Marker making is the process to sketch on fabric 
before cutting it. 
• 
Markers are laid in such a way so that minimum 
possible fabric gets wasted during cutting operation 
Automatic/ 
manual 
Spreading, 
Laying, and 
Cutting 
• 
Spreading is the process of superimposing lengths of 
fabric on spreading table for cutting purpose. 
• 
After successfully spreading the fabric and putting all 
the marks and sketch by the marker; fabric is cut 
according to design 
Automatic/ 
manual 
Sorting/Bundli
ng 
• 
Sorting of pattern shaped cloth according to size and 
design 
• 
Requires much precision since having bundles of 
mismatched patterns can create severe problems. 
Manual 
Sewing 
• 
Stitching/sewing undertaken after cut pieces are 
bundled according to size, color and quantities 
determined by the sewing room. 
Manual 
Wet 
processing 
• 
Includes de-sizing, scouring, bleaching, dyeing, 
printing and finishing etc. that involve adding colors to 
fiber, yarn, or fabric 
• 
Performed along with a variety of finishing steps that 
provide certain desired characteristics to the end 
product. 
Automatic/ 
manual 
Quality 
inspection 
• 
Complete quality checking of product to assess 
whether it is compliant with quality requirements 
Manual 
Spot Cleaning 
and Laundry 
• 
Spots and blemishes are often marked with a sticker 
and taken to a spot-cleaning area where the garment 
is cleaned using steam, hot water, or chemical stain 
removers. 
• 
Based on client requirements, some products require 
to be fully laundered in on-site laundry or with 
subcontract agreements with off-site laundry 
operations. 
• 
Commercial laundry facilities are equipped with at least 
three types of machines: washers, spinners, and 
dryers. Some facilities also have the capability to 
perform special treatments, such as stone- or acid-
washing. 
Automatic/ 
manual

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 18 OF 155 
 
 
Fusing and 
pressing 
• 
Finished product released by quality control goes for 
final pressing. 
• 
The ironing station consists of an iron and an ironing 
platform with steam supplied by an on-site boiler. 
• 
In most facilities, the ironing platforms are equipped 
with a ventilation system that draws steam through the 
ironing table and exhausts it outside the factory. 
Automatic/ 
manual 
Folding and 
packing 
• 
The finished garments are then folded in a specific 
dimension, sometimes using a template. 
• 
The price tags, hang hags and any other kind of tags 
are attached to garment after folding. 
• 
Different types of packing accessories are used to 
keep the garment in a desired shape. 
Manual 
 
The figure 11 below provided the breakdown of the final energy use in the garments industry as per the 
walkthrough survey: 
 
Growth of RMG sector and GHG emission: 
Tracking historic growth of the sector for the past 5 years reveals a CAGR of 7.5%. Even though the market 
is experiencing pressure in generating profits due to high input costs (rising energy, material and labour 
costs), increased compliance cost, high financing rate, the demand for fast fashion items, which can help in 
Steam
28%
Motor Driven 
system
28%
Facilities
18%
Fired heater
20%
Process cooling
4%
others
2%
Figure 11: Process wise share of energy consumption in RMG industry

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 19 OF 155 
 
 
 
23 Source: Bangladesh: Industrial Energy Efficiency Program (ADB website, 2014) 
sustained growth in the sector. While onset of COVID-19 will definitely impede growth in near future, demand 
in the medium and long term is expected to increase and the sector shall continue its growth trajectory. 
Given such a situation, GHG emission will also increase with increased production levels. Given current level 
of penetration of energy efficient equipment, which is negligible, it is expected that emissions growth will 
follow a similar trajectory, witnessing a growth of about 7% CAGR in next five years. Thus, increasing 
penetration of energy efficient equipment would be a key method of stemming the growth of emissions for 
the sector. 
 
Financial Market baseline for EE&C: 
There are several loan facilities for energy efficiency and conservation promotion, however higher lending 
interest rate and the time required for appraisal have hampered smooth implementation of loan projects. In 
this context, both minimizing the time for loan procedure through simplification of loan application and speedy 
appraisal and development of loan having concessional low interest rate and loan scheme will promote 
energy efficiency and conservation in Bangladesh further. 
 
In Bangladesh progress with industrial energy efficiency has been slow. This situation is expected to prevail 
with the current market and technical challenges. Hence, interventions in the proposed program aims to 
increase the rate of adoption of energy efficient machineries in the textile and RMG sectors, which has 25%-
30% of energy saving potential23. 
 
Considering the high cost of changing machinery process optimization is more preferable to the concerned 
stakeholders. However, the replacement of new machinery can be financially justifiable via low interest loan 
so that total payment amount for energy efficient equipment (equipment cost and financial cost) break even 
with acquiring conventional equipment. 
 
The programme will result in a real and visible paradigm shift in the textile and RMG sector of Bangladesh 
and advance it towards low-carbon sustainable development by limiting the country’s GHG emissions, as 
specifically recommended in the Nationally Determined Contribution 2015, the Bangladesh Climate Change 
Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP) and Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan (EE&C Master 
Plan) 2030. The programme is expected to result in direct emission reductions of 0.727 tCO2e annually by 
facilitating and scaling-up investment in energy efficiency improvements. However, gradually the annual 
emission reduction amount will increase as the energy mix will contain greater share of coal and oil, as 
domestic natural gas production is declining. 
 
Context: In describing the mitigation and/or adaptation needs, briefly describe the target region/area of the proposed 
interventions including information on the demographics, economy, topography, etc. 
The Bangladesh economy continues to perform well with robust and stable growth. The strong growth comes 
with stable inflation, moderate public debt, and greater resilience to external shocks. The country continues 
to make steady progress in reducing poverty and improving social indicators. 
Real GDP growth in FY18 (ending June 30) further accelerated to 7.86 percent from 7.28 percent in the 
previous fiscal year, led by strong private consumption and investment. The current account turned into a 
deficit with slower export growth, higher imports, and decline in remittances, while the balance of payments

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 20 OF 155 
 
 
 
24 S&P Global Market Intelligence 
25 https://www.thedailystar.net/country/gdp-growth-rate-of-bangladesh-2019-will-achieve-8-per-cent-adb-
1724293 
remained in small surplus. The debt-to-GDP ratio has remained stable at around 30 percent with the fiscal 
deficit well below the 5 percent of GDP budget target. 
The macroeconomic situation is expected to remain robust in FY19. Growth is projected above 7 percent 
with strong domestic demand. Inflation is expected to remain below 6 percent. The current account deficit is 
projected to widen to close to 2 percent of GDP with stronger import demand for food, industrial raw 
materials, and capital machinery, while remittances and exports start to recover. 
 
 
Table 4: Economic and Demographic data of Bangladesh24 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Market Size and Growth 
Real GDP (Bt.B) 
9,479.0 
10,224.4 
10,992.0 
Real GDP Growth (%) 
7.28 
7.86 
7.50 
Nominal GDP ($B) 
249.7 
274.0 
301.7 
Population (M) 
164.7 
166.4 
168.1 
Population Growth (%) 
1.10 
1.00 
1.00 
GDP per Capita ($) 
1,516 
1,647 
1,795 
Unemployment Rate (%) 
4.37 
4.38 
4.40 
Macroeconomic Stability 
Current Account Balance ($B) 
(6.37) 
(7.84) 
(8.82) 
Consumer Prices Growth (%) 
5.70 
5.54 
5.40 
Budget Balance/ GDP (%) 
(3.42) 
(4.80) 
(4.80) 
External Sector 
Goods: Exports (fob) ($B) 
31.39 
33.72 
35.81 
Total Imports (cif) ($B) 
47.57 
55.39 
58.66 
 
In addition to this, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, ADB reported in its ‘Asian Development Outlook 2019’ 
Bangladesh’s economy is in good shape & likely to grow. Bangladesh is confident that it will surpass the 8 
per cent growth threshold in the current fiscal year on the back of manufacturing and service sectors.25 
With this expected increasing trend of economic growth & positive future outlook, apparel industry played a 
significant role being the largest contributor in export income for the country. Textile sector contributes more 
than 13% of the GDP of Bangladesh while also accounting for over 86% of the country’s export  (from 
Textiles & Textile related products), which is a testament to the huge importance of the sector in the country’s 
growth. However, due to COVID-19 pandemic a lot of the expected economic trend of Bangladesh will 
change, a brief assessment of impact of COVID-19 on Textile and RMG sector is given below.

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 21 OF 155 
 
 
 
26 Source: Article (LightCaste Partners, 2020) 
COVID -19 impact on the Textile and RMG industry: 
As on 15th May 2020, Bangladesh has reported 20,065 confirmed cases and 298 deaths following the 
identification of the first imported covid-19 case on March 8th. 
On March 23rd, the government declared a general holiday from March 26th to April 4th, which was extended 
subsequently. Government offices, private offices, and courts are closed, commercial banks are allowed to 
operate shorter hours. Individuals have been requested not to leave their homes except to collect daily 
necessities and emergency supplies, and to wear masks when outside. On 10 April, The Bangladesh 
Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA) and Bangladesh Knitwear Manufacturers and 
Exporters Association (BKMEA) announced in a joint statement that the readymade garment (RMG) 
factories would remain closed until 25 April. 
Directives by the Bangladesh government stated that textile & garment factories, which supply some of the 
biggest brands in the world and produce 84% of the country’s total exports, would be allowed to resume 
operations after 25th April, provided factories complies with health guidelines and maintain physical 
distancing. 
On 13 May, it was reported that the government is likely to extend the shutdown of most private and public 
workplaces until 30 May. 
Impact: 
Beyond the domestic impact of the health crisis, the two main channels through which the Bangladesh 
economy will be impacted are remittances and exports of textile & apparels. Remittances represent over 5 
percent of GDP ($16.4 billion in FY 19), and a majority of migrant workers are based in Gulf countries that 
are affected by the abrupt decline in oil prices. The textile & garment sector accounts for more than eighty 
percent of the country’s exports. As, Bangladesh, the second-largest apparel producer after China, is set to 
lose roughly US $ 6 billion in export revenue this financial year amid cancellations from some of the world’s 
largest brands and retailers due to Covid-19 outbreak, shared by Bangladesh Knitwear Manufacturers and 
Exporters Association (BKMEA) Vice President Mohammad Hatem. The industry has been hit by the 
cancellation or postponement of several billion US dollars in orders from major retailers in importing 
countries, although top global apparel brands announced on April 1st that they would receive shipments of 
goods already produced. The decline in national and global demand for manufactured goods, particularly in 
the garment sector, risks creating unemployment and deepen poverty. The urban poor will be hardest hit 
while the number of additional poor will be higher in rural areas. The extent of the impact of the pandemic 
will depend on the duration of the crisis and the mitigation measures taken. 
There have been 3 distinct phases, which charts the impact of COVID in textile & particularly RMG sector of 
Bangladesh. A sample study of 316 RMG units by Penn State Center for Global Workers’ Rights (CGWR) 
provides vital insight on how the COVID situation has shaped the key events for each of these phases. 
Details are discussed below: 
 
1. Phase one – Material supply: With the lockdown in China, the single largest source of raw materials 
(Chinese fabric import accounts for 46% of total imports for RMG sector26), RMG units reported 
delays in raw material shipment or significant increase in raw material prices. This set in to motion 
the first phase of impacts. Delay in material receipt resulted in delay in product shipment, as a result 
of which multiple units received imposition of penalty by buyers. Almost all RMG units did not receive 
any extra payments from buyers on account of increased raw material prices.

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 22 OF 155 
 
 
 
27 Source: Article (World Bank, 2020) 
28 Source: Report (ADB, 2020) 
29 Source: Report (ADB, 2020) 
2. Phase two – Delayed payments: In the second phase, global incidence of lockdowns started 
affecting the bottom line of buyers, resulting in delay in payments to RMG units. RMG units were 
experiencing varying levels of delay, relative to contractually stipulated terms. In most cases, the 
delay was extended beyond a month. 
3. Phase three – Order cancellation: Further aggravation of market demand due to continued 
lockdown, led to cancellation of orders by buyers. While there have been reported variations in cases, 
mostly buyers cancelling orders have refused to pay for raw materials or production costs incurred 
by RMG units. 
Supportive measures: 
As is evident from the discussions above, the COVID pandemic has adversely impacted both demand and 
supply side of the textile and RMG sector in Bangladesh thereby resulting in cash crunch. National 
Governments like USA, India are announcing relief package as well as multi-laterals like World Bank.  The 
latter expects to deploy USD 160 billion over the next 15 months to help countries protect the poor and 
vulnerable, support businesses, and bolster economic recovery27. 
While traditional markets are failing, demand for protective personal equipment has surged and prices of 
PPE products have risen dramatically since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak: a six-fold increase for 
surgical masks; three-fold for respirators; and a doubling in the price of gowns28. However, there is a supply 
bottleneck in the market with backlog of 4–6 months for supply orders29. This provides an opportunity for 
textile and RMG units to reposition and focus on medical protective kits. The increased demand for personal 
protective equipment (PPE) is expected to continue in the short to medium term i.e. 1-3 years, given the 
state of pandemic. Such product diversification can help RMG units to tide over the pandemic in short term. 
However, product diversification will also require capital investment, production of specialized equipment 
requires compliance with established medical standards as well as establishing new supply chains. Given 
the current scenario, making such adjustments in scale would require support. While Bangladesh 
government has announced support for the sector, it may not be possible to revive the sectors only through 
Government help. Exploring financing from other sources can help provide the requisite support to the sector 
to tide over the short-term demand glut. 
Concluding remarks: 
IDCOL is seeking concessional finance from Green Climate Fund (GCF) to promote energy efficiency in the 
textile and RMG sector of Bangladesh. Traditionally, funding from GCF has targeted such projects that can 
demonstrate positive climate impact, like climate mitigation from energy efficiency. The pandemic offers a 
unique opportunity to GCF to extend this mandate and bundle an additional supporting financing instrument, 
like grant, with their traditional debt to help beneficiaries to tide over the immediate aftermath of COVID. The 
RMG and textile sector in Bangladesh can benefit from such a grant funding – apart from investments in 
energy efficiency technology, GCF can help promote business recovery in RMG factories and help them 
emerge stronger and more resilient from the COVID crisis. 
Though the impact of covid-19 is being felt in the short run, the growth is expected to recover over the 
medium term. Textile and RMG industry, the main backbone of the country, is expected to overcome this 
crisis as a result of various measures taken by the government and support from international developmental 
organizations.

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 23 OF 155 
 
 
 
30 JICA Report & KII report 
31 Bangladesh PaCT website. 
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/gdp-growth-rate-of-bangladesh-2019-will-achieve-8-per-cent-adb-1724293 
The availability of low cost financing through the proposed GCF funded program for energy saving 
technology upgrades, will be considered positive and beneficial for the sectors and will add to its recovery. 
Related projects/interventions: Also describe any recent or ongoing projects/interventions that are related to the 
proposal from other domestic or international sources of funding, such as the Global Environment Facility, Adaptation 
Fund, Climate Investment Funds, etc., and how they will be complemented by this project/programme (e.g. scaling up, 
replication, etc.). Please identify current gaps and barriers regarding recent or ongoing projects and elaborate further 
how this project/programme complements or addresses these. 
Please identify current gaps and barriers regarding recent or ongoing projects and elaborate further how this 
project/programme complements or addresses these. 
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Promotion Financing Schemes in Bangladesh  30 
• 
Energy Efficiency Finance Program (IEEFP) 
Among the loan facility for EE&C promotion focused on industry sector in Bangladesh, Global Climate 
Partnership Fund (GCPF) was one of the earliest funds. GCPF which was initiated in 2011 is the loan facility 
aiming to extend loans to projects owners for buildings and plants improving energy efficiency by more than 
20% and renewable energy project such as small-scale solar power generation, small-scale hydropower, 
wind power generation and biomass power generation.  However, provision of GCPF loan has been limited 
with just one (1) project which was extended by co-financing of 2 two financial institutions. Reasons for poor 
achievement could be considered as follows: Firstly, higher lending rate for end-user was raised. As is shown 
in Table-5, lending rate in BDT denomination was set as about 12%, which is higher than term-loan rate for 
industry, after considering credit risk cost. Secondly, difficulty in raising fund timely is hampering factor.  
Financial institutions require longer time to conduct technical appraisal which takes more than 3 months. 
Thirdly, condition of the loan which needs to meet more than 20% conservation of energy is a big hurdle. 
• 
Energy Efficiency Finance Program (IEEFP) 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) initiated Industry Energy Efficiency Finance Program (IEEFP) in 2011. 
IEEFP covered only energy efficiency and conservation equipment while GCPF extended loan for not only 
energy efficiency and conservation equipment but renewable energy equipment. The team found out that 
IEEFP fund have comprised of technical assistance and loan facility of USD 30 million. However, it is 
indicated that no loan has been extended and ADB cancelled most of the fund. 
• 
Partnership for Clean Textile (PaCT)31 
IFC has been implementing “Partnership for Clean Textile (PaCT)”. PaCT is playing a leading  role in driving 
the long-term competitiveness and environmental sustainability of the textile wet  processing sector, by 
addressing high water, energy, and chemical use through the adoption of  best practices in the textile sector. 
These best practices lead to declining resource e consumption, soaring profits, and an enhanced image in 
the global apparel market. 
Outline of PaCT project is as follows: Over the years, IFC has drawn on its global and local experience and 
has provided a combination of investments and advisory services in Bangladesh.  As of June 2018, IFC’s 
committed portfolio in Bangladesh is around USD 1.52 billion (IFC  invested USD 800 million in 2017 and 
USD 1 billion in 2018 for Bangladesh Textile Sector.). 
IFC is promoting sustainable growth and private sector development in Bangladesh through  investing in 
critical infrastructure; boosting financial inclusion; enhancing textiles competitiveness and supporting 
reforms to make doing business easier for private sector.

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 24 OF 155 
 
 
 
32 Bangladesh Bank website 
However, some of the key points to be noted for the PaCT programme, are as follows: 
- 
PaCT is Resource Efficiency Financing and not a dedicated energy efficiency financing. 
- 
Through PaCT, IFC is playing the role of investment facilitation. It’s doesn’t have a dedicated credit 
line like other funds which are there in Bangladesh market, to promote energy efficiency in Industries. 
Banks and financial intermediaries (FIs) are involved in the process, they have partner bank who 
review the investment proposals and evaluate the costs and benefits of implementing the proposed 
resource efficiency projects. After the review, the bank lend customized finance to factories to invest 
in the resource efficiency projects. 
- 
PaCT advocacy helped create a USD 200 million Green Transformation Fund that the Bangladeshi 
government uses to support low-cost financing for resource efficiency in the textile industry which is 
not successful primarily because of the cumbersome disbursement process. 
 
• 
Bangladesh Bank (Central Bank) Funds: 
Green Transformation Fund (GTF) 
The Green Transformation Fund was established by Bangladesh Bank in 2016. The size of fund is USD 200 
million and is intended to facilitate access to financing to export-oriented textile & garment products and 
leather goods manufacturing industries when they import capital machinery relevant to environment-friendly 
/green attributes such as energy efficiency, renewable and so on. 
The initial lending rate to IFI was set at 3 Month Libor + 2.25% which was lowered to 3 Month Libor + 1% 
from August of 2017. The team estimates lending rate to end-users from IFI will reach 6-8%. So far only an 
estimated 10%-15% of the fund has been disbursed. 
Following issues are pointed out from financial institution on GTF: 
(i) Since the loan facility is USD denominated and Libor-based floating rate loan, borrowers will be affected 
by change of exchange rate and interest rate; 
(ii) Lot of documents are requested from BB; 
(iii) About half year to 1 year is spent for loan decision, and; 
(iv) Completion of plant and equipment is the condition of loan disbursement. 
 
Bangladesh Bank Re-financing Scheme32 
The central bank launched the BDT 2 billion green banking refinance scheme in 2009 that provides loans 
for renewable energy and energy efficiency projects such as solar, bio-gas plants, industrial ETP (effluent 
treatment plant), Pet bottle recycling plants, vermicomposting, hydro power, Solar Battery recycling plants, 
LED bulb manufacturing plants, setting up of hybrid Hoffman kiln in brick manufacturing units under the 
scheme – to help reduce industrial pollution and increase power supply. The fund has been named the “solar 
energy, biogas and effluent treatment plant sector refinance scheme”. More sectors have been brought 
under the green banking refinance scheme to build environment-friendly economy. Under the scheme, the 
central bank provides funds to financial institutions at 5% interest, which then provide loans for renewable 
schemes at 8 - 9 % interest. The cumulative amount refinanced under the scheme up to June, 2018 stood 
at BDT 3797.25 million. In FY18, total disbursement under the BB's refinance increased by 91 percent to 
BDT 665.47 million which was BDT 348.80 million in FY17.

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 25 OF 155 
 
 
 
33 Bangladesh Bank website 
34 Considering 1USD=86 BDT 
35 Source: Basic concept of Joint Crediting Mechanism (JCM, 2019) 
Long Term Financing Facility (LTFF) under Financial Sector Support Project (FSSP) 33 
BB intends to provide long term financing for private sector firms, mainly midsize manufacturing firms under 
the Financial Sector Support Project (FSSP) financed by the International Development Association (IDA). 
The main objective of this facility is to provide long term financing for private sector firms. The financing 
facility would be provided with a view to facilitate the development of economies and to promote socially and 
environmentally sustainable development outcomes. Estimated total fund of LTFF is USD 292.50 million 
(BDT 229,612.50), of which BB’s contribution is USD 38.50 million (BDT 30,222.50) and IDA’s contribution 
is USD 254.00 million (BDT 199,390.00) in FY18. This Financing would be offered for 3 to 10 years term in 
US dollar and provided to the PFIs authorized by BB to deal in foreign exchange on lending/refinancing to 
the private sector firms. 
• 
JICA: 
The feasibility report revealed the demand for JICA EE&CPF Project loan remains high due to its 
attractiveness in lower lending rate and fixed interest scheme. This high demand is reflected in the fact that 
the private banks approach to IDCOL, asking to participate in large plant and equipment as a loan 
syndication partner by financing eligible energy efficient equipment with JICA loan. The only challenge with 
JICA EE&CPF is that it focusses on varied sectors and hence, cannot cater the complete demand of any 
one of the sectors. The sector approach will help to cater the huge demand and potential of energy efficiency 
in the sector and will percolate deep inside the sector. The second issue with JICA EE&CPF is that the 
project fund size is very small as compared to the demand and potential of the entire country. The second 
issue with JICA EE&CPF involves the limitations in ticket size of one project (maximum BDT 100 Crore/USD 
11.62 million34) and only one company from one group may apply for the loan under this project. This further 
minimizes the reach of this project across industrial sector. The last point is that, this project has a limited 
list of EE interventions that may be financed under this project. These limitations do not help the project to 
percolate deep inside any sector with an approach to bring the entire sector to world standards norms and 
energy intensity standards. 
• 
Joint Crediting Mechanism (JCM)35: 
The mechanism was introduced, through singing of bilateral document between Bangladesh and Japan 
in March 2013. The JCM facilitates diffusion of leading low carbon technologies, products, systems, 
services, and infrastructure as well as implementation of mitigation actions, and contributing to 
sustainable development of Bangladesh. It appropriately evaluates contributions to GHG emission 
reductions or removals from Japan in a quantitative manner, by applying measurement, reporting and 
verification (MRV) methodologies, and uses them to achieve Japan’s emission reduction target. 
Under this scheme, Japanese and Bangladeshi participants work in close co-operation to facilitate 
financial, technological and capacity building support for implementation of programs which will lead to 
reduction of GHG emission. Under this mechanism, 3 projects have been approved out of which 2 
projects are related to energy efficiency i.e. installation of high efficiency loom at weaving factory and 
high efficiency centrifugal chiller for AC system in clothing tag factory.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 26 OF 155 
 
 
 
36 Source: Circular on loan fund of SSREU (Bangladesh Bank, 2019) 
• 
Support of Safety Retrofits and Environmental Upgrades in RMG Sector of Bangladesh 
(SSREU/SREUP)36: 
A loan fund has been constituted in March 2019 of EUR 50 million to pre-finance technical up-
gradation of eligible RMG factories to improve worker safety and reduce environmental footprint. The 
loan fund amount is provided by AFD in the form of a 20-year subsidised sovereign loan, with a grace 
period of seven years. The fund is supplemented by a technical assistance component with total cost 
of EUR 14.29 million sponsored by EU, KfW, GIZ and Bangladesh Bank. 
Under this scheme, a maximum loan amount of EUR 1 million (EUR 3 million in case of exceptional 
cases) with repayment period of 3-5 years (7 years under exceptional case) will be provided to the RMG 
owners by participating financing institutions (PFI). The maximum interest rate to the end users has been 
restricted to 7%, while Bangladesh Bank will on-lend to PFIs at 3.5%. 
The project has a performance-based grant mechanism under which a portion of principal amount of 
loan is waived off (10% and 20% in case of safety remediation and environmental/social investments 
respectively) in case of verified achievement of targets. The breakdown of investment grants among 
Eligible RMG Companies and PFIs would be 90:10 i.e. 90% and 10% of the grant will be provided to 
RMG companies and PFIs respectively. 
In case of energy efficiency projects, only those initiatives which reduces energy consumption by at least 
20% over baseline scenario and exhibit an internal rate of return (IRR) on investment of 10% are eligible 
for funding under this scheme. 
 
Table 05: Summary of the key EE&C financing scheme in Bangladesh 
Name of 
Loan 
Facility 
IFIs 
Amount 
Year of 
Establish
ment 
Curr
ency 
Lending 
rate to 
end-user 
Tenor 
Eligible 
Areas/Sectors/Prod
ucts 
GCPF 
City Bank & 
Southeast 
Bank 
USD 30 m 
2011 
BDT 
About 12% 
5-7 
years 
Energy efficient 
equipment & Clean 
energy 
IEEFC 
(ADB) 
Industrial 
and 
Infrastructur
e 
Developme
nt Finance 
Company 
(IIDFC) 
USD 20 m 
2011 
- 
N.A. 
N.A. 
Energy efficient 
equipment 
EECPFP 
(JICA) 
IDCOL and 
BIFFL 
USD 100m 
(JPY 11.9 
billion) 
2016 
BDT 
4-6 % 
(Currency 
fluctuation 
risk borne 
by GOB) 
Short to 
long-
term 
duration 
Energy Efficient 
equipment’s.

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 27 OF 155 
 
 
ADB-
Financing 
Brick Kiln 
Efficiency 
Improveme
nt Project 
Commercial 
Banks 
USD 50m 
2012 
BDT 
- 
- 
Applicable for Brick 
Manufacturers 
JCM 
Govt. of 
Japan 
Project 
Specific 
2013 
- 
N/A 
N/A 
Implementation of 
low carbon 
technologies 
including energy 
efficient technologies 
SSREU/SR
EUP 
Participating 
FIs 
EURO 01 
million 
2019 
- 
upto 7% 
3-7 
years 
Technical up-
gradation of eligible 
RMG factories 
Bangladesh Bank Fund 
GTF 
Commercial 
Banks 
USD 200m 
2016 
USD 
6-8 % 
5 to 10 
years 
with 1-
year 
grace 
period 
Available only for 
capital machinery 
import for three 
selected sectors; 
export-oriented 
textiles & textiles 
products, leather 
manufacturing and 
jute sectors for 
implementing green/ 
environment-friendly 
initiatives 
Refinan
cing 
Scheme 
for 
Green 
Product
s/Initiati
ves 
Commercial 
Banks 
USD 23.97m 
(BDT 2 billion) 
2009 
BDT 
8-9 % 
4 to 10 
years 
with 3 
to 12 
months 
grace 
period 
based 
on 
product
s/initiati
ves 
Available for specific 
51 green products in 
8 sectors. The 
sectors; RE, EE 
Technology, 
alternative 
energy/fuel, waste 
management, 
Recycling or 
Recyclable Goods 
Manufacture, 
Environment- friendly 
brick manufacturing, 
environment- 
LTTF 
Commercial 
Banks 
USD 300 m 
2015 
BDT 
6-9 % 
3 to 10 
years 
Available for: 
a) Purchase of capital 
machineries and 
equipment for up-
gradation (including 
improving Health and 
Safety compliance) 
b) Relocation of 
factories to

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 28 OF 155 
 
 
designated industrial 
zones 
IFC PaCT 
Partner 
Banks 
PACT Phase 
1: USD 11 
million in 
development 
assistance. 
IFC helped 
catalyze USD 
39 million in 
additional 
investments in 
the 
programme’s 
member 
factories. 
PACT Phase 
2: USD 7 
million in 
development 
assistance. 
Phase 1: 
Launched 
in 2013 
Phase 2: 
Launched 
in 2017 
BDT/
USD 
6-9% 
3 to 10 
years 
Resource Efficiency 
Financing. 
 
The partner banks 
review the investment 
proposals and 
evaluate the costs 
and benefits of 
implementing the 
proposed resource 
efficiency projects. 
After the review, the 
bank lend customized 
finance to factories to 
invest in the resource 
efficiency projects 
and also provides 
linkage with relevant 
technology service 
providers. 
Note: IFC PACT advocacy helped create a USD 200 million Green Transformation Fund that the Bangladeshi 
government uses to support low-cost financing for resource efficiency in the textile industry. 
IFC’s Global Trade Supplier Finance (GTSF) programme also offers suppliers financial incentives to improve 
factories’ environmental and social standards. This USD 500 million investment and advisory programme helps 
suppliers manage working capital, convert sales receivables to immediate cash, and access lower-cost 
financing. 
 
As mentioned above, although there are several loan facilities for energy efficiency and conservation 
promotion, higher lending interest rate and the time required for appraisal have hampered smooth 
implementation of loan projects. 
Demand for JICA EE&CPF Project loan remains high due to its attractiveness in lower lending rate and fixed 
interest scheme (4-6 %) and simplified loan application procedure. However, JICA is not sector focused and 
only covers a small part of spinning in textiles and during JICA outreach it was observed that there are many 
instances of textile units willing to adopt energy efficiency if similar funding is available, hence there is need 
for a dedicated line for textile sector. 
GCF Fund is targeted for overall Textile and RMG Sectors in Bangladesh which will include spinning, 
weaving, knitting, dyeing, spreading, laying & cutting, sewing, wet processing, cleaning & laundry, fusing & 
pressing and folding & packaging, which have larger energy saving potential. In this context, fund from GCF, 
both minimizing the time for loan procedure through streamlining of loan application procedure and speedy 
appraisal as well as development of loan proceeds having concessional low interest rate and loan scheme 
will have catalytic effect and promote energy efficiency and conservation in Bangladesh textile and RMG 
sectors further. 
GCF fund will have catalytic impact on energy efficiency market for Textile & RMG sectors as no dedicated 
fund is currently catering to energy efficiency of Textile & RMG sectors as a whole. Further, most of the

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 29 OF 155 
 
 
current loans are catering to larger client base whereas in this credit line a mix of smaller and larger textile 
clients is proposed which would open a new market for financing availability for this clientele. 
Thus, GCF fund will not have crowding impact but will have market making effect on energy efficiency for 
textile & RMG sectors, where other fund can come later on and contribute towards energy efficiency in 
Textile & RMG sectors of Bangladesh which will lead to multiple benefits such as: 
 
 
 
Production floor 
Enhanced productivity 
Superior product quality and 
value 
Competitive edge 
Lower production costs (energy, 
labor raw material etc.) 
Enhanced asset value 
Increased disposable income 
Operation and maintenance 
Extended life-time for plant & 
machinery 
Reduced process / plant 
downtime 
Deferred capital costs towards 
replacing plant and machinery 
Working environment 
Improved thermal comfort and 
lighting 
Increased worker safety and 
well-being 
Retain and attract skilled staff 
Reduced health insurance costs 
and medical expenses 
Improved labor productivity 
Reduced noise levels 
Environmental 
Reduced compliance costs, 
fines etc. 
Reduced hazardous waste, dust 
etc. 
Reduced CO, CO2, NOx, SOx 
emissions 
Other economic 
Decreased liability/risks 
Re-investment of 
savings/disposable income 
New income streams; increased 
production capacity 
 
Additionally for GCF Fund 
 
1. The engagement is relevant because it addresses the key challenge for Bangladesh - climate change 
mitigation. 
The scope of the programme is in alignment with the SDG targets– SDG 7, SDG 9 and SDG 13. 
Sustainable energy use remains of critical importance to the Bangladesh economy. Availability and 
the rising price of gas is a significant and growing constraint on the growth of textile and RMG 
industries. 
2. Presently Bangladesh market is not fully explored or catered from a financing perspective. IDCOL 
with the help of the Fund and LFIs will solely focus on mainstreaming EE in the various size and type

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 30 OF 155 
 
 
of textile & RMG factories (by relaxing the major market constraints), to establish the concept as a 
business as usual practice so that it can be replicated in other industrial sector. 
3. The loan product will be directed to increase energy efficiency across complete value chain in Textile 
and RMG industries of Bangladesh, which will be a unique product catering to only energy efficiency 
in complete value chain of both the industries (Different from Partnership for cleaner textile (PaCT) 
led by IFC whose focus area is investment facilitation for financing resource efficiency projects in 
textile factories) 
4. The loan facility will have following features which will make it highly attractive in the market. 
- 
Simplified loan application procedure and speedy appraisal minimizing the time for loan 
processing. 
- 
Availability of Grace period & Long Tenure and low interest. 
5. In addition, the broad experience of the  Executing Entities  (IDCOL and LFIs) in financing industrial 
energy efficiency will have  following advantages: 
- 
Executing Entities have built their capacity by successfully implementing EE&C funds 
- 
Strong pipeline built by IDCOL and the LFIs for Textile and RMG sector while implementing 
EE&C fund which will ensure fast disbursal of GCF fund. 
 
Major Gaps and Barriers identified in the previous & existing EE&C credit lines and how it will be 
addressed in the proposed programme 
As mentioned above, although there are several loan facilities for energy efficiency and conservation 
promotion, higher lending interest rate and the time required for appraisal have hampered smooth 
implementation of loan projects. In this context, both minimizing the time for loan procedure through 
simplification of loan application and speedy appraisal and development of loan having concessional low 
interest rate and loan scheme will promote energy efficiency and conservation in Bangladesh further. 
The analysis of the alternative financing indicates a number of issues required to be addressed for being 
successful: 
1. Concessional interest rate in comparison to commercial rate 
Due to higher initial investment requirement for energy efficient equipment, users may be reluctant to 
purchase them compared to conventional equipment. As such, incentivizing the purchase of energy 
efficient equipment through concessional lending would be required. 
2. Flexible tenure & grace period in line with project viability 
Some available with significant grace period (1-2 years) and longer tenures which ensures that 
repayment can be made without cash-flow problems.  Easy access of fund through experienced financial 
intermediary of the energy efficient projects have longer payback period which can only be viable if 
financing is 
3. Due diligence compatible with prevailing investment environment 
While it is important that credit-worthy borrowers are selected under any programme, it is also important 
to ensure that the approval process is streamlined and doesn’t lead to significant delays. Some of the 
alternative financing programme involve multiple agencies in the due diligence and approval process 
which causes delays. 
4. Proper management of currency fluctuation if repaid in foreign currency

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 155 
 
 
Foreign currency loans need to be carefully managed to minimize forex risk. This is especially true for 
USD loans as BDT has been depreciating at an average rate of 2.94% per year in the past and this trend 
is likely to continue in the future as well.  As such, currency fluctuation exposure needs to be managed 
through adequate hedging mechanisms, if available or by having a currency risk fluctuation premium 
which will get added to the cost of the lending. 
• 
Complex technical requirements for processing loans: In order to access loans, detailed technical 
documents need to be prepared which provide the financial justification for undertaking the project and 
helps banks understand the risks in recovery of loans. Development of these documents involve hiring 
of energy auditors by the RMG units, which further adds to the cost component and also increase the 
technical complexity of applying for loans for the unit owners. 
In some cases, eligibility for loans include presence of company policy documents like Environment and 
Social (E&S) policy - a practice which is largely absent in the sector. This reduces the financing options 
available to an RMG unit to fund its energy efficiency measure. 
• 
Limited number of banks providing energy efficiency financing: Under existing market scenario, 
there is limited number of banks in Bangladesh providing energy efficiency financing. Also, large scale 
units have greater access to market information in this regard as compared to medium and small scale 
units. This further limits the option available to unit owners to finance their energy efficiency measures. 
• 
Limited capacity in bank in apprising energy efficiency projects: Like RMG unit owners, LFIs have 
limited technical knowledge in assessing an energy efficiency project and are completely dependent on 
energy auditor for assessment. Also, there is limited market information available for the banking staff to 
effectively understand energy efficiency as a concept and specifically energy efficiency in RMG sector. 
This limited understanding is also contributing to lack of active interest in financing energy efficiency. 
Hence, it is observed that limited penetration of energy efficiency measures can be effectively overcome by 
providing access to concessional financing sources at the same time providing access to technical and 
market related information to both demand side i.e. RMG units and supply side i.e. banks of the financing 
requirement for the sector. The TA component sought under the programme will support in reviewing all 
existing and planned public and private EE financing mechanisms in Bangladesh with a brief review of 
energy consumption in textile industries and their access to financing and identify financial gaps for 
realization of the planned EE programmes /activities. This will help in understanding the present 
requirements/needs of the credit line; including but not limited to institutional setting (management of the 
credit line), human resources need, indicative timeline for establishing the credit line, structure for raising 
capital or allocation of state budget to establish and maintain the credit line, structure for the utilization of 
fund and even diversification of financing facilities. Once the financing strategy is finalized, a financing road-
map along with time-based action plan will be developed, which will be subject to annual review. The 
effectiveness of the new financing mechanism in terms of filling the financing gap for reaching the EE targets 
and physical impact (energy and GHG savings) will be assessed annually  and based on the assessment 
(includes stakeholder consultation) the financing strategy will be revised. 
 
Initiatives by other development partner: 
 
KfW and AFD: In Bangladesh, National Determined Contribution (INDC) by 2030 under Paris Agreement 
are defined as the following two types. One is unconditional contribution as 5 % below BAU. The other is 
conditional contribution assuming international support as 15% below BAU.  With reference to this

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 155 
 
 
background, KfW and AFD are each planning to formulate investment pipeline to reduce not only energy 
consumption but also GHG emission. 
 
GIZ :Not in financial support but in technical cooperation fields, GIZ has been continuously supporting  
SREDA in capacity development in promoting EE&C. Major focused issues are supporting  establishment 
of legal frameworks to promote EE&C and strengthen energy audit skill etc. 
 
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) 
Describe the theory of change and provide information on how it serves to shift the development pathway towards a 
low-emission and/or climate resilient direction. Provide the diagram of the theory of change (approximately 1 page).  
The theory of change should include any barriers (social, gender, fiscal, regulatory, technological, financial, 
ecological, institutional, etc., as relevant) that need to be addressed. Use a results chain of inputs, activities, outputs, 
outcomes, and impact statements, and identify the how and why of causal relations to deliver the project’s expected 
results. 
 
 
Theory of Change of the programme  (EE&C in the Textile and RMG Sector): 
 Figure12:

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 155 
 
 
 
37 Source: Bangladesh Statistical Yearbook 2018 (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2019) 
38 Source: Bangladesh Energy Sankey Diagram (IEA, 2018) 
39 Source: Bangladesh national budget(Daily star, 2020) 
40 Source: Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan up to 2030 (JICA website, 2015) 
41 Source: Information derived from EE & Conservation Master Plan upto 2030 (DANIDA, 2017) 
42 Source: Bangladesh: Industrial Energy Efficiency Program (ADB website, 2014) 
Bangladesh has been consistently witnessing high economic growth (over 6% GDP growth for the last 
decade37). This has led to nearly 49% increase in its final energy consumption between 2008 and 201838. 
With the country expected to continue in its high growth trajectory, the corresponding energy consumption 
is also expected to increase significantly. In order to ensure energy access Government of Bangladesh 
provides generous subsidies in energy supply. The volume has been rising steadily over the past years – 
national subsidy bill for power generation and energy increased from USD 510 million in 2016-17 to USD 
1.62 billion in 2019-2039. Allocation for gas subsidy in annual budget of Bangladesh witnessed a 2x increase 
in 2019-20. The increasing energy subsidy bill can have a crippling effect of Bangladesh’ economy. Efficient 
use of energy can provide a solution to help reduce the subsidy bill and unlock the investment for overall 
economic development of Bangladesh and effectively reducing GHG emissions.  
Within Bangladesh, Garments and Textiles sector are the highest energy consuming sector within industries 
– which has the 2nd highest energy consumption after residential sectors40,41. Multiple studies have shown 
energy savings potential of nearly 25% is present for the sectors, as compared to international best 
practices42. However, there are multiple barriers to ensure benefits are accrued from implementing energy 
savings measure are realized. 
 
As gathered from stakeholder interviews, the unit owners are generally skeptical of the energy savings that 
can be achieved from implementing energy efficient equipment which priced significantly higher over normal 
inefficient variant. The lack of adequate number of demonstration projects for the sector is considered as 
the reason for the skepticism. Also, under the current financing landscape unit owners have to pay an interest 
in the range for 11%-14% - under such high interest rates, financing equipment for which lower priced 
variants are available is unviable for unit owners. The appreciation of cost savings arising of lower energy 
consumption is absent in the market. The investment decisions are further influenced by the lack of technical 
knowledge among the unit owners on how to assess the energy savings and the financial benefits are 
derived. There is also limited information available to the unit owners on the OEMs supplying energy efficient 
equipment and other information like pricing, which can help assist decision making. 
 
Apart from unit owners, the financing institutions also have limited capacity to assess and apprise an energy 
efficiency project, leading to lower to no preference of banks to fund energy efficiency projects as compared 
to other green projects. While, there is currently financing line for energy efficiency through Green 
Transformation Fund (GTF) of Bangladesh Bank, the complicated loan application process leads to 
disbursement of loans, delayed by months at a time. 
There is also a clear lack of policy push through measures like standards and labelling, minimum energy 
performance standards etc. that will create a demand side push for energy efficient equipment. 
Given this landscape, the introduction of low-cost financing coupled with technical assistance activities can 
help bring a transformative change aligned with GCF key mitigation area of reducing emissions from 
industries. Thus in the above shown diagram of Theory of Change we can assume that - 
• 
given the correct support the local financial institutions (LFIs) and the textile & RMG industries are 
willing and able to build their capacity to address climate change through adoption of energy efficient 
equipment and technology

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 155 
 
 
• 
increased access to concessional financing will allow the textile & RMG factory owners to invest in 
high climate impact technologies. Rising energy prices & compliance pressure from global brands 
are inducing industrial behavioral change, promoting sustainable energy savings.  
• 
by strengthening enabling policies/ regulations industrial energy efficiency can be realized in the 
country to mitigate impacts of climate change. 
The proposed programme can accelerate investment in a portfolio of high impact climate technologies and 
supportive changes in business practices especially in the Textile & RMG sectors. 
 
The major barriers that are identified can be classified into three segments (a) institutional capacity, 
governance & technology barriers: this includes complicated and lengthy loan approval process related to 
concessional green financing, lack of capacity of the financial institutions to appraise and monitor 
concessional loans related to industrial energy efficiency and finally the lack awareness in the market about 
the benefits of energy efficient equipment. (b) Financing barrier: this is lack of availability of concessional 
financing in the market that can widely cover the premium/additional costs of energy efficient equipment (c) 
Policy & knowledge barriers: this includes the limited access to technical & market information for effective 
decision making regarding investments in energy efficiency, limited appreciation for economic benefit of 
energy efficiency and lastly the lack of policy-level push in improving EE penetration. 
 
In order to overcome these barriers the programme will ensure access to low-cost financing for the program 
along with effective monitoring of fund implementation will help drive uptake of energy efficient equipment 
and create demonstrative effect to develop market trust in energy efficiency. In order to facilitate effective 
appraisal of energy efficiency project application and monitoring capacity building of banks disbursing low 
cost financing is required, as well as capacity development in units to undertake monitoring and handholding 
in the loan application process. Handholding activity will include assessment of the key issues in existing 
loan application process of IDCOL and  LFIs and accordingly provide recommendations for the modification 
of disbursement process of the low-cost loan instrument under this programme. 
  
In order to improve access to market and technical information related to energy efficiency for unit owners, 
a digital platform is envisaged which will contain case studies, guides, manuals of successful energy efficient 
equipment implementation. The digital platform will help also in registering various stakeholder types (mainly 
unit owners and energy efficient OEM) and stimulate conversations between the stakeholder’ group. The 
platform will also provide a sectorial baseline energy consumption database which coupled with the 
information on energy consumption and savings of individual projects within the programme, will help 
understand sector level impact of energy consumption in Bangladesh. 
 
Apart from virtual conversations, real-life interaction between unit owners and OEMs will be stimulated 
through technology fairs wherein OEMs will exhibit their energy efficient technologies and will clarify any 
queries of unit owners. Specific workshops aimed at increasing awareness of units (particularly unit owners) 
on the benefit of energy efficiency and the various policy levers utilized globally for appraisal of policy makers 
of Bangladesh is planned to improve awareness of benefits of energy efficiency.  
 
In order to stimulate policy level push, manuals and other supporting documents will be prepared to access 
to relevant information by policy makers in developing appropriately designed policies/schemes aimed at 
increasing penetration of energy efficient equipment in Bangladesh. Overall, these activities are expected to 
bring in the paradigm shift in Bangladesh energy efficiency market and create a replicable model that can 
be emulated in other sectors of the country to ensure increased penetration of energy efficiency.

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 155 
 
 
 
43 Please refer to table 06-09 of this document  
44 https://www.bb.org.bd/fnansys/interestlending.php 
Paradigm shift potential: The concessional loan has the potential to trigger behavioural change at industrial 
sector energy management level to incorporate climate change targets and corporate climate governance 
principles into strategic decision making. The transformative shift within textile & RMG  sectors can be  made 
possible through: the uptake of climate impact technologies; the additional shift triggered by behavioural 
change at institutional governance and management levels due to capacity development and sensitization 
on energy efficiency; and all supported by an enabling policy framework, in particular gender-responsive 
sectorial low-carbon roadmaps. The resulting paradigm shift will be (1) a shift and acceleration of industrial 
decarbonisation trajectories; (2) transformation of the supply and demand for energy efficiency finance; and 
(3) acceleration of the market for climate technologies. 
 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) 
Define the project/programme. Describe the proposed set of components, outputs and activities that lead to the 
expected Fund-level impact and outcome results. Components should reflect the project/programme level outcomes.  
This should be consistent with the financing by component in section C.2, the results and performance indicators 
provided in section E.5, and the implementation timetable in annex 5. 
Referring to the feasibility study, describe why this set of interventions was selected instead of alternative solutions 
and how the project/programme can help unlock the needed support in a sustainable manner. Also identify trade-offs 
of the selected interventions, if applicable. 
For Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals and projects/programmes with financial intermediation (loans or on-
granting), describe the selection criteria of the sub-project and types. 
The proposed programme aims to enable market transformation of Textile and RMG sectors in Bangladesh 
to increase penetration of energy efficiency measures, leading to a shift to low-emission sustainable 
development pathways. The programme is broadly divided into 05 components, where Component 1& 2 
addresses the barriers and needs of the textile sector for swift adoption of energy efficiency technologies, 
whereas Component 3 & 4 does the same for the RMG sector and component 05 addresses regulatory 
issues. The implementation plan designed for both the sectors are different to improve efficiency in the 
financial access and also to influence market participation to enable replication in other energy intensive 
sectors of the country. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENT 01 & 02: 
Even though the textile sector of Bangladesh has significant energy saving potential, but due to higher cost 
of energy efficient equipment compared to conventional equipment, end users are often deterred to install 
them. While there are a few products that have been launched by various financial institutions, however, 
except a few they have not been able to significantly meet their objectives due to either procedural issues 
or high cost of funding. The feasibility study indicates the need for ~ 5.7%43 (11%-5.28%) concessionality in 
the interest rate for energy efficient equipment, compared to commonly available commercial loans (i.e 
around 11%44) in order for EE equipment to be widely adopted in Bangladesh.  Using GCF and IDCOL 
funding, this can be achieved. Similarly minimizing the time for loan procedure through simplification of loan 
application and speedy appraisal will promote energy efficiency and conservation in Bangladesh further. The 
key  measures proposed to simplify lending are as follows:

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 155 
 
 
• 
Since the financing will be list based, it will be easier to apprise the project. The eligibility would be 
supported by certificate/catalogue/ brochures/ report from energy auditor or declaration by the 
supplier. The transactional cost of the parties involved would decrease significantly. 
• 
IDCOL has significantly built its capacity in apprising the loan application of energy efficiency projects. 
The loan appraisal process for GCF credit line will take significantly less time compared to any other 
fund. The project will have to meet pre-set criteria approved by GCF and will have to only go through 
internal approval process of IDCOL. In the case of credit lines where third parties are involved (like 
central regulatory body SREDA, in case of JICA Fund) or where intermediary financing institutes are 
involved (e.g. Partner bank in GTF and IFC PaCT project), a significant time (3 month to 1 years) 
gets wasted in loan approval process which will be saved in this credit line. 
 
 
Figure 13: Fund flow from GCF to the end borrowers (reflecting the interest rate and tenor) 
This would ensure a catalytic impact on energy efficiency measures in the textile sector. 
Component 01 & 02 envisages the creation of concessional fund with USD 133 million, including USD 100.00 
million senior loan from GCF and USD 33 million from IDCOL. End borrower’s equity investment for USD 
33.00 million will be the leveraged financing. IDCOL, an Accredited Entity with GCF, will make available the 
GCF funds in the form of loans to the end borrowers, who are in this case the private textile manufacturing 
companies.  Using this fund, the projected IRR estimated to be achieved is 7.0 %.  The implementation of 
these energy efficiency measures equivalent envisages annual GHG reductions estimated at 0.20 million 
tCO2 and 4.00 million tCO2 equivalent over the lifetime of the project (20 years) which if included in the 
economic benefit would lead to an EIRR of 23%. The payback period for various equipment varies between 
4-13 years. In addition to these economic and financial benefits, the project will also lead to other intangible 
social and gender impacts such as better community living standards, providing safe and better working 
environment leading to higher gender balance in workforce and skill up gradation for workers.  
As such, the envisaged program is closely aligned to the GCF objective of catalyzing financing for this 
initiative and helping scale up the initiative across the country in future through increased showcasing of 
economic and societal benefits leading to a market transformation in energy efficiency. The investments 
enabled through this program will help improve the productivity & competitiveness of the local textile industry 
in Bangladesh thereby leading to sustainable development pathways. The investments would also create a

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 155 
 
 
climate resilient built environment through deep penetration of energy saving technologies, equipment and 
appliances in the textile industries. 
The proposed programme will addresses the energy efficiency adoption needs  of textile sector with following 
components-  
Component 1: USD 133.00 million financing for Energy Saving Equipment & Technology for Textile 
sector  
Component 2: USD 3.05 million GCF Technical Assistance (TA) to develop enabling environment 
for EE investment in textile sector 
 
Component 1: USD 133.00 million financing for Energy Saving Equipment & Technology for Textile 
sector  
To encourage the industry and businesses to choose energy-efficient equipment which, in many of the 
cases, is more expensive compared to conventional ones, there is a need to reduce the cost difference by 
providing concessional lending for energy efficient equipment. 
 
Although energy-efficient equipment may become economical on lifecycle cost basis, equipment buyers are 
most likely to decide solely based on investment cost, resulting in choosing cheaper, conventional non-
energy-efficient equipment.  Against this background, the Programme aims to provide a low interest loan to 
the buyers so that total payment amount for energy efficient equipment (equipment cost and financial cost) 
will break even with the cost of acquiring conventional equipment. 
 
During the feasibility study, based on the payment simulations for a few types of equipment it was identified 
that there is a need of for 4.3% to 5.7% concessionality in the interest rate in order to breakeven the cost of 
EE equipment with that of cheaper traditional equipment. For example, market price of energy efficient and 
traditional/conventional spinning and boiler machine were compared .The price of energy efficient spinning 
and bolier machine were found to be 25% and 26% respectively higher than the traditional/conventional 
equipment. Subsequently, the cost impact of purchase of conventional equipment and energy efficient 
equipment by changing tenure period and grace period have been analyzed.  
 
The purchase of an energy efficient spinning machine which is ~25% more expensive compared with a 
conventional type, which will require a 5.53% interest rate loan(considering 8 year loan tenure and 1 year 
grace period) for the total payment to become par with that of a conventional one. Similarly, a 27% more 
expensive once-through boiler requires 5.28% interest rate (considering 8 year loan tenure and 1 year grace 
period) to be even with the conventional type in terms of the total payment amount.  
 
Table 6: Spinning machine with permanent magnet motor (In comparison with induction motor-driven spinning 
machine) 
 
 
Commercial Finance 
GCF Loan Finance 
 
 
Conventional equipment 
Energy Efficient 
equipment 
Price 
USD 
119,000 
149,000 
Interest Rate 
% 
11% 
5.53% 
Tenure Period 
yrs. 
8 
8 
Grace Period 
yr. 
1 
1

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 155 
 
 
Total Payment 
USD 
189,983 
189,983 
 
 
Table 7: Small sized once-through boiler (in comparison with fire-tube boiler) 
 
 
 
Commercial Finance 
GCF Loan 
Finance 
 
 
Conventional equipment 
Energy Efficient 
equipment 
Price 
USD 
48,000 
60,750 
Interest Rate 
% 
11% 
5.28% 
Tenure Period 
yrs. 
8 
8 
Grace Period 
yr. 
1 
1 
Total Payment 
USD 
76,632 
76,632 
 
 
The purchase of an energy efficient spinning machine will require a 6.67% interest rate loan (considering 
10-year loan tenure and 2 year grace period) for the total payment to become par with that of a conventional 
one. Similarly, once-through boiler will require 6.47% interest rate (considering 10 year loan tenure and 2 
year grace period) to be even with the conventional type in terms of the total payment amount. Payment 
Simulation changing loan tenure and grace period. Spinning machine with permanent magnet motor  
     
Table 8: Payment Simulation changing loan tenure and grace period. Spinning machine with permanent magnet 
motor (In comparison with induction motor-driven spinning machine) 
 
 
 
Commercial Finance 
GCF Loan Finance 
 
 
Conventional equipment 
Energy 
Efficient 
equipment 
Price 
USD 
119,000 
149,000 
Interest Rate 
% 
11% 
6.67% 
Tenure Period 
yrs. 
10 
10 
Grace Period 
yr. 
2 
2 
Total Payment 
USD 
222,860 
222,860 
 
 
 
Table 9: Small sized once-through boiler (in comparison with fire-tube boiler) 
 
 
Commercial 
Finance 
GCF Loan Finance 
 
 
Conventional 
equipment 
Energy 
Efficient 
equipment 
Price 
USD 
48,000 
60,750 
Interest Rate 
% 
11% 
6.47% 
Tenure Period 
yrs. 
10 
10 
Grace Period 
yr. 
2 
2 
Total Payment 
USD 
87,678 
89,894

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 155 
 
 
 
45 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/PA.NUS.FCRF?end=2018&locations=BD&start=2018&view=bar 
 
 
 
The above analysis clearly demonstrates that to ensure the feasibility of the project, concessional lending 
is required from GCF to IDCOL to enable IDCOL to extend loan at the low interest to the end borrower.  
Further analysis on how the proposed financial package is seemed to be appropriate and reasonable is 
described in section D.6. 
 
However, one thing to be noted is that the credit provided by GCF to IDCOL will be in the form of USD while 
IDCOL will be lending 60% of the amount to the end users in BDT and the rest 40% in USD. As such, IDCOL 
will have to manage the currency risk as well in this case which is not the case for other similar credit lines.  
 
In time series analysis done for exchange rate movement of Bangladeshi Taka against USD from 1998 to 
2018 it is observed that Bangladeshi Taka is depreciating on an average rate of 2.94%45 every year. Hence, 
IDCOL will be managing the currency risks by charging risk premium to the end borrowers. The feasibility 
study also indicates that some market exists for USD loans amongst the textile industries, so IDCOL plans 
to have a portion of the lending in USD as well. Given that such loans will not be exposed to currency 
fluctuation risk, they can be priced lower than BDT loans. 
 
Eligibility criteria for Textile Borrowers/Sub proponent: 
Each of the following criteria must be met by a local project to be considered as an eligible to be financed 
by GCF credit facility provided through IDCOL. Innovative projects could be considered on a case-by-case 
basis after having conducted a full-fledged feasibility study to assess whether it complies with the eligibility 
criteria set under the programme. GCF will be notified in advance in such cases.   
Nota bene: if deemed appropriate for the management of the Project, the Lender may agree to modify or 
further detail the general objectives and technical and financial eligibility criteria in the Operational Manual 
(to be developed under TA activity). With approval from GCF, the Operational Manual may be updated if 
needed during the Credit Facility’s implementation upon agreement between the Lender and the Borrower. 
 
 
A. General criteria 
 
• 
The project developer will be a business entity of limited company only 
• 
For both Green field and Existing project related to up-gradation to energy efficiency 
technologies/machines.  For a Project loan application already being processed at Accredited Entity, 
a letter of credit (L/C) for purchasing the EE&C equipment, anticipating the use of the Project Loan, 
may be opened up to 12 months prior to either GCF financing or IDCOL approval of the loan. 
• 
The borrower will be a Textile company 
• 
For procurement of Brand-New machines 
• 
Having Energy Efficient component of proposed equipment to be financed 
• 
Supported by suppliers’ declaration/ catalogue/ brochures or report/certificate from 
independent/certified  energy auditor acceptable to IDCOL or the baseline developed under TA 
activity

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 155 
 
 
• 
Fulfillment of other required criteria as mentioned in IDCOL’s CRM guideline and lending policy 
• 
100% of the eligible equipment price can be financed 
 
 
B. Technical Eligibility criteria 
 
Eligibility should be confirmed for each loan application. The Eligible Technology & Equipment List is a 
predefined list of technologies and equipment as prescribed during the programme formulation. This list will 
be updated every year, if required, to reflect the accurate market scenario and will be subject to approval by 
GCF. 
Table 10: List of identified EE equipment under feasibility study 
 
Category 
Major EE&C Equipment  
Condition 
Spinning 
• 
Roving Frame  
• 
Automatic Winder 
• 
Ring Spinning Frame 
• 
Air Jet Spinning 
• 
Air Compressor 
• 
Electric generator 
• 
Energy Efficient Boiler  
• 
Waste Heat Recovery System 
• 
Absorption Chiller 
• 
Chiller  
• 
LED Light 
• 
Any 
Equipment/technology 
eligible for financing , 
not limited to this list, 
must have minimum 
15% energy saving 
potential compared  to 
the prevailing inefficient/ 
less efficient equipment 
used in the sector 
• 
The eligibility would be 
supported by catalogue/ 
brochures/declaration 
form supplier’s or 
report/certificates from 
independent/certified 
energy auditor or the 
baseline developed 
under TA activity 
• 
Common equipment will 
be interchangeable 
within the category. 
Weaving 
• 
Air Jet Loom 
• 
Warper & Sizer 
• 
Sewing Machine 
• 
Stenters 
• 
VFD for Fan, Blower, pump etc. 
• 
 Air Compressor 
• 
Energy Efficient Boiler 
• 
Waste Heat Recovery system of 
Boilers 
• 
Waste Heat Recovery System of 
Stenters 
• 
 Absorption Chiller 
• 
 Chiller 
• 
LED Light

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 155 
 
 
Knitting 
• 
Efficient Knitting Loom 
• 
Circular Knitting Machine 
• 
Flat-bed Knitting Machine  
• 
VFD for Fan, Blower, pump etc. 
• 
 Air Compressor 
• 
 Energy Efficient Boiler 
• 
Waste Heat Recovery System 
• 
Absorption Chiller 
• 
Chiller 
• 
LED Light 
Dyeing 
• 
Energy Efficient Boiler 
• 
Jet Flow Dyeing Machine 
• 
Cold Pad Batch (CPB) Dyeing for Knit 
Fabrics  
• Waste Heat Recovery System  
• Absorption Chiller 
 
C. Eligible Investment Cost  
The cost of purchasing the energy saving technology and equipment will be the main subject of the loan, 
which will be utilized by the borrowers to retrofit and/or expand or establish their new factories, processes 
and building infrastructure.   
Financing modality to the Sub-projects / end borrowers can be any of the followings:  
A: Financing to procure only energy efficiency Equipment as replacement 
B: Financing to procure  energy efficiency  Equipment for expansion of existing project  
C: Financing to setup a new facility comprises of different energy efficiency  technologies.  In this case, the 
GCF Loan will only cover the portion of the financing for the energy efficiency  technologies rather than the 
full cost of the facility. 
 
 
Investment areas/cost heads 
Component 01 -Textile 
Component 03-RMG 
Amount-
USD 
million 
% 
Amount-
USD 
million 
% 
GCF 
contribution 
Cost item I : 
Purchase price with freight, customs 
duty, related insurance 
Cost item II : 
• 
Transport, assembly, installation  
• 
Training and technical transfer;  
• 
Customs 
duty 
and 
other 
administrative 
costs 
and 
100.00 
60% 
150.00 
60%

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 155 
 
 
commissions;  
• 
Auxiliary / ancillary equipment, 
connection and accessories,  
• 
Other incidental costs.  
IDCOL/LFIs 
contribution 
Cost item I : 
Purchase price with freight, customs 
duty, related insurance 
Cost item II : 
• 
Transport, assembly, installation  
• 
Training and technical transfer;  
• 
Customs 
duty 
and 
other 
administrative 
costs 
and 
commissions;  
• 
Auxiliary / ancillary equipment, 
connection and accessories,  
• 
Other incidental costs.  
Cost item III : 
Transport, assembly, installation and 
related civil construction; 
33.00 
20% 
50.00 
20% 
End 
borrowers 
contribution 
Cost item I : 
Purchase price with freight, customs 
duty, related insurance 
Cost item II : 
• 
Transport, assembly, installation  
• 
Training and technical transfer;  
• 
Customs 
duty 
and 
other 
administrative 
costs 
and 
commissions;  
• 
Auxiliary / ancillary equipment, 
connection and accessories,  
• 
Other incidental costs.  
 
Cost item III : 
Transport, assembly, installation and 
related civil construction; 
Cost Item IV: 
Ancillary infrastructure setup such as 
civil construction and other engineering 
and procurement related costs etc., 
33.00 
20% 
50.00 
20%

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 155 
 
 
required for the successful installation 
and subsequent operation of the energy 
efficient equipment. 
 
Total 
166.00 
100% 
250.00 
100% 
  
 
D.1 Financial Criteria 
The Eligible Investment should be profitable, to enable the loan repayment with enough cash flow.  
• 
The pay-back period, including financial costs, shall be minimum two (2) years; 
• 
The loan granted by IDCOL to the end borrowers will have a minimum maturity of three (3) years for 
energy efficiency investments; 
• 
Minimum DSCR of 1.00x 
• 
Any other criteria set by IDCOL approving authority in excess of criteria set out in FP. For deviation 
of any criteria mentioned in this FP will require GCF approval. 
D.2  Lending Conditions- Details in Term Sheet 
 
 
E. Timing of Loan Application and Appraisal  
• 
Usually IDCOL will consider for loan application from the beneficiary prior to procurement of the 
equipment.  However, for retirement of any machinery L/Cs into GCF project term loan, the L/Cs can 
be opened maximum 12 months prior to application.

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 155 
 
 
Figure 14: Simplified loan approval process for GCF credit line 
A typical loan proposal under other credit lines has a three-month long project approval process where in 
the third-party reviewers are involved, as mandated by the respective MDBs/funds. In the GCF credit line 
has the same timeline is envisaged to slash to half of the existing i.e. 1.5 months. This will be possible owing 
to improvements in the application process leading to streamlined applications which will be implemented 
as part of the TA component where in end borrowers will be provided with technical assistance for 
documentation and data sharing which will expedite the entire process of eligibility assessment. Further, 
since external reviewers are not involved in this process, this again will lead to faster approvals which will 
be a significant improvement on other credit lines 
 
F. Collateral & security arrangements: 
As per “Lending policy” of IDCOL and prevailing industry practice. 
 
Component 2: USD 3.05 million GCF Technical Assistance (TA) to develop enabling environment for 
EE investment in textile sector 
GCF non-reimbursable resources (technical assistance) will support to address real or perceived risks and 
barriers that are currently limiting EE investments in the textile sector. IDCOL requires the service of a 
consultant/consultancy firm to perform technical assistance activities. Key output areas under TA will be to 
(a) develop a sustainable financing strategy to achieve programme milestones and maximize impact 
potential of the sub-project (GHGE  reduction) (b) sensitize and create awareness among the stakeholders 
about EE equipment to develop a strong project pipeline, which may increase participation of LFI’s in future 
(c) develop capacity and knowledge at the institutional levels required for faster adoption of EE technology 
(d) develop standards and mechanisms for robust monitoring, reporting and verification of energy savings 
and GHG emissions reductions and (e) advisory support to the textile borrowers/end users on loan 
application process to expedite the due diligence process of IDCOL.  
 
The detail activities are described below: 
 
Output 2.1:  Sustainable financing strategy developed for large scale adoption of EE equipment in 
textile sector.  
 
Activity 2.1.1:  Devise a financing roadmap and time-based action plan 
Activity 2.1.2:  Develop operational manual for the program.  
Activity 2.1.3:  Develop whistle blower policy for the program.  
Activity 2.1.4: Classification of Textile units based on scale and type of products and data collection through 
energy audit of sample plants 
Activity 2.1.5: Consolidation of data and developing sector-level baseline 
Activity 2.1.6: Interact with stakeholders/market players to prepare a list of equipment already implemented 
in Bangladesh and having proven energy savings results.  
Activity 2.1.7: Revision of baseline by conducting energy audit and data consolidation 
 
Activity 2.1.8: Develop technically-robust, bankable EE project pipeline

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 155 
 
 
Output 2.2: Market awareness on importance of EE equipment in textile sector strengthened  
Activity 2.2.1:  Organizing programme launching event, to introduce the new concessional credit line and it 
unique features dedicated to promote EE in Textile Sector. 
Activity 2.2.2: Organizing workshops to disseminate to stakeholders on broad policy framework and 
incentive mechanisms for energy efficiency in textiles, business case and economic benefits, women 
involvement in energy efficient textile operations (Covering entire key stakeholders of the country related to 
textile sector. Trade bodies like BTMA, BGMEA .etc. are expected to be on board and be sensitized of EE 
issues for encouraging their members during decision making. Stakeholders will be selected by IDCOL as 
per consultation with the expert consultants hired under this TA component. IDCOL’s previous stakeholder 
lists developed during scoping & validation workshops under the PPF, will also be considered). 
Activity 2.2.3: Preparing various information materials in the form of brochures/flyers/pamphlets and other 
related information documents for the dissemination activities 
Activity 2.2.4: Develop and launch advocacy campaign on energy conservation and efficiency measures, 
such as workshops, animations, video clips, brochures, etc.   
Output 2.3: Capacity developed at the institutional levels for faster adoption of EE technology 
Activity 2.3.1: Perform capacity needs assessment to map the current and desired level of capacity for 
IDCOL staff and textile end borrowers.  
Activity 2.3.2: Conduct capacity building workshops and training sessions for IDCOL and textiles sector end 
borrowers (participants not limited to end borrowers being eligible for component 01. It will include both 
eligible & other prospective textile sector end borrowers)  who are the applicants for the loan on the tools 
and requirements to be fulfilled for successfully securing the loan 
Output 2.4: Standards and mechanisms for adequate monitoring, reporting and verification of energy 
savings and GHG emissions developed 
Activity 2.4.1:  Updating the parameters and requirements for establishing MRV framework, including energy 
audit and post retrofit performance evaluation for the textile factories (establishing as-is baseline and EE 
investment-based evaluation KPIs on best effort basis) 
Activity 2.4.2: Updating parameters and updating the monitoring framework for environment and gender 
evaluation of projects for the end borrowers & for IDCOL. 
Activity 2.4.3: Carry out yearly energy, financial and environmental audit to establish baseline for monitoring 
and revisit GHG and other programme targets if required 
Activity 2.4.4: Revising and applying guidelines and monitoring methodologies for textile factories 
. 
Activity 2.4.5: Requirements for “Management Information Systems (MIS)” in different types of textile 
factories to be provided to end borrowers for ensuring monitoring and reporting and dashboard preparation 
covering energy data, environment & social reporting (Common Dashboard for both Component 01-Textile 
& Component 04-RMG) 
Activity 2.4.6: Revision of applicable environmental and social policies of IDCOL and gender specific actions, 
if required 
Activity 2.4.7: Review/audit of environmental, gender and social safeguard compliances

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 155 
 
 
Output 2.5: Advisory support to the Textile Borrowers to shorten appraisal timeline  
Activity 2.5.1:  Support the end borrowers, eligible under Component 01, in fulfilling the documentation 
process, completing due diligence during appraisal, checking eligibility and making disbursement process 
faster. 
This will be done through requirement standardization, capacity building of borrowers, facilitating certification 
from equipment suppliers and empanelment of the vendors all of which will significantly cut down on 
documentation and disbursement time. 
• 
Create standardized document requirements for loan application under the credit line. The 
standardization of documents and simplified approval process (internal to IDCOL) will help borrowers 
cut down on application time 
• 
The TA component will hold workshops to appraise borrowers on the application process and the 
documentation requirement, so the awareness levels is increased  
• 
Work with the equipment suppliers to facilitate certification and other documentation requirements, 
so the equipment impact can be clearly mapped 
• 
Vendor’s due diligence etc. can be carried out so time can be saved on their selection/finalization as 
equipment suppliers. They will also work with borrowers to help them speed up application process 
• 
Application process status would be available to borrowers through an MIS tool which they can 
access, to bring in speed and transparency in the approval process. 
Output 2.6: Engagement with global clothing brands to increase EE adoption in textile sectors 
The brands play a catalytic role in driving change in the textile and related sectors. The global brands in 
presence of international competition influence other stakeholders as seen through the feasibility analysis. 
As part of the TA programme, the connection of the brands to the textile manufacturers can be leveraged by 
working closely with the brands and developing customized modules to increase the reach and impact of 
the programme. This will be carried out by: 
Activity 2.6.1 Encouraging textile units to be more aligned to the brands’ sustainability targets and invest in 
energy efficient equipment and measures to reduce emissions and encouraging leading global brands by 
arranging round table discussions 
Activity 2.6.2 Encouraging textile units to improve on the social and gender inclusion in workforce ratio to 
increase the co-benefits impact through sensitization and  by stakeholder consultation 
• 
Carrying out capacity building trainings and workshop for the textile units to disseminate the 
information on the programme and the benefits of the EE adoption (Under activity 2.3.2 above) 
 
The TA component will be executed by IDCOL within the disbursement period of 06 years within project 
time line (Year 01-06). The main beneficiary of the component will be the textile sector borrowers for 
sustainable implementation of the program. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENT 03 & 04: 
The RMG industry is the most energy intensive industrial sub-sector of Bangladesh. As per situation analysis 
conducted in feasibility studies, energy consuming processes in the sector employ old equipment and exhibit 
potential for replacement with equipment which lead to efficient use of energy through incorporation of new

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 155 
 
 
 
46 Source: Stakeholders discussions with bankers to RMG units and individual RMG unit owners 
47 Source: Banking Sector in Bangladesh - Moving from diagnosis to action (CPD, December 2018) 
48 Please refer to table 06-09 of this document  
technologies. Apart from capital intensive measures, there are system inefficiencies caused due to leakages 
which can be reduced by undertaking low-cost or no-cost measures. In the context of the RMG sector, it has 
been established in the previous sections that there is a considerable scope for adopting energy efficiency 
measures along with the benefits of adopting such measures. However, there are also multiple barriers 
which are preventing large scale adoption of energy efficiency measures, thereby deferring realization of 
benefits arising out of it. A key barrier is the availability of concessional financing to support high upfront 
costs of the energy efficiency equipment and longer payback periods as well as limited market information 
regarding available options for energy efficiency.  
Financing for RMG units is provided from participants in Formal Sector like Banks, Non-Bank Financial 
Institutions (FIs), Insurance Companies, Capital Market Intermediaries like Brokerage Houses, Merchant 
Banks etc.; Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs). The inherent high level of risk of lending in the country explains 
the high lending rates, as compared to nearest competitors in RMG export market. A comparison of the 
prevalent lending interest rates in the competing markets is given below for reference: 
 
 
Figure 15: Comparison of interest rates among major RMG exporters 
 
Even though the overall market level interest rates have exhibited a sharp fall in recent times, RMG units in 
the country46 are reported to be receiving funding at 10-12% interest rates from banks and at 11-13% from 
FIs, depending on financial institution’s internal loan process and the creditworthiness of RMG units. In case 
higher risk is assessed, the interest rates may exceed these limits. Also, the lowering of interest rates has 
been offset to a degree by increase in labour wages and increased operational costs due to compliance with 
Accord/Alliance requirements. As exemplified in the figure above, even with the best-case scenario, interest 
rates in Bangladesh are still considerably higher than its immediate competitors. In the near future, the 
interest rates are expected to remain in the current state or even increase given the performance of the 
banking sector in the nation based on key indicators47: The feasibility study conducted for the RMG sector 
indicates the need for ~ 5.7% 48 (11%-5.28%) concessionality in the interest rate for energy efficient 
12.2
13.3
13.9
13.6
12.9
11.7
10.4
9.5
9.7
5.8
6.6
6.0
6.0
5.6
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.4
8.3
10.2
10.6
10.3
10.3
10.0
9.7
9.5
9.5
13.1
17.0
13.5
10.4
8.7
7.1
7.0
7.1
7.4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Interset Rates (%)
Year
Comparison of interest rates
Bangladesh
China
India
Vietnam

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 155 
 
 
 
49 https://www.bb.org.bd/fnansys/interestlending.php 
50 Initial target LFIs are BRAC Bank Limited, Southeast Bank Limited, City Bank Limited and IDLC Finance Limited 
equipment, compared to commonly available commercial loans (i.e around 11%49) in order for EE equipment 
to be widely adopted in Bangladesh.  Using GCF and LFIs funding, this can be achieved. 
Also, there are a number of areas related to implementation where the RMG unit requires expert guidance 
and external consultancy support. Banks, being a key stakeholder, also have limited capacities in assessing 
an energy efficiency project and estimating the cost savings potential. Given this situation where, on the one 
hand, both RMG units as well as the banks have limited technical capacity and on the other hand the 
prevailing market interest rates are considerably high, energy efficiency measures are largely avoided. This 
Program therefore attempts to address both these barriers though a structured technical assistance program 
and a concessional line of financing. In order to access financing from the Program, the end borrowers will 
always be required to take on risk via minimal capital requirements, which is considered as equity 
participation and considered as part of the project amount.  
Component 03 & 04 of the proposed program aims to address the key barriers of RMG sector to increase 
their energy efficiency  by supporting entrepreneurs and business establishments in the garments sector 
with financial and market resources through the LFIs/IDCOL, to avail investment opportunities for energy 
saving technology upgrades. In order to facilitate the implementation of the program, the Accredited Entity 
(AE) Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) has proposed LFIs 50 to be the Executing 
Entities for Component 03 and requested financial support by means of concessional financing from Green 
Climate Fund (GCF).  
The proposed program will comprise following two components addressing the energy efficiency needs of 
the RMG sector: 
Component 3: USD 200.00 million financing for Energy Saving Equipment & Technology for RMG 
sector  
Under this component, IDCOL will sign subsidiary agreements with the EEs to create a term loan facility 
which provides term loans with preferential rates directly to RMG sector end borrowers. 
  
G. General criteria for lending to RMG unit: 
• 
End borrowers i.e. project developer will be a business entity of limited company  
• 
End borrowers  should have operations in the production of RMG sector in Bangladesh 
• 
For both Green field and Existing project related to up-gradation to energy efficiency 
technologies/machines.  For a Project loan application already being processed at LFIs, a letter of 
credit (L/C) for purchasing the EE&C equipment, anticipating the use of the Project Loan, may be 
opened up to 12 months prior to either GCF financing or LFIs approval of the loan. In case of project 
having multiple expense heads, only Energy Efficient component of the proposed equipment to be 
financed 
• 
All financing requests need to be supported by suppliers’ declaration/ catalogue/ brochures or 
report/certifactes from independent/certified  energy auditor acceptable to the LFIs or the baseline 
developed under TA activity 
• 
Fulfillment of other required criteria as mentioned in LFIs CRM guideline, lending policy or other 
applicable policies/requirement 
• 
100% of the eligible equipment price can be financed

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 155 
 
 
 
H. Technical Eligibility criteria:  
Eligibility should be confirmed for each loan application. The Eligible Technology & Equipment List is a 
predefined list of technologies and equipment as prescribed during the programme formulation. This list will 
be updated every year, if required, to reflect the accurate market scenario and will be subject to approval by 
GCF. 
Category 
Major EE&C Equipment  
Condition 
Cutting 
• Optimized Air Compressor system 
• Ducting for hot air exhaust in 
compressors 
• LED Light 
• Absorption Chiller 
• Dehumidifier 
• Any Equipment/technology 
eligible for financing, not 
limited to this list,  must 
have minimum 15% energy 
saving potential   compared  
to the prevailing inefficient/ 
less efficient equipment 
used in the sector 
• 
The eligibility would be 
supported by catalogue/ 
brochures/declaration 
form supplier’s or 
report/certificates from 
independent/certified 
energy auditor or the 
baseline developed 
under TA activity 
• Common equipment will be 
interchangeable within the 
category  
Sewing 
• Servo motors for sewing machine 
• Optimized air Compressor system 
• Ducting for hot air exhaust in 
compressors 
• Exhaust Fans 
• LED Light 
• Gas Generators 
• Absorption Chiller 
Dyeing 
• Steam Boilers with waste heat 
recovery system 
• FD fans for boilers 
• Oxygen control system for flue gas in 
boilers 
• Jet Dyeing 
• Soft Flow 
• Stenter 
• Steam Condensate Recovery system 
• LED Light 
• Absorption Chiller 
• Hydro 
• Insulation of Steam Distribution Lines 
Ironing & 
Finishing 
• Steam Boiler with waste heat recovery 
systems 
• FD fans for boilers 
• Oxygen control system for flue gas in 
boilers 
• Insulation of Steam Distribution Lines 
• Steam Condensate Recovery system 
• Optimized air Compressor system

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 155 
 
 
• Ducting for hot air exhaust in 
compressors 
• LED Light 
 
I. Eligible investment cost: Same as “C. Eligible Investment Cost” for Textile.  
 
J. Financial criteria: The eligible investment should be profitable, to enable the loan repayment with enough 
cash flow.  
• 
The pay-back period, including financial costs, shall be minimum 02 (two) years; 
• 
The loan granted by LFIs to end borrowers will have a minimum maturity of three (3) years for energy 
efficiency investments; 
• 
Minimum DSCR of 1.00x 
• 
Any other criteria set by LFI’s approving authority in excess of criteria set out in FP. For deviation of 
any criteria mentioned in this FP will require GCF approval. 
 
K. Timing of Loan Application and Appraisal: LFIs will consider loan application from end borrowers for 
procurement of new energy efficiency equipment.  However, for retirement of any machinery L/Cs into GCF 
project term loan, the L/Cs can be opened maximum 12 months prior to application. As mentioned in 
Component 1 above, loan processing time will be minimized due to non-existence of external reviewers and 
pre-set terms & conditions. 
L. Lending Conditions- Details in the Term Sheet 
 
M. Collateral & security arrangements: As per “Lending policy” of LFIs and prevailing industry practice 
During implementation of the project, LFIs will undertake due diligence activities to determine eligibility of 
the RMG units for concessional financing. Based on the information provided by the LFIs, IDCOL will provide 
final approval on the eligibility of the sub-projects for access to concessional line of financing. LFIs will 
receive funds from GCF as per the disbursement schedule shared under the term sheet. The repayment of 
the loan from the EEs will also be supervised by IDCOL.  
As per the preliminary analysis in the program concept note, it has been estimated that the program would 
require a financial support of USD 250 million – USD 150 million coming from GCF loan and USD 100 million 
from co-financing sources. The disbursement period has been considered to be five years and the repayment 
period has been considered to be of maximum 20 years at this stage. 
 
Component 4: USD 2.30 million GCF Technical Assistance (TA) to develop enabling environment 
for EE investment in RMG sector 
Based on the discussion with key stakeholders it has observed that there is limited market awareness and 
overall scepticism amongst stakeholders regarding implementation of energy efficiency measures, 
monitoring and verification of benefits accruing from such measures apart from need for concessional

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 155 
 
 
financing. Banks feel that the institutional capacity in appraising an energy efficiency project and determine 
bankability of such projects is low as well as the capacity to ensure effective monitoring and verification of 
these projects to ensure benefits accrual is taking place and hence, repayment is also on track. RMG units, 
despite appreciating the benefits of energy efficiency, are strained due to reduced profitability and have 
limited awareness regarding implementation, maintenance and operational requirement of such projects. 
Also, the lack of demonstration projects within the sector and country, in general, is preventing otherwise 
interested RMG units in undertaking energy efficiency measures. 
Given this context, along with concessional line of financing, there is a definitive need to improve market 
perception about energy efficiency and provide support to the relevant stakeholders at all stages of 
implementation energy efficient measures. Also, creating an interface between energy efficiency equipment 
suppliers or manufacturers and the decision makers behind the investment for energy efficiency i.e. RMG 
unit owners, can help disseminate the information related to energy efficiency and resolve any queries that 
the unit owners may have. Policy makers are also required to be apprised the barriers to implementing 
energy efficiency measures and provide guidance in developing enabling policies, regulations to help 
overcome these barriers. 
It is envisaged that without such enabling activities, a concessional line of financing would not help in 
generating interest among the stakeholders in undertaking energy efficiency measures. Also, given that the 
energy efficiency market in Bangladesh is in its infancy, such support activities would be critical to enable 
market transformation and galvanize the equipment procurement decisions of RMG units. Hence, the TA is 
viewed to be a critical component to ensure greater uptake of energy efficiency measures during the 
programme duration as well as ensure sustainability of energy efficiency market for RMG sector beyond the 
programme duration. 
The detail activities are described below: 
Output 4.1: Preparatory activities & Base lining energy consumption of RMG sector 
Activity 4.1.1: Devise operational manual for the program & selection of prospective LFIs for the program (if 
required) 
Activity 4.1.2 Develop whistle blower policy for the program 
Activity 4.1.3 Organizing programme launching event, to introduce the new concessional credit line and it 
unique features dedicated to promote EE in RMG Sector. 
Activity 4.1.4: Classification of RMG units based on scale and type of products and data collection through 
energy audit of sample plants 
Activity 4.1.5: Consolidation of data and developing sector-level baseline 
Activity 4.1.6: Interact with stakeholders/market players to prepare a list of equipment already implemented 
in Bangladesh and having proven energy savings results. List will be integrated with knowledge platform and 
disseminated through other means to ensure adequate public outreach  
Activity 4.1.7: Revision of baseline by conducting energy audit and data consolidation 
 
Output 4.2:  Capacity building of Local Financial Institutions (LFIs)/IDCOL

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 155 
 
 
Capacity building of LFIs/IDCOL to assess funding proposal and monitor implementation of energy efficient 
technologies in factories of RMG borrowers.  
Activity 4.2.1:  Conduct capacity building trainings/workshops to develop capacity of corporate/head office 
level officials to effectively conduct banking due diligence of loan applications for implementation of energy 
efficient technologies.  
Activity 4.2.2:  Conduct capacity building trainings/workshops to develop technical capacity of banking 
officials at branch/field level to efficiently monitor implementation of energy efficient technologies over the 
duration of repayment of loan amount.  
 
Output 4.3: Capacity building of RMG units to enable implementation of energy efficient 
technologies  
 Capacity building of RMG units to enable implementation of energy efficient technologies 
Activity 4.3.1:  Conduct workshop to establish and disseminate business case of energy efficiency among 
RMG unit owners/top officials to help generate interest in owners in energy efficiency concept as well as 
provide select real-life case studies to instil confidence among them in pursuing energy efficiency projects  
Activity 4.3.2:  Impart training to facility/utility managers on the technical requirements for implementing 
energy efficiency projects as well as necessary steps (i.e. equipment working condition, energy supply 
stability etc.) to be undertaken during operations to ensure theoretical energy savings are realized.  
Activity 4.3.3:  Develop awareness of workers on importance of energy efficiency and impart knowledge key 
skills required to implement energy efficient equipment. This will help them adapt to any possible change in 
the operations due to introduction of new machinery and ensure seamless transition to new machinery 
without a loss in productivity.  
 
Output 4.4: Provide on-demand technical support to participating banks on monitoring, reporting 
and verification (MRV) of energy efficiency projects 
Provide on-demand technical support to LFIs/IDCOL on monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) of 
energy efficiency projects within TA period of 05 years. On-demand technical support means LFIs/IDCOL 
will be able to send queries to TA consultant related to any issues faced during MRV of live projects. TA 
consultant will provide response to the issue or get back to LFIs/IDCOL for further information within 5 
days of request being raised. 
• 
Activity 4.4.1:  MRV Support provided to LFIs/IDCOL (in form of technical trainings, resolve queries 
on request, handholding support).  Impart trainings on technical capacity (i.e. concepts related to 
energy and emission savings, methods for calculating energy, emission and cost savings etc.) 
required for appraisal of energy efficiency projects. Resolve queries and provide technical support to 
LFIs/IDCOL on MRV related issues for projects to develop capacity in the banks to conduct MRV of 
projects even after TA consultant expires its tenure of 5 years.

=== PAGE 56 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 155 
 
 
Resolve queries and provide technical support to LFIs/IDCOL on MRV related issues for projects to 
develop capacity in the banks to conduct MRV of projects even after TA consultant expires its tenure 
of 5 years. 
Activity 4.4.2: Develop standard solutions document and case study for gender based on experience of 
commonly issues encountered in previous activity. Identify most commonly faced issues of banks in MRV 
and develop standard solution document addressing those issues to provide LFIs/IDCOL with 
troubleshooting guide and help them conduct MRV after tenure of TA consultant expires 
 
Output 4.5: Provide assistance to RMG units in loan application process 
Output 4.5: Provide assistance to RMG units in loan application process 
Rapid Diagnostic study report, Guidance documents, Troubleshooting guide and periodic query resolution 
response to RMG units 
• 
Activity 4.5.1 Conducting rapid diagnostic study of key areas related to loan application process for 
which RMG units require handholding as well as nature of support required.  
• 
Activity 4.5.2 Prepare guidance documents and filled up templates of loan application forms along 
with step-by-step explanation of process of loan application along with development of check list on 
list of supporting documents and guides on where and how they can be available.  
• 
Activity 4.5.3 Respond to queries related to loan application process received from through Query 
Management module present in proposed digital platform (discussed under Output 4.8).  
Output 4.6: Provide on-demand technical support for implementation to RMG units which have 
secured GCF funding under this programme 
Periodic query resolution and handholding support provided to RMG units; troubleshooting guide 
• 
Activity 4.6.1: Implementation support provided to  RMG units on request: Resolve queries and 
provide technical support to borrowers to ensure effective implementation of energy efficiency 
intervention 
• 
Activity 4.6.2: Develop standard solutions document i.e. Troubleshooting manual based on 
experience of common issues encountered in previous activity: 
Identify most commonly faced issues of borrowers in implementation and develop standard solution 
document addressing those issues. The responses and queries will be consolidated to a 
troubleshooting guide to provide ready reference to any borrower after tenure of TA consultant ends. 
Output 4.7 : Technology fair to create market awareness and develop access to energy efficient 
technology 
02 days long Technology fairs organized (in Year 3) with participation of minimum 30 different technology 
suppliers and representation from 60 different Textile/RMG units 
Activity 4.7.1: Organization of 01 technology fair: In order to create market awareness and develop access 
to energy efficient technology, IDCOL along with the LFIs will organize technology fair to create interface 
between international manufacturers/suppliers of energy efficient equipment and Textile/RMG unit owners 
to stimulate market development for energy efficiency in the sector. 
This fair will also be covering both Textile sector under component 01 & 02 and RMG sector under 
Component 03 & 04

=== PAGE 57 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 155 
 
 
The TA component will be executed by IDCOL within the disbursement period of 06 years. The main 
beneficiary of the component will be the IDCOL, LFIs and Textile-RMG sector borrowers for sustainable 
implementation of the programme. The TA consultant will be selected from a list of international consultants 
based on competitive bidding procedures and the scope of work developed from activities given above.  
 
• 
Component 5: USD 1.15 million GCF Technical Assistance (TA) to strengthen regulatory & 
institutional framework at the national level to overcome the operational constraints related to 
implementing EE&C in the country 
 
The component has been incorporated to address the policy/regulatory support issue that is preventing 
faster adoption of EE equipment in the textile & RMG sector of Bangladesh. Sustainable Renewable Energy 
Development Authority (SREDA) under Ministry of Power, Energy & Mineral Resources, will be the nodal 
Executing Entity for the proposed activities under this component. 
The component includes several activities under two broad outputs (5.1) Development of relevant policies, 
strategies & plans addressing energy efficiency and (5.2) Strengthening capacity of relevant national 
institutions to overcome their existing operational barriers related to implementing EE&C projects. 
The activities under Output 5.1 are as follows: 
• 
5.1.1: Review of existing national policies, strategies & plans regarding Energy Efficiency 
• 
5.1.2   Identify any policy gap & develop mechanism to address such gaps & stock taking of 
baseline 
• 
5.1.3 Development of relevant policies, strategies & plans 
• 
5.1.4 Implementation of the policies, strategies & plans developed under Activity 5.1.3 
The activities under Output 5.2 are as follows: 
• 
Activity 5.2.1 Assessment of detail capacity development requirement at policy level 
• 
Activity 5.2.2: Develop training manuals based on the world best practices focusing on 
performance measurement, EE standards & labelling and financial support mechanism for 
implementation of energy efficiency projects; (prospective business model with feasible 
payback and IRR) 
• 
Activity 5.2.3: Organize 03 training of the trainers (ToT) for Government officials for 
institutionalization of the training manual 
• 
Activity 5.2.4: Organize 10 training session for the policy makers and relevant government 
official by the trained trainers. National relevant officials mean officials from different 
government offices related to environment, power, energy, energy efficiency .etc. 
• 
Activity 5.2.5: Organizing 02 workshops to disseminate outcome of the programme to policy 
makers and EE practitioners and also the learning from implementing energy efficiency in 
textile and garments sector (financing scenario, business case and economic benefits, 
women involvement and role of government for long-term sustainability) to ensure institutional 
capitalization of knowledge. 
• 
Activity 5.2.6: Mass awareness for energy efficiency through other disseminating tools like 
media coverage, bill board. etc. 
 
The proposed activities under component 05 will facilitate institutionalization of the EE&C measures in the 
country and will be the key exit strategy to ensure additional concessional funding continues after 
programme concludes.

=== PAGE 58 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 155 
 
 
 
51 https://mpemr.gov.bd/power/details/26 
Sustainable and Renewable Energy Development Authority (SREDA) has been formed under the provision 
of “Sustainable and Renewable Energy Development Authority Act, 2012” on 22nd May, 2014 as a nodal 
agency to ensure energy security and promote, facilitate and disseminate sustainable energy (SE) in both 
areas of Renewable Energy (RE) and Energy Efficiency(EE).  
Earlier, different ministries and departments, including the Bangladesh Power Development Board (BPDB), 
the Rural Electrification Board (REB), the Local Government Engineering Department (LGED), autonomous 
bodies like IDCOL and also the private sector was working on renewable energy projects. But the necessity 
of an authoritative organization in renewable energy sector to maintain coordination among them was being 
felt. So, an institution like SREDA was inevitable. The institution is now working under Power Division of the 
Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources (MPEMR) of the Government of the People's Republic of 
Bangladesh as a coordination body for the development of the renewable energy in the country.51 
The below diagram represents the implementation arrangement proposed for Component 05: 
 
Figure 15.1: Component 05 for SREDA 
IDCOL as the accredited entity to GCF will have to sign the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) with GCF to 
ensure proposer implementation of Component 05. IDCOL as the EE will be liable to supervise & monitor 
proper implementation during the implementation timeline. Since, SREDA will be the Implementing Partner 
for delivering this component, IDCOL will sign a separate sub-agreement with SREDA. IDCOL will engage 
the required consultant/consultant firm under its own procurement policy in consultation with and 
engagement of SREDA. SREDA will co-finance for this program in-kind which has been detailed under the 
budget calculation. SREDA as the Implementing Partner will carry out specific activities mentioned above 
and IDCOL will facilitate SREDA for the management and operation for component 05. 
In excess of activities under component 05, IDCOL will regularly report the energy savings achieved under 
this entire program to SREDA, in line with reporting to GCF (with the same frequency). This information will 
be incorporated in national data base for energy savings. 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
 
FAA 
AMA 
IDCOL:  
As EE for component 05 
(Receive Grant USD 1.13 million) 
Sub-agreement for Implementation 
Green Climate Fund 
(GCF) 
SREDA:  
Implementing Partner 
(Co-financing USD 0.02 million)

=== PAGE 59 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 155 
 
 
Provide a description of the project/programme implementation structure, outlining legal, contractual, institutional and 
financial arrangements from and between the GCF, the Accredited Entity (AE) and/or the Executing Entity(ies) (EE) 
or any third parties (if applicable) and beneficiaries.  
 
- 
Provide information on governance arrangements (supervisory boards, consultative groups among others) 
set to oversee and guide project implementation. Provide a composition of the decision-making body and 
oversight function, particularly for Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals.  
- 
Provide information on the financial flows and implementation arrangements (legal and contractual) between 
the AE and the EE, between the EE or any third party and beneficiaries.  For EEs that will administer GCF 
funds, indicate if a Capacity Assessment has been carried out. Where applicable, summarize the results of 
the assessment. 
- 
Describe the experience and track record of the AE and EEs with respect to the activities (sector and 
country/region) that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
 
Provide a diagram(s) or organogram(s) that maps such arrangements including the governance structure, legal 
arrangements, and the flow and reflow of funds between entities. 
 
FOR COMPONENT 01 AND 02: 
 
Governance arrangements under the programme for  Component 01 and 02:: 
 
IDCOL will play the significant role as Executing Entity to assess the eligibility of the sub-projects of the 
Textile sector for financing under the program as per the set criteria and accordingly will place disbursement 
request to GCF. IDCOL will be the borrower & Executing Entity (EE) where the Textile owners will be the 
end borrower. IDCOL will channelize the loans to the ultimate beneficiaries, textile borrowers. This business 
unit(s) of IDCOL will be in primary contact with the end borrowers. IDCOL will have separate role as 
Accredited Entity (AE) & Executing Entity (EE). 
 
IDCOL’s Organogram (Figure 16) shows all the functional departments and detail reporting structure under 
the respective functional departments including Finance, Internal Audit, Procurement, and other key 
functions. IDCOL Board has the following three special committees comprising board members: Audit 
Committee, Credit Committee and Organization Committee (Recruitment and Promotion Committee).  
Composition and roles and responsibilities of Board Committees is annexed. 
 
 
Among the list of internal oversight bodies/committees IDCOL has the following committees for maintaining 
internal oversight in different aspects of company operations: Management Committee, Credit Risk 
Management Committee, Asset Liability Management Committee, Internal Control and Compliance Unit, 
Risk Management Forum, Risk Analysis Unit and Integrity Committee. The terms of reference of the 
aforesaid committees are enclosed in Annex.  All these committees are assigned to ensure dedicated 
internal oversight on vital corporate governance issues. The committees comprise senior management 
officials of IDCOL with appropriate functional designation and responsibilities that best fit to serve the 
purpose of the committees. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16: Organogram of IDCOL

=== PAGE 60 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
Financing Flow under Component 01: (please refer to  figure 17) 
 
1. IDCOL will open a designated GCF “Project Account Textile” for receiving, disbursement & 
repayment of the GCF fund under this project. 
2. After receiving the GCF fund in ““Project Account Textile”, IDCOL will disburse the fund to the 
respective end borrower’s account. 
 
 
GCF financing to IDCOL- under component 01 of the programme GCF will provide IDCOL USD 
100.00 million senior loan. The senior loan will be passed down to the end borrowers as concessional 
loan to make EE equipment affordable in comparison to cheaper traditional equipment.  
 
 
IDCOL financing to end borrowers: IDCOL will on-lend to the end borrower/ textile borrowers in 
both USD & local currency loan equivalent to USD 133.00 million , where USD 100 million is sourced 
from GCF and USD 33.00 million is co-financed by IDCOL.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17: Fund Flow under Component 01&02

=== PAGE 61 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 155 
 
 
 
Repayment from end user/ textile borrower to IDCOL: Repayment will be made by the end 
borrower to IDCOL in USD/local currency for the loan amount they received in USD/local currency, 
as per the repayment dates agreed between IDCOL and end borrower.    
 
 
Repayment from IDCOL to GCF: IDCOL will repay USD 100 million to GCF as per the agreed 
amortisation schedule mentioned in the Term Sheet.  
 
 
Re-investment management: 
o IDCOL will re-invest a portion of reflows till Year 12.  
o The details management of reflows will be described in Term Sheet. 
.  
Financing Flow under Component 02:  
 
 
GCF to IDCOL – GCF will provide IDCOL USD 3.05 million as technical assistance (TA) for market 
development in the form of grant. 
 
 
IDCOL to consultant- IDCOL will execute the TA amount via consultant or consulting firm to carry 
out activities mentioned in section B.3.  
 
 
 
 
IDCOL / Executing Entity 
i.
Textile Borrower will submit project proposal which will be reviewed 
by IDCOL. 
ii.
Upon receiving name clearance from IDCOL Board. Project due 
diligence will be conducted and subsequently placed for IDCOL’s Board 
approval. 
iii.
If Board approves the subproject, IDCOL will receive disbursement 
request from the borrower. 
iv.
IDCOL will place disbursement request to GCF in two process: (a) 
claim advance based on the projected disbursement to the borrowers 
(b) claim re-imbursement on the disbursed amount. This is to ensure 
faster disbursement to borrowers. 
v.
IDCOL will add a margin on the GCF credit line (USD 100 million) 
within the blended interest rate (GCF interest 1.25%+a margin) 
vi.
IDCOL will receive fee from GCF for administering, managing and for 
performing monitoring & reporting of the fund. 
Repayment of USD 
100 million   
Disbursement of 
USD 103.05 million 
Green Climate 
Fund (GCF) 
Repayment in USD & 
BDT (for the loan amount 
they received in local 
currency, as per the 
repayment dates agreed 
between IDCOL and end 
borrower).     
Disbursement in USD & BDT 
(local currency loan equivalent 
to USD 133 million , where 
USD 100 million is sourced 
from GCF and USD 33 million 
is co-financed by IDCOL)  
 
Textile Borrowers/ End Users

=== PAGE 62 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 155 
 
 
Figure 18 : The Implementation arrangement under the programme for Component 01& 02 
 
 
IDCOL as an AE and EE of the proposed programme will sign Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) with GCF 
and subsequently sign sub-loan agreements with textile borrowers/ end borrowers. IDCOL will take the FX 
risk for Component 01 in arrangement with the end borrowers.  
 
Programme implementation capacity of IDCOL: 
 
IDCOL’ experience in EE&C 
 The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Promotion Financing Project (EECPF) is a 100 Mn USD JICA 
credit line administered by SREDA, and IDCOL is one of the participating financial institutions for further on-
lending this fund at preferential rates to eligible projects based on a predefined criteria. Under the JICA 
funded Energy Efficiency and Conservation Promotion Financing Project (EECPFP), IDCOL has approved 
USD 42 million in the in the RMG and Cement sectors, out of which USD 25.15 million has been already 
disbursed. The financed project would help the end consumer in saving 25 percent and 34 percent of primary 
energy consumption in the RMG and Cement facility respectively. This means that an electricity of savings 
of approximately 17 MWh over the life of the equipment. This would also result in a cost saving of 
approximately BDT 14 Crore per year for these installations for the end consumers 
IDCOL has already started approving projects under the second tranche of JICA’s EECPF, which 
aggregates to an amount of USD 84.07 million. IDCOL targets to fully disburse the first and the second 
tranche of EECPF by the end of 2021. 
 
IDCOL’s financial performance  
Looking at long-term loan outstanding of IDCOL by sector, renewable energy projects account for 33.15% 
(December 2018) while that of Infrastructure projects has 66.85% (December 2018). The share of 
FAA 
AMA 
IDCOL/ Executing Entity  
(For both Component 1 & 2) 
 
Textile Borrowers/ End Users 
Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
Sub-loan agreements  
Only for Component 1  
(USD 100 million/Loan)

=== PAGE 63 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 60 OF 155 
 
 
 
52 Annual report of IDCOL 
53 As per disclosure on IDCOL’s website 
renewable energy projects has been decreasing from 70% in December 2015. The importance of financing 
to infrastructure project including energy efficient project is increasing. It implies that due to expected weaker 
demand for renewable energy project especially for solar home system, loan for infrastructure would 
become more significant sector of IDCOL in the future. 
From IDCOL’s financial data, the total assets increased by 22.86% between December 2015 and December 
2018 while loans and advances grew by 64%.  Observing profit and loss statements, total operating income 
have increased by 6.94% within 4 years, while profit before tax and provision have increase 3.4% as well 
during the same period.  
Looking at financial indicators ROE and ROA of IDCOL shows better than or almost same level as the Non-
Bank average. Regarding Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR), BB require at least 10% of total Risk Weighted 
Assets according to the guidelines. That of IDCOL was 11.53% in 2018 and more than 10% from 2015 to 
2018.  
Financial indicators of IDCOL for 4 years.52 
 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
ROE (%) 
24.1 
6.7 
8.4 
10.34 
ROA (%) 
2.0 
0.5 
0.7 
0.85 
Capital Adequacy Ratio (%) 
11.87 
12.44 
11.18 
11.53 
 
Credit rating obtained from credit risk assessment institutions is as follows:  
IDCOL obtained AAA from Credit Rating Agency of Bangladesh53; this rating grade is ranked as first grade 
in the Bangladesh Bank’s rating rate. It is observed under the current corporate finance environment in 
Bangladesh that loan outstanding has continued to increase by 18% from a year earlier backed by strong 
credit demand, while the growth rate of deposit which is the source of lending has lowered to 10% or 11%. 
As a result, advance deposit ratio (ADR: advance/deposit) stays at 77% which is higher than before.  This 
requires tightening in growth of lending which resulted in introduction of private banks’ clients to IDCOL or 
in requesting those NBFI to participate in loan syndication by private banks.   
Private commercial banks and NBFIs were the dominant players in financing most of the categories, such 
as renewable energy (4.7%%), Energy Efficiency  (5.9 %), Green Brick Manufacturing (15.4%), recycling 
and recyclable products (5.4%), setting up green industries (15.8%), and  waste management (49.6%) 
However, IDCOL continues to be the main non-bank financial institution (NBFI) contributor and promoter of 
renewable energy technologies. 
IDCOL’s experience with DFIs 
Since inception IDCOL has implemented loan and grant amount of more than USD 2.1 billion from DFI’s, 
that has been channeled through the GoB. IDCOL’s major development partners are World Bank, ADB, 
JICA, SNV, KfW, GIZ, IDB, USAID, GPOBA and DFI. 
 
FOR COMPONENT 03 AND 04: 
 
Implementation arrangement for Component 04: GCF Technical Assistance (TA) to develop enabling 
environment for EE investment in RMG sector will be the same as implementation arrangement of

=== PAGE 64 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 61 OF 155 
 
 
Component 2: GCF Technical Assistance (TA) to develop enabling environment for EE investment in 
textile sector. IDCOL will be the Executing Entity for both component 02 & 04 and will receive fund form 
GCF for execution. 
The implementation modality for RMG loan component 03 is described below: 
A. Basic Funding modality: 
• 
Initially, four LFIs namely Southeast Bank Limited, BRAC Bank Limited, City Bank and IDLC Finance 
Limited have been selected for the RMG component 03. If any of these LFIs does not agree on GCF 
approved terms & conditions, then IDCOL may select few more LFIs (details in C. Selection process of 
LFIs). IDCOL can also utilize a portion of RMG fund to lend directly to RMG borrowers (in this case the 
implementation arrangements would be equivalent to component 1). 
• 
In addition of the roles & responsibilities as the Accredited Entity (AE), IDCOL will play the role of 
“Borrower” under “Limited Recourse Loan” modality where the repayment obligation of IDCOL will be 
limited only to the repayment amounts received by IDCOL from time to time from the local FIs; Incase 
IDCOL utilizes any portion of GCF RMG fund, then IDCOL will be liable for repayment of this respective 
amount. 
• 
The contractual arrangement for the RMG Loan component 03 will be as follows: 
 
 
. Table 1: Funding Allocation 
B. Funding allocation: Details in Term Sheet 
approval. 
 
C. Selection process of LFIs: Details in Term Sheet 
 
D. Approval of eligible sub-project for GCF financing: 
• 
If IDCOL utilizes a portion of RMG fund to lend directly to RMG borrowers, then the approval 
process will be the same as described for textile loan component (Component 1). 
• 
In case of financing through LFIs, LFIs will submit required information of the eligible sub-projects 
to IDCOL, as per the specific format, for checking the eligibility of the sub-project.  
 
Information required from LFIs: 
 
o Short description of the project & the borrower

=== PAGE 65 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 62 OF 155 
 
 
o List of energy efficiency or investment eligible equipment & technology 
o Environment Assessment (Category B) 
o Co-financing planning with project cost break up  
o Board Approval (Tenure, amount, currency, rate) 
• 
After FP approval, specific format for eligibility checking will be developed during Operation Manual 
preparation under TA support 
• 
Credit Risk Management (CRM) unit of IDCOL will receive the information/document from LFIs (as 
per specific format along required documents mentioned above). They will check/verify submitted 
information/document as per eligible criteria of the GCF. After satisfactory review, IDCOL CRMC will 
provide No-objection to LFI for specific sub-projects. 
• 
Once the sub-project becomes eligible for GCF financing, the LFIs can place disbursement request 
to IDCOL for that sub-project in future. 
 
E. Disbursement & Repayment of Fund under Component 03: 
• 
IDCOL will open a designated GCF “Project Account RMG” for receiving, disbursement & repayment 
of the GCF fund. 
• 
“Proceed Account LFI” will be opened & operated by LFI. Subject to BB permission, IDLC will open 
an FC account with any schedule commercial Bank. 
• 
The LFIs will place disbursement request to IDCOL, for their eligible sub-projects in advanced against their 
upcoming disbursement or reimbursement for already disbursed fund for their sub-projects. Any regulatory 
requirement for USD financing to be obtained by LFIs at its own arrangement and inform to IDCOL. 
• 
Credit Administration (CAD) of IDCOL will receive the disbursement requests from LFIs and will verify 
information/document against disbursement criteria of the GCF Operation Manual. After FP approval, 
specific format will be developed during Operation Manual preparation under TA support 
Required information: 
o Sanction advice (commercial terms, acceptance to ESMF/Gender issues. etc.) 
o Relevant evidence for compliance with ESMF/Gender policy  
o Relevant evidences of disbursement 
 
Upon satisfactory review, IDCOL will approve for disbursement.  
• 
After approval, Accounts Department of IDCOL will submit disbursement request to GCF.  IDCOL will 
place disbursement requests to GCF in any month and several times in a year. After receiving the fund 
in “Project account RMG”, Accounts Department will disburse the fund to ““Proceed Account LFIs” or to 
“Machinery L/C beneficiary A/C” as per LFI’s discretion. 
F. Pricing for co-financing by LFIs: Details in Term Sheet 
 
G. Repayment of Loan & Reflows Management-  Details in Term Sheet 
 
 
Brief Profile of Initial Target Local Financial Institutions (LFIs):  
1. BRAC Bank, established in 2001, is well known for its SME Banking in Bangladesh. It has also grown 
rapidly in retail Banking, Corporate Banking, Treasury and other financial services. BRAC Bank Limited’s 
authorized share is 2,000 million ordinary shares of BDT 10 each. Issued, subscribed and paid-up is

=== PAGE 66 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 63 OF 155 
 
 
approximately 1,072 million ordinary shares of BDT 10 each (2018). Earnings per share is BDT 5.17 in 
2018. Revenue of BRAC Bank in the year 2018 is BDT 19,164 million with a CAGR of 8.30% from year 
2015 and net profit after tax is BDT 5,547 million in the year 2018 with a CAGR of 31.57% from year 
2015. BRAC Bank is implementing green banking practices through ‘Green Reporting’ to the Bangladesh 
Bank. Emphasizing on the conservation of natural resources that include paper, water and energy. At 
the end of the year 2018, the financing amount in green projects is BDT 12,000 million. 
Total asset of the BRAC Bank is BDT 315.42 billion showing CAGR of 12% over the last 4 years while 
compounded annual growth rate of loans and advances is 17.4% per annum flourishing the business of 
the bank. Net interest Income as a percentage of total earnings asset stands at 4.49% in 2018 which 
has slightly declined from 2017. BRAC Bank’s interest on deposit has increased resulting in increase in 
cost of fund and reducing spread over time. Still, spread around 6% in 2018. 
The Bank improved their common equity Tier-1 ratio taking it to 12.31% from 11.24%.  On the other 
hand, Capital to Risk (Weighted) Assets Ratio (CRAR) increased to 13.67% in 2018 and this is well 
above the requirement as per Basel III. On the back of marked improvement in asset quality, that is 
manifested due to Net NPL ratio being restricted at 0.97%. The Bank is improving its financial health in 
all criteria. However, it is being strategically aggressive in case of asset liability mismatch but they are 
maintaining statutory requirement in capital adequacy to withstand any shock. BRAC Bank Limited also 
maintaining improvement in their profit after tax in the year 2018. 
2. IDLC Finance Limited, established in 1985, is one of the pioneers in the non-banking sector in 
Bangladesh. Started as a single product lease finance company, it has a strong and diversified position 
in Corporate, SME, Retail and Capital Market segments now. In the year 2018, IDLC Finance Limited 
has Authorised Share Capital of 1,000 million ordinary shares of BDT 10 each. The paid-up capital is 
377 million ordinary shares of BDT 10 each. Earnings per share of IDLC Finance Limited in the year 
2018 is BDT 4.22. Revenue and net profit after tax in the year 2018 is BDT 4,705 million and BDT 1,591 
million, exhibiting a CAGR of 5.9% and 8.54% from year 2015 respectively. IDLC offers 52 green 
products under 8 categories as defined by Bangladesh Bank to cater the specialized needs of different 
industries and segments. At the end of the year 2018, the Green Banking portfolio stands at BDT 648 
million and cumulative disbursement in green segment is BDT 1,255 million.  
 
Throughout last four year, IDLC is able to maintain AAA (Triple A) long term credit rating and ST-1 short 
term credit rating to the IDLC Finance Ltd. In 2017, following issuance of Rights Share, their total capital 
to risk weighted asset ratio taking it to 15.47% from 15.30% and common equity Tier-1 (CET1) capital 
ratio taking it to 14.62% from 14.57% in the previous year. IDLC has made a marked improvement in 
asset quality manifested in the improved NPL (Non- Performing Loans) ratio, which was restricted at 
2.20%. Total asset of IDLC is BDT 105 billion registering CAGR of 13.6% over the last 4 years while the 
compounded growth of loan and advance is 15.7% per annum accelerating the growth of the business. 
Loan productivity has increased steadily over the last 4 years. 
The holdings in the portfolio of IDLC remain fundamentally strong and are expected to generate value in 
coming periods and aid in improving the ROE and ROA, which took a fall in 2018. IDLC has been paying 
cash dividend consistently to its shareholders over the years.  
3. Southeast Bank Limited is a private commercial Bank, which launched its activities in Dhaka in 1995, 
providing conventional banking products and services to retail and business clients, along with 
specialized products/services like investment fund, automatic fraud monitoring. A dedicated unit named 
as ‘RMG, Textile and Export Financing Unit’ at Head Office has been handling the credit portfolio of 
export-oriented clients, providing both project finance and working capital finance. Total lending amount

=== PAGE 67 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 64 OF 155 
 
 
in RMG sector in the year 2018 is BDT 50,850 million and total lending amount in green projects is in 
year 2018 is BDT 12,671 million. 
As of 2018, Southeast Bank Limited has Authorized Share Capital of 1,500 million ordinary shares of 
BDT 10 each. The paid-up capital is 1,045 million ordinary shares of BDT 10 each and Earnings per 
share of in the year 2018 is BDT 2.33. Total asset is BDT 381.095 million showing CAGR of 13.6% over 
the last 4 years while compounded annual growth rate of loans and advances is 16.1% per annum 
flourishing the business of the bank. Revenue in the year 2018 is BDT 14,724 million and net profit after 
tax is BDT 2,456 million in the year 2018. Capital to Risk Weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) increased in 
2018 despite the growth in loan assets, on the back of marked improvement in asset quality, which is 
manifested in the improved NPL ratio. SEBL has maintained strong equity base, as on December 31, 
2018, and it reflects the bank’s long-term viability. Improved CRAR of 12.47% in 2018, which indicates 
that the bank has kept adequate capital providing cushion against the risk bearing asset.  
The bank is improving its financial health in all criteria. However, it is being aggressive in case of asset 
liability mismatch but they are maintaining statutory requirement in adequacy in capital to withstand any 
shock. Liquidity management is also satisfactory while maintaining profitability, leading to improvement 
of earning quality in 2018. The Asset quality has improved too in the most recent years and their effective 
NPL management has made it one of the few commercial banks in Bangladesh with low NPL. 
4. The City Bank Limited is one of the prominent private banks in Bangladesh. Established in 1983, the 
Bank provides a wide suite of deposit and loan products and solutions, catering to requirements of the 
widest socio-economic population cross-section. The authorized Share Capital of the City Bank Limited 
is 1,500 million ordinary shares with BDT 10 each. Paid-up capital of the bank is approximately 968 
million ordinary shares of BDT 10 each. Earnings per share is BDT 2.08. At the end of the year 2018, 
the lending amount in RMG sector is BDT 39, 251 Million and cumulative disbursement in green projects 
is BDT 1,359 million. 
The total asset of the City Bank is BDT 324.78 billion in the year 2018 registering CAGR of 14.8% per 
annum over the last 4 years along with consistent growth of loan and advances. The business of the 
bank has grown rapidly over the 4 years. Cash flow base accrual ratio was observed to be negative in 
all years except for 2017 demonstrating that earning of bank was of high quality. The spread of the bank 
is quite high enough to provide high interest revenue margin. Gross NPL ratio is moving downwards over 
the years along with net NPL ratio which indicates high quality of the loan asset.  
The bank is improving its financial health in all criteria. However, it is being aggressive in terms of ADR. 
But they are maintaining statutory requirement in capital adequacy to withstand any shock. Liquidity 
management is also satisfactory. Overall, it can be observed that City Bank’s core operational income 
margin has experienced growth; which indicates, the bank is able to run its main operations efficiently. 
Moreover, they have had sufficient surplus capital adequacy for risk weighted assets; resulting in both 
having enough cushion to absorb any unpredicted liquidity shock and complying with Bangladesh Bank’s 
regulations as well. 
For component 05: 
     The implementation arrangement has already described in project description in section B 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)

=== PAGE 68 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 65 OF 155 
 
 
Explain why the project/programme requires GCF funding, i.e. Why is the project/programme not currently being 
financed by public and/or private sector? Which market failure is being addressed with GCF funding? Are there any 
other domestic or international sources of financing?  
Explain why the proposed financial instruments were selected in light of the proposed activities and the overall financing 
package. i.e. What is the coherence between activities financed by grants and those financed by reimbursable funds? 
How were co-financing amounts and prices determined? How does the concessionality of the GCF financing compare 
to that of the co-financing? If applicable, provide a short market read on the prevailing of the pricing and/or financial 
markets for similar projects/programmes. 
Justify why the level of concessionality of the GCF financial instrument(s) is the minimum required to make the 
investment viable. Additionally, how does the financial structure and the proposed pricing fit with the concept of 
minimum concessionality? Who benefits from concessionality?  
In your answer, please consider the risk sharing structure between the public and private sectors, the barriers to 
investment and the indebtedness of the recipient. Please reference relevant annexes, such as the feasibility study, 
economic analysis or financial analysis when appropriate. 
 
Need for GCF funding for proposed mitigation intervention for Textile Sector (Component 01 &02): 
 
• 
Addressing highest energy savings potential:  Textile is one of the most energy intensive industry 
in Bangladesh and a transition into an energy efficient, climate resilient, internationally competitive 
industry will require a sustainable blend of private and public sector funding. In Bangladesh’s context, 
private commercial banks and NBFIs are the dominant players in financing energy efficiency, 
however, IDCOL continues to be the main non-bank financial institution (NBFI) contributor and 
promoter of energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies because of its experience in 
executing successful EE programs with blended finance. 
• 
Overcoming existing barriers: There exist some funding and technical cooperation for energy 
efficiency and conservation in Bangladesh’s industry, such as programmes supported by the GoB 
and multi/bilateral agencies. These include Global Climate Partnership Fund (GCPF), Asian 
Development Bank’s Industry Energy Efficiency Finance Program (IEEFP), IFC’s Partnership for 
Clean Textile (PaCT), GIZ’s support for technical cooperation, Bangladesh Bank’s Green 
Transformation Fund, Bangladesh Bank Re-financing Scheme, Bangladesh Bank’s Long-Term 
Financing Facility (LTFF) under Financial Sector Support Project (FSSP) and JICA’s Energy 
Efficiency and Conservation on promotion financing project (see Feasibility study Annex 2) These 
initiatives were introduced based on the industrial demand and GoB’s commitment towards tackling 
climate change. However, most of such instruments have not been able to meet their full potential 
due to several challenges like higher lending rate for end-user; difficulties in approval and 
disbursement due to delay in operations and loan decision; overly ambitious targets for EE; selective 
assistance either technical or financial; delayed realization of the investment pipeline etc. Further, 
due to constraints in availability of traditional financing, energy efficiency is not getting adequate 
funding from the commercial banks to the textile sector.  
The key reasons why this funding from GCF will be very important for the sector as follows: 
• 
The scope of the programme is in alignment with the SDG targets– SDG 7, SDG 9 and SDG 13. 
Sustainable energy use remains of critical importance to the Bangladesh economy. Availability and 
the rising price of gas is a significant and growing constraint on the growth of industrial 
Activity. 
• 
IDCOL will target to offer 50 % of the loan amount to medium and small textile factories in 
Bangladesh, a market which is not fully explored or catered at present form a financing perspective. 
This will increase their access to debt-based instruments at affordable terms, and ultimately build

=== PAGE 69 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 66 OF 155 
 
 
 
54 Two types of equipment were analysed, comparing the cost impact of purchase of conventional equipment 
and energy efficient equipment by changing tenure period and grace period. 
their creditworthiness. Without GCF funding, these smaller segment factories wouldn’t be able to 
access available loans from mainstreamed FIs.  
• 
The loan product will be directed to increase energy efficiency across complete value chain in Textile 
industries in Bangladesh, which will be a unique product catering to energy efficiency in complete 
value chain of Textile industry (Different from Partnership for cleaner textile (PaCT) led by IFC whose 
focus area is investment facilitation for financing resource efficiency projects in textile factories) 
• 
The loan facility will have following features which will make it highly attractive in the market. 
- 
Simplified of loan application procedure and speedy appraisal minimizing the time for loan 
processing. 
- 
Availability of Grace period & Long Tenure and low interest. 
In addition, since the programme will be implemented by IDCOL it will have following advantage 
- 
Experienced implementing partner. IDCOL has built its capacity by successfully implementing 
EE&C for JICA Fund. 
- 
Strong pipeline built by IDCOL for Textile and RMG sector while implementing EE&C under 
JICA will ensure fast disbursal of fund. 
• 
Ensuring suitable financing options: As a result of all of the above-mentioned factors, there is a 
high need for a programme that can support the transition to energy efficiency in Bangladesh. The 
market failure due to inefficacy and restricted scope of some of these instruments present a learning 
experience for any new financial instrument. The proposed programme has been designed after a 
detailed study of the existing and the past market experiences and have incorporated the lessons 
learned for long term sustainability of the proposed programme. Since the feasibility studies suggest 
that the requirement for concessional, low interest rate, loan scheme is quite high, the proposed 
programme will have a lower lending rate as compared to the other lending instruments in market to 
attract more beneficiaries especially the small and medium textile units for a greater impact. 
Moreover, it will minimize the time for loan procedure through simplification of loan application and 
speedy appraisal.  
 
Relevance of the proposed financial instruments and Concessionality 
Existing or past EE financing products available in Bangladesh, provided capital at a very high interest rate 
to the end users.  This restricted the clientele base to only large borrowers who can afford high interest rates. 
Table 6-9, indicated that due to significant price difference of EE equipment a concessional rate is required 
with a tenor of 8-10 years and grace period of 1-2 years. Analysis of the viability of few54 energy efficient 
equipment for textile industry indicate that 4% to 5%  interest rate for local currency loan will be appropriate 
to compensate the extra capital cost of EE equipment. However, it has been learned from JICA- Energy 
Efficiency and Conservation programme (Phase 1) that end users are willing to pay up to 6%.  .  
 
In addition to GCF funds, the programme is proposed to be co-financed equally from IDCOL’s own funds as 
well as the end borrower’s’ equity, thus ensuring all the stakeholders have a significant stake in the 
programme’s success. The co-financing amounts and prices were determined based on the institutional and 
financial capacities of the beneficiaries and the trends in market. The associated financial assessment is 
discussed in detail in the feasibility report in annex 2.  
 
Risk sharing

=== PAGE 70 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 67 OF 155 
 
 
 
55 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/PA.NUS.FCRF?end=2018&locations=BD&start=2018&view=bar 
56 Source: Monthly Fiscal Frameworks & Budget Briefs, Finance Division (CPD, December 2018) 
The programme has been designed to address the anticipated risks and ensure that risks are shared and 
mitigated by the stakeholders best suited for the same. A detailed risk assessment has been carried out & 
mitigation measures have been idenfied during the program design (Annex: Risk Report). While IDCOL will 
be selecting the borrowers to ensure credit risk is minimized, equipment and technoilogy risk will best be 
mitigated at the end user level. One of the key risks to IDCOL would be on account of currency fluctuation 
risk since GCF will be lending in USD while IDCOL will be lending to the end users in BDT.  
 
In time series analysis done for exchange rate movement of Bangladeshi Taka against USD from 1998 to 
2018 it is observed that Bangladeshi Taka is depreciating on an average rate of 2.94%55 every year,  
Need for GCF funding for proposed mitigation intervention for RMG Sector (Component 03 &04): 
 
While adoption of energy efficiency measures can help in reduction of GHG emissions from the RMG sector 
and increasing in operating margins, the units must have finances available for their implementation. A 
comparison of the interest rates across major RMG producing economies is given in Figure 15 above for 
reference. 
Even though the interest rates have exhibited a sharp fall in recent years, RMG units in the country are 
reported to be receiving funding at 10-12% interest rates from the banks and at 11-13% from other financial 
institutions namely Non-Banking Financial Insitutions (NBFIs). The interest rates depend on the lending 
agency’s risk appetite, loan appraisal process and the creditworthiness of the particular RMG unit. In case 
higher risk is assessed, the interest rates may go beyond this range as well. As per discussions with 
stakeholders is was established the actual cost of capital of RMG units may vary between 10-17%. The 
higher risk perception about energy efficiency loan is also contributed by a combination of insufficient quality 
of collateral from the units and, low collateral asset value of energy-efficient equipment.  The target markets 
of RMG units in Europe, USA have very low inflation rates, leading to near stagnant selling prices. On the 
other hand, the input markets of Bangladesh experience higher inflation rates, leading to increasing input 
costs. The labour wages have also been increasing as well as the overall cost of compliance due to the 
presence of ‘Alliance’ in Bangladesh’s RMG sector. The increasing input cost and stagnated sales prices 
are reducing the profitability of RMG units. This tightened economic environment negatively affects RMG 
units’ willingness to invest in energy-efficiency projects.  
Even future outlook for financing in the country does not provide any indication of lowered interest rates. It 
is observed that State-owned Commercial Banks (SCBs), which have a 48% share of loans in the country, 
have been historically performing poorly in the major banking performance indicators. In order to prevent the 
SCBs from collapsing, Government of Bangladesh has taken the recourse of recurrent recapitalization under 
which, it has spent USD 1.8 billion during the period FY2009-FY201756. In order to stimulate growth in the 
country, it is expected that GoB may continue bank recapitalization to ensure capital infusion in the market. 
Continued bank recapitalization by the Government is expected to constrain the government exchequer to 
invest in social and physical infrastructure.   
There are a number of financing schemes related to energy efficiency and green financing in general. While 
all of the schemes include energy efficiency as one area of financing and/or RMG sector as one of the 
participatory sectors, none of them are focused exclusively on energy efficiency improvement in the RMG 
sector. Discussions with sector stakeholders were undertaken to identify the extent to which the schemes 
have been able to achieve their intended targets and understand the gaps, if any, which limits the success 
of these schemes. Based on the discussion the following key gaps have been identified:

=== PAGE 71 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 68 OF 155 
 
 
1. Lower interest rates required: In order to ensure competitive advantage, the unit owners are operating 
with continually decreasing margins. In such a scenario, interest rates much lower than the existing 
market rate (in the range of 5-6%) would be required to encourage unit owners in taking loans exclusively 
for energy efficiency projects.  
2. Complicated loan application process: In order to get access to energy efficiency financing, unit 
owners are required to conduct energy audits. After the audit, the usual loan appraisal process is 
undertaken by the banks, making the entire process a lengthy and complicated one. Also, unit owners 
have to pay upfront the cost of energy audit, further adding to the cost of undertaking energy efficiency. 
3. Limited capacity of banks in appraisal process: Officials from the banks have limited understanding 
in the technicalities of energy efficiency project though they understand the RMG business. The bank 
officials have limited access to the standard tools, techniques and framework for appraisal of energy 
efficiency projects. This leads to lack of focus in the banks to neither develop financial products targeting 
energy efficiency investment nor conducts processing of loans for such project in a faster and efficient 
manner.   
4. Non-availability of loans with banks having existing relationship with RMG units: RMG owners 
prefer to continue business relationships with their existing bankers rather than starting new relationships 
and in case of prolonged relationships, RMG owners secure loans at lower interest rates than prevailing 
market rates from their existing bank. In case the existing bankers do not provide energy efficiency loans, 
the RMG owners are wary of reaching out to new banks for energy efficiency loan – a deterrent which 
adds to the issues of energy efficiency financing. 
Given this context of of Bangladesh and the key concerns highlighted above, concessional financing can 
help break this vicious cycle by stimulating the willingness to lend by the banks as well as the willingness to 
invest by the RMG owners in energy efficiency projects.  
Risk sharing:  The programme has been designed to address the anticipated risks and ensure that risks 
are shared and mitigated by the stakeholders best suited for the same. A detailed risk assessment has 
been carried out & mitigation measures have been idenfied during the program design (Annex: Risk 
Report). The credit risk, in this case, will be borne by the Executing Entities. 
 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Explain how the project/programme sustainability (financial, institutional, social, gender equality, environmental) will 
be ensured in the long run after project closure, including how the project’s results and benefits will be sustained.  
 
Include information pertaining to the longer-term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations and 
maintenance of investments (e.g. key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements). In case of private sector, 
please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy through IPOs, trade sales, etc. 
 
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sector or civil society as a 
consequence of the project/programme implementation for scaling up and continuing best practices.   
 
Programme sustainability  
The programme activities are designed to impact the sector in a way that the growth is inevitable. A catalytic 
change in financial, institutional, social, gender equality and environment aspect which will have longer 
influences far beyond the scope and timeline of this programme. (refer performance indicators annex 11)

=== PAGE 72 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 69 OF 155 
 
 
Based on the interactions with RMG sector stakeholders, it has been established that the environmental, 
economic and resource conservation benefits of energy efficiency is recognized by over 60% of the top 
management of the garment manufacturing firms. However, lower prevalence of energy efficiency is due to 
combination of factors like 
1. Excessive focus on top-line over bottom-line by the factory owners: In a competitive market 
scenario, the factory owners are more inclined to invest in adding production capacity to increase 
revenue i.e. top-line rather than invest in efficiency upgrade to increase profitability i.e. bottom-line. 
Hence, investment in energy efficiency is not always a high-priority item for the owners.   
2. Capital investment requirement: The investment payback in energy efficiency is not immediate and 
depends on the specific measure being undertaken. In most cases, units do not have adequate capital 
availability to undertake additional capital investment in increasing production efficiency and hence, are 
sceptical to undertake such an investment. Also, in order to identify energy efficiency initiatives, owners 
have to expend on hiring energy audit firms. This adds to the cost component for undertaking energy 
efficiency measures. 
3. Insufficient demonstration examples: Examples of actual savings achieved from energy efficient 
equipment is few and far between in Bangladesh. Owners are normally not hesitant on making additional 
investment when they have case studies which make help them be fully aware of the on-ground 
requirements for getting benefits from implementing energy efficiency measures. 
4. Lack of standardization of energy efficient technologies and processes: There is limited market 
information available to owners to understand the technical specifications of the energy efficient 
technologies and are completely dependent on the opinion of energy auditors to implement a specific 
measure. A list of standardized technologies along with normally used technical specifications that can 
be used in the RMG sector can prove to be a useful tool to apprise owners as well as the on-ground 
staff about the energy efficient equipment. 
5. Limited market information: Also, there is limited information available in the market regarding the 
processes and procedures to be undertaken to identify energy savings opportunities and for assessing 
the benefits received from the opportunities. Standardized templates and SOPs can help bridge this 
knowledge gap and instil a sense of confidence in the owners regarding the entire energy savings 
assessment process.   
The proposed programme aims to address these issues by providing concessional loans and technical 
assistance to stimulate the energy efficiency market in Bangladesh. Since the programme has been 
designed as loan to the beneficiaries – only the projects which are bankable in nature i.e. projects which, on 
an average, can generate returns over and above the cost of capital, are considered under the targeted 
solution set for the programme. Thus, the programme will help kick starting energy efficiency projects in the 
RMG sector at an accelerated pace. This will generate a strong sector-wide demonstration effect.  Hence, it 
is expected that after the programme implementation period ends (a) unit owners will be far more willing to 
invest in energy efficiency projects and, (b) banks and FIs will also be ready to offer a greater number of 
financial products and instruments designed to cater to the appropriate need of the factory owners for 
investing in energy efficiency projects.  
 
As mentioned above, the programme is expected to improve the risk perception of investment in energy 
efficiency in the sector by creating strong demonstration effects and increasing the availability of

=== PAGE 73 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 70 OF 155 
 
 
standardized energy efficient equipment in the market. This in the long run will also drive down the capital 
costs of the equipment making energy efficiency investments more attractive and viable.  Also, the project 
will help create new asset classes i.e. industrial energy efficiency, putting the right mechanisms in place and 
building confidence among investors.  
 
Component 02 & 04, in particular, will help to ensure long-term sustainability of the programme, by providing 
capacity building and technical support to relevant stakeholders such as the textile and RMG factory owners, 
operators and the select bank officials. This in turn will augment the local capacity to prepare bankable, high-
quality energy efficiency projects as well as to appraise those projects for accessing bank credits. Hence, 
even after the end of the GCF prgramme post recovery of loans from IE through, the market for energy 
efficiency in Bangladesh is anticipated to be more mature and self-sustainable. 
 
Financial  
Financial support to the industries to procure EE equipment which would otherwise 
be filtered out of their options due to capital constraints. The EE equipment procured 
under the programme, if costly, will not burden the textile and RMG industry owners 
since the cost saving on energy will, in sometime, reach the break-even and the loan 
is bearable due to the concessionality.   
Institutional  
Institutional capacities will be built financially, technologically and in terms of the 
work force. Internationally competitive EE equipment will facilitate growth in terms of 
production and reduce cost of production from energy savings. Moreover, the textile 
and RMG industries will timely be reporting the social impact on their workforce 
especially gender empowerment and the initiatives towards environmental cleaning 
of their processes.  
Social 
Institutional and financial growth of the industries will bring about growth of the 
communities associated with them. The workforce will experience growth in wages 
as an indirect benefit of industrial growth/profit-making; with expansion in production, 
older employees will undergo training and new jobs will be created; as a mandate, 
the industries will have to provide for basic needs like medical facilities, savings 
account, provision of safer working environments, etc. 
Gender equality  
A specialized gender action plan is devised to ensure that neither of men or women 
experience discrimination. There has to be equity in opportunities for financial 
opportunities in loan disbursement and job opportunities; skill training; provision of 
special needs like separate washrooms and maternity leaves, improving work 
environment, etc. 
Environmental 
The programme scope is designed to continually prevent a great amount of 
emissions from textile and RMG sectors of Bangladesh. The endorsement and 
installation of EE equipment will prevent emissions during the programme life cycle 
and beyond.  
Sustainability ex-post 
The programme aims to achieve catalytic impact in the textile and RMG sectors on various parameters. 
These, if successful, would be replicated across other sectors and ensure significant momentum for the 
objectives. Post 20 years, the impacts of the programme will continue to benefit the environment, society

=== PAGE 74 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 71 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
and the beneficiaries since, the transformational change in societal mindset and technology transfer would 
have happened which the beneficiaries of the loan can’t revert to the two-decade old practices (ex-ante). 
 
 
GCF’S EXIT STRATEGY 
For Component 01 & 02: 
The long-term sustainability of the programme and responsible stakeholder behavior will ensure smooth 
exit for GCF. IDCOL will execute pre-screening of the potential textile end borrowers to disburse fund and 
or their progress through the respective deliverables as mention in MRE. Evaluation of progress reports 
and timely repayment of loan will be done to ensure continued sustainability of the sub-projects. These 
instruments will reduce financial risks for IDCOL.  Repayment of GCF’s reimbursable funds is IDCOL’s 
responsibility to facilitate GCF to exit the programme once the tenure has been completed. 
 
For Component 03 & 04: 
The programme activities under Component 03 & 04, have been designed with a view of developing market 
for energy efficiency equipment in RMG sector through capacity building and awareness generation activities 
i.e. market and technical knowledge related barriers as given under the scope of Component 4. In order to 
overcome the immediate financial barrier that prevents RMG units considering energy efficient equipment, 
a concessional loan is envisaged under Component 3. 
As a result of the activities in the two components, there will be real-life examples of implementation which 
will demonstrate the actual benefits that can be achieved and hence establish business case behind adopting 
energy efficient equipment. This will improve risk perception of energy efficiency measures and create a 
demand push. The participation of banks in the program will ensure that banking sector will become aware 
of the demand, thereby increasing availability of financing options in response. The market development 
activities will help increase operations of equipment supplier, thereby increasing market access of energy 
efficient equipment. The increased demand is also expect to bring down the prices of equipment, making it 
more affordable. Thus, the GCF funding will kick-start positive market transformation, which will be self-
sustaining and continue after GCF closes the program. 
The program design also includes screening of loan application based on established due diligence 
processes of the 4 EEs. This will ensure only those entities which are capable of repayment are selected for 
loan disbursement, thereby, insulating GCF from any default risk and facilitate safe exit from programme. 
 
For Component 05: 
Under this component certain policy will be developed upon proper assessment of policy gap, if any. 
Sustainable capacity building of key regulatory stakeholders will be ensured through capacity building 
initiatives. Energy savings data from this program will be reported to SREDA & will be incorporated into 
national database.

=== PAGE 75 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 72 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
256.48 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
250.00 
20 years 
As per term sheet 
As per term 
sheet  
(ii) 
Subordinated loans 
………. 
Enter years 
Enter years 
 
(iii) 
Equity 
………… 
 
 
 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
………… 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable grants 
……….. 
 
 
 
(vi) 
Grants (TA) 
6.48  
……. 
………. 
……. 
(vii) 
Result-based payments 
………. 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing information 
Total amount 
Currency 
84.02 million 
million USD ($) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
IDCOL (EE) 
Senior 
Loans 
33.00 
million 
USD ($)  
As per term 
sheet 
 
As per 
term sheet 
pari passu 
In kind 
(PMC) 
1.00 
million 
USD ($) 
- 
- 
- 
LFIs (EEs) 
Senior 
Loans 
 
50.00 
million 
USD ($) 
As per term 
sheet 
As per 
term sheet  
pari passu 
 
SREDA 
In kind 
0.02 
million 
USD ($) 
…. 
 
 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
340.50 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page) 
Not applicable  
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
million USD 
($)million 
USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million USD 
($)million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million USD 
($)million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Component 01: 
Energy Saving 
Technology 
financing  for 
Textile sector 
 
EE 
equipment & 
technology 
installed 
133.00 
 
 
100.00 
 
 
 
Senior Loan 
 
33.00 
Senior Loan 
IDCOL

=== PAGE 76 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 73 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Component 02 : 
USD 3.05 million 
GCF Technical 
Assistance (TA) 
to develop 
enabling 
environment for 
EE investment in 
textile sector 
Creation of 
enabling 
situation for 
EE financing 
3.05 
3.05 
Grants 
…. 
…. 
…. 
Project 
Management 
Cost (PMC) for 
Component 01 
- 
1.00 
- 
- 
1.00 
In-kind 
IDCOL 
Component 03: 
USD 200 million 
financing for 
Energy Saving 
Equipment & 
Technology for 
garments sector 
 
EE 
equipment & 
technology 
installed 
 
200.00 
150.00 
Senior Loan 
50.00 
Senior Loan 
LFIs/IDCOL 
Component 04 : 
USD 2.30 million 
GCF Technical 
Assistance (TA) 
to develop 
enabling 
environment for 
EE investment in 
garments sector 
Creation of 
enabling 
situation for 
EE financing 
2.30 
2.30 
Grant 
… 
… 
… 
Component 05: 
USD 1.15 million 
for strengthening 
regulatory & 
institutional 
framework at the 
national level to 
overcome the 
operational 
constraints 
related to 
implementing 
EE&C in the 
country 
Strengthenin
g regulatory 
& institutional 
framework 
1.15 
1.13 
Grant 
0.02 
In-kind 
SREDA 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
430.50 
256.48 
84.02 
 
 
Special Note:  
• 
For Component 1: Energy Saving Technology financing for Textile sector, IDCOL will co-finance 
(from own source or will arrange co-financing from other sources at own responsibility) the GCF credit 
line to the tune of USD 33.00 Million. This co-financing will be blended with GCF funds to develop a 
lending facility for the borrowers or loan component for GCF funding & co-financing will be separate.

=== PAGE 77 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 74 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
• 
Similarly, for Component 3 the LFIs/IDCOL will co-finance (from own source or will arrange co-
financing from other sources at own responsibility) the GCF credit line to the tune of USD 50.00 
Million. This co-financing will be blended with GCF funds to develop a lending facility for the 
borrowers or loan component for GCF funding & co-financing will be separate. 
• 
GCF loan will be pari passu with the IDCOL and LFI loans, which means that it will have the same 
seniority (both senior loans as opposed to senior from IDCOL and subordinated from GCF). 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☐      No ☒ 
 
The activities under Component 02, including the package of standardized tools which the programme is 
expected to develop has a strong replication potential in other market segments and elsewhere. The 
implementation of the proposed intervention includes a number of consultations, technical assistance 
activities and capacity building process of key implementing partners of the program (i.e., IDCOL and the 
textile industries) and a strong dissemination and communications strategy around these standard tools and 
business model. In addition, the monitoring activities during implementation of the Program will provide 
information and early lessons from good practices to be further replicated in later implementation stages of 
the Program and disseminated to market players. This would allow to exchange experiences and replicate 
results in other regions with similar challenges for investment in EE projects. 
 
The activities under Component 04 of the programme intends to develop capacity across a diverse set of 
stakeholders operating in the RMG sector in relevant topics which will help address any technical barriers 
impeding growth of energy efficiency equipment in the sector. In case of EEs, capacity for apprising, 
monitoring and evaluating energy efficient projects is envisaged – this will help the EEs tap into the energy 
efficiency market thereby increasing fund flows to the segment. The trainings of unit owners, their facility 
managers and workers on operational aspects and commercial benefits of energy efficient equipment, will 
help reduce risk perception towards the concept. The programme also intends to develop capacity of policy 
makers, which will ensure that policies supporting use of energy efficient equipment adopted by Bangladesh, 
thereby stimulating the market. Market interface events are also planned which will interested RMG units 
connect with equipment suppliers and get their queries resolved by them - thereby giving the RMG units a 
first-hand understanding of the benefits.

=== PAGE 78 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 75 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result 
areas. As applicable, describe the envisaged project/programme impact for mitigation and/or adaptation. Provide the 
impact for mitigation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to low-emission sustainable 
development pathways. Provide the impact for adaptation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes 
to increased climate-resilient sustainable development. Calculations should be provided as an annex. This should be 
consistent with section E.2 reporting GCF’s core indicators.  
Designed as per GCF’s guideline, the programme aims to achieve the objectives of the fund which is to 
catalyze a flow of climate finance to invest in low-emission and climate-resilient development, driving a 
paradigm shift in the global response to climate change. It envisages national implementation of the said 
targets and so, it’s a large-scale project with an integrated approach to meet national climate commitments57, 
energy targets 58  and streamline industrial development with human development. It will support 
entrepreneurs and business establishments in the textile and RMG sectors, two of the largest industries of 
the country, with financial and market resources to avail investment opportunities for energy saving 
technology upgrades. Consequently, the programme has a substantial impact potential in both the textile 
and RMG sector of Bangladesh. 
IMPACT POTENTIAL IN THE TEXTILE SECTOR- 
Energy Saving Potential: 
 
The textile industry is one of the major energy intensive industries in Bangladesh with total industrial demand 
of 1,701 TOE/year which amount to 17% of total energy demand. As per the feasibility analysis, the 
manufacturing and operational processes in this sector are energy inefficient due to the use of second-hand 
machineries to save costs and thus has lot of potential for implementing new energy efficient equipment or 
retrofitting the existing machineries with energy efficient technologies. Because of energy efficiency 
implementations under the programme in the textile sector, the total energy saving in the sector is estimated 
to be 6,547 GWh. 
Emission Reduction Potential: 
The programme is expected to result in direct emission reductions of 4.00 million tCO2, by facilitating and 
scaling-up investment in energy efficiency improvements for a number of textile facilities. Energy efficiency 
improvement projects include both equipment and technology measures in the selected textile factories. The 
estimated potential for GHG emission reduction in textile factories depending on baseline fuel, is 0.2 million 
tCO2e/year or 4.00 million tCO2 cumulatively over the 20-year investment life-cycle. Emission reductions 
are calculated based on avoided quantity of fuel consumption by multiplying baseline energy use by relevant 
GHG emission factor and lifetime of the investment (which is 20 years in this case). 
Emission reduction potential per million USD of investment (Cost per tCO2eq): 
 
The expected programme cost for Textile sector is USD 133 million of which, USD 100 million will be funded 
through GCF,  USD 33.00 million from IDCOL in the form of loan. There will be leverage financing of $33.00 
million in the form of equity investment from end borrowers. Besides, there is a GCF grant for Technical 
Assistance (TA) to support associated activities.  A multidimensional programme as this, needs to be robust 
enough to resist national market reflexes. The financial feasibilities show that the estimated cost per tCO2eq 
 
57 Bangladesh’s INDC and BCCSAP 
58 EE&C Master Plan 2030

=== PAGE 79 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 76 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
(a/c) is USD 34.33/ tCO2e and the estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (b/c) is approx. USD 25.81/ 
tCO2e.  
IMPACT POTENTIAL IN THE RMG SECTOR- 
The programme aims to achieve the fund’s objective and result areas by contributing shift to low-emission 
sustainable development pathways. The contribution is achieved by providing target market i.e. RMG sector 
of Bangladesh, access to concessional line of financing for undertaking energy efficiency measures which 
will result emissions savings as well as provide market participants (RMG units, banks, policy makers) with 
appropriate technical support required for stimulating the energy efficiency market in Bangladesh, as well as 
to support implementation of energy efficiency initiatives. Implementation of the programme will also help 
Bangladesh meet national climate commitments59, energy targets60, contributing to nation’s overall efforts 
related to climate change. Since the programme aims the RMG sector, a major contributor to Bangladesh 
economy (sector contributes to 11% of nation’s GDP and employs nearly 4 million people) it will help 
streamline industrial development with human development.  
Energy Saving Potential: 
 
The garments industry is the most energy intensive industrial sub-sector of Bangladesh with total demand 
of 2,107 kTOE/year i.e. 15% of total demand of industrial sector. As per situation analysis conducted in 
feasibility studies, energy consuming processes in the sector employ old equipment and exhibit potential to 
for replacement with equipment which lead to efficient use of energy through incorporation of new 
technologies. Apart from capital intensive measures, there are system inefficiencies caused due to leakages 
which can be reduced by undertaking low-cost or no-cost measures. Based on the assessment, an average 
inefficient unit exhibits an energy savings potential of 873 GWh/year and considering the potential number 
of units that can be targeted by the project cost (i.e. USD 250 million), the total energy savings is estimated 
to be 17,468 GWh throughout programme lifetime (21 years). 
Emission Reduction Potential: 
The programme is expected to result in direct emission reductions of 0.527 million TCO2e/year by facilitating 
implementation of energy efficiency measures in RMG units. Energy efficiency improvement projects include 
both equipment and technology measures in the selected textile factories. Considering the program lifetime 
i.e. 21 years, total savings of 10.54 million TCO2e can be achieved. Emission reductions are calculated 
based on avoided quantity of fuel consumption by multiplying baseline energy use by relevant GHG emission 
factor and duration in consideration (21 years in case of program lifetime). 
Emission reduction potential per million USD of investment (Cost per tCO2eq): 
 
The expected project cost is USD 200 million, off which USD 150 million will be funded by GCF through 
concessional loans and USD 50 million through co-financing. With the co-financing component, USD 50 
million will be contributed by LFIs by way of loans and leverage financing of USD 50 million will be contributed 
by RMG units through equity participation. In addition, there is a GCF grant of USD 2.30 million for Technical 
Assistance (TA) for implementation support and development of energy efficiency market in Bangladesh. 
The investment from the programme perspective as well as GCF perspective is evaluated by term cost per 
TCO2e, calculated based on the emission savings estimated. If the programme lifetime is considered, cost 
per TCO2e for programme value and GCF’s contribution are USD 19.20/TCO2e and USD 14.45/TCO2e 
respectively. 
 
59 Bangladesh’s INDC and BCCSAP 
60 EE&C Master Plan 2030

=== PAGE 80 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 77 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Leakage emissions from resale of equipment 
Detail leakage calculation has been described in Annexure 11. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project or programme 
investment. Describe the following, if applicable:  
• 
Potential for scaling up and replication  
• 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning 
• 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
• 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
• 
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change 
adaptation strategies and plans  
The programme enables larger flows of finance for energy efficiency investment and shifting the established 
paradigm and pathways the investments must be made. The paradigm shift potential for the proposed 
programme lies in the programme’s focus on the private sector as the driving force for investment and 
implementation of EE retrofits, as opposed to current models which only focus on large industries. 
 
PARADIGM SHIFT POTENTIAL FOR TEXTILE SECTOR 
Potential for scaling up and replication 
The potential to scale-up the project is great and has been well-incorporated into the project design through 
the establishment of an efficient financial mechanism and monitoring framework to encourage investments 
and ease access to finance for textile factories besides enabling further investment decisions. 
Its replicability within Bangladesh and abroad is high. A transformational programme as this will invite more 
textile factories to participate in EE adoption and up gradation, and energy efficiency itself and enable climate 
mitigation through scaling up of an established market base developed as a project outcome. Neighboring 
countries like Indonesia, Vietnam, and Cambodia with strong textile industrial sector and similar barriers and 
risks to EE investments and may benefit by learning from successful projects in Bangladesh which is a high-
volume supply market. 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
The programme will contribute to knowledge creation and sharing by all market players.  The two workshops 
have sensitized the textile fraternity on availability of fund and knowledge sharing.  
The programme has a strong component of communication and knowledge sharing through consultations,, 
capacity building process of key implementing partners of the program (i.e., IDCOL and the textile industries) 
and a strong dissemination strategy around these standard tools and business model. In addition, the 
monitoring activities during implementation of the programme will provide information and early lessons from 
good practices to be further replicated in later implementation stages of the programme allowing exchange 
of knowledge and learnings. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
The programme will enable market-based environment through policy, finance, technical / capacity de-
risking and barrier removal. There will be deep penetration of energy saving technologies, equipment and 
appliances in the textile industries. The program enables to create a self-reliant ecosystem for both end 
users and suppliers of energy saving technologies. Helping to build scale and volumes for energy saving 
technology suppliers, the program will bring down the costs of these technologies and make them attractive 
even at commercial financing rates.

=== PAGE 81 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 78 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies 
The program will contribute to the country-wide policies/programs to bring down the sectorial emissions and 
the cost of energy saving technologies and systemically promote investment in low-emission or climate-
resilient development.  
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national 
climate change mitigation/adaptation strategies and plans  
As per the commitments of GoB61, programme will mainstream climate-resilient development pathways into 
policies and regulatory frameworks and decision-making processes at national, regional and local levels, 
including private-sector decision-making through this programme will contribute in emission reduction by 
promoting energy efficiency and establishing self-sufficient markets. The investments enabled through this 
program will lead climate resilient development. 
 
PARADIGM SHIFT POTENTIAL FOR RMG SECTOR 
The programme exhibits substantial potential to affect a paradigm shift in the application of energy efficiency 
measure for RMG sector in Bangladesh and catalyse impact beyond a one-off project or programme 
investment. 
 
• 
Potential for scaling up and replication: The model adopted by the programme will help establish the 
bankability of energy efficiency initiatives and help create a number of demonstration projects which will 
help overcome the market apprehensions regarding energy efficiency which is leading lower uptake of 
such technologies. The two-pronged approach of providing concessional financing and providing 
technical support for implementation, will help address the barriers preventing growth of energy efficiency 
markets for RMG sector. With industries sector in Bangladesh having substantial savings potential, this 
approach exhibits potential for replication within the country to achieve further emission savings in future.  
• 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning: As per the programme design, TA consultants will 
provide implementation support to RMG units and MRV support to Executing Entities (EEs)/ LFIs for the 
project duration. In conclusion of the term, TA consultants will prepare documents which summarize the 
key issues faced by the two stakeholder groups along with the implemented solutions. This will provide 
future project proponents with access to learnings from previous projects and accordingly, these 
learnings can be incorporated to the project design to ensure better implementation and benefits 
realization. 
 
• 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment: The TA component will help develop the 
energy efficiency market in Bangladesh for RMG sectors. Overall, the programme, through its TA and 
concessional loan components, aims to overcome the financial and technical barriers which are 
preventing uptake of energy efficiency measures. Technology fairs are planned in the program design to 
create an interface with the end users i.e. RMG units and the energy efficient equipment 
manufacturers/suppliers. The increased uptake through the programme is expected to create scale 
required for improved access to energy efficient equipment, in terms of availability and lower costs. 
 
• 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies: Under the TA component, capacity building 
of policy makers of Bangladesh in fields related to energy efficiency in industrial sphere is planned. This 
is expected the policy makers with insights on the potential contribution energy efficiency can have on 
 
61 Bangladesh’s INDC and BCCSAP

=== PAGE 82 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 79 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Bangladesh’s economy along with the steps taken globally to develop enabling policies and regulations 
to promote energy efficiency. Such capacity building activities along with the demonstration effect of the 
programme is expected to increase market consciousness regarding importance of energy efficiency and 
accordingly, contribute to future steps in developing enabling policies and regulations. 
 
• 
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national 
climate change mitigation strategies and plans: The programme aims to contribute to the NDC targets 
of Bangladesh to reduce GHG emissions in the power, industry and transport sectors by 15% below 
‘business-as-usual’ GHG emissions by 2030 through support is received from developed countries. The 
programme will also contribute to the targets of reducing energy consumption for industrial sector as 
given in the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan up to 2030. Hence, the progamme is making 
positive contribution to the national climate change mitigation strategies and plans. 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/programme in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals 
and provide an estimation of the impact potential in terms of:  
• 
Environmental co-benefits  
• 
Social co-benefits including health impacts 
• 
Economic co-benefits 
• 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
The objective is to utilize an integrated suite of interventions to systematically de-carbonize the textile and 
RMG sector factories to realize both energy and financial savings, without compromising sustainability and 
sectorial growth/development. Delivering a large-scale retrofit initiative through this programme will have 
large and important development benefits whose impacts will increase over time as energy prices rise. 
Further, the availability of domestically produced gas is also severely constrained which will necessitate 
more textile units to depend on grid for electricity needs. The changing energy scenario will stress the 
government to revise fuel prices due to import costs and manage the existing supplies. The proposed 
programme will: 
 
Share the load of the government by reducing the energy consumption on the demand side 
 
Support energy conservation targets of the Government. 
 
Further, the proposed programme will address the gender related concerns in the textile and RMG sector 
and promote gender equality. Based on gender assessment it is evident that gender-based discriminations 
in terms of wages, overtime, promotion, skill development, healthcare facilities and occupational health and 
safety are some of the burning issues in the textile and RMG sector in Bangladesh. The progamme will try 
to address these issues through its Gender Action Plan and ensure that women feel safe, equal and 
encouraged to hold their position in the sector for longer period. Moreover, the programme also intends to 
promote leadership capacity among the female workers for enhanced sustainability of the sector and overall 
development. 
 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN THE TEXTILE SECTOR  
Environmental co-benefits  
 
There are direct and indirect benefits to the environment through the proposed programme.  
 
Most importantly, the installation and operation of EE equipment will lead to GHG emission reduction 
contributing significantly to climate change mitigation.

=== PAGE 83 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 80 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
Contribution to improved air quality due to reduced emissions as a macro-impact 
 
Use of EE effluent treatment plants (ETPs), preventing discharge of untreated water into streams 
and saving energy while on 24x7 running status  
 
Reduction in wastes of product, water, hazardous materials, raw materials use and effective 
reutilization of waste heat 
 
Social co-benefits including health impacts 
 
EE technologies and equipment will result in direct benefits on the society i.e. worker community and the 
communities residing near the textile factories. Industrial growth and development will lead to better skills 
and wages thereby up scaling the social status of the textile dependent households.  
 
Streamlining of local and sectorial economies through increased hiring of local labor, creation of 
green jobs 
 
Capacity building and skill training through training modules proposed in the programme to 
encourage social inclusion 
 
Improved worker safety and health (resulting in reduced lost work) from user friendly technology 
upgrades, upgraded operational practices, decreased noise and improved air quality 
 
Economic co-benefits 
 
The economic benefits from the programme will influence almost all the relevant stakeholders. There’s a 
great potential to economically benefit from the concessions provided under this programme, and the 
consequent energy saving. 
 
Major economic savings due to reduced spending on energy and, as a result, reduction of energy 
poverty among textile factories. 
 
Improved production and capacity utilization and reduced production costs (operations and 
maintenance, raw materials), which leads to enhanced productivity and competitiveness 
 
Potential to enable increased investments for energy saving technologies enabling positive 
externalities in the form of expanded and enhanced job markets, job creation and poverty alleviation 
increased energy security etc. 
 
Potential for utilities to improve their supply‐side efficiency due to reduced energy demand from textile 
sector and increased demand side energy affordability of textile factories. 
 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
 
As per the Fund’s standards, it’s mandatory to encourage and ensure women’s participation all through the 
programme lifetime and beyond. 
 
Improved access of women to investments and to information about textile sector energy efficiency  
 
Broader participation of women in opportunities for skill training, business and financial 
independence.  
 
Reducing manually operated machinery through deployment of easily operable by women  
 
Raised awareness of gender equity through implementation of the programme’s Gender Action Plan 
 
Increased efficiency would also facilitate flexible working shift for women 
Deployment of EE equipment will increase production efficiency and call for job creation and suitably 
designed work shifts for women

=== PAGE 84 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 81 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN THE RMG SECTOR  
• 
Environmental co-benefits:  
o Iinstallation and operation of energy efficient equipment will lead to GHG emission reduction 
contributing significantly to climate change mitigation. 
o Due to reduction in emissions, improved air quality is envisaged as a macro-impact  
o Resource efficiency resulting from effective reutilization of waste heat, reduction in wastes of 
product, water, hazardous materials, raw materials use will lead to lower environmental degradation 
caused due to resource extraction. 
• 
Social co-benefits including health impacts 
o Streamlining of local and sectorial economies through increased hiring of local labor, creation of 
green jobs 
o Capacity building and skill training through training modules proposed in the programme to 
encourage social inclusion 
o Improved worker safety and health (resulting in reduced lost work) from user friendly technology 
upgrades, upgraded operational practices, decreased noise and improved air quality 
• 
Economic co-benefits 
o Increased profitability of RMG units by reduction of fuel costs leading to positive economic 
contribution 
o Creation of new jobs among equipment suppliers, operations and maintenance technicians due to 
market development of energy efficiency equipment  
o Positive impact on financial conditions of RMG units, potentially leading to reinvestment in capacity 
expansion that can help create new jobs within the sector. 
• 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
o Increased entrepreneurship and leadership in RMG sector. 
o Reduced gender gap in terms of wages and thus encourage women to continue their job for longer 
periods.  
o Creating enabling environment for women by providing them medical facilities, childcare facilities, 
WASH and special provisions for pregnant women so that women do not have to leave their job 
due to health or family related issues. 
o Broader participation of women in opportunities for skill training, business and financial 
independence 
o Increased awareness of gender equity through implementation of the programme’s Gender Action 
Plan  
o Develop a gender sensitive grievance redressal mechanism for better functioning and monitoring of 
the proposed interventions.  
o Thus, the gender action plan will address the issues mentioned in the section 5 in the gender 
assessment and enhance gender equality in the 
RMG units, enhanced probability of capacity expansion, leading to a gender-sensitive sustainable 
development. 
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, 
overall income level, etc.). Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• 
Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation only) 
• 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population

=== PAGE 85 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 82 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
• 
Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payments gap that prevents government 
from addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market) 
• 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity 
Bangladesh is one of the most adversely affected countries in terms of climate change. The topography is 
flat, and majority of the landmass lies within 10 meters above mean sea level. The geographic location at 
the convergence of the three great rivers – the Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna – and near the Eastern 
Himalayas. All land types except highlands are exposed to monsoon flooding for part or whole of the year62. 
Floodplains located in the north-western, central, south-central and north-eastern regions are subject to 
regular flooding at different frequency and intensity while the coastal plain is subject to cyclones and storm 
surges, salinity intrusion and coastal inundation. Pleistocene terrace land is characterized by moisture stress 
while flash flood is common in the hilly areas and the piedmont plains   in the northeast and north-western 
parts of the country. Such Climate events are disrupting the socio-economic growth and stability of the 
country. Moreover, Bangladesh is becoming increasingly vulnerable for air pollution, sea level rise, high tide 
and river flood by cyclone potentially caused by GHG emissions from rising fossil fuel consumption.  
This is despite the total GHG emissions in the country being less than 0.35% of the global emissions. The 
country’s fossil emissions since 2000 have grown by 6.8%63 Without a collective ambition to limit GHG 
emissions internationally, the impact of climate change to Bangladesh could be catastrophic resulting in 
annual loss of 2% of GDP by 2050 and 9.4% of GDP by 2100. The country is listed on the top 10 most 
affected countries of the world in the Climate Risk Index for 201764. 
The proposed programme directly contributes to the collective global action under UN Paris Climate 
framework to help limit GHG emissions and mitigate climate change impacts in the country. Being a 
developing country, Bangladesh is also in the list of LDCs by GCF and hence a focus area for the fund. 
 
Also in the current energy supply scenario, the public sector investments in Bangladesh is focused more on 
supply side interventions in order to ramp up the generation capacity and bridge supply gaps. This limits the 
budgetary resources available with the government to drive public sector investments for demand side 
interventions, especially towards energy saving technologies. In this scenario, boosting private sector 
investments is critical to keep investment cycle going in important markets such as industry, buildings and 
household appliances. However, one of the major barriers for driving private sector investments for energy 
efficient technology upgrades is the limited availability of attractive financing availability. Financing barriers 
such as weak capital market, high cost of lending, high investment costs as well as off-taker credit quality 
and complex approval process all limit the availability of financing for energy efficiency initiatives,  In this 
scenario, supporting businesses with attractive financing products and mechanisms for energy saving 
technology upgrades could go a long way in getting the attention of corporate top management and 
overcoming this important market barrier.  
 
For Textile and RMG manufacturers, available means of financing is bank loans or equity contribution. Under 
the current market scenario Textile and RMG units have to lend at a rate of 9-15% based on the credit 
worthiness and credit history of unit. While the bank-lending has grown over 15% since 201665, credit risk in 
the sector continues to be high. It has been observed that credit risk in banking sector will continue to be 
elevated 66  owing to loan-restructuring practices, historically weak credit-risk-management practices, 
concentrated loan books, exposure to single large borrowers, and government-directed pressure on state-
owned banks' lending decisions. The inherent high level of risk of lending explains the high lending rates, as 
 
62 Bangladesh NAPA (https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/ban01.pdf) 2005; updated 2009 
63 https://www.worldometers.info/co2-emissions/bangladesh-co2-emissions/ 
64 German watch 
(https://www.germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202019_2.p
df) 
65 Source: Bangladesh Systemic Risk Dashboard (Bangladesh Bank, December 2018) 
66 Source: Banking sector developments in Bangladesh (IHS Markit, 2018)

=== PAGE 86 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 83 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
compared to nearest competitors in RMG export market. Current efforts to stabilize banks by recapitalization 
by Government of Bangladesh is expected to continue leading to expectations that high interest rates will 
continue to prevail. Such high interest rates negatively affect credit influx into the sector at a time when 
profitability in strained due to high input costs caused by inflation and increased labour wages and due 
stagnated market prices in customer markets in USA and EU. 
 
Besides the financing barriers, energy efficiency uptake also technical challenges such as lack of awareness 
and understanding of the long term benefits by consumers, perceived underperformance risks in energy 
savings, focus of short term benefits and equipment availability all of which also hamper the growth of energy 
efficiency products. These can be mitigated to some extent by demand side awareness and capacity 
building. Based on discussion with stakeholders, it was established that there is limited capacity in banks to 
assess bankability of energy efficiency projects as well as continued MRV of such projects to assess whether 
project objectives are realized. There are also technical knowledge gaps in RMG units regarding 
implementation of energy efficient measures. Also, policies and regulations supporting proliferation of energy 
efficiency in industries sector should be enhanced to ensure market barriers are removed. Accordingly, 
capacity building of policy makers on global best practices on energy efficiency policy development is 
essential to provide guidance on developing similar policies/regulations for Bangladesh. 
 
 
 
 
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/programme. 
Describe the following:  
• 
Existing national climate strategy 
• 
Existing GCF country programme 
• 
Alignment with existing policies such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs 
• 
Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver 
• 
Role of National Designated Authority 
• 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples, 
women and other vulnerable groups  
The programme directly contributes to the country’s ambitions and goals under the UN Paris Climate 
framework. Moreover, the program is consistent with the country’s national strategy (Energy Efficiency 
Master Plan) to provide ‘Energy Efficiency Finance Program’ to boost the investments in energy efficiency 
products with low interest loans as one of the key financial incentives. Furthermore, the program also 
contributes to the GoB target to achieve 10% of energy consumption reduction in the industry sector by 2030 
and 20% improved energy intensity by 2030.  
 
Bangladesh’s NDC identified three key emitting sectors, amongst which power sector accounts for 33% of 
total emission, transportation 26% and industrial sector 41%. Taking this into consideration, improving 
industrial energy efficiency, expanding renewable energy and modernising transport infrastructure have 
been identified as the three key mitigation interventions. This has been embedded in our Five-Year Planning 
process that is central to the development of Bangladesh. NDC has set the target to reduce 15% GHG 
emission below Business As Usual (BAU) emission level by 2030.  
 
To arrange necessary funding for low emission development, the Economic Relations Division of the Ministry 
of Finance, also the NDA of GCF in Bangladesh developed a Country Programme in 2018 with support from 
GCF. The screening process of NDA filtered the most strategically important climate change 
projects/programme that should be funded under GCF.  The Country Program includes a robust pipeline of 
projects and programs which will be submitted to GCF for its financial support. IDCOL as a Direct Access

=== PAGE 87 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 84 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Entity of Bangladesh is now working on developing funding proposals for a couple of these projects. The 
proposed programme is also listed in the Country Programme. 
 
For IDCOL’s and LFI’s capacity to execute the proposed programme please refer to section B.4. The NDA 
advisory committee conducted a due diligence of the proposed programme and IDCOL as an executing 
entity prior to issuing NOL. 
 
This proposal has been developed in consultation with civil society groups and other relevant stakeholders 
and would continue to seek their future engagement in accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social 
safeguards and stakeholder consultation guidelines. The proposal also places decision-making responsibility 
with in-country financial institutions and uses domestic systems to ensure accountability.  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including 
addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers, and providing the minimum concessionality to ensure the project is 
viable without crowding out private and other public investments. Refer to section B.5 on the justification of GCF funding 
requested as necessary.  
 
FOR TEXTILE SECTOR 
 
The programme’s results chain is an approach to market transformation for energy efficiency. This approach 
is based on the fact that, due to the high upfront capital intensity of energy efficient investments in the textile 
sector, access to large quantities of low-cost financing is critical to cost-effectively drive energy efficiency in 
the textile sector.  
 
By conducting payment simulations for a few types of equipment in B.3, the proposed financial structure 
was deemed to be adequate and reasonable to achieve programme’s objective: 
 
 
The purchase of an energy efficient spinning machine which is ~25% more expensive compared 
with a conventional type will require a 5.53% interest rate loan (considering 8 year loan tenure and 
1 year grace period) for the total payment to become par with that of a conventional one. Similarly, 
a 27% more expensive once-through boiler requires 5.28% interest rate (considering 8 year loan 
tenure and 1 year grace period) to be even with the conventional type in terms of the total payment 
amount.  
 
 
On the other hand, in order to overcome the barrier of longer payback period, the loan tenor was 
increased to 10 years, with 2 years grace period. With such, the purchase of an energy efficient 
spinning machine will require a 6.67% interest rate loan (considering 10-year loan tenure and 2 year 
grace period) for the total payment to become par with that of a conventional one. Similarly, once-
through boiler will require 6.4 % interest rate (considering 10-year loan tenure and 2 year grace 
period) to be even with the conventional type in terms of the total payment amount. 
 
The above analysis clearly demonstrates that to ensure the feasibility of the subproject, concessional 
lending is required from GCF to IDCOL to enable IDCOL to extend loan at the low interest to the end 
borrower. IDCOL is currently implementing JICA’s Energy Efficiency and Conservation Promotion Financing 
Project (EECPF) which has been so far the most successful EE credit line in Bangladesh. Thus, for the 
proposed programme IDCOL is using EECPF project as the benchmark for the end user financing package.

=== PAGE 88 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 85 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Besides just comparing the market value of the traditional and EE equipment, further analysis in terms of 
assessing the NPV of operational cost of both types of machineries were done to determine the right interest 
rate that will provide appropriate IRR for the end users. Please refer to Table 12. 
 
The table 12 below compares the NPV of additional investments required for installing the energy efficient 
spinning and boiler machines the proposed GCF credit line vis-a-vis regular equipment under the standard 
commercial financing: 
 
 
Table 12: NPV & IRR comparison of commercial finance, JICA EECPF project and proposed programme 
 
Machine Type 
Δ investment NPV if GCF loan 
is availed (i=5%,tenor-10yrs, 
moratorium-2 yr) compared to 
commercial loan is 
(i=11.5%,tenor 8 yrs, 
moratorium-1 yr)   
Δ investment NPV if GCF loan 
is availed (i=6 %,tenor-10yrs, 
moratorium-2 yr) compared to 
commercial loan (i=11.5%,tenor 
8 yrs, moratorium-1 yr)   
Spinning machine 
BDT 4,81,998 
(BDT 29,986) 
Boiler 
BDT 1,87,760 
(BDT 17,823) 
 
The above table clearly indicates that only an interest rate in the range of 5%-6% for the GCF credit line 
would make the additional investment in EE equipment feasible for the borrowers. Thus, crowding out of 
private investors will not occur at this rate and at the same time the financial structure will be viable to the 
end users. The Δ investment in the above table signifies the overall savings that a borrower will accrue 
when an energy efficient equipment is installed viz-a-viz a conventional equipment. Even though the costs 
of EE equipment are on higher side than that of a conventional machine, the savings in terms of operating 
cost over a lifetime and a tenure of 8-10 years, outweigh the higher cost of EE equipment. The life of machine 
is considered to be 15 years in both the cases. It is assumed that the spinning machine runs on electricity 
and an incremental electricity tariff of 2% is considered for calculating the operating. The EE equipment for 
each machine type shall have a minimum efficiency of 10% over conventional machine, 
 
With the current JICA EE&CPF credit line, there are some challenges faced such as (a) it focusses on varied 
sectors and hence, cannot cater the complete demand of any one of the sectors. Thus, sector approach 
proposed in this programme will help to cater the huge demand and potential of energy efficiency in the 
textile sector and will percolate deep inside the sector. (b) The second issue with JICA EE&CPF involves 
the limitations in ticket size of one project (maximum BDT 1 billion) which further minimized the reach of this 
project across industrial sector. Thus, in the proposed programme the project ceiling has been extended to 
BDT 2 billion. (c) The last point is that, this project has a limited list of EE interventions that may be financed 
under this project. These limitations do not help the project to percolate deep inside any sector with an 
approach to bring the entire sector to world standards norms and energy intensity standards. Hence keeping 
this in mind the proposed programme is designed to accommodate all kind of textile equipment having a 
minimum efficiency level of 10%. 
 
 
FOR RMG SECTOR 
 
High upfront capital investment and high interest rates of borrowing has been informed by stakeholders as 
a key barrier from implementing energy efficient technologies, even if the technologies exhibit a high

=== PAGE 89 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 86 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
expected rate of return. The program intends to address this barrier through concessional financing and 
supplement it with market development activities which would help stimulate market demand, increase 
availability of energy equipment and develop capacities of market players.  
The level of concessionality which will stimulate market for energy efficiency has been determined by 
simulating loan payment scenarios (considering 8-year loan tenure and 2-year grace period) for 2 sample 
equipment:   
• 
Conventional vs Energy Efficient boiler: The energy efficient gas boiler is around 25% more expensive 
than a conventional gas boiler and will require a 5.15% interest rate to have the same repayment 
amount as that of a conventional gas boiler being financed by loans at market rate i.e. 11%. Considering 
a 10% premium on repayment, the interest rate becomes 7.55%. 
• 
Conventional vs energy efficient stenter: Similarly, a 23% more expensive energy efficient stenter 
requires 5.35% interest rate to have the same repayment amount as a conventional stenter with 
financing at market rates. 10% premium makes the interest rate 7.85%. 
Accordingly, a loan payment simulation has been conducted to compare the rate of interest at which an 
energy efficient equipment will have the same repayment as a loan taken at market rate for a comparable 
conventional equipment, all other terms of the loan remaining the same (viz. loan tenor and 
moratorium/grace period). The simulation has been conducted for two sample equipment viz. gas fired boiler 
and stenter machines as given below.  
It is assumed that since energy efficient equipment gives an additional benefit of monetary savings through 
energy conservation, users i.e. unit owners can be inclined to pay a small premium to acquire the energy 
efficient variant. This would also help financial institutions give some margin to accommodate any 
operational costs. The results from the simulation is given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 13: Price simulation for Energy Efficient Gas Boiler 
Parameter 
Unit 
Commercial 
Finance for 
conventional 
equipment 
Commercial 
finance for 
energy efficient 
equipment 
Concessional finance for 
energy efficient equipment 
At par 
10% 
Premium 
Price 
USD 
57,600 
72,000 
72,000 
72,000 
Interest Rate 
% 
11% 
11% 
5.15% 
7.55% 
Tenure Period 
yrs. 
10 
10 
10 
10 
Grace Period 
yr. 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Total Payment 
USD 
89,543 
111,929 
89,661 
98,527 
boiler)

=== PAGE 90 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 87 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Table 14: Price simulation for energy efficient stenter 
Parameter 
Unit 
Commercial 
Finance for 
conventional 
equipment 
Commercial 
finance for 
energy efficient 
equipment 
Concessional finance for 
energy efficient equipment 
At par 
10% 
Premium 
Price 
USD 
64,800 
80,000 
80,000 
80,000 
Interest Rate 
% 
11% 
11% 
5.35% 
7.85% 
Tenure Period 
yrs. 
10 
10 
10 
10 
Grace Period 
yr. 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Total Payment 
USD 
100,736 
124,365 
100,428 
110,736 
 
Considering a wider range of equipment, a range of interest between 5.0%-7.5% should be ideal market 
prices of loan instruments to generate interest in unit owners for energy efficient equipment. 
Hence, a minimum concessional financing at ~5.0-7.5% would be required to make energy efficient 
equipment attractive to unit owners. Given the additional benefit of using energy efficient equipment is 
monetary savings (in the form of energy savings), it is expected that unit owners will be more inclined to buy 
an energy efficient variant over a non-energy efficient one, even with a 10% premium on repayment, thereby 
creating a demand push for efficient variants. This would, however, require extensive awareness building 
among unit owners on the business case for energy efficiency as well as increasing access of energy 
efficient equipment.  
The financial structure for the program includes 04 local financial institutions, which will act as EE for the 
program. However, during programme implementation new LFIs may be selected based on the selection 
criteria described in B4, notably IDCOL may also be an EE if required. For now the shortlisted 04 LFIs .These 
banks have proven experience of operating in RMG financing market as well as offering green financing 
instruments. They have established project due diligence procedures aligned with the statutory requirement 
of Bangladesh. The presence of these institutions in the financial structure will help in taking the 
concessional loan to a greater number of RMG units, given existing customer base of the banks as well as 
increase efficiency in disbursement and monitoring given the alignment of the bank in operating green 
financing instruments. 
The co-financing provided by the banks will help in infusing private sector financing in the sector and with 
the success of the program, it is expected more financial institutions (both public and private sector) will 
increase participation in the sector. 
Apart from the issues discussed above, a number of stakeholders were consulted during program design, 
which has highlighted need for capacity building in apprising, implementing, monitoring and evaluating 
energy efficiency projects as well as improve market interface between equipment suppliers and RMG units. 
These non-financial barriers, which are also critical to the success of the program, have also been 
addressed through activities proposed in Component 2.

=== PAGE 91 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 88 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project/programme, taking into account the total 
financing and mitigation/ adaptation impact the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to 
an appropriate benchmark. 
 
Please specify the expected economic rate of return based on a comparison of the scenarios with and without the 
project/programme.  
 
Please specify the expected financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support to illustrate the need for GCF 
funding to illustrate overall cost effectiveness. 
 
FOR TEXTILE SECTOR 
 
As mentioned above, this programme envisages the creation of concessional fund with USD 133 million, 
including USD 100 million senior loan from GCF and USD 33 million from IDCOL. IDCOL, an Accredited 
Entity with GCF, will make available the GCF funds in the form of loans to the end borrowers, who are in this 
case the private textile manufacturing companies. Using this fund, the projected IRR estimated to be 
achieved is 7.0 %.  The implementation of these energy efficiency measures equivalent envisages annual 
GHG reductions estimated at 0.2 million tCO2 and 4.00 million tCO2 equivalent over the lifetime of the project 
(20 years) which if included in the economic benefit would lead to an EIRR of 23.00%. The payback period 
for various equipment varies between 4-13 years. In addition to these economic and financial benefits, the 
project will also lead to other intangible social and gender impacts such as better community living standards, 
providing safe and better working environment leading to higher gender balance in workforce and skill up 
gradation for workers. 
 
FOR RMG SECTOR 
 
The proposed programme envisages to infuse USD 200 million in financing energy equipment in RMG units. 
This will include USD 150 million of concessional loans from GCF and USD 50 million from EEs i.e. 
LFIs/IDCOL in the form of loans. The loans will be provided by LFIs/IDCOL to the end borrowers at a rate 
substantially lower than prevailing market rates (~11%). Using this fund, the projected IRR is 5.00%.  The 
program will lead to annual GHG emissions of 0.527 MtCO2 and savings of 10.54 MtCO2 across the program 
lifetime. Considering the economic benefit of the emission savings, the program returns an EIRR of 44.5%. 
In addition to these economic and financial benefits, the project will also lead to other intangible social and 
gender impacts such as better community living standards, providing safe and better working environment 
leading to higher gender balance in workforce and skill up gradation for workers. It will also lead to higher 
operating profit for units, a part of which is expected to get reinvested in capacity expansion, leading to job 
creation. The increased demand for energy efficient equipment will also lead to creation of green jobs. 
 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied. If applicable, 
specify the innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. 
 
FOR TEXTILE SECTOR 
 
Sector wide best practices can be broken down into the process improvement, metering water conservation, 
fuel efficiency and reduction in electricity consumption. These measures represent the best practices for 
resource efficiency and a cost effectiveness perspective in the textile processes.  
Table 15: Current best practices for energy efficiency in Textile sector 
Type 
Detail 
Energy 
Management and 
- 
Policies and standard operating procedures for energy 
management

=== PAGE 92 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 89 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
process 
improvement 
- 
Development of skills and knowledge management for 
awareness 
- 
Information systems for monitoring and reporting 
- 
Improve planning and investment  
- 
Marketing and communications for encouraging other units/firms 
- 
Process automation to control dyeing and printing processes 
- 
Improve machine utilization, particularly for the most energy-
intensive machines 
- 
Benchmark energy and water use and set concrete reduction 
targets 
Metering  
- 
To enable factory management to closely track resource and 
energy consumption for specific processes and to identify those 
resource intensive processes where efforts to improve efficiency 
should be focused 
Water 
conservation is 
energy 
conservation 
- 
Water leak detection, preventive maintenance, improved 
cleaning  
- 
Improving boiler efficiency  
- 
Improve efficiency of steam systems and maintain steam traps  
- 
Insulation of equipment and tanks 
- 
Heat recovery and reuse: Reuse cooling water, Reuse 
condensate, Reuse process water 
Efficient use of 
Fuels 
Fuel savings from above mentioned water conservation and reuse by: 
a) Improving the operation and efficiency of the boiler  
b) Increasing efficiency in the use of steam in the production 
process to reduce the quantity of steam the boiler must 
generate. 
Reduction in 
Electricity 
consumption 
- 
Optimization of compressed air systems: fixing leaks in the air 
system and checking and optimizing pressure 
- 
Electricity savings from improved boiler efficiency 
- 
Electricity savings from heat recovery 
 
The above-mentioned practices are easy-to-implement and low-cost that come with multiple co-benefits. 
Besides energy efficiency, these would bring in resource efficiency, environmental benefits, cost 
effectiveness and increase in productivity of textile units. These can be taken up as capacity building part 
of the TA programme. 
 
FOR RMG SECTOR 
 
Garment production is an organized activity consisting of sequential processes such as laying, marking, 
cutting, stitching, checking, finishing, pressing and packaging. Based on best practices in each process 
interventions were suggested to the stakeholders. These measures represent the best practices for resource 
efficiency and a cost effectiveness perspective in the garment manufacturing processes.  
Table 16: Current best practices for energy efficiency in RMG  sector 
Type 
Detail 
- 
Installation of VFD on major motors

=== PAGE 93 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 90 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Energy 
Management and 
Conservation 
- 
Optimization of compressed air system  
- 
Installation of auto oxygen control in boilers  
- 
Installation of energy conservation turbine 
Fuel Reduction 
- 
Improving boiler efficiency  
- 
Improve efficiency of steam systems and maintain steam traps  
- 
Insulation of equipment and tanks 
- 
Heat recovery and reuse: Reuse cooling water, Reuse condensate, 
Reuse process water 
- 
Increasing efficiency in the use of steam in the production process to 
reduce the quantity of steam the boiler must generate. 
Reduction in 
Electricity 
consumption 
- 
Optimization of compressed air systems: fixing leaks in the air system and 
checking and optimizing pressure 
- 
Electricity savings from improved Lighting system 
- 
Electricity savings from use of clutch motors 
- 
Installation of IE3 motors  
- 
Installation of energy efficient screw compressors 
 
The above-mentioned energy conservation measures are easy-to-implement and low-cost that come with 
multiple co-benefits. Besides energy efficiency, these would bring in resource efficiency, environmental 
benefits, cost effectiveness and increase in productivity of RMG units. These can be taken up as capacity 
building part of the TA programme.

=== PAGE 94 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 91 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes 
as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both. 
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development 
 
 
 
 
 
E.2. Core indicator targets (RMG & Textile combined) 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
and cross-cutting only) 
Annual 
0.727 million t CO2 eq 
Lifetime 
14.53 million t CO2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) 
(a) Total programme financing 
340.50 million  USD 
(b) Requested GCF amount  
256.48 million  USD 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
14.53 million t CO2 eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
23.43 USD / t CO2eq 
 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed   
(e = b / c) 
17.65 USD / t CO2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross-cutting only) 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
167.02 million   USD 
(g) Public source co-financed 
0.02 million USD 
(h) Private source finance leveraged  
167.00 million   USD 
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
 
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
 0.0000780    
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
0.65 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
Click here to enter text. 
Click here to enter text.% of female 
Indirect 
Click here to enter text. 
Click here to enter text.% of female 
For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 17. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
Click here to enter text.  (Expressed as %) of country(ies) 
Indirect 
Click here to enter text.  (Expressed as %) of country(ies) 
For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.

=== PAGE 95 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 92 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
E.3. Fund-level impacts  
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baselin
e 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term67 
(After 
Year 06) 
 
Final68 
(After 
Year 
12) 
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances 
M3.1 Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2 
eq) reduced or 
avoided - buildings, 
cities, industries, 
and appliances 
1. Annual report on 
energy savings 
from end 
borrowers & 
reflected in 
dashboard and 
its respective 
GHG emission 
savings. 
2. Yearly Energy 
Audits and 
technical support 
to the LFIs on 
MRV during TA 
implementation 
period (please 
refer to Activity 
2.4.3, 4.4.1 & 
4.4.2). 
3.  After the end of 
TA 
implementation 
period, IDCOL 
and LFIs will 
continue to 
monitor and 
collect data from 
the borrowers. As 
per the loan 
agreement the 
end borrower for 
EE loan sub-
project 
(proponent) 
should submit 
energy efficiency 
data formats 
provided in 
Annex 11 (to 
IDCOL and LFIs) 
on yearly basis. 
0 
tCO2e 
1.07 
million 
tCO2e 
6.66 
million 
tCO2e 
1. Improved 
results in energy 
savings and 
avoidance of 
GHG emissions 
2. Key 
assumptions 
used in 
calculating the 
ex-ante GHG 
impact is 
described in 
section D.1 
3. Programme 
lifetime: 20 
years.69 
4. Machine 
lifetime: 15 
years 
5. Mid-term 
target is defined 
as cumulative 
GHG savings 
expected to be 
achieved by 
mid-term point; 
by this time GCF 
loan amount and 
IDCOL’s & LFI’s 
co-financing 
amount will be 
disbursed to 
borrowers. 
Since 
disbursements 
will start from 
Year 02 (from 
 
67 Midterm point defined as 6 (six) years after Programme start (FAA Effective Date) 
68 Final point defined as 12 (twelve) years after Programme start (FAA Effective Date) 
 
69 The subprojects under the programme has a lifetime of 10 years. IDCOL and LFIs will re-invest the reflows from the 
programme till Year 10, which will be fully recovered by Year 20, hence the programme lifetime is 20 years.

=== PAGE 96 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 93 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
4.  Furthermore, the 
end borrower for 
EE loan sub-
project 
(Proponent) 
should submit 
data and 
information 
required during 
inspection and 
energy audit to 
IDCOL and GCF. 
FAA effective 
date) the 
maximum 
operational year 
of sub-project/s 
will be no more 
than 05 years. 
 6. Actual values 
of cumulative 
GHG savings 
achieved is will 
be reported 
annually.  
7. As per GCF 
approved 
methodology the 
average annual 
GHG emission 
reduced is 0.73 
MtCO2. 
Subsequently 
with a machine 
lifetime of 15 
years and 
programme 
lifetime of 20 
years the 
lifetime GHG 
emission 
reduction is 
14.53 MtCO2. 
 
 
70 Midterm point defined as 6 (six) years after Programme start (FAA Effective Date) 
71 Final point defined as 12 (twelve) years after Programme start (FAA Effective Date) 
E.4 Fund-level outcomes   
Expected Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(After Year 
06)70 
Final 
(After 
Year 
12)71 
M7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
M7.1 Energy 
intensity/improved 
efficiency of 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances as a 
result of Fund 
support  
 
1. Annual report on 
energy savings 
from end 
borrowers & 
reflected in 
dashboard 
Baseline 
for 
textile 
industry- 
0  
GWh 
Textile 
industry-
2618 
GWh 
 
Textile 
industry- 
5,237 
GWh 
 
1.Rebound effect 
due to lower 
energy intensity 
is limited 
2. Energy saving 
data reported to 
GCF will be 
disaggregated

=== PAGE 97 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 94 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Yearly Energy 
Audits during TA 
implementation 
period. 
3. After the end of 
TA 
implementation 
period, IDCOL 
and LFIs will 
continue to 
monitor and 
collect data from 
the borrowers. 
As per the loan 
agreement the 
end borrower for 
EE loan sub-
project 
(proponent) 
should submit 
energy 
efficiency data 
formats provided 
in Annex 11 (to 
IDCOL and 
LFIs) on yearly 
basis. 
4. Furthermore, the 
end borrower for 
EE loan sub-
project 
(Proponent) 
should submit 
data and 
information 
required during 
inspection and 
energy audit to 
IDCOL and GCF. 
 
Baseline 
for RMG 
industry- 
0 GWh  
 
Cumulat
ive 
baseline
- 0 GWh 
RMG 
industry-
2988 
GWh  
 
Cumulativ
e- 5,608 
GWh 
RMG 
industry- 
9,773 
GWh  
 
Cumulat
ive- 
15,011 
GWh 
industry wise. 
Annual energy 
saving per 
industry (i.e. 
textile & RMG) 
will be presented 
along with 
programme 
cumulative 
number.  
3. Key 
assumptions  in 
calculating the 
ex-ante energy 
savings impact is 
described in 
section D.1 
4. Mid-term 
target is defined 
as cumulative 
energy savings 
expected to be 
achieved by mid-
term point; by 
this time GCF 
loan amount and 
IDCOL’s & LFI’s 
co-financing 
amount will be 
disbursed to 
borrowers. Since 
disbursements 
will start from 
Year 02 (from 
FAA effective 
date) the 
maximum 
operational year 
of sub-project/s 
will be no more 
than 05 years. 
5. As per GCF 
approved 
methodology the 
average annual 
energy saving is 
1,310 GWh 
Subsequently 
with a machine 
lifetime of 15 
years and 
programme 
lifetime of 21

=== PAGE 98 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 95 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
years the lifetime 
energy saving is 
24.015 GWh 
 
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
M5.1 Institutional 
and regulatory 
systems that 
improve incentives 
for low-emission 
planning and 
development and 
their effective 
implementation  
-Report on gap 
identification 
-Policy, strategy or 
plan developed 
-  Number of 
Government officials 
trained under Output 
5.2 verified using 
attendance list. 
- Effectiveness of 
the GoB capacity 
development 
activities verified 
using training 
feedback forms, 
outputs of facilitation 
techniques used and 
interacting activities 
performed. 
0 
systems 
Developm
ent & 
operationa
lization of 
new 
effective 
national 
policy, 
strategist 
plan (for 
example. 
Energy 
labeling 
for 
efficiency) 
Policy 
impleme
ntation 
to 
increase 
private 
investm
ent in 
EE 
1. Presently 
there is an 
opportunity 
create enabling 
policies/ 
regulations to 
prompt uptake of 
energy efficienct 
equipment in the 
industrial sector. 
By identifying the 
policy gaps a 
concrete action 
plan will be 
developed. 
However, top of 
the mind 
recommendation 
of SREDA is to 
strengthen the 
EE labelling 
program. 
2. The EE&C 
Master Plan, 
mentions about 
promoting EE 
Labeling 
program which 
will be targeted 
at large energy 
consuming 
entities and 
equipment in the 
industrial, 
residential and 
commercial 
sectors.  
3. Expected 
plans to be 
included in the 
policy:  (a) 
Accreditation of 
laboratories for 
energy efficiency 
measurement 
tests (c)  
evaluate energy 
manager/auditor 
licensing system

=== PAGE 99 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 96 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) increase 
participation of 
manufacturers in 
the EE labeling 
program.  
4. An indicator-
based 
assessment 
framework 
having a 
transparent 
underlying theory 
on how policies 
would impact on 
the selected 
indicator and 
what other 
factors may also 
have an 
influence. This 
will be developed 
under Activity 
5.1.4. 
E.5.Project/programme performance indicators   
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baselin
e 
Target 
 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(After Year 
06) 
Final 
(After Year 
12) 
 
 
Financing  for 
Energy Saving 
Equipment & 
Technology for 
Textile & RMG 
sector 
 
 
Amount of loan 
fund approved 
during the 
targeted project 
timeline 
 
Approval 
letters form 
IDCOL/LFIs & 
acceptance 
by the end 
borrowers  
 
 
0 
 
 
Textile: 
USD 133 
million 
RMG: USD 
200 million 
 
 
Textile: 
USD 
164.93 
million 
RMG: USD 
251.56 
million 
 
 
1. Amount 
considering 
expected market 
demand in the 
Textile & RMG EE 
sector. 
2. Given access to 
appropriate 
finance, textile & 
RMG factories will 
invest in high 
climate impact 
technologies. 
3. To maximize the 
impact of the 
programme fund 
the principal 
payment received

=== PAGE 100 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 97 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
from GCF loan, on-
lent to the end 
borrowers will be 
re-invested till Year 
10 (starting from 
FAA effectiveness).  
EE equipment & 
technology has 
been 
successfully 
installed in the 
factory 
Factory Visit 
report by 
IDCOL/LFIs 
0 
43 factories 
55 
factories 
1. Considering that 
all the regulatory & 
other external 
requirements of the 
projects have been 
completed 
smoothly. 
2. Disbursements 
under the 
programme will 
start from Year 02 
(since FAA 
effectiveness), by 
Year 06 GCF loan 
amount and EE’s 
co-financing 
amount will be fully 
disbursed to the 
end borrowers so 
the number of 
factories installing 
EE equipment will 
be higher fort the 
first 6-7 years of 
the programme.  
 
 
 
 
 
Sector-level 
baseline, 
operational 
manual, list of 
renowned EE 
equipment and 
financing 
roadmap & time 
Acceptance 
letters from 
IDCOL/LFIs 
for adopting 
operation 
manual, 
sector-level 
baseline,  list 
0 
Adoption 
and 
functioning 
of operation 
manual, 
whistle 
blower 
policy & 
Adoption 
and 
functioning 
of 
operation 
manual, 
whistle 
blower 
1.GCF will approve 
the procurement 
process and the 
prepared 
documents by 2nd 
quarter of Year 02 
2. A baseline by 2nd 
quarter of Year 02

=== PAGE 101 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 98 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainable 
financing 
strategy 
developed for 
large scale 
adoption of EE 
equipment in 
textile & RMG 
sector. 
 
based action 
plan both textile 
& RMG 
programs are 
developed   
of renowned 
EE 
equipment, 
financing road 
map & time 
based action 
plan under 
the 
programme 
 
baseline 
information  
policy & 
baseline 
information   
to be developed by  
consolidating data 
based on  
classification of 
Textile & RMG 
units (scale and 
type of products) 
and data collection 
through energy 
audit of sample 
plants 
3. All the required 
factory visits for 
baseline are 
completed within 
stipulated time 
Regulatory & 
institutional 
framework at the 
national level 
strengthened  to 
overcome the 
operational 
constraints 
related to 
implementing 
EE&C in the 
country 
1.Report on 
policy gap 
identification 
2.Policy, 
strategy or 
plan 
developed 
3. An 
indicator-
based 
assessment 
framework 
having a 
transparent 
underlying 
theory on how 
policies would 
impact on the 
selected 
indicator and 
what other 
factors may 
also have an 
influence. 
This will be 
developed 
under Activity 
5.1.4. 
4. Number of 
Government 
officials 
trained under 
Output 5.2 
verified using 
attendance 
list. 
0 
1.Developm
ent & 
operationali
zation of 
new 
effective 
national 
policy & 
strategic 
plan  
2. Organize 
03 ToTs of 
the 
government 
officials   
3. Organize 
10 training 
session for 
the policy 
makers and 
relevant 
government 
official by 
the trained 
trainers. 
4. 
Organizing 
02 
workshops 
to 
disseminate 
outcome of 
the 
programme 
to policy 
makers and 
1.Develop
ment & 
operational
ization of 
new 
effective 
national 
policy & 
strategic 
plan  
2. 
Organize 
03 ToTs of 
the 
governmen
t officials   
3. 
Organize 
10 training 
session for 
the policy 
makers 
and 
relevant 
governmen
t official by 
the trained 
trainers. 
4. 
Organizing 
02 
workshops 
to 
disseminat
e outcome 
of the 
1. The EE&C 
Master Plan, 
mentions about 
promoting EE 
Labeling program 
which will be 
targeted at large 
energy consuming 
entities and 
equipment in the 
industrial, 
residential and 
commercial 
sectors.  
2. Expected plans 
to be included in 
the policy:  (a) 
Accreditation of 
laboratories for 
energy efficiency 
measurement tests 
(c)  evaluate energy 
manager/auditor 
licensing system 
(d) increase 
participation of 
manufacturers in 
the EE labeling 
program.

=== PAGE 102 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 99 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
5. 
Effectiveness 
of the GoB 
capacity 
development 
activities 
verified using 
training 
feedback 
forms, 
outputs of 
facilitation 
techniques 
used and 
interacting 
activities 
performed. 
EE 
practitioners 
and also the 
learning 
from 
implementin
g energy 
efficiency in 
textile and 
garments 
sector 
(financing 
scenario, 
business 
case and 
economic 
benefits, 
women 
involvement 
and role of 
government 
for long-
term 
sustainabilit
y) to ensure 
institutional 
capitalizatio
n of 
knowledge. 
programm
e to policy 
makers 
and EE 
practitioner
s and also 
the 
learning 
from 
implementi
ng energy 
efficiency 
in textile 
and 
garments 
sector 
(financing 
scenario, 
business 
case and 
economic 
benefits, 
women 
involveme
nt and role 
of 
governmen
t for long-
term 
sustainabili
ty) to 
ensure 
institutional 
capitalizati
on of 
knowledge
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Programme 
Launching event 
arranged for both 
Textile & RMG 
program 
Attendance 
list ensuring 
key 
stakeholders 
attended  
 
0 
 
Covering 
entire key 
stakeholder
s of the 
country 
related to 
textile & 
RMG 
sector. 
Covering 
entire key 
stakeholde
rs of the 
country 
related to 
textile & 
RMG 
sector. 
1.Covering entire 
key stakeholders of 
the country related 
to textile & RMG 
sector. Trade 
bodies like BTMA, 
BGMEA, 
BKMEA .etc. are 
expected to be on 
board. 
2.Programme 
Launching event for 
the  for potential 
borrowers, local & 
foreign suppliers, 
O&M service 
providers,  Trade

=== PAGE 103 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 100 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Market 
awareness on 
importance of 
EE equipment in 
textile & RMG 
sector 
strengthened 
 
 
 
 
Bodies, Fashion 
Brands and other 
key private and 
public sector 
stakeholders to 
create awareness 
on the new GCF 
credit line 
Develop effective 
communication 
materials for 
information 
dissemination 
(brochure, flyer, 
pamphlet, etc) 
and advocacy 
campaign for 
Textile 
 
 
 
 
 
-Number of 
communicatio
n materials 
developed 
 -Quick 
survey to 
solicit 
information 
recipient’s 
feedback and 
check their 
reactions and 
comprehensio
n. 
0 
Minimum 
70% of the 
target 
audience 
reached as 
per the 
action plan 
Minimum 
70% of the 
target 
audience 
reached as 
per the 
action plan 
Communication 
materials will be 
developed and will 
focus the 
information need of 
various 
stakeholders.  
Technology fair 
with participation 
of technology 
suppliers and 
representation of 
Textile/RMG 
units organized 
Attendance 
list ensuring 
key 
stakeholders 
attended  
Feedback 
survey of key 
technology 
suppliers and 
representativ
es of 
Textile/RMG 
 
0 
-Minimum 
70% of the 
target 
participants 
should be 
satisfied 
 
 
- Minimum 
70% of the 
target 
participant
s should 
be 
satisfied 
 
1. One international 
technology fair will 
be arranged for 
both textile & RMG 
industries 
2. Technology fair 
with participation of 
30 different 
technology 
suppliers and 
representation of 
60 different 
Textile/RMG units 
organized. 
 
Institutional 
capacity building 
at IDCOL/LFIs 
and at end 
borrowers level 
 
 
 
Improved 
capacity/skills  of  
stakeholders, 
end borrowers, 
IDCOL & LFIs 
ensured to better 
cater to EE 
financing 
Training 
feedback 
forms, 
outputs of 
facilitation 
techniques 
used and 
interacting 
activities 
performed 
0 
-Minimum 
80% of the 
target 
audience 
should be 
satisfied 
- Minimum 
80% of the 
target 
audience 
should be 
able to 
-Minimum 
80% of the 
target 
audience 
should be 
satisfied 
- Minimum 
80% of the 
target 
audience 
should be 
able to 
The training 
sessions will be 
arranged by the 
consultant and the 
participants will be 
selected by 
LFIs/IDCOL.

=== PAGE 104 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 101 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
articulate 
the 
message 
delivered. 
articulate 
the 
message 
delivered. 
E.6. Activities (Component 01&2, EE&C in Textile Sector) 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Financing for Energy Saving Equipment & Technology for Textile sector 
Activity 1.1.1 
Disbursement of USD 
133.00 million credit line  
for EE equipment in 
textile sector 
• 
IDCOL will extend 
USD 133 million 
amount of loans to 
textile borrowers for 
purchasing EE 
equipment over a 
tenor of 10 years with 
maximum 03 years of 
grace period. From 
the USD 133 million, 
GCF loan contribution 
will be USD 100 
million while the rest 
USD 33 million will be 
co-financed by 
IDCOL as the 
Executing Entity. 
IDCOL will revolve 
the loan over 10 
years. 
 
1.1.1.1 Prepare 
financing 
strategy 
 
1.1.1.2 Develop 
strong project 
pipeline & 
mapping 
 
1.1.1.3 Approach 
large number 
of prospective 
textile 
borrowers 
 
1.1.1.4 Selection of 
end borrowers 
 
1.1.1.5 Approval and 
disbursement 
of USD 133 
million against 
USD 33 
million equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Loans of USD 133.00 million 
extended to implementing entities 
Sustainable financing strategy developed for large scale adoption of EE equipment in textile sector. 
Activity 2.1.1:  Devise a 
financing roadmap and 
time-based action plan 
The financing roadmap 
will be a comprehensive 
document that will list the 
tasks for achieving 
programme’s objectives. 
 
2.1.1.1 Prepare financing 
strategy via 
primary and 
1. IDCOL and GCF 
approved financing 
roadmap  
2. Time-based action 
plan

=== PAGE 105 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 102 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Each action will be clearly 
described so as to avoid 
confusion later on. Every 
action will have set 
timeline, designated 
resources and a detail 
implementation plan. The 
action plan will a strategic 
document for IDCOL in 
order to ensure  concrete 
steps needed to attain 
programme goals are 
undertaken (usually 
covering the coming 
year), a timetable for 
each task, a description 
of who will do what and a 
follow-up process. 
secondary data 
collection. 
2.1.1.2 Prepare a detail 
action plan 
keeping in mind 
the targets set in 
the programme 
 
Activity 2.1.2:  Develop 
operations manual for 
the program. 
• 
An operations manual 
will be developed to 
ensure stakeholders 
can reliably and 
efficiently carry out 
their tasks with 
consistent results as 
per GCF policies & 
guidelines. It will 
reduce human error 
and inform everyone 
precisely what they 
need to do, who they 
are responsible to 
and who they are 
responsible for. 
• 
A documented 
operations manual 
will aid in making EE 
projects more 
scalable. When there 
will be documented 
procedures for 
reference, it will be 
much easier to 
implement the same 
procedures on a 
larger scale or at 
other locations/ 
sector.  
2.1.2.1 Study GCF 
policies and 
guidelines that are 
applicable under 
the programme. 
 
2.1.2.2 Study market best 
practices for similar 
programme. 
2.1.2.3  Develop 
operations manual for the 
program 
 
 
IDCOL and GCF approved 
Operational Manual for the 
programme. 
Activity 2.1.3:  Develop 
whistle blower policy for 
the program. 
A whistle blower policy 
will be prepared for the 
programme as per the 
guidelines of GCF and 
Bangladesh Bank to 
maintain transparency. 
This policy will be 
2.1.3.1 Analyze GCF 
policies and 
guidelines that are 
applicable under 
the programme. 
 
IDCOL and GCF approved 
Operation Manual for the 
programme.

=== PAGE 106 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 103 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
applicable only for Textile 
sector EE financing as a 
separate whistle blower 
policy will be prepared 
under RMG TA 
component. 
2.1.3.2 Study market best 
practices for 
similar 
programme. 
 
2.1.3.3 Develop 
whistleblower 
policy based on 
best practices. 
Activity 2.1.4: 
Classification of Textile 
units based on scale 
and type of products 
and data collection 
through energy audit of 
sample plants 
 
There are various sizes of 
textile factories in the 
country. Generally they 
can be widely categorized 
into three segments i.e 
large, medium and small. 
Each categories have 
different energy 
consuming pattern. 
Therefore segregation of 
factories based on their 
production capacity will 
be done primarily. And 
then the baseline 
scenario of each category 
will be identified 
separately in the sector-
level baseline. This is 
important to understand 
appropriate energy saving 
scope of the industry. 
 
 
 
 
 
Rather than an individual 
factory baseline prior to 
every loan application is 
to ensure (i) Loan 
application process does 
not get elongated; (ii) 
Baseline numbers reflect 
accurate conditions and 
are not influenced by 
owners to depict a 
conducive scenario for 
loan application; (iii) Cost 
burden does not fall on 
borrower completely. 
- 
 
2.1.4.1 Sample textile units 
for the baseline study to be 
divided into large, medium 
and small-scale plant, 
based on its production 
data and predetermined 
criteria that gives proper 
representation of the textile 
industry. 
 
 
 
1 nos. report on Textile unit 
classification 
 
Activity 2.1.5: 
Consolidation of data 
Baseline for the 
programme for the 
selected indicators in the 
logframe will be 
2.1.5.1 In Year 01 (since 
FAA effectiveness) 
energy audits to be 
conducted in 
1 nos. document containing 
data sheets (which includes 
baseline information)

=== PAGE 107 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 104 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
and developing sector-
level baseline 
developed under this 
activity. A sector wide 
study, undertaking 
several variables with a 
definitive methodology 
(described in the 
operations manual) will 
be conducted at the 
beginning of the 
programme. This data will 
be used for 5 years and 
later a second baseline 
study will be conducted. 
(please refer to activity 
2.1.8) 
The main reason for 
proposing a consolidated 
baseline rather than an 
individual factory baseline 
prior to every loan 
application is to ensure (i) 
Loan application process 
does not get elongated; 
(ii) Baseline numbers 
reflect accurate 
conditions and are not 
influenced by owners to 
depict a conducive 
scenario for loan 
application; (iii) Cost 
burden does not fall on 
borrower completely. 
multiple plants 
ensuring adequate 
representation 
from each 
category (large, 
medium & small) 
and each type of 
product (viz. 
knitwear, woven, 
non-woven). For 
each category and 
type of product, 
audits will help 
establish 
production 
processes, 
equipment 
involved in each 
process and 
specific energy 
consumption 
(SEC) for each 
process. Based on 
the representative 
numbers and total 
population figures, 
the baseline 
energy 
consumption will 
be prepared for 
Textile sector  
2.1.5.2 Consolidate data 
from energy audit 
2.1.5.3 Identify 
appropriate 
assumptions to 
ensure realistic 
extrapolation of 
audit results 
2.1.5.4 Undertake 
extrapolation of 
audit results 
 
Activity 2.1.6: Interact 
with 
stakeholders/market 
players to prepare a list 
of equipment already 
implemented in 
Bangladesh and having 
proven energy savings 
results. List will be 
integrated with 
knowledge platform and 
Establishing a real-time 
database of energy 
efficient machineries 
related to both the sectors 
that has strong track 
record. By track record it 
is meant those EE 
equipment that are  
widely accepted and used 
in Bangladesh  markets 
as energy efficient 
2.1.6.1 Consultant to 
conduct textile sector EE 
equipment’s market study 
based on primary and 
secondary data  
2.1.6.2 Consultant to 
develop   list of renowned 
& reliable EE equipment 
that can be financed to the 
textile sector borrowers. 
1 nos. document containing 
equipment list

=== PAGE 108 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 105 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
disseminated through 
other means to ensure 
adequate public 
outreach 
machineries and also 
those which has been 
financed under other 
DFIs/ donor organization 
in the country. 
2.1. 6.3 The EE equipment 
list developed is to be 
made widely accessible 
through online knowledge 
platform developed under 
Activity 2.4.6. 
Activity 2.1.7: Revision 
of baseline by 
conducting energy audit 
and data consolidation 
Subsequent to activity 
2.1.6 the proposed 
activity is the second 
baseline study that is to 
be conducted by the end 
of 5th year. 
The main reason for 
proposing a consolidated 
baseline rather than an 
individual factory baseline 
prior to every loan 
application is to ensure (i) 
Loan application process 
does not get elongated; 
(ii) Baseline numbers 
reflect accurate 
conditions and are not 
influenced by owners to 
depict a conducive 
scenario for loan 
application; (iii) Cost 
burden does not fall on 
borrower completely. 
2.1.7.1 In year 06 (since 
FAA effectiveness) energy 
audits to be conducted in 
multiple plants ensuring 
adequate representation 
from each category (large, 
medium & small) and each 
type of product (viz. 
knitwear, woven, non-
woven). For each category 
and type of product, audits 
will help establish 
production processes, 
equipment involved in each 
process and specific 
energy consumption (SEC) 
for each process. Based 
on the representative 
numbers and total 
population figures, the 
baseline energy 
consumption will be 
revised for the Textile 
sector  
 
2.1.7.2 Consolidate data 
from energy audit 
2.1.7.3 Identify appropriate 
assumptions to ensure 
realistic extrapolation of 
audit results 
2.1.7.4 Undertake 
extrapolation of audit 
results 
 
 
  
 
1 nos. report on revised 
energy baseline for sector 
Activity 2.1.8: Develop 
technically-robust, 
bankable EE project 
pipeline 
This will be an 
ongoing activity for 6 
years. 
Consultant/consulting 
firm will be 
responsible to 
promote the 
2.1.8.1 Approach large 
number of prospective 
textile borrowers. 
 
2.1.8.2 Develop strong 
project pipeline & mapping 
Technically-robust, bankable 
EE project pipeline for textile 
sector.

=== PAGE 109 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 106 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
programme in the 
textile sector and 
develop a strong 
relationship with 
prospective 
clients/borrowers. 
Activities 2.2.1 to 
2.2.4 will be some of 
the key platforms to 
connect with the 
borrowers and 
sensitize them on EE. 
This pipeline will be 
very important to 
ensure smooth 
implementation of the 
programme within the 
specified time. 
 
Market awareness on importance of EE equipment in textile sector strengthened 
Activity 2.2.1:  
Organizing programme 
launching event 
A grand opening of the 
programme through a 
social event that will be 
intended to introduce the 
new concessional credit 
line and its unique 
features dedicated to 
promote EE in Textile 
Sector. And also to 
introduce the relevant 
public and private sector 
stakeholders to a new 
business modality using 
EE equipment. 
2.2.1.1 An event 
organizing firm will be 
hired through a 
competitive bidding 
process. The 
procurement process 
will be facilitated by 
the 
consultant/consulting 
firm. Or IDCOL can 
also arrange it at own 
arrangement 
2.2.1.2 The 
participants (local & 
foreign) will be 
selected by IDCOL  
2.2.1.3 Photographs, 
attendance list, post-
event report, media 
publication of the 
programme launching 
event will be shared 
with GCF. 
 
1 nos. program launch event 
Activity 2.2.2: 
Organizing awareness 
raising workshops  
This activity focuses on 
developing the market for 
the programme by 
reaching out to the 
relevant private sector 
stakeholders through 
awareness raising 
workshops. The 
workshops will 
2.2.2.1 Case studies 
and workshop 
presentation materials 
to be developed by 
consultant/consulting 
firms with support 
from IDCOL. 
2.2.2.2 The 
participants (local & 
Awareness raising workshops

=== PAGE 110 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 107 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
disseminate to 
stakeholders on broad 
policy framework and 
incentive mechanisms for 
energy efficiency in 
textiles, business case 
and economic benefits, 
women involvement in 
energy efficient textile 
operations (Covering 
entire key stakeholders of 
the country related to 
textile sector. Trade 
bodies like BTMA, 
BGMEA .etc. are 
expected to be on board). 
With interactive 
approaches, participants 
will be able to acquire 
new knowledge, share 
their experiences and 
develop new practices 
together related to 
adopting EE equipment in 
the textile sector.  
foreign) will be 
selected by IDCOL  
2.2.2.3 On board NDA 
for country ownership. 
2.2.2.4 Interactive 
sessions with the 
participants to 
understand the 
effectiveness of the 
workshop. (group 
work, individual/group 
presentation, open 
floor discussion, Q&A 
sessions with experts, 
feedback forms etc.) 
2.2.2.5 Photographs, 
attendance list, post-
event report, media 
publication of the 
programme launching 
event will be shared 
with GCF. 
Activity 2.2.3: Preparing 
various 
information/communicat
ion materials  
Written and 
visual communication 
materials to be developed 
in the form of 
brochures/flyers/pamphlet
s and other related 
information documents for 
dissemination activities 
and for effective 
marketing of the 
programme.  
2.2.3.1Consultant/con
sulting firm will 
develop written and 
visual communication 
materials for 
marketing of the 
programme amongst 
both the public and 
private sector 
stakeholders.  
2.2.3.2Consultant/con
sulting firm as well as 
IDCOL to ensure 
access to 
communication 
materials for the key 
stakeholders. 
2.2.3.3 IDCOL to 
measure the 
effectiveness of the 
communication 
materials through 
survey.  
Brochures, flyers, pamphlets, 
press release, website, and other 
communication materials. 
Activity 2.2.4: Develop 
and launch advocacy 
campaign on energy 
Advocacy campaign via 
workshops, animations, 
video clips, brochures, etc 
will be the starting point 
2.2.4.1 Develop 
campaign materials to 
raise awareness in the 
• 
Campaign materials 
(brochure, pamphlet, video 
clips, case studies on best 
practices, round table

=== PAGE 111 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 108 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
efficiency & 
conservation.   
for implementation of 
Component 05. This 
campaign will be focused 
on improving/reforming 
the current policy design 
and institutional 
framework regarding 
adoption of EE equipment 
in the textile sector and 
ensure its effective 
implementation.  
 
public and private 
sector. 
2.2.4.2Learning 
dissemination 
document and share 
success stories  
discussion, press release, 
etc) 
 
• 
Quick survey reports to solicit 
information recipient’s 
feedback and check their 
reactions and comprehension 
regarding the campaign 
materials. 
 
 
Capacity developed at the institutional levels for faster adoption of EE technology 
Activity 2.3.1: Capacity 
needs assessment of 
IDCOL and potential 
borrowers. 
Perform capacity 
needs assessment to 
map the current and 
desired level of 
capacity for IDCOL 
staff and potential 
borrowers. 
2.3.1.1 Consultants 
will develop need 
assessment report 
mapping IDCOL’s 
strengths and 
weaknesses to 
implement the 
programme  
A report stating the institutional 
gaps of IDCOL to implement the 
programme, ways of overcoming 
its and the required resources. 
Activity 2.3.2: Conduct 
capacity building 
workshops and training 
sessions for IDCOL, 
stakeholders and end 
users who are the 
applicants for the loan 
on the tools and 
requirements to be 
fulfilled for successfully 
securing the loan 
Capacity building and 
training, including 
support for the 
development of 
necessary financial 
instruments, risk 
management tools, 
procedures and the 
creation of an 
adequate knowledge 
base to evaluate and 
extend EE loans 
 
2.3.2.1 Consultant will 
develop training 
manuals in close 
consultation with 
IDCOL and sectorial 
experts. 
2.3.2.2 Consultant 
along with IDCOL will 
identify potential 
participants for the 
trainings. 
2.3.2.3 Consultant will 
conduct the training 
via experts. 
2.3.2.4 Training 
reports will be 
developed identifying 
the effectiveness of 
the training and the 
satisfaction of the 
attendees 
• 
Training modules  
• 
Attendee list 
• 
Post-training/workshop 
reports 
• 
Attendee feedback forms  
• 
Photographs of the training 
 
 
Standards and mechanisms for adequate monitoring, reporting and verification of energy savings and 
GHG emissions developed 
Activity 2.4.1:  Updating 
the parameters and 
requirements for 
• 
As per the Bali Action 
Plan to ensure the 
programme is 
implemented in 
“measurable, 
2.4.1.1 All relevant 
quantitative and 
qualitative information 
MRV framework, including 
energy audit and post retrofit 
performance evaluation for the 
textile factories

=== PAGE 112 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 109 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
establishing MRV 
framework 
reportable and 
verifiable” manner a 
framework will be 
developed.  
• 
The MRV framework 
will enhance 
transparency of the 
tracking of GHG 
emission levels, 
climate finance flows 
received or the 
impact of mitigation 
actions proposed 
under the 
programme.  
• 
MRV framework will 
also facilitate sharing 
information and 
lessons learnt and 
allow assessing 
whether set targets 
have been achieved 
under the programme 
with relevant 
stakeholders, 
especially the GoB.  
• 
MRV framework will 
also strengthen trust 
of climate finance 
donors and other 
investors for 
replication of EE&C 
projects.  
to be identified and 
verified. 
2.4.1.2 Detail 
methodology on how 
to measure qualitative 
and quantitative 
indicators should be 
developed. 
2.4.1.3  Perform 
energy audit and post 
retrofit performance 
evaluation for the 
textile factories 
(establishing as-is 
baseline and EE 
investment-based 
evaluation KPIs) 
2.4.1.4 Plan the 
monitoring process 
2.4.1.5 Ensure  
institutions, entities, 
arrangements and 
systems involved in 
domestic MRV 
2.4.1.6 Update 
information in the 
framework. 
 
Activity 2.4.2: Updating 
parameters and develop 
the monitoring 
framework for 
environment and 
gender evaluation  
• 
Gender-sensitive 
monitoring and 
evaluation is 
important to reveal 
whether the 
programme 
addresses the 
different priorities and 
needs of women and 
men, to assess if it 
has an impact on 
gender relations, and 
to determine the 
gender aspects that 
need to be integrated 
into monitoring and 
evaluation systems.  
• 
Monitoring is 
fundamental to 
environmental impact 
assessment (EIA) 
both to assess 
2.4.2.1 All relevant 
quantitative and 
qualitative information 
to be identified and 
verified. 
2.4.2.2 Determine 
indicators 
2.4.2.3 Detail 
methodology on how 
to measure qualitative 
and quantitative 
indicators should be 
developed. 
2.4.2.4 Plan the 
monitoring process 
2.4.2.5 Ensure 
institutions, entities, 
arrangements and 
Monitoring framework for 
environment and gender 
evaluation under the programme

=== PAGE 113 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 110 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
adherence to 
standards of the 
programme and to 
support management 
options. The use of 
indicators will assure 
that the key variables 
associated with 
significant 
environmental 
impacts are 
addressed as per 
proposed ESMF and 
improves 
communication and 
reporting processes.  
systems involved in 
monitoring framework. 
2.4.2.6 Update 
information in the 
framework. 
 
Activity 2.4.3: Yearly 
energy, financial and 
environmental audits 
To report 
achievements against 
the set targets in the 
annual progress 
report to GCF, yearly 
energy, financial and 
environmental audits 
will be conducted to 
monitor and track the 
progress against the 
indicators. 
2.4.3.1 Subcontracting 
of audit firms for 
independent 
evaluation if required. 
 
2.4.3.2 Conduct audits 
in selected locations 
and prepare audit 
reports. 
Audit reports 
Activity 2.4.4: Revising 
and applying guidelines 
and monitoring 
methodologies for 
textile factories 
• 
Revise guidelines and 
monitoring 
frameworks after 
scheduled review. 
 
• 
A pragmatic model for 
assessing whether 
guidelines and 
monitoring framework 
need to be updated 
will be identified in the 
operational manual. 
   
2.4.4.1 Schedule 
review of the 
guidelines and 
monitoring 
frameworks  
 
2.4.4.2 Perform 
literature searches 
 
2.4.4.3 Model for 
assessing whether a 
guideline or 
monitoring framework 
needs updating must 
be determined in the 
operations manual 
 
2.4.4.4 Drafted 
guidelines and 
monitoring 
frameworks to be 
shared with GCF for 
review and comments. 
Draft revised guidelines and 
monitoring frameworks to be 
shared with GCF. The revised 
documents will be adopted under 
the programme after GCF and 
IDCOL Board approval

=== PAGE 114 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 111 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Activity 2.4.5: Develop 
an interactive MIS 
dashboard/database  
To ensure organized 
collection of data that 
will be stored and 
easily accessed 
electronically from a 
computer system an 
interactive MIS 
dashboard/database 
will be developed. 
This activity will be 
conducted by the 
consultants under TA. 
The 
consultant/consulting 
firm will be 
responsible for 
development, 
operation, 
maintenance & 
handover of a MIS 
system for knowledge 
management, 
business networking, 
query management, 
loan application 
process and 
automating M&E 
process. This MIS will 
be accessible to key 
public and private 
sector stakeholders. 
2.4.5.1 Gather 
business requirements 
2.4.5.2 Create IT 
architecture 
2.4.5.3 Platform 
development, testing 
& deployment 
2.4.5.4 Maintenance 
till 5th year 
2.4.5.5 Knowledge 
transfer to AE through 
trainings, guidebooks 
etc  
2.4.5.6 Handover to 
AE 
 
1 operational MIS/digital platform 
with functioning modules  
Activity 2.4.6: Revision 
of applicable 
environmental and 
social policies of IDCOL 
and gender specific 
actions, if required 
• 
Revise guidelines, 
policies and action 
plans after scheduled 
review. 
 
• 
A pragmatic model for 
assessing whether 
guidelines and 
monitoring framework 
need to be updated 
will be identified in the 
operational manual. 
 
 
2.4.6.1 Schedule 
review of the 
documents 
2.4.6.2 Perform 
literature searches 
2.4.6.3 Model for 
assessing whether 
documents  needs 
updating must be 
determined in the 
operations manual 
2.4.6.4 Drafted 
documents to be 
shared with GCF for 
review and comments. 
Draft revised documents to be 
shared with GCF. The revised 
documents will be adopted under 
the programme after GCF and 
IDCOL Board’s approval

=== PAGE 115 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 112 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Activity 2.4.7: 
Review/audit of 
environmental and 
social safeguard 
compliances 
Monitor borrowers’ 
compliance to 
environmental and 
social safeguard 
compliances as per 
the lending 
agreement. 
2.4.7.1 Subcontracting 
of audit firms for 
independent 
evaluation if required. 
2.4.7.2 Design audit 
as per guidelines of  
programme’s ESMF 
 
2.4.7.3Conduct audit 
 
Audit report of borrowers’ 
environmental and social 
safeguard compliances 
Advisory support to the Textile Borrowers to shorten appraisal timeline 
Activity 2.5.1: Guiding 
and supporting 
borrower’s for faster 
disbursement  
Prepare guidance 
documents with step-by-
step explanation of 
process for (a)  IDCOL’s 
project appraisal/due 
diligence 
(b) Development of check 
list on list of supporting 
documents and guides on 
where and how they can 
be available. (c) This will 
be accompanied with a 
vendor list to provide a 
ready reference for 
sourcing equipment and 
seeking quotation. 
 
This activity will be 
performed by the 
consultants/consulting 
firms procured under the 
TA. The 
consultants/consulting 
firms will interface with 
the customers to make 
the credit application 
process user-friendly. 
2.5.1.1 Guidance 
documents 
 
2.5.1.2 Face to face 
guidance services 
 
2.5.1.3Compile 
probable list of 
vendors and integrate 
with document 
Guidance document for 
borrowers containing all relevant 
information  
Engagement with global clothing brands to increase EE adoption in textile sectors 
Activity 2.6.1 Round 
table discussions with 
global brands to align 
textile units to the 
brands’ sustainability 
targets  
Through round table 
discussion this activity 
aims to strengthen 
participation of global 
fashion brands in the 
programme to ensure 
wider penetration of the 
2.6.1.1 Select 
participants in 
discussion with 
fashion brands, trade 
bodies and SREDA.  
2.6.1.2 Organize 01 
round table discussion 
• 
Post event report 
• 
Attendance list 
• 
Photographs/Video 
• 
Press brief 
• 
Presentation materials

=== PAGE 116 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 113 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
programme activities in 
the textile sector. By 
partnering with the global 
fashion brands the 
programme will 
strengthen and promote 
EE adoption in the textile 
sector by establishing a 
healthy business 
environment, training the 
workers, improving social 
compliance status and 
building relationships 
among the 
manufacturers, exporters 
and importers, with the 
goal of increasing 
Bangladesh’s export 
market. 
between fashion 
brands, textile 
factories & policy 
makers 
Activity 2.6.2 
Stakeholder 
consultation in 
collaboration with global 
brands 
IDCOL in collaboration 
with the global brands will 
organize stakeholder 
consultation meetings to 
identify ways in which 
textile units can be 
encouraged to improve 
on the social and gender 
inclusion in workforce 
ratio to increase the co-
benefits impacts under 
the programme. 
2.6.2.1 Identify the 
participants 
2.6.2.2 Organize 
stakeholder 
consultation meetings  
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Meeting minutes 
• 
Attendance list 
• 
Photograph 
• 
Presentation materials 
Activities (Component 03&04, EE&C in RMG Sector) 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Financing for Energy Saving Equipment & Technology for RMG sector 
Activity 3.1.1 
Disbursement of USD 
200.00 million credit line  
for EE equipment in 
textile sector 
• 
IDCOL through the 
EEs (LFIs)  will 
extend USD 200 
million amount of 
loans to RMG 
borrowers for 
purchasing EE 
equipment over a 
tenor of 10 years with 
maximum 03 years of 
grace period. From 
the USD 200 million, 
GCF loan contribution 
will be USD 150 
million while the rest 
3.1.1.1 Prepare 
financing strategy 
 
3.1.1.2 Develop strong 
project pipeline & 
mapping 
 
3.1.1.3 Approach 
large number of 
prospective RMG 
borrowers 
 
3.1.1.4 Selection of 
end borrowers 
 
3.1.1.5 Approval and 
disbursement of USD 
Loans of USD 200 million 
extended to 
implementing entities

=== PAGE 117 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 114 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
USD 50 million will be 
co-financed by 
Executing Entities. 
IDCOL will revolve 
the loan over 10 
years. 
EEs/ LFIs will re-
invest the principal 
amount received on 
the GCF contribution 
which will to 
additional to GCF 
proceeds  
200 million against 
USD 50 million equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Preparatory activities & Baselining energy consumption of garments sector 
Activity 4.1.1: Devise 
operation manual for 
the program 
Develop manual 
elucidating stakeholders 
involved in the program, 
activities to be 
undertaken, roles and 
responsibilities etc. 
4.1.1.1 Understand 
program design 
4.1.1.2 Identify 
stakeholders and role 
in program 
4.1.1.3 Create 
program manual 
aligned with specified 
timelines 
 
1 no. operational manual  
Activity 4.1.2 Develop 
whistle blower policy for 
the program 
Develop policy to ensure 
stakeholders can flag 
fraudulent activities or 
activities which deviate 
from stipulations set in 
program manual 
4.1.2.1 Understand 
requirements for 
whistle-blowing 
4.1.2.2 Develop policy 
laying out procedure 
for recording and 
assessing any 
complaint and 
safeguarding the 
whistle-blower 
 
1 nos. whistle blower policy 
document 
Activity 4.1.3 Organizing 
programme launching 
event, 
Programme launch event, 
to introduce the new 
concessional credit line 
and it unique features 
dedicated to promote 
energy efficiency in RMG 
Sector 
4.1.3.1 Identifying 
invitees and sending 
out invites 
4.1.3.2 Other logistics 
to organize event 
4.1.3.3 Conduct event 
 
1 nos. program launch event 
Activity 4.1.4: 
Classification of RMG 
units  
Classify RMG units in 
Bangladesh based on 
scale and type of 
products to aid base 
lining process 
4.1.4.1 Conduct 
energy audit of 
sample plants 
4.1.4.2 Assess audit 
results to develop 
segments of RMG 
units based on scale 
1 nos. report on RMG unit 
classification

=== PAGE 118 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 115 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
of operations and type 
of products 
 
Activity 4.1.5: 
Consolidation of data 
and developing sector-
level baseline 
Data consolidation and 
develop baseline of 
energy consumption for 
RMG units in Bangladesh 
in the Year 1 to aid future 
assessment of sector-
level impact of program 
4.1.5.1 Consolidate 
data from energy audit 
4.1.5.2 Identify 
appropriate 
assumptions to ensure 
realistic extrapolation 
of audit results 
4.1.5.3 Undertake 
extrapolation of audit 
results 
 
1 nos. document containing data 
sheets (which includes baseline 
information) 
Activity 4.1.6: Prepare a 
list of renowned EE 
equipment with proven 
track records 
Interact with 
stakeholders/market 
players to prepare a list of 
equipment already 
implemented in 
Bangladesh and having 
proven energy savings 
results in the RMG sector. 
List will be integrated with 
knowledge platform and 
disseminated through 
other means to ensure 
adequate public outreach   
4.1.6.1 Identify 
relevant stakeholders 
4.1.6.2 Undertake 
discussion to identify 
energy equipment in 
use in Bangladesh 
and has evidence of 
energy savings 
4.1.6.3 Gather 
evidences of energy 
savings for each 
equipment 
 
1 nos. document containing 
equipment list 
Activity 4.1.7: Revision 
of baseline  
Revise baseline derived 
in previously based on 
energy audits of plants 
and estimate actual 
change in energy 
consumption due to 
program 
4.1.7.1 Conduct fresh 
set of energy audits 
4.1.7.2 Analyse data 
as per methodology 
established for 
previous baseline 
study 
4.1.7.3 Derive revised 
results of baseline 
 
1 nos. report on revised energy 
baseline for sector 
Capacity building of Local Financial Institutions (LFIs) 
Activity 4.2.1 Capacity 
building of LFIs 
(corporate office) 
 
• 
Conduct capacity 
building 
trainings/workshops 
to develop capacity of 
corporate/head office 
level officials to 
effectively conduct 
banking due diligence 
of loan applications 
for implementation of 
energy efficient 
technologies. 
4.2.1.1 Identify 
training needs by 
interacting with 
sample within target 
group 
4.2.1.2 Develop 
capacity building 
material to address 
needs 
4.2.1.3 Identify 
participants for 
workshop 
02 combined capacity building 
trainings/workshops with 
participants of 40-60 for each 
training/workshop from  LFIs. 
Participants will include 10-15 
corporate/head office members 
selected from each LFI

=== PAGE 119 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 116 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
Participants will be 
corporate/head office 
level officials (02 
combined capacity 
building 
trainings/workshops with 
participants of 40-60 for 
each training/workshop 
from  LFIs. Participants 
will include 10-15 
corporate/head office 
members selected from 
each LFI) 
4.2.1.4 Organize 
workshop for 
dissemination of 
capacity building 
material 
4.2.1.5 Feedback 
forms taken from 
participants and 
interactive discussion 
stimulated between 
trainer and trainee 
Activity 4.2.2:  Capacity 
building of LFIs (branch 
level executives)  
 
Conduct capacity building 
trainings/workshops to 
develop technical 
capacity of banking 
officials at branch/field 
level to efficiently monitor 
implementation of energy 
efficient technologies over 
the duration of repayment 
of loan amount.  (02 
combined capacity 
building 
trainings/workshops with 
participants of 60-80 for 
each training/workshop. 
Participants will include 
15-20 branch/field level 
officials selected by each 
LFI) 
4.2.2.1 Identify 
training needs by 
interacting with 
sample within target 
group 
4.2.2.2 Develop 
capacity building 
material to address 
needs 
4.2.2.3 Identify 
participants for 
workshop 
4.2.2.4 Organize 
training for 
dissemination of 
capacity building 
material 
4.2.2.5 Feedback 
forms taken from 
participants and 
interactive discussion 
stimulated between 
trainer and trainee 
02 combined capacity building 
trainings/workshops with 
participants of 60-80 for each 
training/workshop. Participants 
will include 15-20 branch/field 
level officials selected by each 
LFI. 
Capacity building of RMG units to enable implementation of energy efficient technologies 
Activity 4.3.1 Awareness 
building workshops on 
EE&C 
Conduct workshop to 
establish and 
disseminate business 
case of energy efficiency 
among RMG unit 
owners/top officials to 
help generate interest in 
owners in energy 
efficiency concept. (02 
workshops at national 
level with participants of 
60-80. These relevant 
participants will be 
4.3.1.1 Identify training 
needs by interacting with 
sample within target 
group 
4.3.1.2 Develop capacity 
building material to 
address needs 
4.3.1.3 Identify 
participants for workshop 
4.3.1.4 Organize training 
for dissemination of 
capacity building material 
02 workshops at national level 
with participants of 60-80. 
These relevant participants will 
be selected by IDCOL upon 
consultation with LFIs.

=== PAGE 120 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 117 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
selected by IDCOL upon 
consultation with LFIs). 
4.3.1.5 Feedback forms 
taken from participants 
and interactive 
discussion stimulated 
between trainer and 
trainee 
Activity 4.3.2:  Building 
capacity for technical 
skills of facility/utility 
managers  
Impart training to 
facility/utility managers 
on the technical 
requirements for 
implementing energy 
efficiency projects as 
well as necessary steps 
(i.e. equipment working 
condition, energy supply 
stability etc.) to be 
undertaken during 
operations to ensure 
theoretical energy 
savings are realized.(02 
combined trainings at 
with participants of 40-60 
within TA implementation 
period of 05 years. 
These relevant 
participants will be 
selected by IDCOL upon 
consultation with LFIs ) 
4.3.2.1 Identify training 
needs by interacting with 
sample within target 
group 
4.3.2.2 Develop capacity 
building material to 
address needs 
4.3.2.3 Identify 
participants for workshop 
4.3.2.4 Organize training 
for dissemination of 
capacity building material 
4.3.2.5 Feedback forms 
taken from participants 
and interactive 
discussion stimulated 
between trainer and 
trainee 
02 combined trainings with 
participants of 40-60 within TA 
implementation period of 05 
years.  
Activity 4.3.3:  Increase 
awareness and develop 
capacity of factory 
workers    
Develop awareness of 
workers on importance of 
energy efficiency and 
impart knowledge key 
skills required to 
implement energy 
efficient equipment in the 
RMG factory. (This will 
be done through 
inclusion of energy 
efficiency & other 
gender-social relate 
issues in regular 
trainings of the factory 
workers. Each LFI will 
ensure such inclusion in 
05 sub-projects during 
TA period of 05 years. 
Apart from it, each LFI 
will also arrange at least 
01 safety training for 
respective end borrowers 
within TA period of 05 
years. 
4.3.3.1 Identify training 
needs by interacting with 
sample within target 
group 
4.3.3.2 Develop capacity 
building material to 
address needs 
4.3.3.3 Identify 
participants for workshop 
4.3.3.4 Organize training 
for dissemination of 
capacity building material 
4.3.3.5 Feedback forms 
taken from participants 
and interactive 
discussion stimulated 
between trainer and 
trainee 
Each LFI will ensure such 
inclusion in 05 sub-projects 
during TA period of 05 years. 
Apart from it, each LFI will also 
arrange at least 01 safety 
training for respective end 
borrowers within TA period of 
05 years

=== PAGE 121 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 118 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Provide on-demand technical support to participating banks on monitoring, reporting and verification 
(MRV) of energy efficiency projects 
Activity 4.4.1:  MRV 
support provided to 4 
LFIs  
Enhance capacity of  
LFIs in undertaking MRV 
to assess the benefits 
realized from the project. 
This will be achieved in 
the form of technical 
trainings, resolve queries 
on request, handholding 
support 
4.4.1.1 Receipt of 
request for MRV support 
4.4.1.2 Resolution of 
queries by consultation 
with sector energy 
efficiency expert 
4 LFIs to be supported in MRV 
through trainings and 
handholding in real-life 
scenarios 
Activity 4.4.2: Develop 
standard solutions 
document based on 
experience of commonly  
issues encountered in 
previous activity 
Identify most commonly 
faced issues of banks in 
MRV 
and 
develop 
standard 
solution 
document 
addressing 
those issues to provide 
banks 
with 
troubleshooting 
guide 
and help them conduct 
MRV after tenure of TA 
consultant expires 
 
4.4.2.1 Consolidate all 
queries resolved in 
previous activity 
4.4.2.2 Prepare 
document listing query 
and resolutions 
1 document containing 
standard solutions to MRV 
issues commonly faced by 
banks 
Provide assistance to RMG units in loan application process 
Activity 4.5.1   
Conduct rapid diagnostic 
study to understand key 
requirements for loan 
application support 
Conducting rapid 
diagnostic study of key 
areas related to loan 
application process for 
which RMG units require 
handholding as well as 
nature of support 
required. This would 
involve conducting 
focused interviews with 
RMG units to understand 
the key issues they face 
in the loan application 
process for any 
conventional corporate 
loan instrument. 
Subsequently, identify 
kind of assistance RMG 
units require as well as 
provide 
recommendations LFIs 
on possible ways to 
simplify loan application 
process for RMG units. 
4.5.1.1 Discussion with 
sample RMG units to 
understand key issues in 
loan application 
4.5.1.2 Discussion with 
banks to understand 
constraints leading to 
issues for applicant 
4.5.1.3 Identify methods 
of resolving issues and 
provide 
recommendations 
1 nos. report which gives 
areas which require 
improvement and 
recommendations on the 
change in the application 
process required to increase 
participation by RMG units.

=== PAGE 122 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 119 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Activity 4.5.2  
Develop FAQs, manuals, 
check-lists, filled-up 
templates to elucidate 
loan application process 
Prepare guidance 
documents and filled up 
templates of loan 
application forms along 
with step-by-step 
explanation of process of 
loan application along 
with development of 
check list on list of 
supporting documents 
and guides on where and 
how they can be 
available. This will be 
accompanied with a 
vendor list to provide a 
ready reference for 
sourcing equipment and 
seeking quotation. 
4.5.2.1 Based on 
recommendations 
prepare loan application 
templates and step-by-
step guide  
4.5.2.2 Compile probable 
list of vendors and 
integrate with document 
1 consolidated document 
containing all relevant 
information  
Activity 4.5.3  
Respond to queries 
related to loan 
application process 
Respond to queries of 
RMG units related to 
loan application process. 
The responses and 
queries will be 
consolidated to a 
troubleshooting guide to 
provide ready reference 
to any borrower after 
tenure of TA consultant 
ends. 
4.5.3.1 Compile all 
queries of RMG units 
4.5.3.2 Develop 
troubleshooting guide 
based on resolution 
provided for queries 
1 consolidated document 
containing all relevant 
information 
Provide on-demand technical support for implementation to RMG units which have secured GCF funding 
under this programme 
Activity 4.6.1: 
Implementation support 
provided to  RMG units 
on request 
Resolve queries and 
provide technical support 
to borrowers to ensure 
effective implementation 
of energy efficiency 
intervention 
4.6.1.1 Compile requests 
from RMG units 
4.6.1.2 Identify activities 
required for resolution  
4.6.1.3 Handhold RMG 
units in implementing 
recommendations 
No. of RMG units with queries 
resolved 
Activity 4.6.2: Develop 
standard solution 
documents 
Identify most commonly 
faced issues of 
borrowers in 
implementation and 
develop standard 
solution document i.e. 
troubleshooting manual 
based on experience of 
common issues 
encountered in previous 
activity addressing those 
issues. The responses 
and queries will be 
consolidated to a 
troubleshooting guide to 
4.6.2.1 Compile all 
queries of RMG units 
4.6.2.2 Develop 
troubleshooting guide 
based on resolution 
provided for queries 
1 consolidated document 
containing all relevant 
information

=== PAGE 123 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 120 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
provide ready reference 
to any borrower after 
tenure of TA consultant 
ends 
Technology fair to create market awareness and develop access to energy efficient technology 
Activity 4.7.1: Organize 
technology fair  
In order to create market 
awareness and develop 
access to energy 
efficient technology, 
IDCOL along with the 
LFIs will organize 
technology fair to create 
interface between 
international 
manufacturers/suppliers 
of energy efficient 
equipment and 
Textile/RMG unit owners 
to stimulate market 
development for energy 
efficiency in the sector. 
The fair will be organized 
in Year 03 (since FAA 
effectiveness) with 
participation of minimum 
30 different technology 
suppliers and 
representation from 60 
different Textile/RMG 
units 
4.7.1.1 Identify invitee list 
for event and send invite 
 
4.7.1.2 Ensure 
interaction between unit 
owners, technology 
OEMs etc. 
1 nos. combined technology 
fair for RMG and Textiles 
sector 
Development of relevant policies, strategies & plans addressing energy efficiency 
5.1.1: Review of existing 
national policies, 
strategies & plans 
regarding Energy 
Efficiency 
• 
The Sustainable & 
Renewable Energy 
Development 
Authority (SREDA) 
was established by 
Bangladesh 
Parliament in May 
2012 as a national 
nodal organization 
for promoting 
demand-side energy 
efficiency and 
conservation in the 
country. 
• 
IDCOL will be 
working with SREDA 
on this component to 
identify the areas of 
national policies, 
strategies and plan 
5.1.1.1 Develop ToR for 
the consultant/ 
consulting firm jointly 
with SREDA 
 
5.1.1.2 IDCOL will 
conduct the procurement 
of the consultant/ 
consulting firm in 
discussion with SREDA 
 
5.1.1.3 The consultant at 
this stage will  be 
engaged in data 
collection, both from 
primary and secondary 
sources and will be 
analysing the findings 
against set criteria, which 
will be preliminary 
Stock taking report on existing 
national policies, strategies & 
plans regarding Energy 
Efficiency

=== PAGE 124 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 121 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
that can be further 
strengthened. 
 Initially there will be a 
stock taking of the 
information from both 
primary and secondary 
sources, which will be 
analyzed on the basis of 
the GoB’s target, 
available resources and 
international best 
practices. 
determined in discussion 
with IDCOL and SREDA 
5.1.2   Identify any policy 
gap & develop 
mechanism to address 
such gaps 
 
Subsequent to Activity 
5.1.1 the 
consultant/consulting 
firm will – 
• 
Identify the gaps in 
policy 
implementation. 
• 
Identify the barriers t 
that is restricting the 
performance of the 
existing polices to 
reach the country set 
EE&C targets.  
• 
Identify the areas of 
improvements that 
can be achieved 
under the 
programme. (at par 
with allocated budget 
and activity timeline) 
 
5.1.2.1 Consultant/ 
consulting firm will 
develop a methodology 
for conducting the policy 
implementation gap 
study. 
 
5.1.2.2 Consultant/ 
consulting firm will 
develop a draft report 
based on primary & 
secondary data 
 
5.1.2.3 Consultant/ 
consulting firm will 
finalise the report in 
consultation with IDCOL 
& SREDA  
• 
A comprehensive report 
on policy gaps (design or 
implementation) and 
institutional gaps, along 
with possible mitigation 
strategies. 
 
Discussion papers 
5.1.3 Development of 
relevant policies, 
strategies & plans 
Based on the finding 
from the report produced 
in activity 5.1.1 and 
5.1.2, relevant policies, 
strategies and plans to 
strengthen the country’s 
EE&C implementation 
capacity 
5.1.3.1 IDCOL and 
SREDA will conduct at 
least two stakeholder 
consultation 
meeting/workshops 
where the findings of the 
study conducted in 
activity 5.1.1. & 5.1.2 will 
be presented and 
through stakeholder 
discussion possible 
mitigation action plan will 
be finalised. 
 
   
• 
Workshop report where 
the discussion paper will 
be presented. 
• 
Draft policies strategies 
and plans developed 
• 
Further consultation with 
the stakeholders ( At this 
stage it is necessary to 
seek help from 
stakeholders to fine tune 
the wording, clarify 
meaning and make 
adjustments to the policy 
before it is finalized. )  
• 
Pictures/ Videos of the 
event 
• 
Attendees list

=== PAGE 125 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 122 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1.4 Implementation of 
the policies, strategies & 
plans developed under 
Activity 5.1.3 
When the stakeholders 
of the policy 
development process are 
satisfied that all issues 
and concerns about the 
policy have been aired 
and dealt with, it is time 
to finalize the policy. The 
final policy document 
needs to be formally 
adopted by the GoB with 
an appropriate record 
entered in to the 
minutes.  
 
Following formal 
adoption of the policy it 
should be communicated 
far and wide throughout 
the organizations and 
stakeholders. 
5.1.4.1 Consultant will 
prepare the upgraded 
policy document as per 
the outcomes of activity 
5.1.3. 
 
5.1.4.2 Relevant 
institutions of GoB will 
adopt the policy 
document. 
 
5.1.4.3 Policy 
implementation to be 
monitored by SREDA. 
 
5.1.4.4 Wide media 
coverage is to be 
ensured. Required 
communication 
documents will be 
developed for creating 
awareness among public 
& private stakeholders.  
• 
Policy documents with 
strategies and action 
plans. 
• 
Minutes of the event 
where GOB adopts the 
policy. 
• 
Media coverage. 
 
Capacity development & Market awareness on importance of EE equipment strengthened 
Activity 5.2.1 
Assessment of detail 
capacity development 
requirement at policy 
level 
As per the policy 
document prepared, an 
institutional capacity 
assessment will be 
carried out to understand 
the policy adoption & 
implementation capacity 
of the involved 
institutions. 
5.2.1.1 Analysis report 
developed on capacity 
need assessment of 
SREDA for short, 
medium and long term 
implementation of EE&C 
projects. 
 
5.2.1.2Consultant/consul
ting firm will collect both 
primary and secondary 
data. 
Institutional capacity 
assessment report 
Activity 5.2.2: Develop 
training manuals  
Following formal 
adoption of the policy, 
training sessions may 
need to be conducted to 
ensure that organization 
personnel are fully 
informed and able to 
implement the policy. If 
the policy is not well 
communicated it may 
fail. Hence a training 
manual will be developed 
5.2.2.1 Audience will be 
identified as per the 
assessment conducted 
under activity 5.2.1 
 
5.2.2.2 Training tools will 
be finalised 
 
5.2.2.3 Training 
materials will be 
developed  
 
Training manual/s developed

=== PAGE 126 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 123 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
based on the world best 
practices focusing on 
performance 
measurement, EE 
standards & labelling and 
financial support 
mechanism for 
implementation of energy 
efficiency projects 
(prospective business 
model with feasible 
payback and IRR). 
 
The training manual will 
ensure consistency in 
presentation of content. 
It may also ensure that 
all training information on 
skills, processes, and 
other information 
necessary to perform 
tasks is together in one 
place. This will be 
important for 
institutionalizing the 
expected outcome of 
component 5. 
5.2.2.4 Assess the 
training materials 
through demo training 
and collect feedback 
Activity 5.2.3: Organize 
03 training of the trainers 
(ToT) for Government 
officials  
Due to rotation, GoB 
officials often get 
transferred to the other 
departments or ministries 
hence it is important to 
develop pool of trainers 
who can continue the 
training or knowledge 
dissemination activities 
beyond programme’s 
implementation timeline, 
so that new batch of 
officials can continue the 
implementation of EE&C 
projects. 
5.2.3.1 Select 
participants for ToT (they 
are often senior 
government officials) 
 
5.2.3.2 Conduct at least 
03 training sessions for 
the trainers 
Post event report on ToT 
Attendees list 
Photographs /videos 
Activity 5.2.4: Organize 
10 training session for 
the policy makers and 
relevant government 
official by the trained 
trainers 
The trainers will now 
conduct training for the 
officer who will be 
responsible for 
monitoring and 
implementing EE&C 
policies. 
5.2.4.1 Select 
participants 
5.2.4.2 Conduct training 
5.2.4.3 Collect feedback 
and have an interactive 
session 
• 
Post training report 
• 
Attendees list 
• 
Photographs /videos 
 
Activity 5.2.5: Organizing 
02 dissemination  
Programme results will 
be presented in national 
conferences where 
participants from 
5.2.5.1 Dissemination 
workshops will be 
• 
Report on dissemination 
workshop. 
• 
Attendees list

=== PAGE 127 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 124 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workshops on 
programme outcomes 
 
government, professional 
associations, trade 
bodies, local community 
groups and other key 
stakeholders will be 
present for effective 
replication in other 
sectors. Through wide 
dissemination of 
programme outcomes to 
policy makers and EE 
practitioners and also the 
learning from 
implementing energy 
efficiency in textile and 
garments sector 
(financing scenario, 
business case and 
economic benefits, 
women involvement and 
role of government for 
long-term sustainability) 
the activity will ensure 
institutional capitalization 
of knowledge. 
arranged in collaboration 
with SREDA  
• 
Photographs /videos 
 
Activity 5.2.6: Develop 
tools for mass 
awareness on EE&C  
The main objective of 
this activity is to achieve 
mass awareness for 
energy efficiency through 
disseminating tools like 
media coverage, bill 
board. etc. Required 
communication materials 
on the importance of 
EE&C in the country will 
also be further 
developed. Information 
on the programme 
success will also be 
widely shared for 
awareness and 
replication through 
increased demand. 
5.2.6.1 ToR for a 
consultant/consulting 
firm to be prepared. 
 
5.2.6.2 Procurement to 
be conducted by IDCOL 
with support from 
SREDA. 
SREDA 
 
5.2.6.3Communication 
materials to be 
developed targeting both 
public and sector 
stakeholders 
 
• 
Communication materials

=== PAGE 128 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 125 OF 155

=== PAGE 129 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 126 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Arrangements for monitoring, reporting and evaluation for component 01 & 02 (EE&C in Textile 
sector): 
 
Monitoring: 
• 
IDCOL has a proven track record of highly efficient, effective monitoring and supervision of the 
previously led and current internationally funded country-wide program. This has been made possible 
because of the programme specific MRE plans devised and implemented by IDCOL suited to the 
needs of each programme.  
• 
As IDCOL will act both as AE & EE for the program, separate units of IDCOL will play different roles. 
Business Unit of IDCOL will be responsible for both the execution of TA support & concessional 
funding to the end borrower. As the AE, “GCF unit” of IDCOL will be responsible for administrating & 
managing the fund as well as supervision, evaluation and reporting. Monitoring will be ensured for 
each sub-project, to be financed under this program, in different project phases through multiple 
engagements: 
 
Stage 
Responsibility 
Monitoring action 
Sub-project approval 
stage 
Business unit of IDCOL 
Select eligible borrowers suitable for GCF 
financing & assess project viability under regular 
process 
Credit Risk Management 
(CRM)  
Ensure due diligence of borrowers and 
compliance with existing lending policy of IDCOL 
& other GCF facility criteria 
Management/ Board of 
IDCOL 
Approve funding proposals as per IDCOL’s 
vision & mission ensuring viability, integrity, 
governance, sustainability and other related 
aspects. 
Sub-project 
disbursement phase 
Business unit, Legal unit, 
Credit Administration 
Department (CAD)  
Ensure disbursement of GCF fund in line with 
FAA 
Sub-project 
implementation stage 
Business unit  
Regularly monitor the project through timely 
progress report from end borrowers and visiting 
the project premise  to ensure  smooth operation 
for anticipated mitigation impact at the project end 
 
Reporting & evaluation mechanism: 
• 
As per GCF’s mandate for a participatory MRE, there will be frequent reporting from the EE to the 
AE and the AE to the Fund as pre-determined intervals. As the EE, while the Business unit of IDCOL 
will conduct their investment activity as usual as the EE, the GCF unit of IDCOL which is a dedicated 
wing other than the business unit will supervise & monitor generation of supporting/documents for 
reporting & verification of different components under the log frame.

=== PAGE 130 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 127 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
• 
GCF Unit of IDCOL will periodically report to GCF on the energy usage & tCO2 reduction for each of 
its sub-project by compiling the data received from different sub-projects (by IDCOL business 
unit/third party M&E consultant through a common dashboard/online portal).  Periodic energy savings 
reporting will contain actual savings from ongoing sub-projects. In case sub-project loan is adjured, 
an estimate for energy savings will be calculated for the remaining life of the equipment. In order to 
set the baseline & energy saving potential through energy efficient equipment & technology, IDCOL 
will engage consultant/ energy auditor under TA component which will be used as reference at the 
time of each proposal approval. The textile borrowers will install energy measurement equipment at 
the factory premise to identify energy usage/savings for the equipment/technology financed under 
this specific GCF program & will report periodically to IDCOL/ third party M&E consultant.. The 
expected mitigation outcome will be verified through 1) Energy savings and 2) Increased production 
output by using EE equipment & technology. 
• 
The reporting and evaluation tools of the programme will be designed and facilitated by a technical 
assistance consultant under the TA activity as per the followings: 
Reporting tool 
Reporting line 
From date of consultant 
engagement 
All relevant reporting formats for: 
 
Energy savings & tCO2 reduction 
 
Gender 
balance 
and 
empowerment 
report (as per Gender Action Plan) 
 
All other relevant reporting formats 
From end borrower to 
IDCOL 
As per “Implementation 
Timetable” 
 
 
From IDCOL to GCF 
Detail methodology and format for interim & 
final evaluation/verification  
From IDCOL to GCF 
 
• 
The mid-term & final evaluation of the program will be carried out by Independent Evaluator for 
reporting to GCF. 
• 
Proper execution of the TA component, for which grant of USD 3.05 million has been requested, will 
be assessed under the Interim evaluation after the end of year 06.   
 
Arrangements for monitoring, reporting and evaluation for component 03 & 04 (EE&C in RMG  
sector): 
 
Monitoring: 
 
• 
IDCOL will play the role as an Accredited Entity (AE) & Local Financial Institutions (LFIs)/IDCOL will 
be the Executing Entity (EE).  
• 
LFIs will have direct relationship with their respective end borrowers i.e. the RMG unit. The monitoring 
action at LFIs level will be as follows: 
Stage 
Responsibility 
Monitoring action 
Sub-project approval 
stage 
Business unit of respective 
LFI 
Select eligible borrowers suitable for GCF 
financing & assess project viability under regular 
process 
Credit Risk Management 
(CRM)  of respective LFI 
Ensure due diligence of borrowers and 
compliance with existing lending policy of LFI

=== PAGE 131 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 128 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Approving Authority  of 
respective LFI 
(Board/Credit 
Committee/Management) 
Approve funding proposals as per LFI’s vision & 
mission ensuring viability, integrity, governance, 
sustainability and other related aspects. 
Sub-project 
disbursement phase 
Credit Administration 
Department (CAD)  of 
respective LFI 
Ensure disbursement of GCF fund in line with 
regulatory requirement, Banks own policy and 
FAA 
Sub-project 
implementation stage 
Business unit  of 
respective LFI 
Regularly monitor the project through timely 
progress report from end borrowers and visiting 
the project premise to ensure smooth operation 
for anticipated mitigation impact at the project end 
 
 
• 
IDCOL has a proven track record of highly efficient, effective monitoring and supervision of the 
previously led and current internationally funded country-wide program. This has been made possible 
because of the programme specific MRE plans devised and implemented by IDCOL suited to the 
needs of each programme.  
• 
As the AE, IDCOL will be responsible for administrating & managing the fund as well as supervision, 
evaluation and reporting. LFIs will have to approach IDCOL for approving their each sub-project. 
IDCOL will assess the eligibility of each sub-project (i.e. project of one RMG Units) as per the terms 
& conditions of the approved GCF program. The pre-specific format will be used to check the eligibility 
(format will be developed during Operation manual development stage).  
 
 
 Reporting & evaluation mechanism: 
 
• 
As per GCF’s mandate for a participatory MRE, there will be frequent reporting from the EE to the 
AE and the AE to the Fund as pre-determined intervals. End borrowers will report to Executing Entity 
i.e. LFIs and LFIs will then report to Accredited Entity i.e. IDCOL. IDCOL will supervise & monitor 
generation of supporting/documents for reporting & verification of different components under the log 
frame. 
• 
IDCOL will periodically report to GCF on the energy usage & tCO2 reduction for each of sub-project 
by compiling the data received from different sub-projects (by LFIs/third party M&E consultant 
through a common dashboard/online portal).  Periodic energy savings reporting will contain actual 
savings from ongoing sub-projects. In case sub-project loan is adjured, an estimate for energy 
savings will be calculated for the remaining life of the equipment. The baseline & energy saving 
potential of energy efficient equipment & technology will be ascertained by the borrower with the help 
of consultant/ energy auditor.  The appointment of the consultant/ energy auditor may co-financed 
under the TA. The End Borrowers will install energy measurement equipment at the factory premise 
to identify energy usage/savings for the equipment/technology financed under this specific GCF 
program & will report periodically to LFIs/ third party M&E consultant. The expected mitigation 
outcome will be verified through 1) Energy savings and 2) Increased production output by using EE 
equipment & technology 
• 
The mid-term & final evaluation of the program will be carried out by Independent Evaluator for 
reporting to GCF. 
• 
Proper execution of the TA component, for which grant of USD 2.30 million has been requested, will 
be assessed under the Interim evaluation after the end of 06 years.   
• 
Following milestones/reports will be ensured under this program as per AMA & project design: Same 
as for component 1& 2 mentioned above

=== PAGE 132 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 129 OF 155

=== PAGE 133 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 130 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
FOR COMPONENT 01 & 02 (EE&C IN TEXTILE SECTOR): 
The main type of risk is technical & operation risks associated with project & less social & environment risks. 
Based on the above assessment, the maximum risk category is Low-Moderate and, therefore, the risk 
category for the overall project is Moderate. A summary of the risk is as follows: 
Risk Factor 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
1. Demand risk and market risk in the textile sector which may 
slow down investment 
 
Credit 
Low 
Medium 
2. Political risks associated with changing attitude towards 
support & priority for EE in Textile 
Low 
Low 
3. Financial risks from Credit and Currency fluctuations 
Forex 
Medium 
High 
4. Social unrest affecting BAU scenario 
 
 
Technical 
& 
Operational 
Low 
Low 
5. Delays in project implementation due to time consuming 
process of review and clearance as well on ground 
operationalization. 
Low 
Low 
6. Potential technological risks like equipment failure & supply 
chain failure 
Low 
Medium 
7. Safety risks to equipment and employees. 
Low 
Medium 
8. lack of awareness and knowledge about the benefits of energy 
efficiency 
 
 
 
 
Other 
Low 
Medium 
9. Social risks like exclusion of social groups and indigenous 
communities from project benefits 
Low 
Low 
10. Gender risks regarding non-access to project benefits 
Low 
Medium 
11. Environment risks caused due to inadequate disposal of waste 
generated from textile process 
Medium 
Low 
12. Health Risks occurring from the processes in textile units 
Low 
Low 
 
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
CreditCredit 
LowLow 
MediumMedium 
Description 
Demand risk and market risk in the textile sector which may slow down manufacturing, marketing and profit 
making and fail to attract investment  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
While chances of demand and market risks are low given the potent role of Bangladesh’s textile sector in 
National and international clothing sector.  
IDCOL will take mitigation measures such as collateral loans for distributing loans to end consumers and 
also ensure hypothecation of energy efficient equipment finance if required. 
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
CreditCredit 
LowLow 
LowLow 
Description

=== PAGE 134 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 131 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Political risks associated with changes in directives that may modify their support and priority for energy 
efficiency in the sector. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Energy efficient measures makes business sense for end consumers as they achieve great savings over 
project life time, especially with concessional lending being proposed which mitigated this political risk. 
Moreover, in an energy deficient country like Bangladesh, significant climate goals to be achieved, 
government is very keen on promoting EE foreseeable future. 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
ForexForex 
MediumMedium 
Select 
Description 
Significant foreign exchange risk at the time of repayment of GCF fund in future as borrowing from GCF will 
be in foreign currency (USD) and re-lending to the end user in local currency (BDT). 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
GCF will provide USD loan to IDCOL & then IDCOL will re-lend it to end borrowers in local currency i.e. BDT. 
Considering the trend of 2.94% yearly devaluation rate of BDT against USD for the last few years due to a 
number of macro-economic factors, the repayment of foreign currency loan (USD) to GCF in the future may 
wipe out the concessional benefits of this program. If end borrowers have to bear the currency fluctuation 
cost then sub-projects financed under this program will not be viable anymore. The absence of long-term 
hedging market for BDT is another barrier for such currency fluctuation management. 
This risk will be addressed by partly lending in USD to the borrowers thereby reducing their BDT exposure 
and also, having currency risk fluctuation premium as part of BDT interest rate.  As Executing Entity for 
Component 1, IDCOL will bear the FX risk. 
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operationalTechnical 
and operational 
LowLow 
LowLow 
Description 
Social unrest caused due to external factors leading to disruption in the BAU scenario for textile sector 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Social instability caused from external influences can be mitigated through involvement and healthy relations 
with the NGOs, social welfare groups and associations working together for worker’s development and 
welfare.  
Compliance with the programme’s ESS will foster a healthy social relationship, ensure social participation 
and empowerment and reduce the discrimination amongst the associated community. The end borrowers of 
the fund will have the sole responsibility of mitigating this risk. 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operationalTechnical 
and operational 
LowLow 
LowLow 
Description

=== PAGE 135 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 132 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Delays in project implementation due to time consuming process of project review and clearance as well on 
ground operationalization. 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
IDCOL has a streamlined project approval process to reduce any delays in approval. To reduce the time 
consumed in installation, the supplier of the equipment will be considered responsible for installation. 
Furthermore, clear specifications of funding terms including documentation required for the project being 
eligible for this project will be communicated in a timely manner. 
Delay in project implementation by the end borrowers will be monitored by IDCOL as per this program 
monitoring framework. 
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operationalTechnical 
and operational 
LowLow 
MediumMedium 
Description 
Potential technological risks like equipment failure; supply chain failure such as delays or collapse of supply 
chain for technology or associated equipment; lack of qualified service technicians, etc. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Companies who have past experience of successful operations in Bangladesh as service provider through 
setting service centers and experienced maintenance staff will be preferred. Also, latest EE equipment can 
be procured from any of these reputed manufacturer / suppliers at discretion of end user/ customer. 
Skill development of the manpower for the operation & maintenance of the EE technology will be ensured 
through trainings and other initiatives.  
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operationalTechnical 
and operational 
LowLow 
MediumMedium 
Description 
Safety risks like accidents, injuries and incidents of fire and other occupational damages to equipment and 
employees. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
It’s mandated to ensure compliance with project ESIA which provides for requisite avoidance, mitigation and 
compensation measures; National Laws and Policies 72 and register with Accord on Fire and Building Safety 
in Bangladesh (Accord)/ the Alliance for Bangladesh Worker Safety (Alliance)/ the National Action Plan on 
Fire Safety and Structural Integrity (NAP) or any other regulatory requirement set by the Government as and 
when required. 
Synchronization with these will significantly reduce risks of accidents, injuries and incidents of fire and other 
occupational damages. 
Compliance with Regulatory Standards of the Ministry of Labour and Employment & IDCOL EHS policies and 
guidelines & clear contractual rules covering the need for occupational health and safety technical activities 
will be monitored. 
 
 
72 Environment Conservation Act (ECA) 1995; Environment Conservation Rules (ECR) 1997; Environment 
Court Act (ECA) 2010

=== PAGE 136 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 133 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
OtherOther 
LowLow 
MediumMedium 
Description 
Risks from lack of awareness and knowledge about the benefits of energy efficiency in textile sector and 
availability of the financial instrument for the same. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Under the technical assistance component of the program, IDCOL will arrange a number of national 
stakeholder engagement events to raise awareness about EE in textile and availability of a funding in this 
regard.  
The knowledge gap will be addressed through development of knowledge products, marketing material, 
workshops, and outreach programs to reduce and mitigate risks associated with lack of awareness about the 
existence and function of the financial facility. 
Selected Risk Factor 9  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
OtherOther 
MediumMedium 
LowLow 
Description 
Social risks like exclusion of social groups and indigenous communities from skill up gradation, trainings, 
workshops and job opportunities from new equipment and machinery. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Compliance with the Social regulatory frameworks in Bangladesh, IDCOL’s ESSF, GCF’s guidelines and 
the ESIA would ensure none of the listed social risk to occur at any given time. 
Selected Risk Factor 10  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
OtherOther 
LowLow 
MediumMedium 
Description 
Gender risks from lack of gender equity in trainings and skill up gradation required for integration of new 
equipment and machinery. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Gender Inclusiveness and equity will be promoted throughout project implementation. The project participants 
to comply with the National policies like Labour Act and Labour Rules, Women development policy 2011 and 
GCF’s Gender policy to ensure reduction and mitigation of gender risks. 
Compliance with Gender Action Plan of this program will ensure the participation of women in such capacity 
building initiatives. 
Selected Risk Factor 11  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
OtherOther 
MediumMedium 
LowLow 
Description 
Environment risks caused due to inadequate disposal of solid and liquid generated industrial plant 
modernization processes.

=== PAGE 137 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 134 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The ESIA identifies and analyses upstream environmental issues that may affect the project and the sector 
and suggests mitigation measures for the same. It also consists of an appropriate management plan for 
implementing, monitoring and reporting of the suggested environmental mitigation and enhancement 
measures. Pre-identification of environmental risks through ESIA would prepare to reduce the occurrence 
and intensity of these risks. 
It essential to comply with the ESIA as it conforms to the national regulations and IDCOL guidelines. 
Selected Risk Factor 12  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
OtherOther 
LowLow 
LowLow 
Description 
Health Risks from Respiratory & Dermal contact with hazards causing risk of lung cancer and injury to the 
bronchial tubes, dust particles, VOCs, heat and chemicals occurring from the processes in textile units 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Health risks are low level and have low probability to occur. Separate mitigation will not be required as this 
risk is already reduced due to the implementation of Energy Efficient equipment that are certified, user and 
environment friendly as compared to the existing equipment. The end-users will have to ensure that the 
equipment and its installation is compliant with programme’s ESIA and conforms to the national regulations 
and IDCOL guidelines. 
 
FOR COMPONENT 03 & 04 (EE&C IN RMG SECTOR): 
The program is exposed to majorly technical and operational risks, which includes environmental and social 
risks and the combined rating of impact and probability of the various risks is observed to be mostly 
Medium. A summary of the risks is given below: 
 
Risk Factor 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
1. Lack of capacity in equipment operation and 
maintenance (O&M) 
Technical & 
Operational 
Medium 
Medium 
2. Limited market awareness 
Medium 
High 
3. Disposal of inefficient machinery 
Medium 
Medium 
4. Reduced job opportunities for women & other social 
groups 
Medium 
Medium 
5. Health and safety related issues 
Medium 
High 
6. Credibility of executing entities 
Credit 
Medium 
High 
7. Default in re-payment by end borrowers (RMG 
units): 
Medium 
High 
8. Foreign exchange fluctuation 
Forex 
Low 
High 
9. Limited capacity in banks for due diligence of energy 
efficiency project 
Governance 
Medium 
High 
10. Long lead time in loan disbursement 
Medium 
Medium 
11. Reduced demand from client markets 
Other 
Medium 
High 
12. Decline in sectoral growth 
Low 
High 
13. Money laundering/Terrorism Financing risk: 
ML/FT 
Low 
High 
Accordingly, the overall program has a Moderate Risk Level due to greater incidence of Medium-level risk 
elements.

=== PAGE 138 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 135 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and 
operationalTechnical and 
operational 
MediumMedium 
MediumMedium 
Description 
Lack of capacity in equipment operation and maintenance (O&M): If penetration of advanced EE 
equipment low, adequately trained personnel for O&M of machine would be low. Also, availability of spares 
may be low and cost of spares high. Hence, overall cost of O&M would be high increasing skepticism of 
potential borrower and reducing uptake of EE equipment. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Technical Assistance (TA) activity designed to develop capacity within set of RMG units in O&M of energy 
efficiency equipment. Uptake and continued use of energy efficient equipment in targeted units under the 
programme will help create real-life demonstration of the benefits as well as prompt other parties to take 
up similar measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and 
operationalTechnical and 
operational 
MediumMedium 
HighHigh 
Description 
Market Awareness: If penetration of advanced EE equipment low, adequately trained personnel for 
O&M of machine would be low. Also, availability of spares may be low and cost of spares high. Hence, 
overall cost of O&M would be high increasing skepticism of potential borrower and reducing uptake of EE 
equipment. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
As part of TA activity, technology fairs proposed involving RMG unit owners and energy efficient equipment 
manufacturers, to generate awareness on technical and commercial queries. Also, capacity building 
sessions are planned as part of TA activities, to provide RMG unit owners, facility managers and workers 
with information on facets of energy efficiency relevant to their particular category. Additionally, LFIs are 
expected to pursue independent efforts to push the loan products in the market by improving overall 
awareness regarding the benefits of energy efficiency 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and 
operationalTechnical and 
operational 
MediumMedium 
MediumMedium 
Description 
Reduced job opportunities for women & other social groups: Women currently constitute 80% of work 
force of RMG units, most of them area employed in sewing area. Depending on the specific type of energy 
efficient equipment, there might be a need for re-skilling of women workforce. Re-skilling increases risk of 
reduced job opportunities. This can have an adverse effect on the prospect of women empowerment. 
Similar risks are applicable for other social groups, most of whom are unskilled to low-skilled. 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 139 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 136 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Under TA activity, capacity building activities are planned specifically for women workers which will 
disseminate relevant information for operating new energy efficient equipment. Under Gender Action Plan, 
targets for capacity building of women workers is also provided to ensure there is no risk of reduced job 
opportunities for women. Similar capacity building activities for workers are planned as part of the TA 
activity 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and 
operationalTechnical and 
operational 
MediumMedium 
MediumMedium 
Description 
Issues related to health and safety: Installation of new equipment can lead to increased health related 
issues due to generation of material harmful to the health of human beings. The deviation in regular 
operations for the workers due to installation of new equipment might lead to safety related issues. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Under TA activity, capacity building activities are planned for workers group to ensure they are better 
equipped to handle new energy efficient equipment and there is limited loss of productivity. These activities 
will help workers to get acquainted to the new equipment and impart knowledge on implication of improper 
handling on safety 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and 
operationalTechnical and 
operational 
MediumMedium 
HighHigh 
Description 
Disposal of inefficient machinery: The program aims to replace existing inefficient equipment with 
efficient equipment variant. The inefficient variants if discarded, can pose serious environmental issues. 
With no existing laws related to disposal of discarded equipment in place, proceeding with the replacement 
process may lead to detrimental environmental 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The ESIA identifies and analyses environmental issues arising out of disposal and pollution that may 
affect the project and the sector. It provides the guidelines under which potentially harmful activities can 
be undertaken, taking into account the possible mitigation measures. The guidelines are integrated into 
an appropriate management plan for implementing, monitoring and reporting of the suggested 
environmental mitigation and enhancement measures. It essential to comply with the ESIA as it conforms 
to the national regulations and IDCOL guidelines 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
CreditCredit 
MediumMedium 
HighHigh 
Description 
Credibility of borrowing entity: The key financial indicators for banking sector in Bangladesh indicates 
in spite of substantial credit growth, it is plagued with high default rates and banks are not able maintain 
the minimum capital adequacy norms. In the current scenario, the banking system can be considered be 
stable with medium level of risk of instability in the short to medium term. 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 140 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 137 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
As part of the feasibility study, due diligence of the LFIs has been undertaken. This has helped establish 
the current and future financial strength of the selected banks, ensuring assured repayment to GCF and 
flow of funds in subsequent tranches. 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
CreditCredit 
MediumMedium 
HighHigh 
Description 
Default in re-payment: Even though RMG sector has been witnessing three-year average credit growth 
of over 15% since 201673, credit risk in the sector continues to be high. Furthermore, sector is plagued by 
long and difficult legal processes to recover loans and continued case of defaults may lead to reduced 
interest of banks in lending to RMG sector units. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
As part of TA activity, templates for verifying energy and cost savings of project in the loan application will 
be prepared. This coupled with established process to determine financial health of a borrowing entity, will 
help in mitigation. Also, project design ensures periodic assessment by executing entities and accredited 
entities to monitor project progress, templates for which have been prepared as part of project preparatory 
activities. 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
ForexForex 
LowLow 
HighHigh 
Description 
Foreign exchange fluctuation: LFIs will be receiving funds from GCF in USD and in case it chooses to 
extend loans to RMG units in BDT, it would be exposed to Forex rate fluctuation risk. Since repayment 
from the borrowing units to the LFI would be in BDT and bank would be repaying the amount to GCF in 
USD, in case of fluctuation in forex rate, banks would have to repay more or less than original amount 
received. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Since program design leads to lower risk rating, it is recommended to ensure that structure of loan 
disbursement be continued during program implementation 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
GovernanceGovernance 
MediumMedium 
HighHigh 
Description 
Limited capacity in LFIs for due diligence of energy efficiency project: Under current scenario, bank 
officials have limited technical knowledge about energy efficiency, the requirements for energy efficient 
equipment, assessment of cost savings realized by installing such equipment and how the savings affects 
loan repayment. The lack of technical capacity can lead to incorrect assessment of borrowers and hence, 
increase risk of loan repayment. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
TA activity can help identify information gap among the personnel of LFIs and accordingly develop 
training material to bridge the knowledge gap. The knowledge material can be disseminated through 
workshops with branch level officials as well as mid management officials. Non-financial standardized 
documents will be prepared which will help establish the rules for engagement of the borrower and the 
LFIs. This will help create the necessary framework which can be adopted by the LFIs. 
Selected Risk Factor 10 
 
 
73 Source: Bangladesh Systemic Risk Dashboard (Bangladesh Bank, December 2018)

=== PAGE 141 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 138 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
GovernanceGovernance 
MediumMedium 
MediumMedium 
Description 
Long lead time in loan disbursement: To design an energy efficiency project, an independent energy 
audit required where entire process may take considerable time, spanning into 7-8 months in worst case 
scenario. Under such circumstances, the premise under which the loan proposal was prepared might 
change leading to invalidity of the project and accordingly, potential borrowing entities might be 
discouraged from pursuing such projects. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
In order to ensure faster turn-around of the loan proposal, evaluation of the proposal would be conducted 
by the EEs. As part of the project preparatory activity, the necessary monitoring framework and templates 
by which accredited entity i.e. IDCOL can comprehensively monitor and evaluate the fund disbursement 
by LFIs will be developed. Accordingly, development of adequate capacity in LFIs would be undertaken as 
part of TA activity 
Selected Risk Factor 11 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
OtherOther 
MediumMedium 
HighHigh 
Description 
Reduced demand from client markets: RMG is an export-oriented industry and change in demand 
pattern in the target market can affect the sector as a whole. In case of reduced demand, profitability of 
units would decrease leading to reduced finance availability to fund energy efficiency measures 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Since the risk arises from external factors which are beyond the scope of action of the stakeholders, 
tolerating the risk level is the only risk treatment option available 
Selected Risk Factor 12 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
OtherOther 
LowLow 
HighHigh 
Description 
Decline in sectorial growth: RMG sector is witnessing a period of tepid growth after decades of high 
growth along with effect of rising costs and stagnant output prices. Maintaining profitability under such 
scenario will be strained and accordingly, RMG owners can be disincentivized to undertake EE measures
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Since the risk arises from external factors which are beyond the scope of action of the stakeholders, 
tolerating the risk level is the only risk treatment option available 
Selected Risk Factor 13 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
ML/FT 
LowLow 
HighHigh 
Description 
Money laundering/Terrorism Financing risk: Finance disbursed under the program can also be 
utilized to finance terrorist activities, money laundering or prohibited practices by the banks or the end 
borrowers. While on one hand the intended objective will not be met, on the other hand the finance would 
be utilization would be counterproductive. Also, given the fact that it is a concessional line of financing, 
perceived probability of money laundering can also be high  
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 142 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 139 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Bangladesh has strong regulatory system to monitor financing issues of the Financial Institutions under 
the purview of central Bank i.e. Bangladesh Bank. The detail system has been explained in attachment 
Annex 02_Reply_”Compliance Note”.

=== PAGE 143 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 140 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening and the rationale 
for assigning such category. Present also the environmental and social assessment and management instruments 
developed for the proposal (for example, ESIA, ESMP, ESMF, ESMS, environmental and social audits, etc.). Provide 
a summary of the main outcomes of these instruments. Present the key environmental and social risks and impacts 
and the measures on how the project/programme will avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts at each stage 
(e.g. preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with GCF’s ESS standards. If the proposed project or 
programme involves investments through financial intermediations, describe the due diligence and management 
plans by the Executing Entities (EEs) and the oversight and supervision arrangements. Describe the capacity of the 
EEs to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for compliance monitoring, supervision and reporting. 
Include a description of the project/programme-level grievance redress mechanism, a summary of the extent of multi-
stakeholder consultations undertaken for the project/programme, the plan of the Accredited Entity (AE) and EEs to 
continue to engage the stakeholders throughout project implementation, and the manner and timing of disclosure of 
the applicable safeguards reports following the requirements of the GCF Information Disclosure Policy and 
Environmental and Social Policy. 
 
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including the 
development of an Indigenous Peoples Plan and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, prior and 
informed consent, pursuant to the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy.  
 
Attach the appropriate assessment and management instruments or other applicable studies, depending on the 
environmental and social risk category as annex 6.  
 
FOR COMPONENT 01 & 02 (EE&C IN TEXTILE SECTOR): 
 
IDCOL has conducted risk screening for the project using the IFC’s Performance Standards and World 
bank’s EHS Guidelines, besides national legislation of GoB and evaluate their significance level (i.e. level 
of risk and probability). The envisaged environmental and social safeguards (ESS) category for this project 
under consideration is Category B (medium risk category)74. The potential risks (refer to Section F) are 
few; low to medium in magnitude and occurrence and largely reversible using the prescribed mitigation 
measures and good international industry practices. 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
During the PPF activity, an ESMF has been developed by IDCOL to identify potential risks to the 
environment and social matters from the projects and outline strategies for managing those risks and 
minimising undesirable environmental and social impacts.  The programme’s ESMF will:  
 
 
 
 
74 IFC’s approach to risk categorization as adopted by GCF 
Provide energy efficient solutions 
to the textile sector of Bangladesh 
to reduce energy consumption in 
the sector and in turn the 
emissions of greenhouse gases
Encourage the deployment of 
energy efficient equipment and 
technology through planning, 
commitment and continuous 
improvement
Comply with all applicable laws, 
regulations and standards for the 
protection of the environment and 
society; and
Adopt the best practicable means 
available to prevent or minimise 
environmental impact.
Describe all monitoring 
procedures required to identify 
impacts on the environment; and
Provide an overview of the 
obligations of Project staff and 
contractors regarding 
environmental obligations

=== PAGE 144 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 141 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Audit 
An environmental audit was conducted on one of the textile factories to establish the past performance, 
environmental issues or non-compliances if any. It assessed the entire processing area and the area under 
which the utility section of unit operates. Environmental and safety issues with respect to liquid effluent, 
solid waste and emissions, as well as light, sound and ventilation were covered under this audit. 
Furthermore, the audit included assessment of energy conservation and energy efficiency opportunities 
at the factory. 
Documents to be developed during programme implementation  
Site-specific screening check-lists and Environmental and Social Management/ Mitigation Plans (ESMPs), 
based on the ESMF, will be prepared for each site where construction works will be implemented, publicly 
consulted and disclosed locally before procurement commences for the civil works. 
 
Key Environmental and Social Risks have been presented in detail with respective and highly specific 
mitigation measures in Section F. To summarise, the relevant risks and mitigation measures are:  
Discrimination/Exclusion of social groups 
Social exclusion may happen due to multiple reasons like structural/economic (iniquitous economic 
conditions, low wages, dual and segregated labour markets, historical oppression (colonialism), 
discrimination, absence of legal/political recognition, institutional/civic non-acceptance, self-exclusion, etc. 
These can be managed by complying with social regulatory frameworks in the country, sectorial mandates, 
IDCOL’s ESSF and GCF’s guideline for social inclusion.  
Gender based discrimination/exclusion 
Gender-disaggregated data will be used for monitoring outputs, outcomes and impacts during project 
implementation to ensure women’s participation in employment opportunities in the textile sector. Hence, 
the gender issues and mitigation is addressed in almost all the programme design documents namely, 
ESMF, Gender assessment and action plan, Logical Framework (Performance indicators) and the MRE 
Report. 
Occupational safety 
Bangladesh Accord was created to enable working in a fearless environment for concerns like fires, 
building collapses, or other accidents that could be prevented with reasonable health and safety measures. 
Besides, IDCOL’s ESS, GCF’s ESMF and the programme ESIA developed specifically for this case, 
identifies workplace hazards to minimize their risks with appropriate control measures and thereby avoid 
the financial costs of accidents & occupational ill health.  
Waste Disposal 
Under Section 12 of the Bangladesh Environment Conservation Act 1995 (ECA 1995) no industrial unit or 
project can be established or undertaken without obtaining an Environmental Clearance Certificate (ECC) 
from the DOE. The programme ESIA should be made to ensure compliance with the legislations/ 
regulations associated to solid waste management and Bangladesh Standards and Guidelines for Sludge 
Management and other related guidelines. 
Health Risks 
Health related risks will be minimal as the certified, user friendly energy efficient equipment will reduce 
exposure to most of the health hazards as they minimise handling of chemicals, heat, dust with automated 
machines. This will be a low-level risk with least chances of occurrence.  
 
Institutional arrangement 
The textile factories (EEs) with the assistance of the Project Management team from IDCOL (AE), will be 
responsible for ensuring sound environmental performance of the contractor in charge of construction

=== PAGE 145 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 142 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
throughout the project and ensure compliance with the ESMF. IDCOL will supervise and advice on 
monitoring and reporting under this component. 
 
Multi-stakeholder consultations  
Gender balanced scoping and validation consultations were conducted where distinguished guests, key 
and primary stakeholders from Ministries, associations, trade unions, industries, academicians and 
development professionals participated to state their insights and discuss several associated issues. 
 
 
The project management team will continue to monitor the programme implementation and timely report the 
developments as per the MRE schedule, i.e. an annual report on Environmental and Social compliance (as 
per the ESMF) to monitor the degree of implementation of the ESMF and an annual Gender balance and 
empowerment report. This will involve stakeholder engagement and knowledge dissemination across 
various stakeholder groups throughout the implementation. 
 
 FOR COMPONENT 03 & 04 (EE&C IN RMG SECTOR): 
IDCOL has undertaken risk screening of the project based on the framework provided in IFC’s Performance 
Standards and World bank’s EHS Guidelines as well assessed compliance with national legislation of GoB. 
Based on this assessment, the significance level (i.e. level of risk and probability) of each risk has been 
determined and subsequently a composite score has been assigned for the risk the project faces. 
Accordingly, the envisaged environmental and social safeguards (ESS) category for this project is Category 
B (medium risk category)75. As observed, the potential Environmental and Social risks (mentioned in 
Section F) are limited with low to medium risk rating. Also, these risks can be easily mitigated, by 
incorporating adequate measures in the program design. 
 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
As part of PPF activity, an ESMF has been developed by IDCOL as the environmental and social 
assessment and management instrument for the proposed program. The document provides a framework 
for managing environmental and social risks specific to the projects constituting the proposed program to 
minimise undesirable environmental and social impacts. The programme’s ESMF will aid in project 
development by executing entities in the following way:  
 
 
 
 
75 IFC’s approach to risk categorization as adopted by GCF 
Workshop on ‘Importance of energy efficiency in textile sector and its influence on 
environment, society and gender’ on 29th May 2019 in Dhaka.
Dissemination and stakeholder consultation workshop on ‘Impact of Energy Efficiency on Envi
ronment, Social and Gender in Textile Sector of Bangladesh’ on 29th July 2019, Dhaka
Help identify environmental and 
social risks specific to their 
projects
Apprise on  E&S regulations of 
GoB and related guidelines of 
GCF
Help develop plan to effectively 
manage identified 
environmental and social risks
Guidance on ensuring 
stakeholder participation in 
developing ESMP
Establish robust grievance 
redressal mechanism to ensure 
stakeholder pariticpation during 
implementation phase
Provide guidance on 
institutional mechanism 
required to ensure effective 
implementation of ESMP

=== PAGE 146 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 143 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Audit 
In order to understand environmental and social risks at program level, survey was conducted for 20 RMG 
units and further supplemented by survey of 150 households located around the selected REMG units. Under 
the survey, existing working conditions, health and safety hazards, social issues within factory premises 
were assessed along with interviews with unit workers and facility managers. This formed the basis for 
developing the ESMF. 
 
Documents to be developed during programme implementation  
Site-specific screening check-lists and Environmental and Social Management/ Mitigation Plans (ESMPs), 
based on the ESMF, will be prepared for each project site, publicly consulted and disclosed locally before 
project implementation. 
 
Management of key environmental and social risks 
Key Environmental and Social Risks have been presented in detail along with their respective mitigation 
measures in Section F. To summarise, the relevant environmental and social risks and mitigation measures 
are:  
1. Discrimination/Exclusion of social groups 
Probability of social exclusion occurring due to the program is limited since implementation of energy 
efficient equipment is independent of which social group is involved in O&M. Also, impact is medium 
since introduction of energy efficiency equipment would lead to minimal disruption since semi-skilled 
labour, required for operating the equipment, is readily available in Bangladesh. Hence, overall risk 
arising from this factor is low for the program.  
2. Gender based discrimination/exclusion 
Introduction of energy efficient equipment may require upskilling for female workers in the Garment 
factories, most of whom are in low-skill functions. Given the risk, capacity building activities are planned 
specifically for women workers which will disseminate relevant information for operating new energy 
efficient equipment and risk of reduced job opportunities for women is mitigated. 
3. Occupational safety 
Introduction of new machinery would lead to deviation from existing operations of workers and 
inappropriate handling may lead to safety related risks. This can not only lead to injury of concerned 
worker, but also unrest among worker groups or loss of life in the extreme case, causing high to medium 
levels of loss of productivity. In order to mitigate this risk, capacity building activities are planned for 
workers group to ensure they get acquainted with new equipment and gain knowledge on implication 
of improper handling on safety 
4. Waste Disposal 
Lack of regulatory bindings on disposal of inefficient equipment would mean unit owners will adopt the 
least cost method of disposal, which may not be environment friendly. Accordingly, ESMF provides 
guidance on safe disposal of all wastes arising from project activities, thereby minimizing environmental 
damage 
5. Health Risks 
Majority of energy efficient RMG equipment do not contain harmful or hazardous material that can 
adversely affect workers. Difference in generation of noise between efficient and inefficient equipment 
is also low. Hence, it is perceived that low health risks will occur as a result of the program 
 
Institutional arrangement 
A detailed institutional arrangement is provided where specialist in procurement, social development, 
financial management, environment etc. will support the project director and the project management unit to 
ensure compliance with ESMP. In order to ensure Capacity development of End-borrowers in effective 
monitoring and evaluation, specific capacity building programmes have been proposed as part of the 
program design. Also, disclosure of ESMP documents as well as periodic compliance monitoring reports is

=== PAGE 147 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 144 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
proposed to be translated to local language and disseminated to all the concerned stakeholders as well as 
made available to the public, through the website of the End Borrower and any other suitable online public 
platform. 
 
A Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) has also been developed that allows affected people to voice 
concerns regarding environmental and social impacts for sub-project activities through a predictable, 
transparent, and credible process, resulting in outcomes that are seen as fair, effective, and lasting. It 
provides the institutional structure and grievance resolution process along with insight on GCF’s perspective 
on GRM. 
 
Multi-stakeholder consultations  
Gender balanced scoping and validation consultations were conducted where distinguished guests, key and 
primary stakeholders from Ministries, associations, trade unions, industries, academicians and development 
professionals participated to state their insights and discuss several associated issues. 
 
As part of the program design, stakeholder consultations for a key part of development and ESMP, as well 
during its implementation. The design also provides scope of stakeholders reaching out to executing entities 
by establishing a robust grievance redressal mechanism. 
 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Provide a summary of the gender assessment and project/programme-level gender action plan that is aligned with 
the objectives of GCF’s Gender Policy. Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing the process 
used to develop both documents. Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and why) and key 
recommendations (how to address the vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment. Indicate if stakeholder 
consultations have taken place and describe the key inputs integrated into the action plan, including: how addressing 
the vulnerability will ensure equal participation and benefits from funds investment; key gender-related results to be 
expected from the project/programme with targets; implementation arrangements that the AE has put in place to 
ensure activities are implemented and expected outcomes will be achieved, monitored and evaluated. 
 
Provide the full gender assessment and project-level gender action plan as annex 8.  
 
FOR COMPONENT 01 & 02 (EE&C IN TEXTILE SECTOR): 
 
Gender assessments were done through analysis of various parameters like Socio-economic, Health & 
Safety, Sanitation and access to basic facilities to understand gender-based vulnerabilities and specific 
needs. The data from primary (industrial survey, KII, two national level gender balanced stakeholder 
consultations) and secondary sources (National statistics, progress reports and government published 
documents) was equated with the international relevant standards and policies for gap analysis.  
Key Findings: 
The assessments highlighted a number of disparities ranging from gender ratio, wages, job opportunities, 
education, financial independence, skill and trainings, health, safety, provisioning of basic facilities and most 
importantly decision making. Women have been observed to be far left behind in terms of job security and 
Scoping workshop on environmental, social and gender considerations for the program 
on 4th September 2019 in Dhaka.
Dissemination and stakeholder validation workshop on environmental, social and 
gender considerations for the program on 23rd October 2019, Dhaka

=== PAGE 148 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 145 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
financial independence. Unlike the RMG sector, textile is a male dominated sector with limited/negligible 
women participation at execution or decision-making level. 
Industrial survey under the PPF activity indicate that women workers are paid around 8 to 10% less on 
average than their male compatriots and have lesser opportunities in the sector. Their participation in 
trainings for skill upgradation and safety also has been quite low. Surveys show that women are under-
privileged due to lack of skills/technical knowledge and experience, attrition due to unplanned pregnancy, 
selective availability for single day shift, unwillingness to stretch for more hours at work, lack of higher 
degrees to handle supervisory/decision-making roles. 
 
Programme interventions: 
 
The programme encourages gender equality throughout the development and implementation phases i.e. 
gender balanced consultations, decision making and embedding gender specific benefits during the 
implementation of the project. Women participation as key stakeholders for project design and development: 
 
Table 17: Percentage of women participation in stakeholder engagement 
 
Stakeholder Engagement 
Stakeholder Type 
% of women participants 
Key Informants Interview 
(KII) 
Primary Stakeholders: 
Ministries, Associations, Multilaterals,  
Research/Academia and Industry 
 
27% 
Workshop/Group 
consultation  
Primary 
and 
Secondary 
stakeholders: 
Ministries, Associations, Multilaterals,  
Research/Academia and Industry 
Workshop 1 
23% 
Workshop 2 
24% 
Industry Survey 
Industry: 
Women led, Workers and Community 
Women led industries: 
35% factories surveyed have 
women leaders in capacities of 
Directors/DGM/CEO 
Executives/workers: 
30% 
 
Gender sensitive vision and objectives have led to specific log-frame indicators to embed gender inclusion 
in project design. The M&E log frame will measure the performance of the gender-based activities.  
Specific activities have been listed in the Gender action plan with strict targets to be achieved as per the 
given timeline. These programme activities for gender empowerment are: 
• 
Encouragement of women entrepreneur to venture in the textile sector 
• 
Prioritization of existing woman headed manufacturing units 
• 
Reducing the gender wage gap through unbiased employment as per the labour rules and 
encouragement of similar wages for men and women for similar work type 
• 
Facilitate women participation in the sector through provision of medical facilities, child care and 
sanitation facilities 
• 
Training and Skill Development for machine use and operating on programming software through 
development of training modules and periodic trainings and evaluation 
• 
Safety trainings while operating on new machinery/equipment through development of training 
modules and periodic trainings and evaluation 
• 
Grievance Redressed through formulation of grievance committee and establishment of grievance 
redressed process

=== PAGE 149 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 146 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
• 
Formulation of a Gender Balanced Project Committee with women participating in decision-making 
from IDCOL’s programme management team and textile factories 
 
The programme’s MRE scheme will measure outputs and track progress of gender specific activities through 
monitoring and reporting the achievement towards mid-term and final targets for each activity with a specific 
performance indicator and means of verification. Timely reporting will facilitate evaluation of the performance 
of gender based programme activities. 
 
FOR COMPONENT 03 & 04 (EE&C IN RMG SECTOR): 
The gender assessment was conducted by examining the engagement of men and women in the RMG 
sector in Bangladesh, labor force participation, access and control to technology and financial resources, as 
well as power relations. Such analysis enabled to explore into a plethora of factors namely Socio-Economic, 
Health & Safety, sanitation and access to basic facilities, which in turn facilitated to clearly understand the 
magnitude of adversities based on gender and the precise requirements necessary to mitigate them.  
Primary data was collected through industrial surveys, household surveys, Key Informant Interviews (KIIs), 
two national level stakeholder consultations etc. The data from secondary sources was gathered through 
relevant reports, about national policies, guidelines and statistics (environmental, social, gender), documents 
published by the government which focused upon potential risks identified in the RMG sector, historical 
studies and research on Energy Efficiency (EE) in Bangladesh’s RMG sector. This was compared with the 
international best practices, considering gender equity to identify and scrutinize into the gap prevalent in 
terms of gender considerations in the sector.  
Key Findings: 
The findings derived from the gender assessment emphasized upon the discrepancies prevailing within the 
RMG sector which essentially includes male-female employment ratio, wage discrimination, employment 
opportunities, financial independence & inclusion, occupational health & safety, lack of access to skill & 
trainings and basic facilities, welfare provision, social protection and freedom of association, collective 
bargaining and social dialogue  as well as playing a decision making role at the managerial level.   
Women in the labor force have been at the forefront of Bangladesh’s recent successful economic growth. 
They make up most of the workers in the ready-made garment (RMG) sector, the country’s flagship export-
oriented industry. However, even though the RMG sector has played a tremendous role for women 
empowerment, there has been discrimination in labour force participation in this sector.   
From data collected within factories, 4 out of every 5 production line workers are female, whilst just over 1 
in 20 supervisors is a woman.  This is mainly due to lack of education, trainings, technical knowledge and 
social responsibilities of women towards their families. Also, women are engaged more in sewing or as 
helpers compared to men. Less number of women are seen in RMG units working in cutting, quality control 
or supervising compared to men.  
Numerous surveys (both industrial and household) carried out under the PPF reflect that although gender-
based wage discrimination does not exist predominantly in the sector, discrimination exists in areas of equal 
treatment— women are forced to do overtime more than the men and the cut from the overtime allowance 
is more for women workers than men. Women workers face severe discrimination with regard to the scope 
of promotion and their career prospect is limited.

=== PAGE 150 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 147 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Participation of women is increasing in the Bangladeshi labor market, but socio-cultural norms envisage 
that women and men’s position is not equal. Women tend to be concentrated in certain low-paying, low-
skilled sectors in the garment industry, and within it, are often stuck in lower paying occupations such as 
sewing machine operators and helpers.  
Due to stereotypes regarding women’s and men’s aspirations, preferences and capabilities, employers’ 
perceptions of women’s and men’s skills and attitudes are affected. Thus, majority of women are not 
privileged enough to avail considerable access to enhancing their skillset and technical knowledge through 
training & experience and hence they remain ‘unskilled’ compared to their male counterparts. In addition, 
social and work place safety, maternity and pregnancy issues, unwillingness to work long hours/overtime, 
lack of transport facilities and the care burden all contribute to the fact of significantly limited presence of 
women engaged in more sophisticated employment positions such as managers/supervisors in the RMG 
sector. 
 
Programme interventions: 
 
During the course of the proposed programme, gender balance, equity and equality has been promoted all 
through the development and execution stages. This is inclusive of gender balanced participation in 
stakeholder consultations, incorporating gender induced benefits & enhancements during the design and 
implementation of the projects. The following illustrates participation of female stakeholders in various 
engagements undertaken within project planning and development phase:     
 
Table 18: Percentage of women participation in stakeholder engagement 
 
Stakeholder Engagement 
Stakeholder Type 
% of women participants 
Key Informants Interview 
(KII) 
Primary Stakeholders: 
Ministries, Associations, Multilaterals,  
Research/Academia and Industry 
 
25% 
Workshop/Group 
consultation  
Primary 
and 
Secondary 
stakeholders: 
Ministries, Associations, Multilaterals,  
Research/Academia and Industry 
Workshop 1 
15% 
Workshop 2 
11% 
Industry Survey 
Industry: 
Women led, Workers and Community 
Women led industries: 
0% factories surveyed have 
women leaders in capacities of 
Directors/DGM/CEO 
Executives/workers: 
40% 
 
Coalescing gender responsive perception and goals under the programme will enable to constitute 
indicators for the logical framework that in turn will establish gender inclusion into the programme design 
and evaluate their performance based on gender sensitive activities.

=== PAGE 151 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 148 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
The Gender Action Plan (GAP) within this assessment mirrors the logical framework of the project and is 
an integral part of project/program design. GAPs include clear targets, gender design features and 
measurable performance indicators to ensure women’s participation and benefits. Key aspects of the GAP 
are incorporated into project/program assurances to encourage buy-in from AEs and other partners. The 
activities listed within the GAP are as follows:  
 
• 
Encouragement of women entrepreneur to venture in the garment sector 
• 
Reducing the gender wage gap through unbiased employment as per the “Labour rules (2015)” and 
Encourage similar wages for men and women for similar work type as per the “National Wage 
Board”   
• 
Facilitate women participation in the sector through provision of: Medical Facilities, Child care and 
Sanitation Facilities 
• 
Training and skill development for machine use and operating on programming software through 
development of training modules and trainings and evaluation  
• 
Safety trainings while operating on new machinery/equipment through development of training 
modules and periodic trainings and evaluation  
• 
Grievance Redressed through Formulation of a project committee for addressing grievance and 
Establishing grievance redress process  
• 
Formulation of a project committee with women participating for monitoring of the activities under 
the program  
• 
Training & skill development of relevant Business Units of LFIs  
 
The programme monitoring, reporting, evaluation & verification procedures will quantify and evaluate outputs 
and track progress through reporting the results by aligning them with mid-term and final targets for each 
activity with a specific performance indicator and means of verification. Periodic and prompt reporting in 
accordance with the designated timeline will enable to actualize evaluation of the performance of gender 
based project/programme activities.  
 
 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
• 
IDCOL, as a development financial institution under the ownership of Ministry of Finance of 
Government of Bangladesh, has substantial experience in financing and monitoring industrial 
development projects and management of funds provided by development organizations like World 
Bank, ADB, JICA .etc. The projects funded by IDCOL have successfully been accounted and audited 
as per the international standards, in line with national procedures in financial management.  
 
Financial management of the program will be guided by IDCOL’s own accounting policies & 
procedures, as well as procedures related to the financial & operational aspects of project 
management administration. When not acting as an Executing entity, IDCOL, as an AE will comply 
with the terms & conditions set forth for financial management of GCF proceeds as per the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA). Again for Component 03, IDCOL in its role as AE will ensure 
that the executing entities i.e. LFIs/IDCOL will comply with internationally accepted accounting 
standards for the project related activities at their end.

=== PAGE 152 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 149 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 
The energy efficiency component procured under this program will be the subject matter of the loan 
financing. Thus the procurement will be carried out by the end borrower for their respective projects 
as per the business as usual practice.  Along with the disbursement request/procurement application, 
the end borrowers will be submitting the evidences/supporting for implementation of the respective 
procurement under the programme. These will be screened by IDCOL/LFIs to approve the loan 
application.  
 
After the disbursement of GCF fund as per the implementation arrangement in section B4, 
IDCOL/LFIs will monitor that the proceeds of the funding are efficiently utilized for intended purposes 
only and in compliance with GCF and GoB. Fund disbursement and repayment will be conducted as 
per scheduled (annex 14).   
 
IDCOL has an independent internal audit division, reporting directly to the Board, to add value 
through an independent appraisal of all IDCOL’s financial operations and activities. The result of such 
appraisal is improved operational efficiency, risk analysis & management and internal control system 
that will ensure achieving IDCOL’s corporate objectives. Moreover, IDCOL’s financial statements are 
audited externally by a qualified, internationally recognized auditing firm, in accordance with 
international standards of auditing. This firm is competitively selected by IDCOL. 
 
As per the AMA, the procurement of goods and services for funded activities, whether by the 
Accredited Entity itself, and Executing Entity or by a third party, shall be done in accordance with the 
rules, policies and procedures of the Accredited Entity i.e. IDCOL to the extent and scope of its 
Accreditation. Thus IDCOL will follow its own “Procurement Policy” for the operations of this program. 
Procurement audit is conducted periodically by the internal audit division to ensure proper compliance 
with the policy.  
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure 
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and 
programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in 
confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the 
document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.  
 
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. 
 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
  
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 153 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 150 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) : Attached 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable- Attached  
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format- Attached  
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan – Attached  
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones – Attached  
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)  Attached  
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan-Attached  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan- Attached   
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)- Attached   
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan- Attached  
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan- Attached as part of “Program Indicator, Reporting & 
Monitoring Framework” 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request- Attached   
☐ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule -
Attached 
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  GHG Emission Methodology Attached 
☒ 
Annex 23  Risk Assessment Report Attached

=== PAGE 154 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 151 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
 
 
Acronyms 
Acronym 
Full form 
ADB 
Asian Development Bank  
ADR 
Advance Deposit Ratio  
AE 
Accredited Entity  
AFD 
Agence Francaise De Development  
AMA 
 Accredited Master Agreement  
BAU 
Business as usual 
BB 
Bangladesh Bank  
BCCSAP 
Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan  
BDBL 
Bangladesh Development Bank Limited 
BDT 
Bangladesh Taka 
BERC 
Bangladesh Energy Regulatory Commission  
BGMEA 
Bangladesh Garments Manufacturers and Exporters association 
BIFCL 
Bangladesh Industrial Finance Company Limited 
BIFFL 
Bangladesh Infrastructure Finance Fund Limited 
BISR 
Bangladesh Institute of Social Research 
BKMEA 
Bangladesh Knit Manufacturers and Exporters association 
BTMA 
Bangladesh Textile Mills Association  
BTMC 
Bangladesh Textile Mills Corporation  
CAD 
Credit Administration Department  
CAGR 
Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CAR 
Capital Adequacy Ratio  
CCPP 
Construction of Combined Cycle Power Plant 
CEO 
Chief Executive Officer 
CLASP 
Collaborative Labelling and Appliance Standards Program  
CN 
Concept Note 
CO2 
Carbon dioxide 
CRM 
Credit Risk Management 
CSR 
Corporate Social Responsibility 
DAE 
Direct Access Entity  
DFI 
Development Finance Institution  
DFID 
Department for International Development 
DoE 
Department of Environment 
DSCR 
Debt Service Coverage Ratio 
E&S  
Environmental and social 
ECA 
Environment Conservation Act  
ECC 
Environment Clearance Certificate  
ECR 
Environment Conservation Rules  
 
Annex 24  Environment Audit Report  Attached

=== PAGE 155 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 152 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Acronym 
Full form 
EDA 
Enhanced Direct Access  
EE 
Energy Efficient 
EE&C  
Energy Efficiency and Conservation  
EE&CPF 
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Promotion Financing  
EECPF 
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Promotion Financing  
EIRR 
Economic Internal Rate of Return  
EPZs 
Export Processing Zones  
ERD 
Economic Relations Division 
ESIA 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environmental and Social Management/ Mitigation Plans  
ESMS 
Environmental and Social Management System  
ESS 
Environment and Social Safety 
ESSF 
Environmental and Social Safety framework  
ETP 
Effluent Treatment Plant  
EY 
Ernst & Young  
FAA 
Funded Activity Agreement  
FBCCI 
Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce & Industries 
FCBs 
Foreign Commercial Banks  
FIRR 
Financial Internal Rate of Return  
FIs 
Financial Institutions  
FP 
Funding Proposal 
FSSP 
Financial Sector Support Project  
FY 
Financial year 
GCF 
Green Climate Fund 
GCPF 
Bangladesh, Global Climate Partnership Fund  
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GHG 
Green House Gas 
GIZ 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
GoB 
Government of Bangladesh 
GTSF 
Global Trade Supplier Finance  
GTF 
Green Transformation Fund  
GWh 
Giga watt hour 
ICB 
Investment Corporation of Bangladesh 
ICCCAD 
International Centre for Climate Change and Development 
ICS 
Improved Cook Stove  
IDA 
International Development Association  
IDCOL 
Infrastructure Development Company Limited  
IDP 
Information Disclosure  
IEA  
International Energy Agency 
IP 
Implementation Partner 
IEEF 
Industrial and Energy Efficiency Finance

=== PAGE 156 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 153 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Acronym 
Full form 
IEEFP 
Energy Efficiency Finance Programme  
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IFI 
International financing institution 
INDC 
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution 
IP 
Implementing Partner 
IRR 
Internal Rate of Return 
JICA 
Japan International Cooperation Agency 
KIIs 
Key Informant Interviews  
KPIs 
key Performance Indicators  
RFP 
Request for Proposal 
kWh 
Kilowatt Per Hour 
L/C 
Letter of Credit 
LED 
Light-emitting Diode 
LFI 
Local Financial Institutions 
LNG 
Liquefied Natural Gas 
LTFF 
Long Term Financing Facility  
M&E  
Monitoring and evaluation 
MIS 
Management Information System 
MoEF 
Ministry of Environment and Forests  
MoEFCC 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  
MoLE 
Ministry of Labour and employment 
MoPEMR 
Ministry of Power Energy and Mineral Resources 
MoT 
Ministry of Textile 
MoU 
Memorandum of understanding 
MoV 
Means of Verification  
MoWCA 
Ministry of Women and Children Affairs 
MRV 
Monitoring, Reporting and Verification 
MT 
Million Tonne 
MTOE 
Million tonnes of oil equivalent 
NAP 
National Action Plan  
NAPA 
National Adaptation Programme of Action 
NBFI 
Non-Bank Financial Institution  
NDA 
National Designated Authority  
NDC 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
NIP 
New Industrial Policy  
NPV 
Net Present Value  
OE 
Original Equipment  
PaCT 
Partnership for Clean Textile  
PC 
Power Cell 
PCBs 
Private Commercial Banks  
PFI 
Participating Financial Institution  
PFI 
Power Factor Improvement

=== PAGE 157 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 154 OF 155 
 
 
 
 
Acronym 
Full form 
PLS 
Profit-Loss Sharing  
PO 
Partner Organizations  
PPF 
Project Preparation facility 
PPP 
Public Private Partnership 
PSMF 
Power System Master Plan 
PSMP 
Power System Master Plan 
PTS 
Primary Textile Sector  
RE 
Renewable Energy 
REB 
Rural Electricity Board 
RMG 
Readymade garment 
ROA 
Return on asset 
ROE 
Return on equity 
SCB 
State Commercial Bank  
SDBs 
Specialized Banks  
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SHS 
Solar Home System  
SLL 
Shuttle less looms  
SMEs 
Small and medium enterprises 
SOCB 
State Owned Commercial Banks  
SREDA 
Sustainable & Renewable Energy Development Authority  
SSL 
Shuttle Less Looms  
TA 
Technical Assistance  
TCF 
Trillion Cubic Feet 
TOE 
Tonnes of oil equivalent 
MRE 
Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
UN 
United Nations 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme 
UNFCCC 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
USD 
United States Dollar 
VFD 
Variable Frequency Drive 
VSDs 
Variable Speed Drives

=== PAGE 158 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 155 OF 155

=== PAGE 159 ===
156

=== PAGE 160 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Promoting private sector investment through large scale 
adoption of energy saving technologies and equipment for 
Textile and Readymade Garment (RMG) sectors of 
Bangladesh 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Private 
Accredited entity 
Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Bangladesh 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, October 9, 2020 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Bengali 
Explanation on language 
Bengali is the official and national language of Bangladesh 
and spoken by the beneficiary communities. 
Link to disclosure 
Environmental and Social Management Framework for 
RMG 
English:  
https://idcol.org/download/Environment%20and%20Social%2
0Management%20Framework_RMG%20(English).pdf 
Bengali:  
https://idcol.org/download/Environment%20and%20Social%2
0Management%20Framework-RMG%20(Bengali).pdf 
157

=== PAGE 161 ===
Environmental and Social Management Framework for 
Textile 
English: 
https://idcol.org/download/Environment%20and%20Social%2
0Management%20Framework_Textile%20(English).pdf 
Bengali: 
https://idcol.org/download/Environment%20and%20Social%2
0Management%20Framework-%20Textile%20(Bengali).pdf  
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
2 project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework: Promoting private sector 
investment through large scale adoption of energy saving 
technologies and equipment for garment sector” and the 
“Environmental and Social Management Framework: 
Promoting private sector investment through large scale 
adoption of energy saving technologies and equipment for 
textile sector of Bangladesh.” 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, October 9, 2020 
Place 
Hard copies of the disclosure were made available at the 
IDCOL headquarters, located at:  
Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) 
Head office  
UTC Building, 16th Floor, 8 Panthapath, Kawran Bazar, 
Dhaka-1215, Bangladesh 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
TBD 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, November 9, 2020 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
________ 
158

=== PAGE 162 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 159 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP150 
Proposal name: 
Promoting private sector investment through large scale 
adoption of energy saving technologies and equipment for 
Textile and Readymade Garment (RMG) sectors of Bangladesh 
Accredited entity: 
Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential   
 
 
 
 
 Scale: Medium/High 
1. 
Bangladesh, in South Asia, forms the larger and eastern part of the Bengal region. It is 
situated in one of the largest deltas in the world, formed by a dense network of the 
distributaries of the rivers Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna, and more than 230 major rivers 
and their tributaries. The total land area of 147,570 square kilometres consists mostly of low 
and flat land. With a population exceeding 166.5 million, Bangladesh is ranked as one of the 
most densely populated countries in the world.  
2. 
Although its status is being reviewed, Bangladesh is currently regarded as a least 
developed country. The country’s economy recorded remarkable growth since 2010 as a result 
of strong private consumption and investment. The country’s real gross domestic product (GDP) 
grew from 7.3 per cent in 2017 to 8.2 per cent in 2019.  
3. 
Bangladesh is frequently cited as one of the countries most vulnerable to climate change 
because of its geographic location, the dominance of floodplains, and low elevation from the sea, 
among other things. The country experiences severe climate change impacts such as higher 
summer temperature, irregular monsoon and erratic rainfall patterns, floods and droughts, 
coastal and riverbank erosion, and salinity intrusion along the coast. 
4. 
Although the total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of Bangladesh amount to less than 
0.35 per cent of total annual global emissions, the country’s fossil fuel-related emissions have 
grown by 6.8 per cent since 2000. GHG emissions per capita increased from 0.18 tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) in 1997 to 0.47 tCO2eq in 2014, with an average annual 
growth rate of 6 per cent. The increase was driven by rapid industrial expansion, and growth of 
energy production from fossil fuel sources.  
5. 
Bangladesh is the world’s second-largest apparel producer after China. Textile 
industries are one of the fastest growing and among the most important industries of the 
country. The sector’s contribution to GDP has grown from 3 per cent in 1991 to more than 13 
per cent in 2018 representing more than 80 per cent of the country’s annual exports. The textile 
industry (along with the garment industry) is one of the largest employers in the country, 
employing over 4 million people, or 6 per cent of the country’s industrial employment. 
6. 
The industrial sector in Bangladesh accounts for 47.8 per cent of commercial energy 
consumption, predominantly in the form of natural gas and electricity. However, the sector is 
not efficient in its energy use because of continuous usage of old or poorly maintained machines 
and inadequate energy management. The industries’ lack of interest in energy-efficient and 
conservation technologies is assessed to be due to inadequate financial incentives, and lack of

=== PAGE 163 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 160 
 
 
technical expertise. If the economic growth persists with the current industrial energy intensity, 
Bangladesh could face difficulties in managing the rising energy demand and consequently in 
achieving its GHG emission reduction targets under the Paris Agreement. 
7. 
Although energy-saving opportunities are present across the various industrial sectors, 
the textile sector (spinning, weaving, knitting and dyeing), and ready-made garment (RMG) 
sector (cutting, sewing, dyeing, ironing, and finishing) in particular are considered to have 
substantial scope for energy savings. The RMG sector is the most energy intensive of all industry 
sectors, consuming 15.4 per cent of the total industrial energy demand in Bangladesh. The 
textile sector follows the RMG subsector, with its demand representing 12.4 per cent of the 
industry sector.1 
8. 
Investment in energy efficiency is regarded by textile and RMG factories as an additional 
financial burden so is rarely undertaken, especially in small to medium-sized factories. The 
feasibility study conducted for the textile sector suggests that the larger textile facilities are 
typically 10–15 per cent more energy efficient than those in the small or medium categories, 
with efficiency differences being as high as 50 per cent in some cases. In the RMG sector, small 
factories having small-scale investments are more oriented towards increasing short-term 
profits than increasing productivity and profits in the long run. 
9. 
The proposed programme “Promoting private sector investment through large scale 
adoption of energy saving technologies and equipment for Textile and Readymade Garment 
(RMG) sectors of Bangladesh” offers concessional funding to local financial institutions to on-
lend to private sector textile and RMG entities to procure energy-saving equipment and 
technology for replacement or expansion with the aim of reducing GHG emissions from the 
subsectors, and ultimately from Bangladesh. The programme period is 20 years including an 
implementation period of 11 years. 
10. 
IDCOL of Bangladesh is the accredited entity (AE). In addition to IDCOL, four local 
financial institutions (LFIs) will be executing entities (EEs), BRAC Bank Limited, City Bank 
Limited, IDLC Finance Limited, and South East Bank Limited. The Sustainable and Renewable 
Energy Development Authority (SREDA) under Ministry of Power, Energy & Mineral Resources 
will be the implementing entity for the policy component. 
11. 
The programme is comprised of five components: two funding components and three 
technical assistance (TA) components. 
12. 
Component 1 entails USD 133.0 million of financing for energy-saving equipment and 
technologies for the textile sector. Under component 1, IDCOL, as the EE, will make GCF funds 
available to the private textile manufacturing businesses in the form of senior loans on 
concessional terms together with its own contribution of USD33.0 million, which IDCOL would 
provide from its own account or mobilize from other sources. Disbursements will be made from 
IDCOL in USD and local currency for the businesses to procure energy-efficient equipment and 
technologies. Technical eligibility criteria require a 15 per cent energy-saving potential for the 
equipment to be funded. Technical eligibility will be confirmed by IDCOL based on 
manufacturers’ catalogues or certifications, or energy auditors’ reports. Component 1 will 
finance replacement and expansion of existing equipment and facilities. The maximum amount 
of a single loan is set as USD 20 million. 
13. 
In component 2, TA amounting to USD 3.05 million is to be provided from GCF to 
support IDCOL’s funding activities in component 1. This will help IDCOL to establish an 
implementation strategy and build the capacity of IDCOL staff for efficient adoption of energy-
efficient technologies as well as effective monitoring, reporting and verification of energy 
 
1 Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan up to 2030 (2015) prepared by SREDA and the Power Division, 
under the Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources

=== PAGE 164 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 161 
 
 
savings and GHG emission reductions. Market awareness of energy-efficient equipment and 
technologies will be enhanced to generate a project pipeline and for swift implementation of the 
programme. Government agencies will be approached so that challenges identified during the 
programme can be shared to develop enabling policies and regulations for investments in 
energy efficiency in Bangladesh. 
14. 
Component 3 provides USD 200.0 million of financing for energy-saving equipment and 
technologies for the RMG sector. As EEs, the four LFIs will on-lend the GCF concessional funding 
in USD to private sector RMG businesses for investment in energy-saving equipment and 
technologies. IDCOL, as the AE, will channel the GCF funds to the four LFIs. The LFIs will provide 
an additional USD 50 million on their own account in both USD and local currency in total. 
Technical eligibility criteria require a 10 per cent energy-saving potential for the equipment to 
be funded. Similar to component 1, technical eligibility will be confirmed by the LFIs based on 
manufacturers’ catalogues or certifications, or energy auditors’ reports. Component 3 will 
finance replacement and expansion of existing equipment and facilities. The maximum amount 
of a single loan is set as USD 20 million. 
15. 
Component 4 is for TA amounting to USD 2.3 million to support the lending activities of 
the four LFIs in component 3, and to promote energy efficiency investments in the RMG sector. 
This component includes support for the EEs to undertake preparatory work for 
implementation, and capacity-building for EE staff and private sector entities in the RMG sector. 
Technical support for the EEs and private sector entities is also provided for monitoring, 
reporting and verification of the savings achieved and for programme implementation. In 
addition, this component envisions a technology fair to be held within three years of the start of 
implementation, to promote market awareness and access to EE technology. This knowledge 
dissemination event will cover both the textile and RMG subsectors. 
16. 
Component 5 is for TA amounting to USD 1.15 million to strengthen the regulatory and 
institutional framework at the national level to overcome the operational constraints related to 
implementing energy efficiency and conservation in the two subsectors in the country. It offers 
technical support for assessing the existing regulatory framework and preparing policies and 
strategies conducive to the promotion of energy efficiency in Bangladesh. It further includes 
capacity development and training of government officials and other stakeholders on energy 
efficiency measures and financing. The component will be implemented by IDCOL, as the EE, 
and SREDA. 
17. 
The programme requires total financing of USD 340.5 million, of which GCF is requested 
to provide a USD 250.0 million loan and USD 6.48 million TA grant. The balance of USD 84.02 
million is to be provided by IDCOL (a USD 33.0 million loan plus USD 1.0 million contribution in 
kind), the four LFIs (a USD 50.0 million loan) and SREDA (a USD 20,000 in-kind contribution). 
The GCF loans have a tenor of 20 years including a 5-year grace period. 
18. 
The AE estimates that the programme will reduce or avoid about 18.6 MtCO2eq of GHG 
emissions in total over the 20-year lifetime of the investments by offering financial and 
technical resources to private companies operating in the textile and RMG sectors to access 
investment opportunities for energy-saving technology upgrades. In that estimation, 13.1 
MtCO2eq, or 70 per cent of the programme’s target GHG emission reduction will be achieved in 
the RMG sector while 5.5 MtCO2eq or 30 per cent will be achieved in the textile sector. 
19. 
The estimation is made taking into account the emission factors of the major sources of 
energy (natural gas, diesel, electricity from grid) being consumed by factories, and emission 
savings that can be achieved by introducing energy efficiency technologies. The AE further 
estimates that 50 per cent of the total funding would be used by large factories. The rest would 
be directed to finance medium- and small-scale factories.

=== PAGE 165 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 162 
 
 
20. 
In response to a question from the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) on 
treatment of the existing equipment replaced with energy-efficient equipment funded by the 
programme, the AE clarified that the replaced equipment might be resold in the market if it is 
still considered to have economic lifetime and monetary value. The AE agreed to take into 
account the estimated GHG emissions that are likely to continue if the replaced equipment, 
which is less energy efficient, remains in operation for some time. The AE explained that it 
assumes that the existing equipment has a machine life of 10–15 years and could be replaced 
and resold at years 6–10. Subsequently, the equipment would be used for 4–5 years by the new 
buyer before it is fully retired. According to the AE, these ongoing emissions can be estimated to 
be 1.5 MtCO2eq and 2.6 MtCO2eq in the textile and RMG sectors, respectively. 
21. 
Accordingly, the AE estimates that the total amount of GHG emission savings the 
programme is expected to deliver amount to 14.5 MtCO2eq, of which the saving in the textile 
sector is 4.0 MtCO2eq (27.6 per cent), and that of the RMG sector is 10.5 MtCO2eq (72.4 per 
cent).  
22. 
The TAP assesses the impact potential of the programme to be medium/high. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
  
Scale:  Medium/High 
1.2.1. 
Potential for scaling up and replication 
23. 
The programme offers USD 416 million for concessional financing and technical support 
to IDCOL and the four LFIs to support investments in energy efficiency in the sectors. Long-term 
concessional financing will be required from GCF so that loans from IDCOL and the four LFIs to 
the sectors can be priced low enough so that the present value of the energy-efficient equipment 
can be at par with that of conventional equipment when financed with ordinary market-priced 
loans. In the Bangladesh market today, the cost of energy-efficient equipment is 20–25 per cent 
higher than conventional equipment.  
24. 
The TAP considers that the programme scalability and replicability are largely 
dependent on the availability of concessional financing. The bankability of energy efficiency 
investments cannot be established in the absence of concessional financing. The textile and RMG 
sectors contain more than 1,400 and 4,000 factories respectively, among which only a fraction 
operates energy efficiently. Therefore, if the programme is to upscale, the funding requirement 
would be large. Accordingly, the TAP considers the programme’s potential for scaling up and 
replication to be limited unless a large amount of concessional financing is secured. 
1.2.2. 
Potential for knowledge and learning  
25. 
The TA components of the programme will contribute to knowledge creation and 
dissemination about energy-efficient equipment and technologies and their benefits for the 
textile and RMG industries among key stakeholders in Bangladesh. Knowledge and lessons 
learned will be accumulated and shared through consultations and, more importantly, through 
the monitoring activities to be carried out with the assistance of consultants during 
implementation. 
1.2.3. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
26. 
The programme provides components that will help develop the energy efficiency 
market for the textile and RMG sectors in Bangladesh. The loan components support the private 
companies in the sector to overcome the financial and technical hurdles to investing in energy-
efficient equipment and technologies. Technology fairs are planned in the programme design to

=== PAGE 166 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 163 
 
 
create an interface with the investors/users, and the manufacturers/suppliers of energy-
efficient equipment. Knowledge and lessons learned collected throughout the programme’s 
implementation will be shared among key stakeholders including financial institutions, 
industrial communities and government agencies. The programme may contribute to bring 
down the costs of the energy-efficient equipment by creating a new market for energy-efficient 
equipment and technology in these sectors. 
1.2.4. 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies 
27. 
The programme promotes capacity-building of the policymakers in fields related to 
energy efficiency in industry especially in the textile and RMG sectors in Bangladesh. 
Component 5 of the programme, to be implemented jointly by the AE and SREDA, offers 
technical support for assessing the existing regulatory framework and preparing policies and 
strategies conducive to promoting energy efficiency, as well as training of government officials 
and other stakeholders.  
28. 
The TAP views the paradigm shift potential of the programme as medium/high. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential   
 
 Scale: Medium/High 
1.3.1. 
Environment co-benefits 
29. 
The programme will promote reduction in the use of fossil fuels (natural gas, diesel and 
coal) as energy sources in the sectors’ operations, thus contributing to improved air quality in 
Bangladesh. Energy consumption in the textile and RMG sectors is skewed towards use of 
natural gas with grid electricity having a minor share. Diesel is mostly used to generate 
electricity as a backup and its use depends on non-availability of grid electricity. Although large 
factories are equipped with captive natural gas power plants that supply electricity, small RMG 
factories rely heavily on diesel generation sets to fulfil their power needs. The share of diesel 
has increased significantly, by 2,440 per cent, while the shares of natural gas and grid electricity 
have declined by 22 per cent and 75 per cent, respectively. 
1.3.2. 
Economic co-benefits 
30. 
The programme will help the industry to improve production and capacity utilization 
and reduced production costs, which will lead to improved productivity and competitiveness. 
The industry contributes more than 13 per cent of the country’s GDP and 86 per cent of the 
country’s export. It also generates more than 65 per cent of the country’s industrial 
employment, employing over 4 million people of whom 80 per cent are women. In addition, the 
industry promotes development of small-scale industries, because 99 per cent of ancillary 
activities such as dyeing, printing and manufacturing zippers and labels are carried out locally.  
31. 
The programme contributes to environment and economic development of the country 
by enhancing energy efficiency in the industry which contributes more than 13 per cent to the 
nation’s GDP. The sector is also the largest sector of employment. Although the industry has a 
workforce comprising more than 80 per cent women, any benefits that the programme 
generates are likely be indirect. As such, the TAP considers the sustainable development 
potential of the programme as medium/high.

=== PAGE 167 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 164 
 
 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient   
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.4.1. 
Economic and social development level of the country and affected population 
32. 
Bangladesh remains a least developed country although its economy recorded 
remarkable growth since 2010 as a result of strong private consumption and investment.   
33. 
Bangladesh is one of the most adversely affected countries in terms of climate change. It 
is listed in the top 10 most affected countries of the world in the Climate Risk Index for 2017. 
The topography is flat, and the majority of the landmass lies within 10 metres above mean sea 
level. All land types except highlands are exposed to monsoon flooding for part or all of the year. 
Floodplains located in the north-western, central, south-central and north-eastern regions are 
subject to regular flooding at different frequencies and intensity. The coastal plain is subject to 
cyclones and storm surges, salinity intrusion and coastal inundation. It is estimated that the 
impact of climate change on Bangladesh could result in an annual loss of 2 per cent of GDP by 
2050 and 9.4 per cent of GDP by 2100.  
1.4.2. 
Absence of alternative sources of financing 
34. 
The programme requires total financing of USD 340.5 million, of which a USD 250.0 
million loan and a USD 6.48 million TA grant are required from GCF. The GCF loans will be 
priced at a concessional rate and have a tenor of 20 years including a 5-year grace period. 
35. 
The public sector investments in Bangladesh are presently focused more on supply-side 
interventions in order to increase generation capacity and bridge supply gaps. Budgetary 
resources available to drive public sector investments for demand-side interventions, especially 
towards energy-saving technologies, are therefore constrained. 
36. 
Under the current market scenario, the industry may access commercial loans at an 
interest rate of 9–15 per cent based on creditworthiness and credit history. Although bank 
lending to the sector has grown by over 15 per cent since 2016, the sector is still perceived as 
being a high credit risk. There are several loan facilities for energy efficiency and conservation 
promotion; however, higher lending interest rates and the time required for appraisal have 
hampered smooth implementation of loan projects.  
37. 
The TAP notes that alternative sources of financing are not currently available, 
especially of this size and tenor. 
1.4.3. 
Needs of strengthening institutions and implementing capacity 
38. 
Although the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan up to 2030 (2015) 
prepared by SREDA and the Power Division under the Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral 
Resources  confirms the potential and importance of energy efficiency in the industry and 
building sector for economic development, the implementation and promotion of energy-
efficient equipment and technologies has been slow in Bangladesh due to lack of concessional 
funding and technical capacity. The programme includes capacity-building activities not only for 
financial institutions and industry but also for policymakers in fields related to energy efficiency 
in industry, especially in the textile and RMG sectors. Technical support is included for 
preparing policies and strategies conducive to promoting energy efficiency, as well as training of 
government officials. 
39. 
The TAP assesses the needs of the recipient of the programme as high.

=== PAGE 168 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 165 
 
 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 Scale: Medium/High 
1.5.1. 
Existence of a national climate strategy 
40. 
Bangladesh submitted its intended nationally determined contribution to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in September 2015. Bangladesh 
ratified the Paris Agreement on 21 September 2016 and its nationally determined contribution 
(NDC) can now be found on the UNFCCC’s interim NDC Registry.  
41. 
Bangladesh’s NDC describes its plans for reducing GHG emissions through a progressive 
approach to developing its economy on a low-carbon pathway. In the NDC Bangladesh 
committed to reducing GHG emissions in the power, industry and transport sectors by 5 per 
cent below the business as usual scenario by 2030 using only domestic resources, or by 15 per 
cent below the business as usual scenario by 2030 if sufficient and appropriate international 
support is received. 
42. 
Bangladesh’s NDC identified three key emitting sectors: the industrial sector accounts 
for 40.6 per cent of total emissions; the power sector accounts for 32.8 per cent; and 
transportation 26.6 per cent. Accordingly, improving industrial energy efficiency is identified as 
one of the three key mitigation interventions together with renewable energy expansion, and 
transport infrastructure modernization. This has been embedded in the country’s 5-year 
planning process. 
1.5.2. 
Coherence with existing policies 
43. 
The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan up to 2030 (2015) contemplates a 
programme to extend low-interest loans for energy efficiency and conservation undertakings in 
industrial and building sectors. The programme will contribute to the government’s target to 
achieve a 10 per cent reduction in energy consumption by the industry sector by 2030, and 20 
per cent improvement in energy intensity by 2030. 
1.5.3. 
Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver 
44. 
IDCOL is the AE of this programme. It is also the EE of all the financial and technical 
components except component 3 where the four LFIs extend loans to the RMG sector. IDCOL 
will assess the eligibility of the borrowers in the textile sector for financing under the 
programme as per the criteria set prior to loan execution. 
45. 
IDCOL is a non-banking institution established in 1997 and is owned by the Government 
of Bangladesh. It has a mission to catalyse and optimize private sector participation in 
promotion, development and financing of infrastructure, as well as renewable energy and 
energy efficiency projects in a sustainable manner through public–private partnership 
initiatives.  
46. 
The financial performance of IDCOL is compatible with or better than other non-banking 
institutions in Bangladesh. The total assets of IDCOL increased from 66,980 million Bangladeshi 
taka (BDT)2 in 2015 to BDT 90,876 million in 2019 (i.e. by 35.7 per cent) while its loan book 
grew from BDT 36,964 million to BDT 68,799 million (86.1 per cent). Its total revenue increased 
from BDT 4,324 million to BDT 5,378 million (24.4 per cent) during the same period. It is rated 
AA1 by Credit Rating Agency of Bangladesh. The IDCOL loan portfolio in 2018 included 
renewable energy projects (33.2 per cent) and infrastructure (including energy efficiency) 
projects (66.9 per cent).  
 
2 As of October 2020, 1 USD = 84.70 BDT

=== PAGE 169 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 166 
 
 
47. 
IDCOL has implemented loans and grants amounting to more than USD 2,100 million 
channelled through the government from development finance institutions. Its development 
partners include World Bank, Asian Development Bank, Japan International Cooperation 
Agency, KfW, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit, Inter-American 
Development Bank, United States Agency for International Development and GPOBA (now 
known as Global Partnership for Results-Based Approaches, GPRBA). Under the USD 100 million 
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Promotion Financing Project funded by the Japan 
International Cooperation Agency, IDCOL has approved USD 42 million for the RMG and cement 
sectors, out of which USD 25 million has been already disbursed.  
48. 
Component 3 will be executed by four LFIs: BRAC Bank Limited, City Bank Limited, IDLC 
Finance Limited and South East Bank Limited. 
49. 
BRAC Bank Limited, established in 2001, is well known for its banking services aimed at 
small and medium-sized enterprises in Bangladesh, with half of its lending portfolio being small 
and medium companies. In 2015-2019, revenue and net profit after tax increased from BDT 
6,835 million and BDT 2,436 million to BDT 9,948million and BDT 5,646 million (average 
growth rate of 11.4 per cent and 32.9 per cent), respectively. Total assets of BRAC Bank Limited 
amount to BDT 367,920 million in 2019 showing an average growth rate of 16.0 per cent during 
the same period, while its portfolio of loans and advances grew by 19.8 per cent per annum. In 
2018 it reported BDT 12,000 million of financing for green projects. The bank is rated as AA1 by 
the Credit Rating Agency of Bangladesh. 
50. 
City Bank Limited was established as Bangladesh’s first private commercial bank in 
1983. It provides a wide range of deposit and loan products and solutions catering for the needs 
of its broad client base. The total assets of City Bank increased at an annual growth rate of 14.8 
per cent since 2014to reach BDT 324,780 million in 2018. In 2019 it reported that its loan 
portfolio and profit after tax had increased to BDT 246,944 million and BDT 2,472 million with 
an annual growth rate of 6.7 and 22.5 per cent, respectively. The total assets of City Bank were 
reported to be BDT 354,698 million in 2019. In 2018 its lending amount to the RMG sector was 
BDT 39,251 million, and cumulative disbursements to green projects amounted to BDT 1,359 
million. It is rated as AA2 by Credit Rating Agency of Bangladesh. 
51. 
IDLC Finance Limited, established as a single product lease company in 1985, is 
regarded as one of the pioneers in the non-banking sector in Bangladesh. It currently has a 
diversified operation across different segments in banking services. Revenue and net profit after 
tax in 2019 amounted to BDT 4,815 million and BDT 1,522 million, exhibiting a growth rate of 
7.7 per cent and 5.7 per cent since 2014, respectively. During the same period total assets 
increased from BDT 57,160 million to BDT 114,655 million at a rate of 14.9 per cent. IDLC 
Finance Limited offers 52 green products under eight categories as defined by Bangladesh Bank, 
the Central Bank of Bangladesh. In 2018, the green banking portfolio stood at BDT 648 million 
and cumulative disbursements in the green segment reached BDT 1,255 million. IDLC Finance 
Limited is rated AAA. 
52. 
South East Bank Limited is a private commercial bank launched in 1995. It provides 
conventional banking products and services to retail and business clients, along with specialized 
products/services such as an investment fund and automatic fraud monitoring. Its total assets 
in 2018 were reported to be BDT 381.095 million, which was the result of annual growth of 13.6 
per cent over the previous four years. Revenue was BDT 14,724 million and net profit after tax 
was BDT 2,456 million in 2018. Its exposure to the RMG sector was BDT 50,850 million in 2018. 
The total lending to green projects was BDT 12,671 million. Southeast Bank Limited is rated AA 
by Credit Rating Information and Services Limited of Bangladesh.

=== PAGE 170 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 167 
 
 
1.5.4. 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
53. 
As part of the project development, the AE carried out consultation workshops for key 
stakeholders including government agencies, financial institutions, representatives of textile 
and RMG companies, academia and civil society organizations. Reports of the consultation 
workshops are attached to the funding proposal. 
54. 
A no-objection letter issued by the Ministry of Finance, Government of Bangladesh, the 
GCF national designated authority, is attached to the funding proposal.  
55. 
The TAP considers the programme’s country ownership as medium to high. The 
programme is in line with the national policies and strategies that support energy efficiency in 
the industrial sector. It was developed in consultation with key stakeholders. The TAP considers 
that the AE has sufficient experience and capacity to implement the programme as presented. 
While the four LFIs do have exposure to the RMG sector, their capacity to implement the 
programme cannot be fully confirmed. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
             Scale: Medium 
1.6.1. 
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency regarding financial and non- financial aspects  
56. 
As per the AE’s projection, the programme intends to deliver total GHG emission savings 
of 14.5 MtCO2eq. Accordingly, the cost of GHG emission reductions per tCO2eq is estimated to be 
USD 23.4 against the total cost of funding of USD 340.5 million. With respect to GCF funding of 
USD 256.5 million, it is projected to be USD 23.4 per tCO2eq. 
57. 
The cost varies between the textile and RMG sectors: USD 34.3 per tCO2eq and USD 19.2 
per tCO2eq, respectively, against the programme funding. With respect to GCF funding, it is 
estimated to be USD 25.8 and USD 14.5 per tCO2eq for the textile and RMG sectors, respectively. 
1.6.2. 
Amount of co-financing  
58. 
The co-financing ratio of GCF financing is estimated to be 0.33. The programme requires 
a total financing of USD 340.5 million, of which USD 256.48 million is provided by GCF in the 
form of loan and grant. The balance of USD 84.02 million is to be provided by IDCOL, the four 
LFIs and SREDA in the form of a loan and in-kind contribution.  
59. 
The total amount of funding to be mobilized for purchasing energy-efficient equipment 
is expected to be higher than the total amount of the programme. IDCOL and four LFIs expect 
borrowers to provide equal amounts of funds to their loans. Accordingly, an additional USD 83.0 
million can be mobilized in the form of borrower’s equity contribution. If that amount is 
included, then the co-financing ratio goes up to 0.65.  
1.6.3. 
Programme/project financial viability and other financial indicators  
60. 
The programme promotes investments in energy efficiency by providing concessional 
financing so that the total cost of investment, including equipment, financial and operational 
costs that a company incurs for its purchase of energy-efficient equipment would not be 
disadvantageous when compared with that of conventional equipment. On the basis of a survey, 
the AE estimates that the upfront cost of energy-efficient equipment is approximately 25 per 
cent higher than that of conventional equipment. Therefore, the interest rate of the 
programme’s loans for the companies will be set lower than the market interest rate so that the 
present values of investment in energy-efficient equipment and conventional equipment 
become compatible. The loan tenor will extend up to 10 years to help companies manage yearly 
cash outflow.

=== PAGE 171 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 168 
 
 
1.6.4. 
Industry best practices  
61. 
The programme will help the textile and RMG sectors to showcase the financial and 
operational merits of energy-efficient equipment and technologies and establish energy-
efficient practices in Bangladesh. The three technical components include assistance to the EEs 
and private sector companies in the sectors to enhance monitoring and market awareness. A 
technology fair will be organized within three years of the start of implementation, to promote 
market awareness and access to energy-efficient technologies for both sectors. The government 
agencies will be supported so that challenges identified in the programme can be shared and 
lessons learned can be reflected in developing enabling policies and regulations for investments 
in energy efficiency in Bangladesh.  
62. 
The TAP assesses the efficiency and effectiveness of the programme as medium. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
63. 
The TAP recommends that the Board consider the proposed programme with the 
following two conditions: 
(a) 
The AE shall monitor and report to GCF actual annual energy consumption of each piece 
of eligible energy-efficient equipment and technology which has been financed by the 
Programme, for as long as any amount of the related sub-loan is outstanding; and 
(b) 
The AE shall monitor and report to GCF annual energy consumption of each piece of 
equipment and technology that has been replaced as a result of the Programme, from 
the date it was replaced until: 
(i) 
The sixth anniversary of the replacement; or  
(ii) 
The relevant equipment or technology has been scrapped and retired from 
operation, whichever is earlier. 
64. 
The programme offers concessional funding to finance energy efficiency investments for 
replacement and expansion in the textile and RMG sectors in Bangladesh. The AE assumes that 
replaced equipment would be resold at the secondary market rate for replacement of even less 
efficient equipment. Accordingly, there would be no leakage with respect to emission 
reductions. However, the TAP is unable to fully agree to the AE’s assumption, because that 
would not be always the case. Rather, the likely case is that replaced equipment would be 
purchased on the secondary market for the purpose of expansion to catch up with market 
growth, rather than replacement, especially if textile and RMG factories have limited interest in 
energy efficiency.  
65. 
Further, the TAP sees a risk that the replaced equipment would be operated longer in 
total than its expected lifetime so the estimated impact on emission reductions could be larger 
than that assumed. In that case, the estimated emission reductions of the programme would 
turn out to be less. To validate and confirm the leakage of emission reductions, it is imperative 
that actual energy consumption of all equipment replaced is actually monitored so that GCF can 
reasonably evaluate the programme’s ultimate impact with respect to GHG emission reductions.  
66. 
Without the strong monitoring plan, the TAP would recommend that the Board consider 
a request to the AE to ensure all of the replaced equipment to be scrapped and retired from 
operation.

=== PAGE 172 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 169  
 
 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel  
assessment findings (FP150) 
Proposal name: 
Promoting private sector investment through large scale adoption of 
energy saving technologies and equipment for Textile and Readymade 
Garment (RMG) sectors of Bangladesh 
Accredited entity: 
Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) 
 
Impact potential 
As rightfully mentioned in the ITAP assessment that the the textile sector (spinning, weaving, knitting and 
dyeing), and readymade garment (RMG) sector (cutting, sewing, dyeing, ironing, and finishing) have 
substantial scope of energy savings. The RMG sector is the most energy intensive in the industry 
consuming 15.4 per cent of the total industrial energy demand in Bangladesh. The textile sector follows 
the RMG subsector with its demand representing 12.4 per cent of that of the total industry. The proposed 
programme ““Promoting private sector investment through large scale adoption of energy saving 
technologies and equipment for Textile and Readymade Garment (RMG) sectors of Bangladesh” aims to 
achieve the Fund’s objective and result areas by contributing shift to low-emission sustainable 
development pathways. The contribution is achieved by providing target market i.e. Textile and RMG 
sector of Bangladesh, access to concessional line of financing for undertaking energy efficiency measures 
which will result in 14.53 MtCO2 emissions savings as well as provide market participants with 
appropriate technical support required for stimulating the energy efficiency market in Bangladesh, as 
well as to support implementation of energy efficiency initiatives.   
 
Paradigm shift potential 
The paradigm shift potential is rightly described in the ITAP assessment, IDCOL as a government owned 
development financial institution will strongly support government’s target and vision to enable the 
industrial energy transition to low carbon energy system through major increase in energy efficiency. The 
success of the proposed programme will enable replication of similar programmes in other sectors of the 
country. 
 
Sustainable development potential 
IDCOL agrees with the remarks made by ITAP regarding the programme’s sustainable development 
potential. Delivering a large-scale retrofit initiative through this programme will have large and 
important development benefits whose impacts will increase over time as energy prices rise. 
Needs of the recipient 
 
Bangladesh is in dire need of concessional financing, capacity development and marketing activation to 
realize the potential of industrial energy efficiency. The need of the proposed programme is indeed high, 
especially considering the severe impact that the manufacturing sector has faced due to impacts of 
COVID-19.  
 
Country ownership

=== PAGE 173 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.10/Rev.01 
Page 170  
As mentioned in the ITAP assessment the Country Ownership of the proposed programme is relatively 
higher. The proposed programme is regarded in the Country Programme (A16 & A17) as of strategic 
importance and considered to be (a) well aligned with national development and climate priorities and 
(b) reflective of the national priorities with a focus on appropriate action in the field of mitigation.
Country Program:  
http://nda.erd.gov.bd/files/1/Publications/CC%20Policy%20Documents/Bangladesh_GCF-CP_Draft.pdf 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
As rightfully mentioned in the ITAP assessment the proposed programme is  designed to optimize the use 
of funding available in terms of leverage and sustainability, investing concessional resources optimally in 
bankable projects to enable adequate financing and creating market instruments to manage risks among 
the market actors. Furthermore, the programme will help the textile and RMG sectors to showcase 
financial and operational merits of energy efficiency equipment and technologies, and establish energy 
efficient practices in Bangladesh. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
The ITAP recommended in its assessment, that IDCOL has to consider following two conditions. 
1)
The AE shall monitor and report to GCF actual annual energy consumption of each piece of eligible
energy-efficient equipment and technology which has been financed by the Programme, for as long as
any amount of the related sub-loan is outstanding; and
2)
The AE shall monitor and report to GCF annual energy consumption of each piece of equipment and
technology that has been replaced as a result of the Programme, from the date it was replaced until:
a)
The sixth anniversary of the replacement; or
b)
The relevant equipment or technology has been scrapped and retired from operation,
whichever is earlier.
IDCOL’s response: 
IDCOL agrees to the above conditions and will work with GCF to implement a reporting system.

=== PAGE 174 ===
GENDER ASSESSMENT REPORT
Promoting private sector investment through large scale 
adoption of energy saving technologies and equipment for 
garment sector in Bangladesh 
171

=== PAGE 175 ===
2 
Table of Contents 
Executive Summary ................................................................................................. 4 
1 Introduction ........................................................................................................... 5 
2 Rational of Gender Assessment .......................................................................... 6 
3 Methodology of the Gender Assessment ............................................................ 7 
3.1 
Literature Review .................................................................................................... 7 
3.2 
Factory Survey and Household Survey ................................................................ 7 
3.3 
Key Informant Interview ......................................................................................... 7 
3.4 
Stakeholder Engagement Workshop .................................................................... 8 
4 Policies and Regulations ...................................................................................... 9 
4.1 
National Policy, Strategy and Framework ............................................................ 9 
4.2 
International Policy and Framework ................................................................... 12 
4.2.1 Green Climate Fund (GCF) ............................................................................................... 12 
4.2.2 World Bank Group ............................................................................................................. 13 
4.2.3 Asian Development Bank (ADB) ....................................................................................... 14 
4.2.4 International Finance Corporation (IFC) ........................................................................... 15 
4.2.5 Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) ............................................................... 16 
 4.3     Gender Related Policies of IDCOL and Local Financial Institutions (LFIs)…  17 
5 Findings from Gender Assessment ................................................................... 19 
5.1 
Introduction ........................................................................................................... 20 
5.2 
Labor Force Participation .................................................................................... 21 
5.3 
Constrains for Female Employment ................................................................... 26 
5.4 
Educational Status ............................................................................................... 28 
5.5 
Gender Perspectives of Energy Efficiency ........................................................ 30 
5.6 
Decision Making ................................................................................................... 31 
5.7 
Wage and Benefits ............................................................................................... 32 
5.8 
Workplace Environment ...................................................................................... 33 
5.9 
Social beliefs, perceptions, and stereotypes ..................................................... 37 
5.10 Access to Information .......................................................................................... 38 
5.11 Women and Health ............................................................................................... 39 
5.12 Access to Financial Services by RMG Workers ................................................ 39 
5.13 Leadership Opportunities for Women in RMG Sector ...................................... 40 
6 Gender Inclusion Practices in Bangladesh ....................................................... 42 
7 Legal and Administrative Framework Protecting and Promoting Gender 
Equality in Bangladesh .......................................................................................... 44 
172

=== PAGE 176 ===
3 
8 Alignment of the Project with GCF Gender Assessment Guideline ............... 47 
9 Grievance Redressal System (GRS) .................................................................. 49 
10 Recommendations ............................................................................................ 51 
11 Gender Action Plan ........................................................................................... 52 
11.1 Outline ................................................................................................................... 52 
11.2 Monitoring of Gender Action Plan ...................................................................... 59 
 
 
 
List of Tables 
Table 5-1 Trends in labour force and employment ............................................................... 22 
Table 5-2 Annual average change in labour force and participation rate7 ............................. 23 
Table 5-3Revised wage structure by GoB in 2019 ............................................................... 32 
 
 
List of Figures  
Figure 5-1 Gender scenario in labour force participation in RMG units ................................ 22 
Figure 5-2 Gender distribution of workers in selected RMG units......................................... 24 
Figure 5-3 Gender of facility managers ................................................................................. 24 
Figure 5-4 Major constraints to female employment perceived by different stakeholders .... 27 
Figure 5-5 Education Attainment of the Female Workers ..................................................... 28 
Figure 5-6 Education Attainment of the male Workers ......................................................... 29 
Figure 5-7 Educational qualification of facility managers ...................................................... 29 
Figure 5-8 Country-wise Garments Monthly Minimum Wage 2019 / Source: NYU Stern Center 
for Business and Human Rights ........................................................................................... 33 
Figure 5-9: Workers’ Responses on Maternity Care ............................................................. 35 
Figure 5-10 Respondents receiving training on chemical handling and storage .................. 35 
Figure 5-11 Respondents receiving training on fire management ........................................ 36 
Figure 5-12 Respondents receiving environment, health and safety training ....................... 36 
173

=== PAGE 177 ===
4 
Executive Summary 
Ready-made garment (RMG) sector in Bangladesh plays a key role in the economic 
development of the country as one of the biggest industrial contributors to the country’s gross 
domestic product (GDP). The RMG industry now contributes over 83% to Bangladesh’s export 
income. Moreover, this sector is one of the major sources of employment for women in 
Bangladesh, especially for the poor and unprivileged women. Women were the main 
workforce in the country's apparel sector since the sector began its journey in 1970’s. The 
RMG sector has been a key enabler in overall socio-economic development of Bangladesh. 
In common perspective, a majority of the 4-5 million people employed in the sector are women 
- 80% of the workers and more than 60% of the total workforce for the sector are women.  
 
The employment of these women, mostly from rural areas, have provided them with financial 
freedom and greater social independence. Compared to other industries, women employment 
rate is higher in RMG sector in Bangladesh. So, for implementing any project in the RMG 
sector it is very important to ensure equal participation of both male and female in all the 
project interventions. The GCF also promotes environmental, social, economic and 
development co-benefits through taking a gender-sensitive approach. In this regard, this 
project aims to assess the gender dimensions in RMG sector in Bangladesh during project 
preparation, implementation and monitoring stage. For this purpose, the study team 
conducted stakeholder consultations and field surveys to collect information and analyzed 
those data through a gender lens. The results were incorporated throughout the other project 
documents and mainstreamed into the mitigation and adaptation initiatives to obtain in such a 
way that gender co-benefits are obtained. 
 
The objective of the Gender Assessment was to identify the gender aspects of the project 
activities, including selection of employees and their trainings, to collect information from 
various stakeholders such as workers, supervisors, managers, key informants (women and 
men) and to learn the impact of the project on empowerment of different categories of women 
and men. This tool also helped to promote gender – relevant entry points, policies and identify 
opportunities for enhancing gender equality in this project. 
 
Through this gender action plan the project aims to ensure that the services and technologies 
provided by the project/program be available and accessible to both women and men, equal 
access for the women and men from vulnerable communities to information and opportunities 
necessary to participate and benefit fully from the anticipated outcomes of the project and 
promote leadership capacity of women. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
174

=== PAGE 178 ===
5 
1 Introduction 
 
Improved energy efficiency in Bangladesh can lead to greater business growth and profitability 
at the local level; at the national level it supports GDP growth and enhances energy security, 
and at a global level it helps mitigate climate change and ensures sustainable global growth. 
For industries, energy efficiency reduces production costs and increases profits. This also 
reduces their carbon footprint at no additional cost (an important consideration in the face of 
international buyers' requirements). Among all the sub-sectors, Garment and textile sector 
(manufacturing sector) consumes maximum energy. As Garment and Textile sector consumes 
maximum energy, it also holds a significant potential to reduce energy consumption. Valuing 
these benefits, in the current environment in Bangladesh, if energy intensive industries 
(Garment and textile) in sectors with high savings potential start utilizing energy efficient 
technologies they will be poised to capture huge future economic opportunities. In addition to 
such economic benefits, the environmental impact of decreased energy usage and reduced 
carbon emissions, social impact by providing well-being and employment will create a more 
sustainable Bangladesh for future generations.  
 
Based on the existing scenario of RMG sector in Bangladesh, it is evident that adoption of 
energy efficiency measures can considerably improve socio-economic impact of the sector as 
well as reduce environmental impact. Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) 
intends to realize these benefits by developing and implementing a program to support 
entrepreneurs and business establishments with financial and market resources to avail 
investment opportunities for energy saving technology upgrades. IDCOL has solicited financial 
support from Green Climate Fund (GCF) to execute this program. This fund will be then utilized 
as concessional loans to finance garment business via four selected banks i.e. City Bank Ltd, 
Southeast Bank Ltd, BRAC Bank Ltd and IDLC Finance Ltd.  
 
Ready-made garment (RMG) sector in Bangladesh plays a key role in the economic 
development of the country as one of the biggest industrial contributors to the country’s gross 
domestic product (GDP). The RMG industry now contributes over 83% to Bangladesh’s export 
income.1 Moreover, this sector is one of the major sources of employment for women in 
Bangladesh, especially for the poor and unprivileged women. Women were the main 
workforce in the country's apparel sector since the sector began its journey in 1970’s. The 
RMG sector has been a key enabler in overall socio-economic development of Bangladesh. 
In common perspective, a majority of the 4-5 million people employed in the sector are women 
- 80% of the workers and more than 60% of the total workforce for the sector are women.  
 
The employment of these women, mostly from rural areas, have provided them with financial 
freedom and greater social independence. Compared to other industries, women employment 
rate is higher in RMG sector in Bangladesh. However, the percentage of female workers have 
declined in the recent years. According to a survey of Center for Policy Dialogue (CPD), 
released on March 2018, among garment worker 60.8% are female & 39.20% are male. The 
survey was conducted on 2270 workers in 193 factories in Dhaka, Gazipur, Narayanganj & 
Chottogram. This situation has been created in the sector due to increasing use of technology, 
 
1 
Dey, 
P. 
2019. 
RMG 
sector’s 
contribution 
to 
GDP 
downs 
by 
3%. 
TextileToday. 
https://www.textiletoday.com.bd/rmg-sectors-contribution-gdp-downs-3-2/  
175

=== PAGE 179 ===
6 
lack of skills of women workers compared to males, increasing interest of men for salary rise, 
social inequalities and due to labor-intensive nature of the sector. Even, the average age of 
women working in this sector is lower than that of men. In addition, there is discrimination in 
areas of service book, working hour including overtime, leaves (casual, sick, annual), 
separation of rest room, social protection like provident fund and group insurance, and 
representational rights.  
 
After the Rana Plaza incident, more emphasis has been given on the compliance issues in 
the RMG sector. All the owners are obliged to ensure health and safety issues for the workers 
and ensure equal facilities for both genders. International buyers also give importance on 
compliance issues while placing order and usually select those that are more complaint. 
However, due to lack of financial support, many small and medium enterprises often lag 
behind to ensure the required facilities for women, especially pregnant women and mothers 
with dependent children. So, with this programme there will be an opportunity for the RMG 
units to include better facilities for women and address compliance issues as well. This way 
they will be able to attract more international buyers and access better opportunities for future 
development. 
 
As such, gender equity is crucial to the sustainable development of all sectors of the economy. 
GCF also gives special attention on ensuring gender equity and focuses on gender-responsive 
climate action programmes and projects that benefit women and men. The GCF Governing 
Instrument states that: “The Fund will strive to maximize the impact of its funding for adaptation 
and mitigation … promoting environmental, social, economic and development co-benefits 
and taking a gender-sensitive approach.” In this regard, this programme aims to assess 
gender dimensions in RMG sector in Bangladesh during project preparation, implementation 
and monitoring stage. For this purpose, the study team conducted stakeholder consultations 
and field surveys to collect information and analyzed those data. The results were 
incorporated throughout the other project documents and mainstreamed into the mitigation 
and adaptation initiatives to obtain in such a way that gender co-benefits are obtained. 
 
2 Rational of Gender Assessment 
The Gender Assessment will help to understand relationship between men and women, their 
access to resources, their activities, and the constraints they face relative to each other. A 
comprehensive gender assessment entails the examination of the different roles, rights, 
needs, and opportunities of women and men, boys and girls in this project context. It is a tool 
that will help to promote gender – relevant entry points, policies and identify opportunities for 
enhancing gender equality in this project. GCF also puts emphasis on the ensuring gender 
equity in all project level activities. In this regard, a Gender Assessment was conducted for 
mainstreaming gender into the project level activities. The objective of the Gender 
Assessment was- 
• 
to identify the gender aspects of the project activities, including selection of employees 
and their trainings. 
• 
to collect information from various stakeholders such as workers, supervisors, 
managers, key informants (women and men); 
• 
to learn the impact of the project on empowerment of different categories of women 
and men; 
176

=== PAGE 180 ===
7 
3 Methodology of the Gender Assessment 
 
The assessment studied the engagement of men and women in the RMG sector in 
Bangladesh, labor force participation, access and control to technology and financial 
resources, as well as power relations. The study team gathered information through literature 
review, surveys and stakeholder analysis. Also, household surveys were conducted to get the 
perspective of the community people living in the vicinity of the factory. Detailed methodology 
is described below: 
 
3.1 Literature Review 
At the inception phase of the project the team performed literature review from secondary 
sources to understand the baseline situation of the RMG sector in Bangladesh to understand 
the baseline situation of RMG sector and the broad scope for EE applications in the sector 
considering gender dimensions. In this regard, the project team analyzed relevant reports, 
about national policies and guidelines (environmental, social, gender equality), potential risks 
identified in the RMG sector, historical studies and research on Energy Efficiency (EE) in 
Bangladesh’s RMG sector, international best practices, potential EE interventions etc. 
considering gender equity.  
 
3.2 Factory Survey and Household Survey 
The study team conducted open inquiries of facility managers and workers of RMG factories 
and community people living near the selected RMG units on energy efficiency, environment 
and social issues related to RMG sector focusing on gender. For this purpose, 80 respondents 
from 20 RMG units and 150 households were selected in four key garment hubs i.e. in Dhaka, 
Gazipur, Narayanganj and Chattogram district. In each of the RMG units, key informant 
interviews (KII) were conducted with facility managers and workers and field group 
discussions (FGD) were conducted with a group of 10-15 people including workers and facility 
managers. While choosing the respondents for FGD, the study team tried to maintain gender 
balance by including both male and female representatives. However, during the survey 
period, no female facility manager was identified so there is no representation of women in 
the information shared by facility managers.  
 
3.3 Key Informant Interview with Experts 
Key informant interviews (KIIs) have been conducted to supplement the information mined 
from secondary sources as well as to enhance the understanding of the ground realities of the 
RMG sector. For KII representatives were selected from government ministries, NGO, INGO, 
development partners, academicians, financial institution, monitoring agencies for RMG 
sector etc. A total of 25 KIIs were conducted based on a questionnaire which contain queries 
related to the following thematic areas: 
• 
Growth prospects of RMG sector 
• 
Compliance with environmental, social and gender (ESG) related requirements 
• 
Energy efficiency adoption in sector 
• 
Financing energy efficiency initiatives.  
 
177

=== PAGE 181 ===
8 
During the KIIs the study team tried to maintain a gender balance by including both male and 
female representatives from each sector. But in most of the cases it was not possible due to 
absence of female leadership in the sector. However, at least one woman was interviewed 
from selected stakeholder categories i.e., from selected government ministries, NGO, INGO, 
development partners, academicians, financial institution, monitoring agencies (BGMEA, 
BKMEA) working for RMG sector etc. 
  
3.4 Stakeholder Engagement Workshop 
While preparing the proposal, stakeholder engagement was a prerequisite. In this regard, the 
information gathered during the literature review and surveys were presented during the 
stakeholder workshops where stakeholders and beneficiaries discussed on existing issues 
and concerns pertaining to Environment, Society and Gender in the Garment sector. A wide 
range of key stakeholders i.e. energy efficiency practitioners including regulators, policy 
makers, experts and garment sector entrepreneurs, as well as environment, social and gender 
experts actively participated and shared their insights and experiences. The workshop clarified 
the framework of the proposed GCF proposal along with the key indicators with the 
stakeholders and participants. The outcome of the workshops was noted and relevant 
changes in the project documents were made accordingly. The detail findings from the 
workshops have been presented in a separate document of workshop report. 
 
Both the workshops were well attended. A wide range of energy efficiency practitioners 
including regulators, policy makers, experts, academicians, researchers, garment sector 
entrepreneurs, NGO, INGO, development organizations, CSOs as well as environment, social 
and gender experts were attended the workshop. In the first workshop total 46 participants 
were present among them 15% were female participants and in the second workshop there 
were 45 participants where 11% were female participants. Even though RMG sector occupies 
a high number of women workers, there few women involved in the higher management. Also, 
very few organizations have women involved in project management or research regarding 
RMG sector related issues. So, the representation of women was less compared to men in 
the workshops. However, in both the workshops it was maintained that at least one woman 
was present from relevant government ministries and departments, monitoring agencies 
(BGMEA, BKMEA), academicians, researchers, garment sector entrepreneurs, NGO, INGO, 
development organizations, CSOs and sectoral experts.  
 
 
178

=== PAGE 182 ===
9 
4 Policies and Regulations 
4.1 National Policy, Strategy and Framework 
The government of Bangladesh recognizes the need for coordinated efforts on gender issues 
and the need to mainstream gender issues in development initiatives to increase resilience. 
At present Bangladesh is engaged in aligning national legislation and policies with its 
international commitments to strengthen gender dimensions. Some key policies are with 
regards to climate change and adaptation and the provision of gender issues in those policies 
are highlighted below. In addition, there is also a set of supporting ‘Rules’ and ‘Regulations’ 
that include important provisions. 
 
The Constitution of Bangladesh has recognized fundamental rights of women workers at 
work places including necessary social protection (Articles, 28, 29, 34, 38, 14, 15 and 20(1), 
(The Constitution of Bangladesh). Bangladesh Constitution provides that the state shall not 
discriminate against any citizen on the grounds of religion, race, caste or place of birth and 
women shall have equal rights with men in all spheres of the state or public life (Article 28). 
Bangladesh as a state is responsible for its citizens to ensure the right to work that is the right 
to guaranteed employment at a reasonable wage having regard to the quantity and quality of 
works, and reasonable rest, recreation and leisure (Article 15). Bangladesh Constitution 
recognizes that everyone shall be paid for work on the basis of the principle from each 
according to his abilities (Article 20). In addition, the fundamental rights guaranteed in Chapter 
III of Bangladesh Constitution, especially relevant to workers' rights, prohibits all forms of 
forced labour and makes it a punishable offence (Article 34) and guarantees the right to 
freedom of association and to form trade unions (Article 38). 
 
Bangladesh Labour Act, 2006 (BLA) has included a large number of labour rights for 
protection of women workers. BLA has various positive points relating to labour rights, but due 
to its various limitations, absence of adequate penalty in statutory law for employers and lack 
of proper code of conduct by the garment authorities, there is scope of violation of labor rights 
in some areas.  
 
The BLA 2006, mainly focus on the following major components: 
a. Sanitation and Hygiene: From section 51-59, BLA 2006, the terms and conditions of 
cleanliness, ventilation and temperature, dust and fume, disposal of waste and effluents, 
overcrowding, lighting, drinking water, latrines and urinals, were discussed. In section 59, 
it is clearly mentioned to provide distinct toilet facility for men and women along with proper 
cleaning maintenance. 
b. Maternity Benefit: Every pregnant women worker can get the maternity benefit of eight 
weeks, preceding the expected day of her delivery and eight weeks immediately following 
the day of her delivery (Section 45-46). The procedure and amount of regarding payment 
of maternity benefit are also mentioned in Section 47- 49. 
c. Working conditions and hours: Employment of women, adolescents or children in 
specific works (such as the dangerous operations, underground or underwater work) is 
prohibited or restricted (Section 39, 40, 42 and 79). Furthermore, without the consent of 
women worker, working between 10.00PM to 06.00AM is not allowed (Section 109). 
179

=== PAGE 183 ===
10 
d. Safety: According to Section 89, At least one first-aid box for every one hundred fifty 
workers must be accessible and maintained. Also, for the establishments with forty or more 
workers, a child care room with proper facilities should be provided (Section 94). 
e. Trade Union: If 20% of the total workers or members are women than while establishing 
trade union, the executive body must comprise minimum 10% women members (Section 
176e, BLA, 2013). 
f. Indecent behavior: Despite of the rank or status of a woman worker, no one of the 
establishment can treat or behave in indecent or improper manner with her (Section 332, 
BLA, 2013). 
g. Institutional framework: If factories occupies 50 or more workers than safety committees 
must be formed (Section 90A, BLA, 2013), a Safety welfare officers shall be appointed 
and the cost of treatment of occupational diseases will be covered (Section 150(3), BLA, 
2013) if the establishment holds more than 500 workers (Section 89(8), BLA, 2013) and 
workplaces with more than 5000 members or staffs should establish workplace health 
centres (Section 89(6), BLA, 2013). 
 
Bangladesh Labor Rules, 2015 emphasizes on gender equity and has special provision for 
pregnant women. According to the Bangladesh Labor Rules, 2015, the owner and other 
workers should have the following responsibilities to a pregnant worker, such as: 
(a) Such behavior or comment should not be made so that she gets insulted or humiliated 
(b) Not engage her in hazardous work declared by the government or any work hazardous for 
her health. 
(c) To transfer or post her to any work where there is no hazard. 
(d) To give priority to use the lift during the work. 
(e) After the delivery, to make opportunity for breastfeeding and ensure the congenial 
atmosphere for this. 
 
Right to Occupational Safety and Health BLA, 2006 prescribes provisions relating to 
occupational hygiene, occupational diseases, safety measures, industrial accidents, 
protection of women and young persons in dangerous occupations and also covers conditions 
of work, working hours, welfare facilities, holidays, leave etc. (Sections 11, 51, 52, 53, 56, 57, 
58, 61, 62, 91, 92, 93,94 and, 109, BLA, 2006). Most of the provisions lack in standard values 
and are not specific rather general in nature. In terms of occupational safety and health issues, 
the status of Bangladesh is very poor and women workers are extremely vulnerable in this 
regard. 
 
Section 195 of the Bangladesh Labor Act, 2006 (amended 2013) outlaws numerous “unfair 
labor practices.” For example, no employer shall “dismiss, discharge, remove from 
employment, or threaten to dismiss, discharge, or remove from employment a worker, or injure 
or threaten to injure him in respect of his employment by reason that the worker is or proposes 
to become, or seeks to persuade any other person to become, a member or officer of a trade 
union.” 
 
The National Women Development Policy (2011) briefly promotes women’s role in 
environmental management and the importance of ensuring facilities for and the security of 
pregnant women in the event of natural disasters. It emphasizes on elimination of all forms of 
violence to women including physical and mental abuse and sexual harassment, rape, dowry, 
family abuse and acid throwing in family, society and in the workplace. The policy ensures 
180

=== PAGE 184 ===
11 
participation of women in decision making regarding environment management and pollution 
control and program implementation. It also ensures gender equal rate of wages, increase 
participation of women in the labor market, equal opportunity at the workplace, ensured 
security and removal of disparities in employment.  
 
The policy aims to motivate all employment agencies to give women all kinds of equal 
opportunities under government quota and employment policy and create necessary 
environment to promote access of women to employment arras at increasing rate, their 
position as such and continue their advancement. In addition, it promotes to make necessary 
reforms of all concerned law, rule and policy for wider employment of women. In recognition 
of the contribution of women in the management of natural resources conservation and a safer 
environment to give them opportunity of equal participation in environment preservation policy 
and programs reflecting a women perspective. Also, the policy emphasizes to undertake all 
out initiative for employment of the educated and illiterate women labor.  
 
The 7th Five Year Plan (2016-2020) has also highlighted the aspects for worker safety.  It 
was mentioned in the 7FYP that higher growth in Bangladesh was benefitted from a rising 
labour force both due to the demographic transition that produced a larger share of working 
population and an increasing labour force participation rate of the female labour. But wage 
rates tend to be lower for female workers relative to male and proper employment regulations 
to facilitate the participation of female workers (e.g. maternity leave, skill development, child 
care facilities, etc.) have to be put in place in most areas of employment. The RMG industry 
has shown the way. However, safety standards in RMG are becoming a major challenge for 
sustaining the continued expansion of RMG sector. Thanks to recent coordinated efforts of 
the Government with the Apparel Manufacturers, and the buyer-driven initiatives. Substantial 
progresses in ensuring worker safety standards and improvement in working conditions have 
been achieved. 
 
Bangladesh has ratified International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions 87 and 98 
on freedom of association and collective bargaining and is required to protect the rights 
contained in them. At the international level, Bangladesh has also ratified the UN Convention 
on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), as well as 
different ILO Convention. 
 
Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 2009 (BCCSAP) has a programme 
for strengthening gender consideration for climate change management. Under this 
programme it was mentioned that gender consideration is needing to be included in all climate 
responsive activities.   
 
Bangladesh Climate Change and Gender Action Plan (ccGAP: Bangladesh) 2013 has 
been prepared with an aim to ensure gender equality in climate change-related policies, 
strategies and interventions. This policy has highlighted the importance of equal participation 
of women and men in climate change mitigation practices and low carbon development. Some 
of the major points that are addressed in the action plan are following: 
a. Ensure that gender considerations are addressed in the process of reviewing energy and 
technology policies. 
b. Develop gender responsive programmemes to reduce GHG emission at household (HH) 
while ensuring women’s access to energy and power technologies. 
181

=== PAGE 185 ===
12 
c. Improve women’s knowledge on climate change mitigation issues. 
d. Develop women’s entrepreneurship related to waste management. 
e. Increase women’s participation in solid waste and drainage management. 
f. Mainstream gender considerations in coastal and social forestry programmemes or 
initiatives. 
 
In addition, the ccGAP: Bangladesh 2013 has also put emphasis on enhancing knowledge 
and access to financial instruments for women. 
 
The primary responsibility for protecting the rights of workers rests with the Bangladesh 
government. However, there are some professional bodies such as Bangladesh Garment 
Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA), and the Bangladesh Knitwear 
Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BKMEA) who can do to ensure compliance with 
such provisions, and to sanction companies that abuse worker rights. However, factory 
owners can carry considerable political clout in Bangladesh and this can act as a barrier to 
holding them to account for violating workplace rights, as well as health and safety provisions. 
 
The United Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and 
Forest Degradation in Developing Countries + (REDD+) Readiness Roadmap (2012) pays 
attention to gender by taking initiative to identify gender-specific risks of the REDD+ 
Readiness development process in Bangladesh. In addition, the roadmap describes activities 
and institutional development that ensure ‘gender-neutral outcomes.’ 
 
International companies that purchase clothes and other products from Bangladesh factories 
also have a responsibility to ensure that worker safety and rights are maintained throughout 
their supply chains. Many factory conditions described in this report not only violate 
Bangladesh’s labor law, but also breach the standards that Western high street retailers insist 
that their suppliers follow.  
 
4.2 International Policy and Framework 
4.2.1 Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
The GCF provides clear definitions and differences between key gender terms; Gender, 
Gender Equality, Gender Equity and Gender Sensitivity. 
 
In accordance with the GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan, the core elements of gender 
mainstreaming required in GCF project design include: 
• 
Country ownership in terms of alignment with national policies and priorities; 
• 
A mandatory initial socioeconomic and gender assessment, to proactively build in a 
gender-sensitive approach to project planning design and implementation 
arrangements; 
• 
Gender equitable stakeholder consultations based on the gender parameters in the 
policy; 
• 
Determination of how the project/programme can respond to the needs of women and 
men in view of the specific climate change issue; 
• 
Identification of drivers of change and gender dynamics required to achieve the 
project/programme adaptation or mitigation goals;  
182

=== PAGE 186 ===
13 
• 
Identification and design of specific gender elements to be included in 
project/programme activities. 
 
Mainstreaming gender in GCF projects can be synthesized into a three-pronged approach on 
a gendered project cycle: 
• 
Gender analysis: to understand the social, economic and political factors underlying 
climate change-exacerbated gender inequality, and the potential contributions of 
women and men to societal changes in order to build resilience to and address climate 
change; 
• 
Gendered actions: methods and tools to promote gender equality and reduce gender 
disparities in climate action; and 
• 
Gender-sensitive M&E: measuring the outcomes and impacts of project activities on 
women and men’s resilience to climate change through gender responsive M&E. 
 
4.2.2 World Bank Group 
The World Bank recognizes in its Gender and Development Policy Framework that gender 
issues are important dimensions of its poverty reduction, economic growth, human well-being 
and development effectiveness agenda. According to the gender mainstreaming strategy, 
“The term gender refers to culturally based expectations of the roles and behaviors of males 
and females. The term distinguishes the socially constructed from the biologically determined 
aspects of being male and female.” 
 
The Bank Operational Policy Focused Specifically on Gender and Development (OP/BP 4.20) 
has been developed with the following objectives: 
• 
Providing a country-level, strategic Approach to mainstreaming gender issues 
• 
Country-level Gender Assessments 
• 
Integration of gender assessment findings in the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) 
developed by the bank for each donor country. It draws on and discusses the findings 
of the Gender Assessment and links policy provisions for gender (OP/BP 4.20) and 
policy provisions for CAS preparation and consultation (BP 2.11) 
• 
Integration of gender issues into operations of interventions established under the 
CAS. 
 
Based on the policy guidelines, a Gender Assessment (whether stand alone, as part of a 
broader ESW, or done outside the Bank) should typically include the following aspects: 
a. A brief description of: 
i. 
The different socioeconomic roles of females and males, including their 
participation in both the market and household economies; 
ii. 
male-female disparities in access to, control over, and use of assets and productive 
resources; 
iii. 
male-female disparities in human development indicators; 
iv. 
The relative participation of females and males in development decision-making; 
and 
v. 
Laws, institutional frameworks, norms, and other societal practices that lead 
(implicitly or explicitly) to gender discrimination and/or gender inequality; 
183

=== PAGE 187 ===
14 
b. A review of the country context, including the country’s policies, priorities, legal and 
regulatory framework, and institutional arrangements for implementing its gender and 
development goals; and 
c. Based on (a) and (b) above, suggested gender-responsive policies and interventions 
that are relevant for reducing poverty and enhancing economic growth, human well-
being, and development effectiveness. 
 
4.2.3 Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
ADB’s policy on Gender and Development (GAD) adopts mainstreaming as a key strategy in 
promoting gender equity. The key elements of ADB’s policy include the following. 
a. Gender sensitivity: to observe how ADB operations affect women and men, and to 
consider women’s needs and perspectives in planning its operations. 
b. Gender analysis: to assess systematically the impact of a project on men and women, 
and on the economic and social relationship between them. 
c. Gender planning: to formulate specific strategies that aim to bring about equal 
opportunities for men and women. 
d. Mainstreaming: to consider gender issues in all aspects of ADB operations, 
accompanied by efforts to encourage women’s participation in the decision-making 
process in development activities. 
e. Agenda setting: to assist DMC governments in formulating strategies to reduce gender 
disparities and in developing plans and targets for women’s and girls’ education, 
health, legal rights, employment, and income-earning opportunities. 
 
In 2013, ADB adopted a new Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Operational Plan 
2013-2020 that sets out the strategic directions and guiding framework for moving the gender 
equity agenda forward, and for better aligning gender operations with Strategy 2020. 
 
The outcome of the gender equality operational plan is improved gender equality results of 
ADB operations by 2020. While gender mainstreaming will remain the primary and priority 
approach, on its own it may not be sufficient to narrow persisting gender gaps and inequalities. 
Targeted public policies and priority investments in women and girls are required to accelerate 
closing remaining gender gaps and achieving better gender equality outcomes. 
Opportunities for direct investment in women and girls to narrow gender disparities will be 
explored in areas such as: 
a. 
girl’s secondary education and completion; 
b. 
access to productive assets, labor saving technology, jobs, and income earning 
opportunities; 
c. 
school-to-work transition programs and skills training for employment, especially 
for young women; 
d. 
business development services for women entrepreneurs; (v) financial services 
and access to credit; 
e. 
policy and legal reforms to tackle issues of gender-based violence and anti-
trafficking 
f. 
giving women voice in decision-making in both formal and informal institutions. 
 
184

=== PAGE 188 ===
15 
These complimentary and more targeted initiatives are more likely to deliver gender equality 
outcomes faster and to equip women to better capture and benefit from the opportunities 
provided through gender mainstreaming. 
 
4.2.4 International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
Supporting gender equality is a strategic priority for IFC, which provides advice and 
investments in partner countries and companies that help expand and strengthen the role of 
women.  IFC's strategic priorities for Gender: 
1. Closing gaps in health and education 
2. Supporting more and better job opportunities 
3. Helping increase access to finance, insurance, technology, and land 
4. Enhancing women’s leadership roles 
 
IFC works to reduce gaps between men and women in the private sector, enabling companies 
and economies to improve their performance. Too often, women's private-sector participation 
is under-valued. Integrating women better into business operations can increase companies’ 
profitability and contribute significantly to shared prosperity. However, women have less 
access to equal employment opportunities and capital to grow their businesses, experience 
high levels of sexual violence, are often barred from owning or inheriting land or other property, 
and have less income to invest for the future. 
 
IFC and its partners are addressing these challenges by working with clients to ensure that 
women and men can equally participate in creating business value and secure influence and 
income for themselves. When men and women alike are allowed to make decisions, pursue 
employment, entrepreneurship, and leadership, societies can reach their economic potential. 
 
In the IFC Performance Standards (PS 1-8), gender inclusion is addressed as a cross-cutting 
issue across multiple Performance Standards especially for assessment and management of 
environmental and social risks and impacts (PS-1) and labor and working conditions (PS-2).  
 
Further, IFC has developed a toolkit for addressing the specific gender related issues. The 
toolkit is a modular, customizable guide that includes four tool suites focused on different 
issues: 
a. TOOL SUITE 1: Increasing Gender Diversity from the Workforce to the Boardroom 
Tool Suite 1 presents a detailed business case for increasing gender balance on 
boards, in senior management, and in the workforce. It features 16 tools to help 
companies:  
i. 
Assess their gender-balance performance at all levels of their organization 
ii. 
Increase gender balance in their workforce  
iii. 
Monitor and evaluate progress towards gender diversity targets 
b. TOOL SUITE 2: Women-Owned Businesses and the Supply Chain 
Tool Suite 2 presents a detailed business case for increasing the gender diversity of 
businesses that are part of an OGM company’s supply chain. It features six tools to 
help companies: 
i. 
Evaluate their current supply chain  
ii. 
Develop gender-sensitive criteria for qualified vendors to improve outreach to 
and development of women-owned businesses  
185

=== PAGE 189 ===
16 
iii. 
Monitor and sustain progress towards a more gender-diverse supply chain 
c. TOOL SUITE 3: Women and Community Engagement 
Tool Suite 3 presents the business case for considering the issues, perspectives, and 
concerns of female community members in a company’s community engagement 
activities. It features 10 tools to help companies: 
i. 
Assess the degree of gender sensitivity in their current community engagement 
approaches  
ii. 
Integrate gender into existing community engagement assessments and 
activities  
iii. 
Monitor and sustain progress towards a more gender-equitable community 
engagement strategy and activity portfolio 
d. TOOL SUITE 4: Addressing Gender-Based Violence (GBV) in the Workforce 
Tool Suite 4 addresses and defines GBV, including intimate partner violence (IPV), 
sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA), and sexual harassment. It features seven tools 
to help companies:  
i. 
Recognize, address, and support victims of workplace sexual harassment  
ii. 
Support employees who may have experienced IPV and SEA in the community  
iii. 
Design activities as part of their community engagement portfolio, to recognize 
and address forms of GBV occurring in the community 
iv. 
Monitor and sustain progress towards reducing GBV 
 
4.2.5 Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
JICA has three Strategic Development Objectives (SDOs) for “gender and development,” with 
effective approaches, trends, and possible future directions. These three objectives are 
introduced below. The first and the second objectives correspond to the “principal objectives” 
in DAC classification of aid contribution, while the third corresponds to the “significant 
objective” of the same.  
 
JICA envisions “Inclusive and Dynamic Development” in its efforts for promoting human and 
to provide timely, comprehensive support to those in developing countries. JICA recognizes 
women as a key agent for change in development and ensures that women have an equal 
voice and leadership in decision-making in all its interventions. JICA will also enhance 
women’s participation in leadership roles in all stages of natural disasters from DRR, to 
emergency relief and to reconstruction. It will also facilitate the formation of policies from a 
gender and diverse group perspective. JICA’s work will be responsive to the different needs 
and priorities of women and diverse groups as well as their security as it actively provides 
support in building societies full of hope and dignity. 
 
Priority Areas: 
i. 
Women’s Economic Empowerment; Promote women’s Livelihood, employment, 
entrepreneurship and business development 
ii. 
Women’s Rights and Security; Ensure women’s rights and security in conflicts, 
natural disasters and other crisis including Trafficking in persons and Gender 
based violence 
iii. 
Women’s Education and lifetime Health; Promote women’s lifetime health and 
education to enhance their autonomy 
186

=== PAGE 190 ===
17 
iv. 
Gender Responsive Governance; Promote gender equal policies, strategies and 
institutions  
v. 
Gender Responsive Infrastructure; Promote infrastructure to enhance women’s 
mobility, economic opportunities and well-being  
vi. 
Enhancing Women’s Capabilities, Eliminating Discrimination and Improving Basic 
Infrastructure. 
 
4.3 Gender Related Policies of IDCOL and Local Financial 
Institutions (LFIs) 
4.3.1 IDCOL 
IDCOL makes the gender equity and equality a priority to maintain a safe, secured, positive, 
and collaborative culture in its work environment. IDCOL’s ESMF provides detail directions on 
integrating gender issues in development and assessing projects/programs which are 
following: 
 
a) IDCOL will assess internal mechanism and capacities to promote greater visibility of 
gender and social inclusion considerations in the design of its projects and programs.  
b) Ensure that all recipient projects and borrowers under the projects will identify and 
maximize opportunities for women’s participation in all employment opportunities 
during construction, operation and maintenance of infrastructure, with potential 
adoption of evidence-based gender related targets. 
c) Promote adherence to national core labor standards and commitments to gender 
equity and women’s empowerment stated in the legislations and regulations of the 
Government of Bangladesh.  
d) AssessthesocialandgenderimpactsoftheSolarHomeSystemsprogramandthe potential 
use of other identified women friendly technologies for greater social gender related 
benefits. 
e) Ensure the use of the Gender Action Framework. 
 
This Policy will guide in promoting gender equality, equity and awareness in its internal policies 
and procedures.  
 
Additionally, IDCOL has developed a Gender Policy for its organizational purpose. IDCOL 
believes that all staff members share a common interest in achieving the objectives of the 
organization and collaborative effort of the employees will ensure creating an environment 
that would promote teamwork and mutual respect. This Policy has been formulated to institute 
a systematic approach within the organizational practices in promoting gender sensitiveness, 
awareness, equity and equality in its internal environment and activities. Therefore, the 
Gender Policy along with ESMF will lead to implement gender sensitive approaches at IDCOL, 
its activities, and adherence to all other relevant laws, guidelines and policies. 
 
4.3.2 Local Financial Institutions (LFIs) 
There will be four local financial institutions (LFIs) involved in the programme who will channel 
the fund as concessional loans to finance garment business. These financial institutions are- 
City Bank Ltd, Southeast Bank Ltd, BRAC Bank Ltd and IDLC Finance Ltd. All of these 
institutions are well aware of the gender related concerns as they have experience of working 
187

=== PAGE 191 ===
18 
with readymade garments (RMG) sector. RMG sector in Bangladesh is one of those sectors 
that follows rules and regulations regarding gender quality especially in wage distribution, 
labor rights and occupational health and safety. Also, the current monitoring system in the 
RMG sector is well maintained and there is pressure from the international buyers as well. As 
a result, the LFIs are well aware of the gender related issues and its monitoring. A brief 
description of the existing policy and experience of the LFIs are following: 
 
IDLC Finance Limited follows the ten Principles of the United Nations Global Compact 
(UNGC) which are derived from Universal Declaration of Human Rights, International Labor 
Organization’s Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, Rio Declaration on 
Environment and Development, United Nations Convention Against Corruption. These 
Principles covers Human Rights, Labor, Environment and Anti-Corruption, and IDLC takes 
consent from respective clients for the same to approve loan applications. Thus, IDLC will 
consider gender issues to finance Energy Efficient projects under GCF by taking consent from 
clients considering wage level, overtime, leave policy, workplace health and safety (i.e., 
protective gears, fire safety, first-aid), freedom of association and/or collective bargaining 
provisions, and child labor.  
 
BRAC Bank has always been very much aligned with the gender equality, women 
empowerment and promoting leadership capacity of women when it comes to adhering ESG 
requirements within its organizational framework. On the policy level, they have their own 
Environmental & Social Safeguard Policy and Speak-up Policy where gender issues are 
highlighted with utmost priority.  
 
They have agreed to follow the following process under the guidance of Bank's Sustainable 
Finance Committee and on the working level, Sustainable Finance Unit will carry forward 
following activities to adhere GCF's ESG requirements: 
1) Review the existing Environmental & Social Safeguard Policy and add the new ESG 
requirements of GCF as part of it and get it approved by the management/board. 
2) Rollout capacity building sessions for business and risk assessment officials on the 
new ESG guidance note as prescribed by GCF. 
3) Follow GCF's prescribed methodology as well as already operating ESG risk 
assessment framework prior financing any under GCF. 
4) Yearly/half yearly monitoring of Bank as well as its client’s performance in dealing with 
ESG issues. 
 
Apart from Sustainable Finance Unit, BRAC Bank has their own Credit Inspection Team to 
monitor client's performance all over the year, hence conducting half-yearly or annual 
inspection will be a regular activity for us. 
 
Southeast Bank Limited (SEBL) does not have any specific gender related policy but they 
conduct periodic inspections at the project sites. Periodic and surprise inspections are among 
the keys risk management tools of SEBL. Most of the RMG clients of SEBL work with 
renowned international buyers who also have certain conditions precedent on gender related 
matters. For the proposed sub-projects, SEBL will conduct onsite as well as offsite periodic 
inspection for ensuring proper practice of gender related issues in the project. Also, SEBL will 
assess the client’s willingness and ability to implement gender issues as required by GCF and 
other regulatory authorities in the appraisal of loan proposal.  
188

=== PAGE 192 ===
19 
 
City Bank does not have any separate gender related policy for external project monitoring. 
However, they have an ESMS that is prepared following IFC Performance Standards and 
consider gender inclusion into the projects. Their customers have to fill up a declaration form 
before getting loan above a certain amount. This declaration form also has some criteria 
regarding gender issues. Also, they have a gender policy within their institutional framework 
to ensure gender equality in their organization and staff.  
 
City Bank conducts period audits and monitoring at project level and are positive about 
conducting half-yearly/ yearly monitoring after providing loans to the RMG units. During the 
monitoring procedure they will follow the gender action plan developed for this programme 
along with national policies and GCF guidelines for ensuring gender equality and women 
empowerment. 
 
 
189

=== PAGE 193 ===
20 
5 Findings from Gender Assessment  
5.1 Introduction 
Since its journey in Bangladesh, the RMG sector has created opportunities for people, 
especially for the poor and disadvantaged women to lead a dignified life. The industry plays a 
key role in employment generation and in the provision of income to the poor – it employs 
nearly 4.4 million workers2. The sector has also played a significant role in the socio-economic 
development of the country with women comprising nearly 80% of the total workforce in the 
sector3. It also plays a pivotal role to promote the development of linkage small scale 
industries, since 99% of the accessories like dyeing, printing, zippers, labels are manufactured 
in Bangladesh4. This had helped open employment opportunities through indirect economic 
activities, thereby contributing to the country’s overall socio-economic development, woman 
empowerment and poverty alleviation. 
 
It has seen tremendous growth and dominated the industrial sector of the country. Currently, 
there are more than 4,000 RMG firms (The Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and 
Exporters Association, 2019) in Bangladesh. Majority of those firms are locally owned with the 
exception of a few foreign firms located in export processing zones. Nearly 98% of RMG firms 
of Bangladesh are located mainly in 4 districts viz Dhaka (38.0%), Gazipur (28.9%), 
Chittagong (16.1%) and Narayanganj (14.7%)5.  Most of the factories are in different industrial 
clusters in these four districts due to availability of   better infrastructural facilities, access to 
major trade routes for import and export, logistic and banking facilities as well as easier 
availability of workers. Even within these regions there is a spread of RMG units within and 
beyond Export Processing Zones (EPZs) – only 1.5% of the total RMG enterprises are located 
in EPZs. This is due to the change in government legislation in 2010, allowing foreign direct 
investment (FDI) outside EPZs as well. Another key characteristic of the RMG sector in 
Bangladesh is that almost half of the units i.e. 48.9% are small enterprises which hire less 
than 500 workers6.  
 
However, women working in RMG sector are plagued with various problems, some of these 
are insufficient wage, irregularity in timeliness of wage payments and unsafe working 
conditions. Specifically, women workers have many issues that need to be taken care of 
especially in areas like workplace discrimination and career prospect, harassment, work and 
working time including rest, occupation health and safety, welfare provision, social protection 
and freedom of association, collective bargaining and social dialogue. Although gender-based 
wage discrimination is not seen that much now a days, discrimination exists in areas of equal 
treatment— women are forced to do overtime more than the men and the cut from the overtime 
allowance is more for women workers than men. Women workers face severe discrimination 
with regard to the scope of promotion and their career prospect is limited. A study shows that 
only 5-10% of the women workers eventually become supervisors (The Daily Star, March 8, 
 
2 Source: Information disseminated by BGMEA 
3 Source: Statement by BGMEA President (BGMEA website, 2019) 
4 Source: As per presentation provided by BGMEA representative  
5 Source: New Dynamics in Bangladesh’s Apparels Enterprises (CPD website, 2018) 
6 Source: New Dynamics in Bangladesh’s Apparels Enterprises (CPD website, 2018) 
190

=== PAGE 194 ===
21 
2015). Women workers’ workplaces are not free from sexual harassment which ranges from 
simple insults and demeaning remark to unwelcome touching and grabbing. 
 
The Gender Assessment mainly focused on the existing gender scenario of the RMG sector 
Bangladesh and tried to identify the problems, gaps and potential measures to overcome 
those. For the growth and sustainability of the sector, integrating women’s participation and 
contribution is a major concern. In this project, survey was conducted in 20 RMG units of 
different size, location & energy intensity to get an overview of the baseline scenario and 
identify the existing issues for ensuring gender equity. Along with this, KII, FGD and 
stakeholder consultations were conducted to get an overall picture of the current gender 
dynamics of the RMG sector in Bangladesh. 
 
5.2 Labor Force Participation 
Women in the labor force have been at the forefront of Bangladesh’s recent successful 
economic growth. They make up most of the workers in the ready-made garment (RMG) 
sector, the country’s flagship export-oriented industry. The creation of a large microfinance 
system focused on women—a subject of much study and emulation around the world—has 
also changed the economic position of women. Some of the major issues behind the 
participation of women in the RMG sector in Bangladesh are the following according to a 
study7: 
a) Women from extreme poor households have a significantly higher probability of 
participation compared to non-poor. The difference between moderate poor and non-
poor are insignificant. 
b) Poorer women are more likely to participate in low paid wage employment whereas 
the non- poor participate in self-employment. 
c) Presence of young children has a positive effect on self-employment and a negative 
effect on wage employment. 
d) Being married has a negative effect. This result may have been influenced by the fact 
that paid employment dominated by the RMG sector requires long hours of work. The 
study finds that there is a growing acceptance of outside employment among young 
unmarried workers.  
 
In socioeconomic context of Bangladesh, women participate less on formal livelihood activities 
in rural areas. Even if they do, there is discrimination in wages compared to men and socially 
it is not seen positively that a woman is working outside home. Also, there is limited livelihood 
opportunity due to lack of industries in rural areas. So, women from rural areas prefer RMG 
sector as there is good opportunity for women even with no education or skill, they get equal 
or almost equal pay as men, it is a formal employment and they get a regular salary each 
month. Moreover, they move to new places for work and there they can live independently 
and without judged by the society. On the other hand, as the women coming from the rural 
area are comparatively less educated or skilled than those of urban areas, the employers can 
hire them with minimum wages. Also, they are more vulnerable, docile and manageable than 
women in urban areas. They accept without protest the flexible terms of employment and 
hardly raise their voice against anything. This is why employers prefer to hire them.  
 
7 Bridges, S; Lawson, D; Begum, S. 2011. “Labour Market Outcomes in Bangladesh: The Role of Poverty and 
Gender Norms”, European Journal of Development Research, Vol. 23, www.palgrave-journals.com/ejdr. 
191

=== PAGE 195 ===
22 
 
Even though the RMG sector has played a tremendous role for women empowerment, there 
has been discrimination in labour force participation in this sector. From data collected within 
factories, 4 out of every 5 production line workers are female, whilst just over 1 in 20 
supervisors is a woman.8 This is mainly due to lack of education, trainings, technical 
knowledge and social responsibilities of women towards their families. Also, women are 
engaged more in sewing or as helpers compared to men. Less number of women are seen in 
RMG units working in cutting, quality control or supervising compared to men. A recent study9 
showed that Male workers are found to be less in helper and sewing department by about 
86% and 78% respectively. 
 
Figure 5-1 Gender scenario in labour force participation in RMG units 
The Labour Force Surveys (LFS), conducted by the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS), 
are the major source of data related to labour market and employment in the country. There 
are a number of challenges in using LFS data, as there are concerns with respect to the 
comparability of data from different survey years, owing to changes in methodology. Keeping 
in mind these limitations, we here present the figures on labour force participation and 
employment for the period between 1999/00 and 2016/17. 
 
Table 5-1 Trends in labour force and employment10 
1999/00 
2005/06 
2010 
2013 
2015/16 
2016/17 
 
8 https://www.theigc.org/blog/female-empowerment-in-the-bangladeshi-garment-industry/  
9 Mahmud, M. I. & Afrin, S. 2017. Sustainability of Female Workforce in the Ready-Made Garment Industries of 
Bangladesh. International Journal of Science and Qualitative Analysis. Vol. 3, No. 5, pp. 49-54. 
doi:10.11648/j.ijsqa.20170305.11 
10 Raihan, S. & Bidisha, S. H. (2018). Female employment stagnation in Bangladesh. EDIG Research Paper Five 
192

=== PAGE 196 ===
23 
All areas 
Rural 
Urban 
All areas 
Rural 
Urban 
All areas 
Rural 
Urban 
All areas 
Rural 
Urban 
All areas 
Rural 
Urban 
All areas 
Rural 
Urban 
Labour force (millions) 
Both 
40.7 31.5 9.2 
49.5 37.8 11.7 56.7 43.4 13.3 60.7 43.5 17.1 62.1 44.8 17.3 63.5 45.7 17.8 
Male 
32.2 25.1 7.1 
37.3 28.5 8.9 
39.5 30.2 9.3 
42.5 30.5 12 43.1 30.6 12.5 43.5 30.7 12.8 
Female 
8.6 6.4 2.2 
12.1 9.3 
2.8 
17.2 13.2 4.0 
18.2 13.1 5.1 19.1 14.3 4.8 19.9 14.9 5.01 
Employed population (millions) 
Both 
39.0 30.3 8.7 
47.4 36.1 11.3 54.1 41.7 12.4 58.1 41.9 16.2 59.5 43 16.5 60.8 43.9 16.9 
Male 
31.1 24.4 6.7 
36.1 27.5 8.6 
37.9 29.1 8.8 
41.2 29.6 11.6 41.8 29.7 12.1 42.2 29.8 12.4 
Female 
7.9 5.9 2 
11.3 8.6 
2.7 
16.2 12.5 3.7 
16.8 12.3 4.5 17.8 13.3 4.4 18.6 14.1 4.6 
Labour force participation rate (%) 
Both 
54.9 54.6 55.8 58.5 59.4 55.7 59.3 60.0 57.3 57.1 57.3 56.7 58.5 59.6 56 58.2 59.3 55.7 
Male 
84.0 84.0 83.7 86.8 88.0 83.2 82.5 83.3 80.2 81.7 81.6 81.7 81.9 81.9 81.7 80.5 80.3 81 
Female 
23.9 23.1 26.5 29.2 29.8 27.4 36.0 36.4 34.5 33.5 33.7 32.9 35.6 37.6 30.8 36.3 38.6 31 
Source: LFS, BBS (Data from several years) 
 
Table 5-2 Annual average change in labour force and participation rate7 
1999/00–
2005/06 
2005/06–
2010 
2010–
2013 
2013– 
2015/16 
2015/16–
2016/17 
Annual average growth rate in labour force (%) 
Male 
2.64 
1.47 
2.53 0.38 
0.96 
Female 
6.78 
10.5 
1.94 1.65 
4.49 
Annual average change in labour force
Male 
0.85 
0.55 
1.00 0.20 
0.40 
Female 
0.58 
1.23 
0.33 0.30 
0.80 
Annual change in participation rate (percentage
Male 
0.47 
-1.08 
-0.27 0.07 
-1.4 
Female 
0.88 
1.70 
-0.83 0.7 
0.7 
Source: LFS, BBS (Data from several years) 
 
According to the labor force survey (LFS), the female labor force participation rate increased 
from 2003 to 2006 and then increased dramatically from 2006 to 2010, reaching 36.1%. The 
LFS in 2013, found women’s participation declined to 33.5%, or a 2.6 percentage point fall 
between the two surveys.11 According to a recent survey of Center for Policy Dialogue (CPD), 
the ratio of female worker participation in the RMG sector, known as a women-driven sector, 
has seen a decline in recent years. According to the survey, there are 3,596 active RMG 
factories in Bangladesh with 3.5 million workers, of which 60.8% are female and 39.2% are 
male. In the previous survey in 2015, the workers were 36% male and 64% female. The survey 
was conducted on 2,270 workers in 193 factories in small, medium, and large categories in 
Dhaka, Gazipur, Narayanganj, and Chittagong.12  
 
During this study it was observed that the percentage of female workers is less than male 
workers. This scenario might have occurred because of the recent increase in wages which 
 
11 https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/203906/women-work.pdf 
12 https://cpd.org.bd/declining-female-participation-in-rmg-sector-cpd-study/ 
193

=== PAGE 197 ===
24 
attracted more male workers to join the labour force in RMG sector. Also, the employers are 
now becoming interested to hire male workers over females as they would not have to provide 
additional facilitates (i.e., maternity leave, special support for pregnant or lactating mother, 
workplace safety during night shifts) to men. Moreover, men are available anytime as they do 
not have family bindings or security related concerns in the perspective of Bangladesh.  
 
 
Figure 5-2 Gender distribution of workers in selected RMG units 
The RMG units were selected were based on their technical performance mainly and the 
survey was conducted with the Facility Managers to get an overall idea about the factory. 
However, in case of facility managers, all the facility managers in the sample are males. There 
was no representation of women in the higher management of the selected RMG units as well. 
This is a very common scenario in Bangladesh as the participation of women in managerial 
posts in garments sector is negligible. According to a study conducted on women workers in 
Bangladesh RMG sector by CPD in 2018, only about 0.5% of managers in RMG enterprises 
are female, and only about 9.3% of HR managers in the RMG sector are female. On the 
production floor, of the 60.8% females, more women are employed in the sewing section 
(73.9%) and less women work in the cutting section (22.7%).13 
 
 
Figure 5-3 Gender of facility managers 
Lack of training facilities, skill and proper knowledge of technology are the main reasons for 
female workers to lag behind in the sector, the surveys reveal. Besides, male workers are 
taking more interests in the sector due to increasing wages. During FGD, female workers said 
 
13 Uddin, M. 2018. Declining female participation in RMG sector: CPD Study. Centre for Policy Dialogue. 
https://cpd.org.bd/declining-female-participation-in-rmg-sector-cpd-study/  
43%
57%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Female
Male
Gender Distribution of the Workers
100%
Gender of the Facility managers
Male
194

=== PAGE 198 ===
25 
that there are trainings for workers but women do not participate because they feel most of 
the participants are male. Also, women are promoted less in higher positions. So, the female 
workers do not feel interested to participate in the trainings. However, 
 
It was revealed from KII with experts that in terms of gender equality, the sector has very low 
wage discrimination at similar work-levels although some works are exclusive terrains of male 
workers. The sector does, however, has limited participation from women in decision-making 
positions - only 7% of management professionals are women. This leads to entry barriers in 
terms of market perceptions. Also, women themselves are also less inclined to get into such 
job roles. 
 
The tapering off the number of female workers can be stopped only by organizing training and 
skill development works, both by public and private organizations, the experts said. Over 3.31 
million people are, at present, working in this sector. Majority of them are laborer. Earlier in 
2013, the BBS survey found the percentage of male workers in the RMG sector 43.14 while 
the female workers 56.86%. The total workers in this sector were 2.99 million at that time. The 
reason of the decline is mainly due to changing technology, women have no opportunity to 
rule the readymade garments sector by utilizing sewing skill only. A comparison between the 
findings of the two BBS surveys also revealed that the average growth rate of employment of 
male workers in the RMG sector has increased 11.54% between 2013 and 2016-2017. On the 
other hand, the rate of employment for women has decreased by 6.56% during the same 
period. 
 
Specifically, on women workers in Bangladesh RMG sector, the CPD study reveals that only 
about 0.5% of managers in RMG enterprises are female, and only about 9.3% of HR managers 
in the RMG sector are female. On the production floor, of the 60.8% females, more women 
are employed in the sewing section (73.9%) and less women work in the cutting section 
(22.7%). The study points to the skill level comparison between males and females in terms 
of knowledge of using machines, and finds that compared to male workers, female workers 
are proportionately less knowledgeable about operating different machines. 
 
There are numerous estimates on the number of factories and number of labourers present. 
The list below gives the estimates from reputed establishments: 
a. Department of Inspection for Factories and Establishments (DIFE): DIFE has 
published a full database of 4841 RMG factories in 2017 (DIFE 2017). According to 
this data base, 2,155,453 workers are currently employed in the RMG industry of them 
43% are men and 57% are women.  
b. Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA): As 
per BGMEA documentation, there are 4,482 RMG factories employing about 4 million 
workforces of them 3.2 million are women (BGMEA, 2017).  
c. Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS): BBS conducts Labour Force Survey which 
is counted as having the biggest sample sizes in Bangladesh. According to this survey, 
there are 3.1 million workforces employed in the RMG factories of them 1.7 million are 
men and 1.4 million are women (QLFS, 2017) i.e. 54% and 46% men and women 
respectively.  
 
Government policies can affect female labor force participation rates, positively or otherwise. 
Some important policies are already in place and appear to have had good effect. The various 
195

=== PAGE 199 ===
26 
programs that have been implemented for increasing female enrollment in primary and 
secondary schools have been notably effective in eliminating the gender education gap. 
Bangladesh already has a relatively generous maternity leave policy. Employers are required 
to provide 16 weeks of paid maternity leave, as specified by the 2006 Labor Law. While in 
principle this policy is likely to increase female participation rates, it is unclear how much 
impact it has had in practice. It is unlikely to have any effect at all on anything but formal paid 
employment, which limits it to a small minority of working women. No systematic evaluations 
appear to have been made, but there are reports that paid maternity leave is generally not 
granted at most RMG factories and that most workers are not aware of their rights in this 
regard. 
 
5.3 Constrains for Female Employment 
The KIIs were conducted with policy makers, BGMEA, BKMEA, RMG factories, development 
partners, noted economists and asked mainly about their views on the present status of 
women in the RMG sector, the challenges of female employment and the strategies that can 
be adopted to raise female labour force participation in Bangladesh.14 
 
Figure 5-4 presents the seven major constraints to employing women as mentioned by the 
stakeholders. These constraints include lack of education, required skill and knowledge, social 
and work place safety, social norms, maternity and pregnancy issues, long working 
hours/overtime, lack of transport facilities and the care burden. 
 
Male-female equal contribution is very important for social coherence and balance. However, 
due to social constrains, female workers have face problems and sometimes have to sacrifice 
their career. After the updated increased PayScale, more men are showing their interest to 
join RMG sector. The owners also prefer to employ a male worker rather than a female worker. 
This is mainly because of – 
o Lack of skill in female workers. 
o Female workers need more breaks after marriage or after having children.  
o Safety issues need to be assured for female workers and mostly they do not want 
to stay for night shifts. 
 
Most of the female workers in the RMG sector are very young, 18-29 years and do not tend 
to work in the sector for a long period. This is mainly due to occupational hazard, health issues, 
damage to eyesight, having children etc. Also, employers do not prefer aged experienced 
workers in the factory to reduce cost and prefer to higher fresh workers at lower wages.  
 
However, social and gender issues are better than previous because maternity leave, and 
other facilities are given to the workers in most of the RMS units. 
 
14 Annex 1 presents a list of the KII participants 
196

=== PAGE 200 ===
27 
Figure 5-4 Major constraints to female employment perceived by different stakeholders 
From social perspective, male ratio is higher in management sector. It will be solved by 
creating awareness and providing training programs. There are some barriers like mind set 
up, lack of equity, lack of awareness, etc. It will be solved in future. BKMEA also provide 
lactating mother training (who have two children under 2 years age) and get 900 take-ups per 
month (total 36000 take-ups in two years) for extra care of mother (Government is paying the 
amount) and also female pregnant workers get maternity leave.  
Currently, rate of educated women has increased in the RMG sector with the increased 
education rate in the country overall. Young women joining the sector have mostly completed 
at least primary education with a good percentage of completion of eighth grade and above 
as well. However, women usually get less opportunity for technical skill development trainings 
due to the common perspective of the management that men are technically sounder than 
women and can learn new skills easily. This situation makes women lag behind from their 
male competitors and they cannot get promotions. In many cases, women have to be stagnant 
in a position for years or lose their job. To ensure increased women’s engagement, mandatory 
gender-sensitive trainings for all workers is needed. In this way female workers will not be 
dropped off for automation only due to lack of trainings.  
Jobs in the garments sector are divided among several sections and there are different 
workers for each section. At initial level the workers do not need much technical skills. But in 
later stages higher technical knowledge is required for operating modern machineries. No 
worker, both male and female enter into the sector knowing the technical skills; they gradually 
learn those after several trainings. The problem lies in gender inequality because male 
workers are given more opportunities and involved in decision making than female workers. 
Major 
constrains 
for female 
employment 
in RMG
Lack of 
education
Lack of 
technical 
knowledge 
and skill
Social and 
workplace 
safety
Social norms
Long 
working 
hour/ 
overtime/ 
late night 
shifts
Maternity 
and 
pregnancy 
issues
Lack of 
transport 
facilities
197

=== PAGE 201 ===
28 
So, it is essential to ensure that both women and men get access to skill development 
opportunities. Also, the higher management need to change their concept of sex-segregation 
of work and provide equal scope for both genders. 
The project will increase awareness of the women working in the sector regarding their rights 
and encourage them to raise their voice whenever they face any injustice. Also, monitoring 
mechanism will be at place so that it can be assessed whether the management is addressing 
issues to ensure women empowerment and gender equality. 
5.4 Educational Status 
In RMG sector, at the worker level recruitments are done through interview and by skill test of 
the worker. No standard certification system exists to assess the skill level of the worker. RMG 
employers prefer at least class 5 level education while recruit workers and at least class 8 for 
the technical occupations and supervisors. According to a survey of Center for Policy Dialogue 
(CPD), released on Mar’18, among garment worker 60.8% are female & 39.20% are male. 
The survey was conducted on  2270 workers in 193 factories in Dhaka, Gazipur, Narayanganj 
& Chottogram. These large portions of women are mostly less or uneducated. 
Among the female workers surveyed, most have attained some form of education (SSC or 
HSC level, primary level or education up to class ten) and 4% have no formal education at all. 
Figure 5-5 Education Attainment of the Female Workers 
Among the male workers surveyed, there is a greater incidence of individuals with higher 
educational qualifications (34% have SSC qualification, 14% have HSC qualification, 9% have 
primary education attainment, 29% have education attainment up to class ten and 14% have 
a diploma or a bachelor’s degree) and there are no individuals without any formal education.  
Primary
20%
Upto Class ten
19%
SSC
19%
HSC
38%
No Education
4%
Education Attainment of the Female Workers
Primary
Upto Class ten
SSC
HSC
No Education
198

=== PAGE 202 ===
29 
Figure 5-6 Education Attainment of the male Workers 
Overall, the male workers perform better in terms of education attainment than the females. 
Figure 5-7 Educational qualification of facility managers 
Three-fourths of the sampled facility managers have education higher than HSC and one-
fourths of the facility managers have education qualification of HSC or below.  
In RMG sector the practice of formal training is still not so popular. Only technicians and 
managerial staff undergo some formal training system but for the workers and supervisors the 
skills are achieved mostly through informal training which is well known as on-the-job training. 
Only a small number of entrepreneurs have been investing for developing the skills of their 
workforce. 
The apparel industry in Bangladesh needs to draw the attention of the youth of the country, to 
show them the huge career opportunities that are to be found in the RMG sector. This could 
include a stronger emphasis on providing young people with a basic understanding of the 
sector, including the various levels of employment opportunities at the floor level, to 
merchandisers, designers, product developers and beyond. 
In education, there is a strong need for greater levels of knowledge transfer between education 
and business. Many western countries have clear and well-developed knowledge transfer 
partnerships in place which sees ideas developed in colleges and universities being shared 
Primary
9%
Upto Class 
ten
29%
SSC
34%
HSC
14%
Diploma and 
Bachelor
14%
Education Attainment of the male Workers
Primary
Upto Class ten
SSC
HSC
Diploma and Bachelor
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
HSC and below
Degree above HSC
Educational Qualification of the Facility 
Manager
199

=== PAGE 203 ===
30 
with the industry. Bangladesh also needs to think carefully about how it can develop an 
education system to provide the RMG sector with the industry leaders of the future who will 
allow the sector to compete at the higher end of the value chain and address the need for 
competent middle management. It is unfortunate that the RMG industry in Bangladesh often 
hires mangers from neighboring countries such as Sri Lanka and India when there is an 
abundance of potential talent domestically available—if only they were nurtured the right way. 
Around 13 percent of the country’s garments factories have employed foreign experts in the 
top posts who remit over USD 5 billion from Bangladesh every year (CPD 2018). In the 
absence of a skilled workforce, particularly in merchandising, design and marketing, as 
well as in operation of sophisticated machines, the factory owners have hired experts 
from  China, Japan, India, and Pakistan to fill the gap. Out of 126 universities (46 
public and 80 private) 
there 
are 
two 
universities 
in 
the 
country—BGMEA 
University of Fashion and Technology (BUFT) and Bangladesh University of Textiles 
(BUTEX)—that 
have 
been 
established for the garments and textiles industry 
specifically.15 Even though the number is not up to the mark, these two universities are 
producing skilled graduates for the garments industry. Other engineering and technical 
universities should also include courses relevant to textile/RMG sector as it is a potential 
industry in the country.  
Moreover, current industry leaders have a vital role to play here, visiting schools and 
colleges and providing input to government agencies about the long-term needs of the RMG 
industry. There is an urgent need to develop a cadre of upper level managers. The country's 
business schools, in cooperation with BGMEA and BKMEA can develop training 
programmes for lower level managers to become upper level managers. Bangladesh 
should stop dependence on expatriate managers. Producing high skilled workers for the 
RMG industry will contribute to the economy by reducing the amount of foreign remittance 
that leaves the country.13 
At present the demand for skilled workers is increasing. Besides, it is becoming difficult 
for new women to get involved in this sector due to its labor-intensive nature of work. Women 
are quitting their jobs to take care of their children. Without initiatives taken at the public-
private level to make women skilled, it will be difficult for them to sustain in this profession. 
Moreover, Woman worker cannot work more than seven years on average. A number of 
experts and people involved with the sector said a large section of women workers quit 
jobs after having a child. 
5.5 Gender Perspectives of Energy Efficiency 
Different opinions were gathered on gender perspectives of energy efficiency from 
the stakeholder engagement workshop where a wide range of energy efficiency 
practitioners including regulators, policy makers, experts, academicians, researchers and 
garment sector entrepreneurs, as well as environment, social and gender experts 
participated. During the discussion it was identified that the women who are joining 
mainly are either unskilled, uneducated, or has joined without any training. As a result, no 
expertise is being created. With increased automation and use of advanced technology in 
machineries, already a decreasing trend of female workers is seen in the past 4 years. 
Experts are concerned that with the introduction of energy efficient machineries and 
equipment the percentage of female workers 
15 Rahman, S. 2019. Are educational institutions failing the RMG industry? The Daily Star. November 20, 2019. 
https://www.thedailystar.net/opinion/news/are-educational-institutions-failing-the-rmg-industry-1829314  
200

=== PAGE 204 ===
31 
might reduce even more if they cannot compete with the male workers in terms of technical 
knowledge and skills. Some recent studies also showed similar types of findings.  
 
According to a study, it was underlined that women workers are more vulnerable than their 
male counterparts to losing their jobs due to automation in 5 key sectors in Bangladesh 
including the readymade garment industry. It said women in low-wage occupations with less 
education are likely to be impacted more due to high risk of automation in readymade garment 
and textile, furniture, agro-processing, leather and footwear and tourism and hospitality 
sectors at the beginning of Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR).16 The research also mentioned 
that the workers with primary education are going to be more vulnerable than those having 
secondary level of education. To overcome this situation, more trainings and knowledge 
sharing activities need to be promoted especially for the female workers as they are generally 
the ones with lower level of education and technical skills compared to the male workers in 
the context of Bangladesh.  
 
Another issue identified during stakeholder consultation was considering special needs of men 
and women while installing any energy efficient equipment. For instance, replacing regular 
lights with energy efficient lights is a very common measure towards attaining energy 
efficiency. However, some studies by BKMEA showed that workers face difficulties with color 
shading when LED lights are used and it ultimately caused eyesight damage especially to 
women as more women are engaged in sophisticated tasks like sewing in RMG sector. So, 
there should be some standard for choosing energy efficient machinery and equipment has 
no negative impact on health. 
 
5.6 Decision Making 
Bangladesh RMG sector plays a significant role to reduce poverty and to increase women 
empowerment. RMG industry has been swaggering in the country since long time as a catalyst 
for sustainable development and growth. Apart from job opportunities, the RMG sector gave 
underprivileged women to step out of their homes and live independently. Through working in 
the sector, women became more aware of their rights and started to raise voice for equality. 
Also, higher education can give increased wage which encouraged a lot of poor and 
underprivileged women to complete secondary (SSC) and higher secondary (HSC) level of 
education. With the job women can support their families financially and have secured a place 
in decision making at family level. Moreover, this sector plays a significant role in changing 
mindset of women as these working women realize the importance of education and tend to 
spend more on their children’s better education. 
 
However, there is still a gap in terms of decision making at the workplace. Workers’ 
organization/committees of different forms are available at workplaces but most of the women 
workers generally are not members of the organization/committees available at workplaces. 
Moreover, majority are not members of any organization/association at workplace. 
 
 
16 https://bd.apparelresources.com/business-news/sustainability/automation-weighs-heavy-women-garment-
workers/  
201

=== PAGE 205 ===
32 
While women workers are increasingly becoming representatives at the factory level, they are 
still not being equally represented. Also, leadership positions in union confederations and 
federations are still largely dominated by men. 
 
This is partly due to widely-recognized gender ideologies, as well as to the reality that women 
are still expected to assume the majority of childcare responsibilities after they return home, 
discouraging them from serving as trade union representatives. 
 
5.7 Wage and Benefits 
In every five year, the government forms a new Minimum Wage Board for the RMG sector to 
formulate a new wage structure for apparel workers. The board is usually led by a senior 
district judge as chairman. In addition to representative from the owners and workers in the 
board, it also consists of three independent members. The representatives of owners and 
workers separately propose minimum wage for the workers respectively and place it to the 
board in black and white. The government of Bangladesh gazette the new wage structure for 
RMG workers setting Tk 8,000 or USD 97.7117  as the minimum monthly pay in 2019. 
 
Table 5-3Revised wage structure by GoB in 2019 
Grade 
Basic 
Wage 
in 
2018 
Gazette 
(BDT) 
Revised 
Basic 
Wage 
in 
2019 
(BDT) 
Increase in 
basic 
wage (%) 
Gross 
wage 
in 
2018 
(BDT) 
Gross 
wage 
in 
2019 
(BDT) 
Increase in 
gross 
wage (%) 
7 
4100 
4100 
0.0% 
8000 
8000 
0.0% 
6 
4370 
4380 
0.2% 
8405 
8420 
0.2% 
5 
4670 
4683 
0.3% 
8855 
8875 
0.2% 
4 
4930 
4998 
1.4% 
9245 
9347 
1.1% 
3 
5160 
5330 
3.3% 
9590 
9845 
2.7% 
2 
8520 
9044 
6.2% 
14630 
15416 
5.4% 
1 
10440 
10938 
4.8% 
17510 
18257 
4.3% 
 
 
 
17 Considering USD 1= BDT 81.17 on 1 January 2019 
202

=== PAGE 206 ===
33 
 
Figure 5-8 Country-wise Garments Monthly Minimum Wage 2019 / Source: NYU Stern Center for 
Business and Human Rights 
The survey results showed that in RMG sector there is no gender-based discrimination in 
terms of wages and other benefits. In terms of gender equality, the sector has very low wage 
discrimination at similar work-levels although some works are exclusive terrains of male 
workers. Also, there is fair compensation provided to workers as per their pay grades. Most of 
the workers generally get festival bonus. Women workers get lunch break. However, except 
lunch break workers are not provided with opportunity to take rest. 
  
However, knowledge among the women workers about calculation of overtime compensation 
is poor. Three in every four women do not know the calculation method. So, the authority can 
manipulate them easily. Also, there is a discrimination in disbursement of salary on time. 
According to government policy, salary of the workers should be cleared within seven days 
after the due date. But in case of female workers there is often a delay in salary disbursement. 
Moreover, on terms of trainings and other opportunities women are les promoted. As a result, 
they get less promotions compared to their male colleague due lack of skill and technical 
knowledge. This is one of the reasons why there are few women in the supervisor and 
managerial positions.  
 
5.8 Workplace Environment 
The study also revealed that, overall working conditions for women is favorable - wage 
discrimination on the basis of gender in the sector is largely absent, special benefits are 
provided for women with special needs (like infrastructure for lactating mothers, maternity 
leaves etc.). The incidence of workplace harassment does exist and in case any such cases 
are reported, there is a robust redress mechanism in place. Also, examples of child labor are 
also limited.  
 
However, the scenario is only present in large scale factories and mostly absent in medium 
and small-scale factories. The workers from medium and small factories still suffer from 
unhealthy working condition, not having standard working hours, inadequate breaks during 
working hours and inadequate worker safety. Workplaces of the women workers are not free 
203

=== PAGE 207 ===
34 
from harassment. In other words, women workers experience different forms of harassment 
at workplace. Of the different forms, verbal abuse/harassment is the most common one. The 
reason behind this contrasting level of compliance between large scale and medium/small 
scale units is the growing concern of the buyers in social, health, safety and gender 
considerations after the Rana Plaza incident.  
 
Sexual harassment has decreased in the garments sectors in recent years due to strict rules 
and monitoring at the factories. Most of the large enterprises are highly compliant ensuring 
safety and security of their workers and there is functional sexual harassment complaint 
committee. In case of small and medium enterprises, there are sexual harassment complaint 
committee on paper, but their functionality and transparency are questionable. However, in all 
cases the workers have less trust on the committees and most of the time do not file any 
complaint.  So, this issue can be considered as a moderate risk factor as there is already 
existing committees for sexual harassment and the rate of sexual harassment is decreasing.  
 
Post Rana Plaza, there was a severe market and media pressure on the buyers i.e. large 
apparel brands to fulfil their social responsibility and ensure better working conditions for the 
workers employed in these manufacturing units. Accordingly, the buyers demanded stringent 
compliance with safety and health norms from the manufacturing units and would withdraw 
business in case these norms are not met. The Accord18 and Alliance19 was developed and 
strictly implemented for this purpose – audits were conducted, and the unit were notified on 
the areas of improvement. This prompted the large industries, who are in direct business with 
the buyers, to comply with these norms. However, the trickledown effect on small and medium 
scale units was limited since they rarely have forward linkages with the final buyers and mostly 
supply inputs for these large-scale units. Hence, there is a large scope of improving the social, 
health and safety conditions for the medium and small-scale units.  
 
Women workers are mostly deprived of social protection related facilities at workplace. High 
prevalence of ignorance/unawareness among workers concerning the social protection 
facilities are a striking feature in this regard for a long time. However, the situation is changing 
now. At present the factories try to comply with existing regulations and provide facilities to 
female workers.  
 
 
18 The Accord is an independent, legally binding agreement between brands and trade unions to work towards 
a safe and healthy garment and textile industry in Bangladesh. 
19 The Alliance for Bangladesh Worker Safety (Alliance) is a legally binding, five-year commitment to improve 
safety in Bangladeshi ready-made garment (RMG) factories. 
204

=== PAGE 208 ===
35 
From this study it was also observed that most factories try to provide maternity leave and 
special provisions for pregnant and lactating mothers as shown in the graph below.  
Figure 5-9: Workers’ Responses on Maternity Care 
 
In terms of safety issues, there is a risk of fire hazard as most of the materials and chemicals 
used in RMG are flammable. So proper fire safety needs to be ensured. In terms of health and 
safety issues this sector has improved a lot, especially after the Rana Plaza incident. However, 
they are still not up to the standard. The study found that among the total respondents, 48% 
said that they received trainings on chemical handling and storage of which 15% were female 
and 33% male workers. On the other hand, 52% said that they did not receive any training of 
which 21% were female and 31% were male (Figure 6-11). 
 
 
Figure 5-10 Respondents receiving training on chemical handling and storage 
82%
89%
70%
 The facility has breastfeeding and childcare
facilities
Provision for maternity leave
 Special provision for pregnant women
0%
10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
205

=== PAGE 209 ===
36 
 
 
Figure 5-11 Respondents receiving training on fire management 
The study findings also showed that most of the facilities that were surveyed provided fire 
safety trainings to the workers.  
 
 
 
Figure 5-12 Respondents receiving environment, health and safety training 
The study revealed that among the respondents 66% received training on environment, heal 
and safety issues of which 21% were female and 45% were male. Rest of the 44% 
respondents said that they did not receive any sorts of training related to this issue from their 
facility. 
 
The effectiveness of initiatives undertaken by Government to address environment, social and 
gender related issues in RMG sector is high. But the owners are not always interested to follow 
those unless the initiatives are imposed on them. However, the RMG sector is doing 
comparatively better than other industries. Monitoring bodies like Accord, Alliance, ILO push 
the owners to follow the standards for which the current situation in terms of compliance have 
206

=== PAGE 210 ===
37 
improved. But there is still a lack of awareness among the workers about their rights in terms 
of wages and other facilities. So, they need to sensitize more so that they can be aware of 
their rights.  
 
5.9 Social beliefs, perceptions, and stereotypes 
Participation of women is increasing in the Bangladeshi labor market, but socio-culturally 
constructed norms envisage that women and men’s position is not equal. Women tend to be 
concentrated in certain low-paying, low-skilled sectors such as the garment industry, and 
within it, are often stuck in lower paying occupations such as sewing machine operators and 
helpers. Due to stereotypes regarding women’s and men’s aspirations, preferences and 
capabilities, employers’ perceptions of women’s and men’s skills and attitudes are affected. 
This trend has been strengthened over the last two decades: as garment production becomes 
more technology-intensive, occupations become increasingly skilled and better paid, 
employing a higher proportion of men. Similar scenario was observed from the KII that female 
workers are decreased in Bangladesh in the RMG sector mainly because of – 
o Increased wage structure attracts male workers to this job and owners prefer male 
over female. 
o Due to automation and lack of skill in female workers. 
o Female workers need more breaks after marriage or after having children. This is 
also a reason why owner prefer male workers more. 
o Safety issues need to be assured for female workers and mostly they do not want 
to stay for night shifts. 
 
Moreover, most of the female labors in the garment industries are mainly involved in cutting, 
sewing, hemming, stitching, ironing, buttoning, and folding20. This is obviously seen as a 
gender-based skills compared to men whereas man mainly occupy supervisor or managerial 
positions. At the same time, men are firstly introduced to formal training, new technologies, 
and fashions. Women workers whom called “unskilled” are identified as marginal and low-paid 
labors and excluded from organizational and managerial training. Thus, women are 
marginalized in managerial roles because gender stereotypical beliefs and practices. 
 
Like many other countries, the participation of women in market economy especially in the 
managerial position of any kind of business firms in Bangladesh is seriously affected on limits 
by gender nature or stereotypes. Nevertheless, when men and women are in similar 
professions, clearly men’s earning, wages and profit is higher than women. In Bangladesh 
although government job’s payment system is equal for men and women, but non-government 
jobs salary is varied for men and women, especially in managerial position. Male than female 
mainly occupies educational institutions, bank, and insurance companies’ senior positions, 
which represent that strong gender stereotypes exist in the organizations. Besides these, 
women’s pregnancy and child rearing are further barrier to achieving stable or top most 
 
20 Habiba Z (2001) Paid Work and Socio-Political Consciousness of Garment Workers in Bangladesh. Journal of 
Contemporary Asia 31: 145-160. 
207

=== PAGE 211 ===
38 
position of an organization21. Trade Union is still dominated by male, whereas women’s 
position is as a recipient22,23. 
 
It was observed from the KII and field survey that there is less participation of women in 
management and technical positions. From social perspective, male ratio is higher in 
management positions and roles. It will be solved by creating awareness and providing 
training programs. There are some barriers like mind-set or cognitive biases against women, 
lack of equity, lack of awareness, etc. These are expected to be reduced over a period of time.   
 
5.10 Access to Information  
There is wide variation of in practice of leave provisions. Among several types of leave weekly 
holiday is the most enjoyed. Many workers are even unaware about the practice of leave at 
their workplaces. Night duty is mandatory for many women workers. In other words, when 
night duty is scheduled these workers are left with not options but to do night duty. There are 
workers who lack awareness in this regard. Lack of awareness has also been among many 
workers regarding practice of taking written consent from workers for night duty. However, 
largest segment of the workers claim that employers never take written consent from them.  
 
Not all employers generally do provide workers with information regarding risks at workplace. 
One in every four workers claims that their employers do not inform workers in this regard. 
RMG workers who have faced/observed accidents (pricking of needle during work, cutting 
finger or hand, fracturing leg and fracturing hand, fire) at workplaces are quite high. 40.4 
percent workers have this experience. There are also workers, though few, who don’t know 
whether any accident took place at their workplaces. Most workplaces maintain/have made 
available different facilities/arrangement for ensuring workplace safety. However, it also true 
that still some factories have not made enough arrangement. Many workers do not know 
whether organizations/committees exist at workplace. 
 
Presently, most of the garments have their own sexual harassment policies and any issues 
regarding sexual harassment is dealt with strictness. So, number of cases of sexual 
harassment has decreased in recent years. However, in many cases the victims do not file 
complaint due to lack of trust for getting justice or they feel embarrassed. Also, they do not 
know whether there is a system to file compliant or whom to approach first and. What are the 
procedures. To address these issues, sexual harassment should be added during the 
grievance redressal. Also, awareness of the workers should be increased about the 
committees and the complaint filing process.  
 
 
21 Sarah S, Sonia J, Shahana R (2005) Women’s Employment in Urban Bangladesh: A Challenge to Gender 
Identity? Development and Change 36: 317-349. 
22 Nidhi K (2009) The Ready-Made Garments Industry in Bangladesh: A Means to Reducing Gender-Based Social 
Exclusion of Women? Journal of International Women’s Studies 11: 289-303. 
23 Naila K (2004) Globalization Labor standards and women’s rights: dilemmas of collective (in) action in an 
interdependent world Feminist Economics 10: 03-35.  
208

=== PAGE 212 ===
39 
5.11 Women and Health 
According to BLA, employers must ensure basic standards for health and safety in the 
workplace. In the Bangladesh labour Law-2006, specified the rights of health and hygiene in 
the section (51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 59, and 60). Despite the specific code in the sections, 
health and safety violations are common in garment factories. Women in Bangladesh are more 
disadvantaged group than men in terms of health and nutrition. In most cases, due to closed 
windows, light and air is not sufficient in RMG factories. Toilets are not sufficient for the crowd. 
So, toilet remain dirty all the time proper water supply can’t properly supplied harmful gas 
emission from the toilet for the huge crowd and the environment of factory remains stinky most 
of the time.24 
 
Most of the female RMG workers live in urban slums or semi slums where clean drinking 
water, hygiene and sanitation health care are inaccessible due to scarcity and their low wages. 
Also, study identified that, community diseases are common in the workers live in slums. The 
female workers working in fabrics section (stitching, coloring, dye etc) are exposed to toxic 
elements and inhale dust of fabric which cause different breathing and respiratory diseases 
and those who are working. The female RMG workers mostly suffer from malnutrition, anemia, 
gastric, dysentery, hepatitis, diarrhea, respiratory problem, gynecological problems, 
tuberculosis and urine infection etc. Other than these diseases as they are sitting for a long 
working hour lead them to suffer from bones such as neck pain, joint pain, musculoskeletal 
pain, neural problem and problem in body muscles, joint, tendons, ligaments and bones. Also, 
the noisy environment from sewing machines cause hearing disability.25  The female RMG 
workers receive only BDT 200 as medical allowance as per wages boards, 2010 but their 
average monthly medicine expense is BDT 497.5, which is more than double what they are 
provided.26 
 
Few RMG workers get the day care and in many garment factories, mothers do not have 
space or time to breastfeed. Breastfeeding rates by working women in garment factories can 
be as low as 10 percent (UNICEF 2015). Workplaces of these workers are not gender 
sensitive— there are insufficient numbers of toilets for women; no arrangement of sanitary 
napkins at workplace; and most of the factories also do not arrange women doctors.27 
Unwanted physical contact and sexual harassment by lineman, supervisor and other male 
workers lead to sexual diseases as well as hamper mental wellbeing. Moreover, female 
workers abort babies to retain their job due to their poor economic condition. 
 
5.12 Access to Financial Services by RMG Workers 
Even though the majority of the RMG workers are female, their wages are not up to mark to 
satisfy them even after working for a long time (including overtime). Consequently, they do not 
 
24 Rights of Female Garments Workers in Bangladesh: A Case of Chittagong.  
25 Ahmed, S., & Raihan, M. Z. (2014). Health status of the female workers in the garment sector of Bangladesh. 
J Faculty Econom Administr Sci, 4(1), 43-58. 
26 Mustafa, A., Islam, M. S., Islam, S., & Khatun, M. (2016). Impact of RMG sector on livelihood change of women 
employees of Bangladesh. Social and Economic Geography, 2(1), 1-10. 
27 Monitoring Work and Working Condition of Women Employed in Ready-Made Garment Industries of 
Bangladesh. March 2019. Karmojibi Nari. Dhaka. 
209

=== PAGE 213 ===
40 
have access to basic needs such as nutritious food or better clothing, medications etc. A study 
conducted on female Garment workers in Chittagong Metropolitan area identified the insecure 
condition of the female workers who are still trapped in the vicious cycle of poverty.28  
 
A recent study conducted by Care Bangladesh indicates that female RMG workers want to 
use financial services, for benefits that include loans, savings, their own bank/Bkash29 
accounts, etc.30 According to the IFC data, there is a stark gender gap in access to financial 
services in Bangladesh, where only 36% of women have a formal bank account, compared to 
65 percent of men.31 The study also indicated that many female RMG workers may not have 
full control over their earnings. Thus, financial services that enables a female RMG worker to 
exercise greater management of her finances may empower her and facilitate greater savings 
and more financial control. Furthermore, due to the limited amount of wages, they cannot save 
much for the future. 
 
Given the economic significance of the readymade garment sector, which is dominated by 
female workers, digitizing wage payments through MFS can have a significant impact on 
women’s financial inclusion. Almost about 90% of factories pay their workers in cash, which 
is a missed opportunity for both the financial and RMG sectors. When garments workers open 
MFS accounts to receive their salaries, they can avail a broad range of financial services. 
Through IFC’s initiative, over 70,000 female workers benefitted from digital wage payments to 
their mobile financial services accounts between 2016 and 2018, and they can now use their 
accounts to send money, build savings and make payments securely. However, non-
availability of national ID of workers, lack of financial literacy and awareness about accounts, 
and difficulty in covering fixed costs incurred by MFS providers are among major constraints 
in wage digitization in readymade garment industry in Bangladesh.32  
 
5.13 Leadership Opportunities for Women in RMG Sector  
In Bangladesh, textile and garments sector is entirely male dominated. Even though the 
present elected president of BGMEA is a woman, there is no existing database on women 
enterprises or women involved in the higher management positions in the textile and garments 
industry.  
 
According to the Global Gender Gap Report 2020, companies with female-majority ownership 
in Bangladesh are only 1.70%, whereas firms with female top managers are 4.80%. During 
the gender assessment, no women led enterprise could be reached. According to a recent 
report, women in leadership and in organizational decision-making in businesses as well as 
in the company’s board are very few, because of social stigma towards women. Male 
 
28Mustafa, A., Islam, M. S., Islam, S., & Khatun, M. (2016). Impact of RMG sector on livelihood change of women 
employees of Bangladesh. Social and Economic Geography, 2(1), 1-10. 
29 bKash is a mobile financial service in Bangladesh operating under the authority of Bangladesh Bank as a 
subsidiary of BRAC Bank Limited. 
30 http://www.carebangladesh.org/publication/Publication_8660144.pdf  
31 
https://www.dhakatribune.com/business/2019/06/26/lack-of-financial-literacy-awareness-major-
challenges-for-wage-digitizing  
32 
https://www.dhakatribune.com/business/2019/06/26/lack-of-financial-literacy-awareness-major-
challenges-for-wage-digitizing  
210

=== PAGE 214 ===
41 
dominance continues to persist in managerial or decision-making positions at corporate or in 
the boards of companies. To engage more women enterprises in the garments sector, 
government and BGMEA should create enabling environment and facilities. To get more 
women enterprises interested in the sector, gender stereotyping should be eliminated.  
 
Women do not have the right skill for promotion from blue collar type work to a more white-
collar job profile and capacity building is required in solving this. Perception of owners is an 
important determinant of the extent to which gender issues get resolved. Focusing on 
improving about the male-female ratio may not necessarily resolve gender issues, however 
efforts on improving overall working conditions might help more. Nowadays workers are 
getting different types of training for skill development (sometimes free of cost training). 
BKMEA, BGMEA and other organizations provide some training free of cost (If needed), and 
additionally provide some money and refreshments, as additional motivators to increase 
participation in trainings. This has led to increased shift of female workers from supervisor or 
operator level. While development of skills in female workers require time, upskilling to counter 
advancement in technology can surely be undertaken. Hence, the technology factor is 
expected not to be a major issue in limiting job prospects of females.   
 
 
211

=== PAGE 215 ===
42 
6 Gender Inclusion Practices in Bangladesh 
Equal rights for workers can be best assured by a combination of legislative measures as well 
as awareness of the business owners and their management about the advantages to be 
gained through employment of workers based on their capabilities rather than gender or other 
personal attributes. Recent government initiatives including amendments to the Labour Law 
in 2013 and Labour Rules in 2015 have made inroads into ensuring equality in the workplace, 
and the introduction of training initiatives including those related to effective workplace 
cooperation and Essentials of Occupational Safety and Health (EOSH) conducted by the 
BGMEA, BKMEA and BEF, with support from ILO-ITC since 2014, to establish a culture of 
occupational safety and health and respect at the factory level, go some way to improving the 
situation.33 
 
Equal responsibility within the RMG industry has been greatly helped by initiatives launched 
by the Bangladesh government and other bodies, which include the recently formed Tripartite 
Consultative Committee (TCC) that addresses labour and workplace related issues in the 
RMG sector and is a substantial step towards forming a collaborative and all-inclusive entity.34 
It was established specifically to deal with all unresolved or disputed issues within the 
workplace. Initiatives such as these, together with the work undertaken with the guidance of 
Accord and Alliance and other agencies, have created an environment in which ethical, 
environmental and sustainable standards are not only considered the norm, but also the 
minimum level that any RMG entity today has to abide by in order to gain necessary 
compliance certification from the customers. 
 
Promoting equal participation of men and women in trade unions can play a crucial role in 
ensuring rights and interests of workers especially raising women workers’ issues such as 
sexual reproductive health rights, sexual harassment, adopting a gender approach to OSH, 
leadership and communication skills.35 In addition, it also helps to mainstream gender issues 
in all policies and programmes, including collective bargaining to promote women workers’ 
rights. However, Trade unions’ activities must be focused, rights based, efficient and aligned 
with regulatory measures provided in the Bangladesh provisions provided in the Bangladesh 
Labour Act (2006) and the Labour Rules (2016). 
 
Bangladesh RMG industry is subject to the harshest scrutiny regarding all aspects of health 
and safety at work, compliance and structural standards following the tragic events of April 23, 
2013 at the Rana Plaza. The Accord, Alliance, and National Action Plan (NAP) initiatives, 
implemented since that fateful day, have ensured that the RMG sector has greatly improved 
and now has 7 of the 10 highest rated LEED factories in the world, complying with the highest 
ethical and environmental standards throughout the industry. Level of compliance is high for 
those industries which have realized the business need of complying with safety regulations. 
In this respect, Rana Plaza incident has completely transformed the market by highlighting the 
disastrous effect the lack of safety can have on not only the workers but also on overall 
business prospects of the RMG units. The key reasons for non-compliance with applicable 
 
33 https://www.thedailystar.net/opinion/perspective/enhancing-equality-within-rmg-industry-1573354  
34 https://www.dhakatribune.com/business/2017/03/12/govt-forms-tripartite-council-rmg-sector  
35https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/---ilo-
dhaka/documents/publication/wcms_615874.pdf   
212

=== PAGE 216 ===
43 
regulations would extra cost of compliance which in some cases are an added burden to the 
limited financial capacity. In current market scenario, with business margins getting 
constrained, this added cost is leading to disparity in competitive advantage – with non-
compliant companies having spare resources for creating market outreach. However, 
awareness about the benefits of compliance is increasing and it is expected levels of 
compliance will further increase in the days ahead, with market pressure increasing as well.  
 
However, the investment to achieve such improvements is not always recognized by the 
immediate customer, and there is an unhealthy culture that regards Bangladesh as a low-cost 
source, no matter what the price. Equality at this level surely demands that the buyers respect 
the investments and the advances made by the RMG industry in Bangladesh and also realize 
that these changes have come about through significant investment in both plant and 
machinery and that, in a world of escalating raw material costs, some price levels are artificially 
suppressed.  
 
213

=== PAGE 217 ===
44 
7 Legal and Administrative Framework Protecting and 
Promoting Gender Equality in Bangladesh 
 
Bangladeshi women have been struggling to establish their rights in family, society and in the 
state. In reality, women are still facing discrimination, exclusion and injustice and have a 
negligible influence in decision-making processes in a male-dominated society of Bangladesh. 
Discriminatory laws and policies hinder formal equality and socio-political conditions prevent 
women from exercising their rights.36 
 
The implementation of women development policy and work plan is the basic responsibility of 
the Government. This responsibility can be discharged on a sound basis through building up 
a well-organized and broad-based institutional system. Despite having under-representation 
of women at different levels, the government of Bangladesh has been implementing different 
steps to ensure gender equality and women’s empowerment in the country. Through the vision 
2021 and 2041, a momentum has been created for taking forward Bangladesh to a middle 
and high-income level, respectively. The GoB has undertaken various programs to materialize 
Vision 2021 for establishing rights of women, their empowerment and mainstreaming them in 
the overall development. The 7th Five-Year Plan (2016-2020) of the Bangladesh government 
considers women’s engagement in political and economic activities as a crosscutting issue 
and one of the main drivers of transformation. Realizing the essence of ensuring gender 
equality, the government has shown its commitment to attaining the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG) of gender equality and empowering women and implementing the Convention 
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the Beijing 
Platform for Action.  
 
There is a dedicated ministry, the Ministry of women and Children Affairs (MoWCA) for the 
development and welfare of women in the country. Also, the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment (MoLE) that deals with labor related issues have particular focus on ensuring 
gender equality in the employment sector and to achieve that they promote different types of 
capacity building activities for different sectors. The MoWCA has been implementing different 
programs to alleviate poverty of women, stop abuse of women, stop trafficking of women, and 
ensure safety in all areas including their workplace with a view to ensuring full and equal 
participation of women in socio-economic activities. ILO and Ministry of Labour and 
Employment have taken initiatives to provide capacity building trainings and leadership 
programs to women working in RMG sector.37 BGMEA and BKMEA also have training and 
capacity development programs for both male and female workers. BGMEA also promotes 
potential female workers for obtaining higher education by providing them scholarships.  
 
Bangladesh has already substantially achieved the MDGs as it has achieved gender parity in 
primary and secondary education at the national level, among other successes of the MDGs. 
Bangladesh has been working relentlessly to ensure women’s overall development by 
ensuring their equal and active participation in the mainstream socio-economic activities and 
removing the various impediments to their empowerment. In order to attain the SDG goal of 
gender equality; the government of Bangladesh has been implementing different initiatives so 
 
36 https://www.daily-sun.com/post/345296/SDGs-and-Gender-Equality-in-Bangladesh  
37 https://www.ilo.org/dhaka/Informationresources/WCMS_583272/lang--en/index.htm  
214

=== PAGE 218 ===
45 
that gender equality and women empowerment can be ensured in the country. The following 
are some important initiatives of the government. 
 
Since 2009 the gender-responsive budget has been planned by the Government of 
Bangladesh for ensuring the participation of women in various programmes. At present, all the 
ministries have adopted gender-responsive budgeting and have made accountable towards 
spending their allocation for the economic and social empowerment of women. Allocation for 
women’s development is too 7,908.7 million, which is 26.80 per cent of the total budget in the 
current fiscal year.  
 
To ensure gender equality and protection of and security to women, the government of 
Bangladesh has formed several acts and policies. These include:  
 Mobile Court Act, 2009:  The executive magistrate was given power to take steps by 
linking Section 509 of the Bangladesh Penal Code in the schedule of Mobile Court Act. 
This would resist and prevent eve teasing and sexual harassment of the girls and 
women. 
 Citizenship Act (amended), 2009: The provision for giving citizenship by mother to 
child was made by the national parliament by amending the citizenship act in 2009. 
 Dowry Prohibition Act, 1980: Prevention of financial obligation to provide gifts and 
assets 
 Women and Children Repression Prevention Act, 2000: To ensure the safety and 
protection to women at homes and their surroundings. 
 Domestic Violence (Prevention and Protection) Act, 2010: Prevention of domestic 
violence, protection of women and children from domestic violence 
 Prevention and Suppression of Human Trafficking Act, 2012: To prevent trafficking 
for slavery, sexual interests and bonded labour. 
 High Court (2009) ruled to include mother’s name in all official documents, 
school admission forms, either alone or with that of the father. Consequently, climate 
change and its impacts are enhancing vulnerabilities for women due to the lack of 
climate adaptive capacities. 
 Legal Aid Services Act, 2000: An Act to provide legal aid for the litigants who are 
incapable of seeking justice due to financial insolvency, destitution, helplessness and 
for various socioeconomic conditions. 
i. 
Acid Crime Prevention (Amended) Act, 2010;  
 Human Trafficking (Deterrence and Suppression) Act, 2012: The Act aims to 
restrain and suppress human trafficking, to ensure the protection of victims of the 
offence of human trafficking and their rights, and to ensure safe migration. So, under 
this act, if any offence has been committed regarding human trafficking, anyone can 
file a complaint (following the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898), to 
the police or Tribunal and his identity may be concealed for the security purpose. 
ii. 
Children Act, 2013;  
iii. 
National Education Policy 2010;  
iv. 
Comprehensive Early Childhood Care and Development Policy 2013;  
v. 
National Plan of Action to implement National Women Development Policy;  
vi. 
National Action Plan to Prevent Violence Against Women and Children 2013-2025: 
The action plan aims to ensure he accountability and promoting the agencies for 
women empowerment and gender equality by developing and implementing the  
vii. 
National Action Plan for Combating Human Trafficking 2015-2017. 
215

=== PAGE 219 ===
46 
 
Besides the above initiatives, the government has taken different initiatives in other aspects 
to ensure gender equality and women empowerment.  These initiatives have been taken in 
different sectors, including (i) social security and social empowerment of women; (ii) 
rehabilitation and legal aid for women victims; (iii) prevention of women’s oppression; (iv) 
institutional mechanism for women’s development; (v) sports and women; and (vi) digital 
Bangladesh. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
216

=== PAGE 220 ===
47 
8 Alignment of the Project with GCF Gender Assessment 
Guideline 
 
According to GCF guideline, gender analysis needs to take place early in the planning process 
so that an understanding of gender roles and power relations is built into the project. All 
projects/programs should include an analysis of gender and include data on gender issues 
within the overall situation analysis. In this project survey was conducted in selected 20 RMG 
factories among 70 workers and 20 facility managers. The survey questions were based on 
educational qualification, labor force participation, participation in decision making process, 
existing facilities on the factory, gender considerations etc. 
 
The project reviewed the existing policies, strategies and frameworks related to labor 
participation especially considered gender aspects both at national and international level. 
The projects interventions will be designed considering the legal status of women as well. In 
addition, the project considered commonly held beliefs, perceptions, and stereotypes related 
to gender, the division of labor among women and men and the participation between women 
and men in the formal/informal economy in the project/program footprint area. Also, during the 
stakeholder engagement workshops, KII and factory surveys it was ensured that both male 
and female participants take part in the discussions and give their valuable opinion. However, 
RMG sector and associated sectors related to this has very little involvement of women in 
higher management, research or academic line. Still the study tried to ensure participation of 
female respondents as much as possible.  
 
During the first and second workshop 15% and 11% female participants were present 
respectively. The workshops were designed to share ideas around a wide range of energy 
efficiency practitioners including regulators, policy makers, experts, academicians, 
researchers and garment sector entrepreneurs, as well as environment, social and gender 
experts. There were participants from different ministries and government agencies, BGMEA, 
BKMEA, garments units along with development partners, NGOs, academic and research 
organizations who have been working with different issues related to RMG sector in 
Bangladesh, especially environmental, social and gender concerns.  
 
During KII, 25% respondents were women and 50% of the respondents had knowledge and/or 
experience on working with gender related issues in the RMG sector in Bangladesh. 
Especially, respondents from Ministry of Labour and employment (MoLE), Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) and Economic Relations Division (ERD) 
under Ministry of Foreign Affairs shared their views and knowledge regarding gender 
consideration and its importance in the sustainability of RMG sector. Representatives from 
BGMEA and BKMEA had first-hand experience on gender issues and providing capacity and 
knowledge building training to both male and female workers, promote female workers with 
potential for higher education and training and provide trainings to the workers on health and 
safety related issues. The researchers and academicians were also directly involved in 
addressing gender issues in the RMG sector and working for gender equality within the sector. 
 
During factory survey more than 40% respondents were female workers. However, during the 
survey with facility managers there were no female respondents as the selected RMG units 
did not have any female facility managers till the survey was conducted. 
217

=== PAGE 221 ===
48 
 
Moreover, the project considered the existing gender inequalities and situation of women and 
men in the interventions related energy efficiency and emphasize more on capacity building 
on energy efficiency for both male and female workers. Also, access to financial resources 
and control over these resources is considered while designing the interventions. In addition, 
it will address differential needs/priorities of women and men in the context of the project. 
 
The project will ensure the following issues in the gender action plan: 
• 
Services and technologies provided by the project/program be available and accessible to 
both women and men 
• 
Equal access for the women and men from vulnerable communities to information and 
opportunities necessary to participate and benefit fully from the anticipated outcomes of 
the project  
• 
Ensure capacity development activities of disadvantaged groups 
• 
Encourage women entrepreneurship in RMG sector 
• 
Encourage more educated women to enter RMG sector in higher management 
• 
Promote leadership capacity of female workers 
 
The information gathered from the gender analysis/assessment should be considered in all 
stages of the project cycle: design, formulation, implementation, and monitoring and 
evaluation. In each of these stages, project managers should keep a ‘gender lens’ in mind, 
looking at ways the project/program can address gender inequalities that emerge from the 
project; ensure the differential needs of women and men are addressed; ensure women and 
men have equal access to resources, services, and capacity development; ensure equal 
participation of women and men in management arrangements and as beneficiaries, partners 
and key stakeholders; and ensure women’s equal participation in decision – making 
processes. 
 
Moreover, the Ministry of Women and Children’s Affair (MoWCA) and Ministry of Labour and 
Employment (MoLE) will be involved in the project activities. While developing the training 
modules for capacity building, consultations will be done with these respective ministries as 
well so that they can provide adequate guidelines. Also, experiences shared by the ministries 
regarding capacity building of industrial workers, especially underprivileged women will help 
to develop the proposed actions in a sustainable way.  
 
 
 
218

=== PAGE 222 ===
49 
9 Grievance Redressal System (GRS) 
 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is recognized worldwide as one of the important 
indicators of an organization’s proficiency and efficiency. Grievance redressal is, in fact, a 
governance related management process. In this case, the GRM will help to identify whether 
the stakeholders as well as communities and households living near the factories are facing 
any negative impacts due the implementation and operation of the sub-projects.  
 
Management staff in the RMG sector come from varied backgrounds and do not necessarily 
have professional management trainings to understand and address issues related to well-
being of workers. So, the GRS need to easily manageable, easily accessible and user friendly.  
 
In this project the End Borrower would ensure that grievance redress procedures are in place 
and would monitor those procedures to ensure that grievance are handled properly. The End 
Borrower will establish a procedure to answer sub-project-related queries and address 
complaints, disputes, and grievances about any aspect of the sub-project, including 
disagreements regarding the assessment and mitigation of environmental and social impacts. 
Generally, the grievance redress committees (GRC) are of two types (i) formal courts of appeal 
and (ii) a locally constitutes GRC for dispute resolution. The second may not totally avoid but 
may reduce the problem significantly. Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) will be formed. 
The GRC will ensure proper presentation of complaints and grievances, as well as impartial 
hearings and transparent decisions. The GRCs will meet periodically to discuss the merit of 
each case and fix a date for hearing and notify the aggrieved persons to submit necessary 
documents in proof of her/his claim/case; resolve grievances within one month of receipt of 
complaint. Additional details regarding the functioning of GRC is presented in the SMF. 
 
A general guideline for the GRS will be developed by the LFIs in consultation with the MoWCA 
and BGMEA. It should be ensured that the GRM within the RMG units are aligned with the 
GCF Independent Redress Mechanism as well as the Accredited Entity’s Grievance Redress 
Mechanism (including contact details, accessibility and basic procedures of such 
mechanisms, etc.).  
 
Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) will be formed and established at each project site. 
Grievance response focal point will be available at each shelter site for instant response to an 
aggrieved person, receiving written complaints or suggestions, produce them to the GRC for 
hearing and resolution. The GRC will be comprise of the members from the PIU (Please refer 
Gender action Plan: Activity 3.1.1: Formulation of a project committee with women 
participating for monitoring of the activities under the program.)  and representatives from 
workers (one male and one female). This GRC will be responsible for reporting to the LFIs. 
Detailed structure and mechanism are described in the ESMF. The Grievance Redress 
Committee (GRC) will be same for ESMF & gender issue. 
 
The following issues should be considered during for a successful GRM: 
User manual: An easy to understand instruction document should be provided for the GRM 
for the general user wishing to avail the proposed central GRM. 
 
User friendliness: The system should not be too complicated either in technical terms or in 
language for the general public irrespective of education background. 
219

=== PAGE 223 ===
50 
 
End-to-end tracking: Tracking of grievance both by the complainant and the authority for 
grievance redressal is very important.  
 
Confidentiality, security and anonymity: Keeping complainant’s identity a secret is very 
important for security reasons. Ensuring that the system provides an option to complainants 
for lodging their grievances anonymously would also ensure confidentiality and security. 
 
Progress monitoring: Grievance should be addressed within 7 days of receiving. A 
grievance redress system is no good if the grievances are not addressed regularly. When the 
grievances are not addressed for a long time then the employees will lose faith from the 
system and stop sharing their issues. 
 
Feedback option: There should be a feedback option to measure client satisfaction and 
collect opinions on the effectiveness of the system.  
 
 
 
 
220

=== PAGE 224 ===
51 
10 Recommendations 
 
The issue of gender equality has immense significance as it is not only a fundamental human 
right but also a necessary foundation for a peaceful, prosperous and sustainable world.38 
Providing women and girls with equal access to education, health care, decent work, and 
representation in political and economic decision-making processes will fuel sustainable 
economies and benefit societies and humanity at large. Implementing new legal frameworks 
regarding female equality in the workplace and the eradication of harmful practices targeted 
at women is crucial to ending the gender-based discrimination prevalent in many countries 
around the world. Thus, several initiatives are required to be taken to augment the process of 
attainment gender equality in Bangladesh.  
 
In order to create a gender equitable environment at the workplace, the following initiatives 
can be implemented: 
• 
Create enabling environment for hiring workers considering their skills rather than gender. 
• 
Ensure job security by issuing job contracts and ensure effective implementation of 
different laws and regulations in terms of wages and other facilities. 
• 
Ensure trainings and capacity development workshops for both male and female workers. 
• 
Awareness raising activities among communities and families so that no woman has to 
leave their carrier due to social pressure or responsibilities. 
• 
Capacity development of female RMG workers to avail financial services and awareness 
on existing financial services. 
• 
Advocacy needs to be done with the family members to engage women in the family and 
community level economic activities so that women can be financially independent and 
take their own decisions. 
• 
Building a network among women, influential community and educational leaders is 
important so that the network would work as a catalyst by bringing changes in the society. 
• 
Provide safe transportation facilities especially for woman so that they can join work in 
different shifts as well as men without getting concerned about security issues. 
• 
Provide better medical and mental health facilities to workers for increasing their health 
which will eventually increase their performance. 
• 
Ensure special provisions for pregnant and lactating mothers and maternity leave should 
be as per government rules.  
• 
Provision of daycare facilities by the factory authority as well as community.  
• 
Facilitate gender responsive and socially inclusive training in the RMG units. 
• 
Initiatives to improve the women’s access to social services.  
• 
Take initiatives to foster equality in the decision-making process and encourage 
participation of both male and female workers in trade bodies or labour unions for 
developing better leadership skills. 
• 
Implement different programmes those would facilitate women’s access over resources.  
• 
Organize capacity-building events for industry personnel on gender sensitivity and equal 
opportunities. 
• 
Ensure proper occupational health and safety for all the workers irrespective of gender. 
• 
Ensure harassment free working environment for the workers regardless of gender. 
 
38 https://www.daily-sun.com/post/345296/SDGs-and-Gender-Equality-in-Bangladesh  
221

=== PAGE 225 ===
52 
11 Gender Action Plan 
11.1 Outline 
A project/program-specific Gender Action Plan (GAP) is a tool used to ensure gender 
mainstreaming is clearly visible in project/program design and implementation. The project 
GAP is not a separate component. It mirrors the logical framework of the project and is an 
integral part of project/program design. GAPs include clear targets, gender design features 
and measurable performance indicators to ensure women’s participation and benefits. Key 
aspects of the GAP are incorporated into project/program assurances to encourage buy-in 
from AEs and other partners.  
 
The GAP presents:  
• 
Work undertaken to address gender issues in the project/program;  
• 
Targets and design features, included in the project/program to address gender 
concerns and ensures tangible benefits to women and men, especially from vulnerable 
communities;  
• 
Mechanisms to ensure implementation of the gender design elements;  
• 
Gender - sensitive monitoring and evaluation indicators.  
 
Below is presented a GAP that contains impact, outcome and output statements, gender – 
responsive activities, gender – performance indicators and targets, timeline, responsibility 
lines, and approximate budgetary allocations against each activity. 
 
 
222

=== PAGE 226 ===
53
Gender Action Plan 
Activities 
 Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
Impact Statement:  
Enhanced livelihood opportunities and reduced inequalities at work through training and skill development to improve the productivity and competitiveness for both men 
and women from the implementation of energy efficient technologies and equipment in readymade garment (RMG) sector. 
Outcome Statement:  
Increased access of the garment sector to concessional financing for energy efficiency, leading to energy savings through large scale adoption of energy efficient 
technologies to reduce GHG emissions. 
Component 1: Concessional loans for energy efficiency in garment sector 
Output 1.1:  Women entrepreneur successfully engaged in the program 
Activity 1.1.1:  
Encouragement 
of 
women 
entrepreneur to venture in the 
garment sector   
 
Indicator 
Encourage loan application from garment units with 
significant 
participation 
of 
(Chairman/Any 
Director/MD/CEO) women entrepreneurs 
Target 
To approach minimum 06 (six) woman led garment 
business entities under the programme 
Minimum 01 woman 
led 
garment 
business entity will 
be approached in 
each year. 
Total 
06 
(five) 
woman led garment 
business entities  will 
be 
approached 
within 05 years of 
GCF loan availability 
period 
Implementation 
responsibility by LFIs  
Funding Source: LFIs 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
Within 
the 
 
“Project 
Management Cost” from 
LFIs in line of regular 
business process 
Output 1.2: Investment to comply with national standards for women welfare and recover costs from the energy savings from programme/project 
implementation 
Activity 1.2.1: 
Reducing the gender wage 
gap 
(1) Unbiased employment as 
per the “Labour rules 
(2015)” 
(2) Encourage similar wages 
for men and women for 
Indicator 
Encouraging women participation by providing unbiased 
employment opportunities and providing similar wages 
for same jobs to men and women 
Target 
Submission of existing pay scale ensuring similar wages 
for men & women or proposed pay scale with a time 
bound implementation plan ensuring such similar wages 
 
Number 
of 
such 
submission 
will 
depend 
on 
the 
number 
of 
end 
borrowers 
approaching LFIs for 
their financing. There 
is no yearly target of 
how 
many 
end 
LFIs & End borrowers 
Funding 
Source: 
End 
borrowers  
Amount: XXXXX 
 
 
The cost of any such 
implementation 
will 
be 
borne by end borrowers & 
223

=== PAGE 227 ===
54
similar work type as per 
the “National Wage Board” 
borrowers 
will 
be 
financed 
rather 
specific amount for 
each year & a total of 
entities have been 
mentioned in the log 
frame. 
So LFIs will ensure 
submission 
of 
existing pay scale 
ensuring 
similar 
wages for men & 
women or proposed 
pay scale with a time 
bound 
implementation plan 
ensuring such similar 
wages in line with 
their actual financing 
in each year. 
 
 
 
this will not be part of GCF 
project cost 
Activity 1.2.2: 
Facilitate women participation 
in the sector through provision 
of: 
(1) Medical Facilities 
(2) Child care 
(3) Sanitation facilities 
 
Indicator 
Encouraging women participation by facilitating them 
with medical assistance, child care and sanitation as 
prescribed under Labour Rule 2015 & other regulatory 
compliances 
Target 
Share existing status of the mentioned parameters 
during loan application and ensure compliance with the 
national standards (if not already complied) within 12 
months of the loan disbursement.  
Number 
of 
such 
sharing will depend 
on the number of end 
borrowers 
approaching LFIs for 
their financing. There 
is no yearly target of 
how 
many 
end 
borrowers 
will 
be 
financed 
rather 
specific amount for 
each year & a total of 
LFIs & End borrowers 
Funding 
Source: 
End 
borrowers  
Amount: XXXXX 
 
The cost of any such 
implementation 
will 
be 
borne by end borrowers & 
this will not be part of GCF 
project cost 
224

=== PAGE 228 ===
55
entities have been 
mentioned in the log 
frame. 
So LFIs will ensure 
sharing of existing 
status 
of 
the 
mentioned 
parameters 
during 
loan application and 
ensure 
compliance 
with 
the 
national 
standards 
(if 
not 
already 
complied) 
within 12 months of 
the 
loan 
disbursement in line 
with 
their 
actual 
financing 
in 
each 
year within 05 years 
of 
GCF 
loan 
availability period. 
 
 
 
 
Component 2: Large scale adoption of Energy Efficient technologies and equipment 
Output 2.1: Energy Efficient technology upgrades in the garment units employing new programmed/automated processes 
Activity 2.1.1:  
Training and skill development 
for machine use and operating 
on programming software 
(1) Development of training 
modules 
(2) Trainings and evaluation 
Indicator 
Ensure participation in skill development trainings 
leading to women empowerment by providing skill 
development 
through 
the 
technical 
assistance 
workshops 
Target 
Within 05 years of 
GCF loan availability 
period. 
As 
the 
LFIs 
will 
arrange 
this 
separately, so there 
is no year specific 
Each LFI will ensure at 
least 01 training for their 
respective end borrowers 
& ensure targeted women 
participation 
 
 
  
Funding 
Source: 
End 
borrowers & LFIs 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
 
The cost of any such 
implementation 
will 
be 
borne by end borrowers & 
225

=== PAGE 229 ===
56
Ensure women employee participation a minimum of 
25% in skill development and training workshop (Total 
04 workshops) 
time for arranging 
such training. 
this will not be part of GCF 
project cost. 
The cost of LFIs will be 
within 
the 
 
“Project 
Management Cost” from 
LFIs in line of regular 
business process 
 
Activity 2.1.2:  
Safety 
trainings 
while 
operating 
on 
new 
machinery/equipment 
(1) Development of training 
modules 
(2) Periodic trainings and 
evaluation 
Indicator 
Reduction in accidents and safety issues rising from 
new certified machinery for which due trainings have 
been provided to the workers including women. 
Target 
Ensure women employee participation a minimum 20% 
in the safety training for workers (Total 04 safety 
trainings) 
Within 05 years of 
GCF loan availability 
period 
As 
the 
LFIs 
will 
arrange 
this 
separately, so there 
is no year specific 
time for arranging 
such training. 
 
Each LFI will ensure at 
least 01 training for their 
respective end borrowers 
& ensure targeted women 
participation 
 
Funding 
Source: 
End 
borrowers, LFIs & GCF 
Amount: USD 24,710 from 
GCF 
 
 
The cost of any such 
implementation 
will 
be 
borne by end borrowers & 
this will not be part of GCF 
project cost. 
The cost of LFIs will be 
within 
the 
“Project 
Management Cost” from 
LFIs in line of regular 
business process. 
GCF will finance USD 
24,710 
under 
TA 
component Activity  4.3.3  
Activity 2.1.3:  
Grievance Redressal 
(1) Formulation of a project 
committee for 
addressing grievance  
(2) Establishing grievance 
redressal process 
Indicator 
Encouragement 
for 
establishment 
of 
grievance  
redressed system  for enhanced women employee 
security  
Target 
An active grievance redressal system in place within 12 
months of project operation 
Number 
of 
such 
grievance redressal 
system will depend 
on the number of end 
borrowers receiving 
financing form this 
program. There is no 
yearly target of how 
 
 
 
LFIs & end borrowers 
Funding 
Source: 
End 
borrowers & LFIs 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
The cost of any such 
implementation 
will 
be 
borne by end borrowers & 
226

=== PAGE 230 ===
57
many end borrowers 
will 
be 
financed 
rather 
specific 
amount for each year 
& a total of entities 
have 
been 
mentioned in the log 
frame. 
 
So LFIs will ensure  
such 
active 
grievance redressal 
system 
in 
place 
within 12 months of 
project operation in 
line with their actual 
financing 
in 
each 
year within 05 years 
of 
GCF 
loan 
availability period 
this will not be part of GCF 
project cost. 
The cost of LFIs will be 
within 
the 
 
“Project 
Management Cost” from 
LFIs in line of regular 
business process 
Component 3: Gender balanced participation during the Implementation/operationalization of the project/programme 
Output 3.1: Women Participation during project implementation 
Activity 3.1.1:  
Formulation 
of 
a 
project 
committee 
with 
women 
participating for monitoring of 
the 
activities 
under 
the 
program. 
Indicator 
Gender balanced project/programme committee in each 
LFI  
Target 
To ensure women participation in the Project Committee 
& ensure at least 01 female member participation 
To form a Project 
committee within 06 
months after signing 
the Funded Activity 
Agreement 
(FAA) 
with GCF  
           
LFIs 
Funding Source: LFIs 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
 
The cost of LFIs will be 
within 
the 
 
“Project 
Management Cost” from 
LFIs in line of regular 
business process 
Activity 3.1.2:  
Training & skill development 
of relevant Business Units of 
LFIs 
Indicator 
Increased women skills & participation in various 
management aspects of the program 
Target 
• 
02 workshop in 
Year-2 
• 
02 workshops in 
Year-6 
 
IDCOL, along with LFIs, 
will 
arrange 
training 
program for  Business 
Funding Source: GCF 
Amount: 
USD 
192,701 
(For entire activities) 
 
227

=== PAGE 231 ===
58
 
To ensure women employee participation (from LFIs) in 
the relevant capacity building initiatives as beneficiary 
(Please see project 
Implementation Time 
table) 
Units of LFIs & ensure 
targeted 
women 
participation 
Activity 
4.2.1 
Conduct 
capacity 
building 
trainings/workshops 
to 
develop 
capacity 
of 
corporate/head office level 
officials 
to 
effectively 
conduct 
banking 
due 
diligence 
of 
loan 
applications 
for 
implementation of energy 
efficient technologies. 
Activity 4.2.2:  Conduct 
capacity 
building 
trainings/workshops 
to 
develop technical capacity 
of 
banking 
officials 
at 
branch/field 
level 
to 
efficiently 
monitor 
implementation of energy 
efficient technologies over 
the duration of repayment 
of loan amount. 
228

=== PAGE 232 ===
59 
11.2 Monitoring of Gender Action Plan 
Ensuring the sustainability of the gender action plan is a major concern and to achieve this a 
proper monitoring system should be in place. At the sub-project level, there will be Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU)39 who will be responsible for the proper implementation of the 
gender related interventions. The PIU will submit periodic monitoring reports (yearly) to the 
project committee in Activity 3.1.1: Formulation of a project committee with women 
participating for monitoring of the activities under the program. The LFIs will then monitor 
whether the end borrowers (i.e., RMG units) are following the policies and guidelines regarding 
gender issues and the action plan is implemented ensuring gender equality and women 
empowerment within the sector.  
 
The selected LFIs involved in the program have experience on monitoring gender related 
issues. Most of their RMG clients work with renowned international buyers who have certain 
conditions precedent on gender related matters. As a result, they have to maintain certain 
guidelines to ensure gender equality and women empowerment. Thus, the LFIs are well aware 
of the gender related concerns and are capable of monitoring the overall gender related 
activities during the 05 years of GCF loan availability period. 
 
For the Gender Action Plan of this programme, the LFIs have agreed to conduct onsite as well 
as offsite periodic inspection for ensuring proper practice of gender related issues in the 
projects. In the appraisal of loan proposal, they will assess the client’s willingness and ability 
to implement gender issues as required by GCF and other regulatory authorities. They are 
cooperative in terms of gender related concerns and they will establish a monitoring 
mechanism within their organization. The LFIs will conduct annual assessment after the 
project implementation throughout the 05 years of GCF loan availability period. During the 
assessment it will be assessed whether the end borrowers have implemented the gender 
issues mentioned in the gender action plan and created enabling environment of increased 
women empowerment. 
 
39 The structure of the PIU will be same as proposed in the ESMF.  
229

=== PAGE 233 ===
60 
 
230

=== PAGE 234 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
Gender Action Plan 
Activities 
 Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
Impact Statement:  
Enhanced livelihood opportunities and reduced inequalities at work through training and skill development to improve the productivity and competitiveness for both men 
and women from the implementation of energy efficient technologies and equipment in readymade garment (RMG) sector. 
Outcome Statement:  
Increased access of the garment sector to concessional financing for energy efficiency, leading to energy savings through large scale adoption of energy efficient 
technologies to reduce GHG emissions. 
Component 1: Concessional loans for energy efficiency in garment sector 
Output 1.1:  Women entrepreneur successfully engaged in the program 
Activity 1.1.1:  
Encouragement of women 
entrepreneur to venture in the 
garment sector   
 
Indicator 
Encourage loan application from garment units with 
significant 
participation 
of 
(Chairman/Any 
Director/MD/CEO) women entrepreneurs 
Target 
To approach minimum 06 (six) woman led garment 
business entities under the programme 
Minimum 01 woman 
led garment 
business entity will 
be approached in 
each year. 
Total 06 (five) 
woman led garment 
business entities  
will be approached 
within 05 years of 
GCF loan availability 
period 
Implementation 
responsibility by LFIs  
Funding Source: LFIs 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
Within the  “Project 
Management Cost” from 
LFIs in line of regular 
business process 
Output 1.2: Investment to comply with national standards for women welfare and recover costs from the energy savings from programme/project 
implementation 
Activity 1.2.1: 
Reducing the gender wage 
gap 
(1) Unbiased employment as 
per the “Labour rules 
(2015)” 
(2) Encourage similar wages 
for men and women for 
Indicator 
Encouraging women participation by providing unbiased 
employment opportunities and providing similar wages 
for same jobs to men and women 
Target 
Submission of existing pay scale ensuring similar wages 
for men & women or proposed pay scale with a time 
bound implementation plan ensuring such similar wages 
 
Number of such 
submission will 
depend on the 
number of end 
borrowers 
approaching LFIs for 
their financing. 
There is no yearly 
target of how many 
LFIs & End borrowers 
Funding Source: End 
borrowers  
Amount: XXXXX 
 
 
The cost of any such 
implementation will be 
borne by end borrowers & 
231

=== PAGE 235 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
similar work type as per 
the “National Wage Board” 
end borrowers will 
be financed rather 
specific amount for 
each year & a total 
of entities have been 
mentioned in the log 
frame. 
So LFIs will ensure 
submission 
of 
existing pay scale 
ensuring 
similar 
wages for men & 
women or proposed 
pay scale with a time 
bound 
implementation plan 
ensuring such similar 
wages in line with 
their actual financing 
in each year. 
 
 
 
this will not be part of 
GCF project cost 
Activity 1.2.2: 
Facilitate women participation 
in the sector through 
provision of: 
(1) Medical Facilities 
(2) Child care 
(3) Sanitation facilities 
 
Indicator 
Encouraging women participation by facilitating them 
with medical assistance, child care and sanitation as 
prescribed under Labour Rule 2015 & other regulatory 
compliances 
Target 
Share existing status of the mentioned parameters 
during loan application and ensure compliance with the 
national standards (if not already complied) within 12 
months of the loan disbursement.  
Number of such 
sharing will depend 
on the number of 
end borrowers 
approaching LFIs for 
their financing. 
There is no yearly 
target of how many 
end borrowers will 
be financed rather 
specific amount for 
each year & a total 
LFIs & End borrowers 
Funding Source: End 
borrowers  
Amount: XXXXX 
 
The cost of any such 
implementation will be 
borne by end borrowers & 
this will not be part of 
GCF project cost 
232

=== PAGE 236 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
of entities have been 
mentioned in the log 
frame. 
So LFIs will ensure 
sharing of existing 
status of the 
mentioned 
parameters during 
loan application and 
ensure compliance 
with the national 
standards (if not 
already complied) 
within 12 months of 
the loan 
disbursement in line 
with their actual 
financing in each 
year within 05 years 
of GCF loan 
availability period. 
 
 
 
 
Component 2: Large scale adoption of Energy Efficient technologies and equipment 
Output 2.1: Energy Efficient technology upgrades in the garment units employing new programmed/automated processes 
Activity 2.1.1:  
Training and skill 
development for machine use 
and operating on 
programming software 
(1) Development of training 
modules 
(2) Trainings and evaluation 
Indicator 
Ensure participation in skill development trainings 
leading to women empowerment by providing skill 
development through the technical assistance 
workshops 
Target 
Within 05 years of 
GCF loan availability 
period. 
As the LFIs will 
arrange this 
separately, so there 
is no year specific 
Each LFI will ensure at 
least 01 training for their 
respective end borrowers 
& ensure targeted women 
participation 
 
 
  
Funding Source: End 
borrowers & LFIs 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
 
The cost of any such 
implementation will be 
borne by end borrowers & 
233

=== PAGE 237 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
Ensure women employee participation a minimum of 
25% in skill development and training workshop (Total 
04 workshops) 
time for arranging 
such training. 
this will not be part of 
GCF project cost. 
The cost of LFIs will be 
within the  “Project 
Management Cost” from 
LFIs in line of regular 
business process 
 
Activity 2.1.2:  
Safety trainings while 
operating on new 
machinery/equipment 
(1) Development of training 
modules 
(2) Periodic trainings and 
evaluation 
Indicator 
Reduction in accidents and safety issues rising from 
new certified machinery for which due trainings have 
been provided to the workers including women. 
Target 
Ensure women employee participation a minimum 20% 
in the safety training for workers (Total 04 safety 
trainings) 
Within 05 years of 
GCF loan availability 
period 
As the LFIs will 
arrange this 
separately, so there 
is no year specific 
time for arranging 
such training. 
 
Each LFI will ensure at 
least 01 training for their 
respective end borrowers 
& ensure targeted women 
participation 
 
Funding Source: End 
borrowers, LFIs & GCF 
Amount: USD 24,710 from 
GCF 
 
 
The cost of any such 
implementation will be 
borne by end borrowers & 
this will not be part of 
GCF project cost. 
The cost of LFIs will be 
within the “Project 
Management Cost” from 
LFIs in line of regular 
business process. 
GCF will finance USD 
24,710 under TA 
component Activity  4.3.3  
Activity 2.1.3:  
Grievance Redressal 
(1) Formulation of a project 
committee for 
addressing grievance  
(2) Establishing grievance 
redressal process 
Indicator 
Encouragement for establishment of grievance  
redressed system  for enhanced women employee 
security  
Target 
An active grievance redressal system in place within 
12 months of project operation 
Number of such 
grievance redressal 
system will depend 
on the number of 
end borrowers 
receiving financing 
form this program. 
There is no yearly 
 
 
 
LFIs & end borrowers 
Funding Source: End 
borrowers & LFIs 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
The cost of any such 
implementation will be 
borne by end borrowers & 
234

=== PAGE 238 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
target of how many 
end borrowers will 
be financed rather 
specific amount for 
each year & a total 
of entities have been 
mentioned in the log 
frame. 
 
So LFIs will ensure  
such active 
grievance redressal 
system in place 
within 12 months of 
project operation in 
line with their actual 
financing in each 
year within 05 years 
of GCF loan 
availability period 
this will not be part of 
GCF project cost. 
The cost of LFIs will be 
within the  “Project 
Management Cost” from 
LFIs in line of regular 
business process 
Component 3: Gender balanced participation during the Implementation/operationalization of the project/programme 
Output 3.1: Women Participation during project implementation 
Activity 3.1.1:  
Formulation of a project 
committee with women 
participating for monitoring of 
the activities under the 
program. 
Indicator 
Gender balanced project/programme committee in 
each LFI  
Target 
To ensure women participation in the Project Committee 
& ensure at least 01 female member participation 
To form a Project 
committee within 06 
months after signing 
the Funded Activity 
Agreement (FAA) 
with GCF  
           
LFIs 
Funding Source: LFIs 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
 
The cost of LFIs will be 
within the  “Project 
Management Cost” from 
LFIs in line of regular 
business process 
Activity 3.1.2:  
Training & skill development 
of relevant Business Units of 
LFIs 
Indicator 
Increased women skills & participation in various 
management aspects of the program 
Target 
• 
02 workshop in 
Year-2 
• 
02 workshops in 
Year-6 
 
IDCOL, along with LFIs, 
will arrange training 
program for  Business 
Funding Source: GCF 
Amount: USD 192,701 
(For entire activities) 
 
235

=== PAGE 239 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
 
To ensure women employee participation (from LFIs) in 
the relevant capacity building initiatives as beneficiary 
(Please see project 
Implementation 
Time table) 
Units of LFIs & ensure 
targeted women 
participation 
Activity 4.2.1 Conduct 
capacity building 
trainings/workshops to 
develop capacity of 
corporate/head office level 
officials to effectively 
conduct banking due 
diligence of loan 
applications for 
implementation of energy 
efficient technologies. 
Activity 4.2.2:  Conduct 
capacity building 
trainings/workshops to 
develop technical capacity 
of banking officials at 
branch/field level to 
efficiently monitor 
implementation of energy 
efficient technologies over 
the duration of repayment 
of loan amount. 
236

=== PAGE 240 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
 
GENDER ASSESSMENT REPORT 
Promoting private sector investment through large scale adoption of 
energy saving technologies and equipment for textile sector of 
Bangladesh 
 
 
 
237

=== PAGE 241 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
1 
 
I 
Table of Contents 
1. 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 4 
1.1. 
Programme brief and relevance ......................................................................................... 5 
1.2. 
GCF’s guideline on gender equality .................................................................................... 7 
1.2.1. 
Objective, Principles and Mandatory requirements ................................................... 7 
2. 
Methodology ............................................................................................................................... 8 
3. 
A contextual snapshot of Gender sensitivity and equality in textile sector in Bangladesh ........ 9 
3.1. 
Gender and energy efficiency in textile sector ................................................................... 9 
3.2. 
Perceptions and stereotypes ............................................................................................ 10 
3.3. 
Institutional arrangements (Legal and administrative) .................................................... 11 
3.3.1. 
Policy ......................................................................................................................... 11 
3.3.2. 
Laws ........................................................................................................................... 11 
3.3.3. 
Institutions ................................................................................................................ 12 
3.3.4. 
Accords and Conventions .......................................................................................... 14 
4. 
Situational analysis: understanding vulnerabilities through Gender Assessment ................... 14 
4.1. 
Socio-economic assessment ............................................................................................. 14 
4.1.1. 
Average age of women in working in textile units .................................................... 14 
4.1.2. 
Marital status and average household size (adults and children) ............................ 15 
4.1.3. 
Education Status ....................................................................................................... 15 
4.1.4. 
Skills and trainings (acquired personally and with support from employer) ............ 16 
4.1.5. 
Gender ratio in textile workforce ............................................................................. 16 
4.1.6. 
Average work hours .................................................................................................. 17 
4.1.7. 
Sources of income, average income and expenditure .............................................. 17 
4.1.8. 
Female led households, house ownership and tenancy ........................................... 17 
4.1.9. 
Savings and loans ...................................................................................................... 18 
4.1.10. 
Provident fund/life Insurance ................................................................................... 18 
4.2. 
Health and Safety assessment .......................................................................................... 18 
4.2.1. 
Health issues faced by men and women in textile units .......................................... 18 
4.2.2. 
Health camps and medical facilities (like dispensary) and health insurance ............ 18 
4.2.3. 
Maternity leaves ....................................................................................................... 18 
4.2.4. 
Violence and abuse at work ...................................................................................... 18 
4.2.5. 
Injuries and Accidents ............................................................................................... 19 
4.2.6. 
Safety precautions, trainings and tools..................................................................... 19 
4.2.7. 
Compensation to victims .......................................................................................... 19 
4.3. 
Sanitation and access to basic facilities ............................................................................ 20 
238

=== PAGE 242 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
2 
 
I 
4.3.1. 
Access to drinking water, washrooms and sanitation facilities (soaps, sanitary 
napkins, etc) .............................................................................................................................. 20 
5. 
Qualitative Gap Analysis ........................................................................................................... 21 
6. 
Bridging Gaps: gender sensitivity and applicability of the programme .................................... 28 
6.1. 
Inclusivity in stakeholder approach (planning, management and implementation)........ 28 
6.1.1. 
First stakeholder workshop ....................................................................................... 28 
6.1.2. 
Second stakeholder workshop .................................................................................. 28 
6.2. 
Monitoring interventions and Evaluation ......................................................................... 28 
 
 
 
Table of figures and tables 
 
Figure 1: The Fundamental Principles of GCF's Gender Policy ............................................................... 8 
Figure 2: Percentage of Textile workers belonging to various age groups  .......................................... 15 
Figure 3: Marital status of men and women ........................................................................................ 15 
Figure 4: Gender wise education status of textile worker group ......................................................... 16 
Figure 5: Gender wise break-up of the monthly income of textile worker group ................................ 17 
Figure 6: Elements of the Gender Action Plan ...................................................................................... 29 
 
Table 1: Percentage of women participation in stakeholder engagement ............................................ 5 
Table 2: Project activities that are aligned with SDGs for social and gender inclusion .......................... 5 
Table 3: Survey Statistics......................................................................................................................... 8 
Table 4: Institutional framework relevant to the programme ............................................................. 12 
Table 5: Responses of the textile workers on trainings and skill development ................................... 16 
Table 6: Responses of textile labour on respective issues .................................................................... 19 
Table 7: Gender biases in textile sector in Bangladesh ........................................................................ 21 
 
 
 
239

=== PAGE 243 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
3 
 
I 
List of acronyms 
ADB 
Asian Development Bank 
AE 
Accredited Entity  
BTMA 
Bangladesh Textile Mills Association 
DAE 
Direct Access Entity 
DOE 
Department of Environment 
E&S 
Environmental and social  
ECA 
Environment Conservation Act  
ECA 
Environment Court Act  
ECC 
Environment Clearance Certificate  
ECR 
Environment Conservation Rules  
EE 
Electrical Efficiency  
EHS 
Environment, Health and Safety 
EIA 
Environment Impact Assessment 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework  
ETP 
Effluent Treatment Plant 
GCF 
Green Climate Fund 
GHG 
Green House Gas 
GoB 
Government of Bangladesh  
GRC 
Grievance Redressal Committee  
IDCOL 
Infrastructure Development Company Limited  
IE 
Implementing Entity  
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
INDC 
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions  
PS 
Performance Standards  
 
 
240

=== PAGE 244 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
4 
 
I 
1. Introduction 
Government of Bangladesh committed to various energy consumption reduction targets in the past 
few years and initiated EE&C programmes like Energy Management Program, EE Labelling Program 
and EE Buildings Program, targets at large energy consuming entities and equipment in the industrial, 
residential and commercial sectors. Bangladesh being an international hub for clothing (textile and 
readymade garments production1), has one of the world’s fastest growing economy, largely driven by 
its exports in textile and readymade garments. The textile sector alone contributes to above 12% in 
GDP with more than 81% of the export earning coming from textiles & textile related products2. 
To meet the demands from world over, the sector has been growing and expanding rapidly over the 
last few years. With concentration of more production units, the electricity consumption in the sector 
is increasing and so is the employment of the workforce. The textile labour market has its own set of 
challenges like unorganised, uneducated-unskilled labour, urban-rural and wide male-female worker 
ratio disparities. Besides, the industrial challenges for the workforce are low wages, exhaustive long 
shifts, compromised health & safety, hazardous working conditions, sexual harassment/discrimination 
and lack of human resource policies.  
Evidently, deriving from the above-mentioned facts, gender inequalities affect more woman than men 
in this case, given the fact, women are more personally, socially, economically and politically 
challenged. The industrial units prefer women labourers, especially young women workers since they 
are in abundant supply at a very low cost. However, in textile units, women employment is less due 
to the manual, labour intensive processes3. Stereotypically it isn’t favoured by owners to employ 
women due to their low competence, productivity and capacity to perform certain tasks in textile 
units. Therefore, presence of women is very less and the rest few that are working in textile units as 
directors, managers or executives face unequal access to authority and decision-making, human and 
legal rights, house/asset ownership, bank credits, education and skill development, economic 
resources, and health services. 
Bangladesh’s Third National Communication (TNC)4 to UNFCCC clearly states that Bangladesh is one 
of the most climate vulnerable countries in the world and the challenges posed by climate change 
make the lives and livelihoods of millions of people increasingly complex and vulnerable. Bangladesh 
is prone to climate disasters like floods, droughts and cyclones. Consequently, climate change and its 
impacts are enhancing vulnerabilities for women due to the lack of climate adaptive capacities. 
Struggles in coping up with the impacts of climate disasters, living in extreme unhealthy working 
conditions, inability to earn a living due to health issues and lack of education and skills, fully covered 
drapes and clothes that reduce the possibility of escaping the place of climate event and man-made 
disasters like fire, are a few to name. 
To understand the delicate relation between energy efficiency and gender equality, there is a need to 
understand the capacity of energy efficient processes and equipment to influence the life of workers 
both socially and economically by deep diving into the socio-economic status of the textile workforce 
which determines the human and economic development in the past and the upon technology 
 
1 Raw material for RMG sector is fabrics produced locally. Hence, RMG is a textile dependent sector. 
2 As quoted by Bangladesh Textile Mills Association (BTMA). Available at: https://www.btmadhaka.com/ 
3 Primary data sources (field survey and interviews) 
4 TNC 
(https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/TNC%20Report%20%28Low%20Resolation%29%2003_01_2019
.pdf) 
241

=== PAGE 245 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
5 
 
I 
upgrades. In this context, it’s important to understand gender specific inequalities and 
vulnerabilities. The following sections will discuss the concern in detail. 
1.1. 
Programme brief and relevance  
The programme ‘Promoting private sector investment through large scale adoption of energy saving 
technologies and equipment for textile sector of Bangladesh’ aims to reach out to the business 
establishments and entrepreneurs in textile sector to provide them with financial and market 
resources to avail investment opportunities for energy saving technology upgrades. The programme 
objectives have clearly been laid out to ensure direct and indirect benefits to the vulnerable and 
underprivileged sections of the society which are dependent on this sector. Project activities consider 
encouraging gender equality throughout the phases which particularly involves women in 
consultations, decision making and embedding gender specific benefits during the implementation of 
the programme. 
During the design and development of the programme, gender equality has been maintained at the 
stakeholder consultation and workshop, key informants at planning and management level (women 
in the ministries, relevant department and associations), executive and labour level. Women 
respondents have been included and preferred to answer the survey questions related to facilities and 
challenges at their workplaces (in different sections in textile units).  
Table 1: Percentage of women participation in stakeholder engagement 
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Stakeholder Type 
% of women participants 
Key 
Informants 
Interview (KII) 
Primary Stakeholders: 
Ministries, Associations, Multilaterals,  
Research/Academia and Industry 
27% 
Workshop/Group 
consultation  
Primary and Secondary stakeholders: 
Ministries, Associations, Multilaterals,  
Research/Academia and Industry 
Workshop 1 
23% 
Workshop 2 
24% 
Industry Survey 
Industry: 
Women led, Workers and Community 
Women led industries: 
35% 
factories 
surveyed 
have 
women leaders in capacities of 
Directors/DGM/CEO 
Executives/workers: 
30% 
 
Table 2: Project activities that are aligned with SDGs for social and gender inclusion 
Project Activities 
SDGs and Gender specific considerations 
► Assess the feasibility of 
the 
programme 
by 
conducting an in-depth 
review 
of 
the 
242

=== PAGE 246 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
6 
 
I 
technologies 
and 
equipment’s 
used 
in 
Bangladesh’s 
textile 
sector and developing a 
baseline 
for 
energy 
consumption in textile 
sector 
in 
current 
scenario. 
The assessment to consider the feasibility of the programme employs 
research and review of existing baselines in energy consumption of 
the textile units and the roles and responsibilities of the associated 
institutions.  
Gender equality has been ensured while conducting the studies to 
assess the status and during implementation, ensure provision of 
clean energy, industrial and infrastructural development and 
reduction in consumption of energy throughout the textile value 
chain. 
► Assess 
environmental, 
social and gender gaps in 
the current scenario and 
impacts on introduction 
of new technology and 
equipment’s. 
Environmental, social and gender assessments to assess the attitudes 
of the management and executives towards the impact of their 
currently deployed processes and operations on environment, society 
and the underprivileged gender and bridge the observed gaps during 
the implementation of the proposed programme. 
To develop a Gender Action Plan from the findings of gender 
assessment based on primary and secondary data.  
► Analyse 
and 
evaluate 
environmental, 
social, 
political, 
financial, 
operational 
risks 
associated 
with 
the 
sector. 
Evaluation of potential risks that may occur during the 
implementation of programme which may hamper the benefits and 
mitigation measures to be adopted for a gender equal approach.  
► Identify 
programme/programme-
level indicators to assist 
development of a GCF 
proposal 
aimed 
at 
Promoting private sector 
investment through large 
scale adoption of energy 
saving technologies and 
243

=== PAGE 247 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
7 
 
I 
equipment 
for 
textile 
sector of Bangladesh 
Development of a GCF proposal which is gender sensitive and 
proposes a gender action plan to be incorporated for the 
implementation of the programme.  
Innovation and infrastructure development, economic growth, 
sustainable value chain and provision of affordable and clean energy 
is directly related to women empowerment and welfare, lowering 
their sectoral and climate related vulnerabilities. 
 
1.2. 
GCF’s guideline on gender equality 
The Green Climate Fund has a mandate to support a paradigm shift to low-emission and climate-
resilient development and gender mainstreaming is central to its objectives and guiding principles, 
through engaging women and men of all ages as stakeholders in the design, development and 
implementation of strategies and activities to be financed5. 
The Gender Policy and Action Plan was adopted in March 2015, by the GCF board. The policy states, 
that a gender-sensitive approach is therefore part of a paradigm shift; Impacts of climate change are 
borne differently by man and women and existing gender inequalities are likely to be exacerbated; 
greater vulnerability of women to climate change stems from gender norms and discrimination that 
result in the imbalanced division of labour, lower incomes, and lesser livelihood opportunities; less 
access and control over land and other productive assets; fewer legal rights; lesser mobility and lesser 
political and professional representation. 
1.2.1. Objective, Principles and Mandatory requirements 
The overall objective of the gender policy is to ensure that by adopting a gender-sensitive approach, 
the Fund will efficiently contribute to gender equality and achieve greater and more sustainable 
climate change results, outcomes and impacts6.  
It is a mandatory requirement of the gender initiatives under the GCF programme to satisfy the basic 
requirements i.e. gender equality and equity, inclusiveness, accountability, country ownership 
through alignment with national policies and priorities in stakeholder inclusion, enhancing 
competencies through fund’s institutional framework and equitable resource /allocation for equal 
benefits for men and women through fund’s climate action. 
 
5 Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects: A practical manual to support the integration of 
gender equality in climate change interventions and climate finance 
(https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/194568/Guidelines_-
_GCF_Toolkit_Mainstreaming_Gender.pdf/860d1d03-877d-4c64-9a49-c0160c794ca7) 
6 Gender Policy and Action Plan (GCF/B.08/19 6 October 2014) Available at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/24946/GCF_B.08_19_-
_Gender_Policy_and_Action_Plan.pdf/afd29fd9-3efa-41c3-8318-7d86587c7701 
244

=== PAGE 248 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
8 
 
I 
 
Figure 1: The Fundamental Principles of GCF's Gender Policy 
Mainstreaming gender in GCF programmes can be synthesized into an approach which mandates a 
gender analysis to assess social, economic and political factors underlying climate change-exacerbated 
gender inequality, action plans with methods and tools to promote equality, and gender sensitivity of 
the monitoring and evaluation of the programme to measure and quantify the outcomes and impacts 
of programme activities on women and men’s resilience to climate change.  
In line with GCF’s gender policy, IDCOL has conducted a gender assessment and has ensured gender 
balance during all activities conducted under the PPF for this programme. The gender specific needs 
and priorities of men and women have been assessed and taken up for an action plan as instructed by 
the GCF. 
2. Methodology 
Gender assessment is done to investigate gender roles and power relations in relation to the 
programme design and identify multiple causes of vulnerability, including gender inequality. It is a tool 
used to identify and build on the diverse knowledge and capacities within communities/households 
that can be used to make them more resilient to climate related shocks and risks.   
This document is based on the review of national data and statistics, progress reports and government 
published documents; websites (ministries, departments, associations, international agencies and 
other active organisations) and resources from authentic sources; Meetings and Key informant 
interviews with the stakeholders and gender specialists. The data and information obtained from the 
secondary sources is equated from the primary sources (site visit, field survey, worker and community 
interviews, etc). The industrial survey has been done with the a) Facility lead/CEO/MD; b) Facility 
engineer; c) Facility workers (male and female) d) Community. The textile facilities were picked 
through random sampling. Once selected, these factories were visited for the survey and the workers 
were picked through stratified random sampling. The workers were split through the Strata 1: Female 
and Strata 2: Male and then picked randomly. The sample was stratified in order to maintain a gender 
balance.  
Table 3: Survey Statistics 
Total no. of Textile units surveyed:  
Each for Facility lead/CEO/MD and Facility engineer 
20 
Total no. of workers surveyed  
201 
Total no. of women workers 
59 
Commitment to gender 
equality and equity
Inclusiveness in terms of 
applicability to all the Fund’s 
activities
Accountability for gender 
and climate change results 
and impacts
Country ownership in terms 
of alignment with national 
policies and priorities and  
inclusive stakeholder 
participation
Competencies throughout 
the Fund’s institutional 
framework
Equitable resource 
allocation so that women 
and men benefit equitably 
from the Fund’s adaptation 
and mitigation activities. 
245

=== PAGE 249 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
9 
 
I 
 
These sources provided with the status of the targeted/planned initiatives and the on-ground 
implementation of the actions. The huge amount of data obtained from this exercise is aligned with 
the nationally published data to highlight the gaps and the areas that require immediate attention to 
suggest the pathways and an action plan to bridge the gaps. 
3. A contextual snapshot of Gender sensitivity and equality in textile sector in 
Bangladesh 
Textile sector being the major recruiter in Bangladesh has a men-women ratio of 70:307. Some of the 
textile mills don’t even have a single female worker.  The few employed women in the textile sector 
belong to the most vulnerable sections of the society. However, both women and men labour have 
increased vulnerability due to wage and income gaps, access to finance, lack of rights for land and 
property, access to information, health and safety issues8.  
International statistics show that Bangladesh has a Gender Inequality Index Rank of 1199  and a Global 
Gender Gap Index Rank 7210. These are the function of reproductive health (maternal mortality ratio 
and adolescent birth rate), empowerment (share of parliamentary seats held by women and share of 
population with at least some secondary education), and labour market participation (labour force 
participation rate).  
Hence, Bangladesh has a long way to go for which programmes that incorporate gender sensitive 
approach are vital. Development of this sector will have direct and indirect benefits for women 
currently employed and those that seek employment which will show up in a few years. 
3.1. 
Gender and energy efficiency in textile sector 
There exists a delicate relationship in gender and energy efficiency. It is essential to look at the trends 
of employment, which suggest, textile industry has more male workers than female. The employment 
of men is favoured in textile industry because of the common perceptions like processes in the textile 
units are labour intensive and manual, women can’t perform tasks which include heavy lifting, shifting 
and loading. Women experience occupational segregation, as most of which are employed are given 
lighter, sitting jobs. This leads to insufficient skill development and possibly lower wages for women 
employed in Bangladesh’s textile mills. 
The equipment and processes currently being used in textile sector in Bangladesh are labour and 
energy intensive. In most cases, smaller and medium textile units do not undertake energy audits and 
continue to use decade-old technologies. Quite evidently, lack of skills and use of age-old, labour-
intensive machinery are big constraints for job opportunities for women in this sector.  
In the past, buyers to bring down their costs, often overlooked the working conditions of their 
manufacturing labour class and exploited their skills for low wages. The government of Bangladesh 
has been making stringent rules and amendments 11in the existing laws to counter these challenges. 
Recently, it has been observed that the international buyers like M&S, H&M, Zara, Puma, etc., to meet 
 
7 Calculated from Primary sources of data: Field survey and KII with the facility managers 
8 International Labour Organisation (https://www.ilo.org/infostories/en-GB/Stories/Employment/barriers-
women#intro) 
9 UNDP, Human Development Report, 2016 
10 UN Women. http://evaw-global-database.unwomen.org/en/countries/asia/bangladesh 
11 Labour Rules 2015 and amendment in Labour Law (2013), discussed in following sections of the report. 
246

=== PAGE 250 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
10 
 
I 
their sustainability standards/commitments and CSR targets12, have started pushing the 
owner/suppliers to maintain certain standards in employee facilities and safety13. The textile mills 
have been pushed further to reduce the gender gaps in employment. To facilitate the mandate of 
their buyers, mills are undertaking initiatives like equal wages, child care centres, maternity and 
paternity leaves, medical facilities, safety precautions and trainings for skill development and 
awareness. Some of the reputed international brands demand ‘state of art’ machinery and technology 
upgrades to be introduced in the mills, manufacturing their products, to maintain brand competencies 
and quality. The interviews with the managers and CEOs of the large textile facilities indicate that the 
introduction of new and energy efficient, world-class technologies and equipment that are user 
friendly have opened more opportunities and jobs for men and women in textile sector. However, the 
textile mills who have integrated energy efficiency in their operations are only a few large industries, 
while many other due to lack of financial support and expertise, lag much behind. There’s a need of 
financial support to facilitate large-scale adoption of technology upgrades in textile sector to open 
new opportunities for men and women both. 
3.2. 
Perceptions and stereotypes 
Perceptions continue to enhance gender inequality in the sector. Most of the key informants and 
survey respondent shared their perceptions and views regarding the issue.  
The major perceptions/misconceptions for women, that continue to exist are: 
• 
Inability to perform labour intense assignments. The labour-intensive jobs are thus assigned 
to men, reducing the scope of work and wages for women. 
• 
Long, uncertain maternity leaves. Major concern for hiring managers is the long leaves 
women take on account of pregnancy and child care. 
• 
Women are Technologically challenged. Common perception is that the women can’t 
operate on complicated machinery due to their poor understanding of technology, mechanics 
and programming. 
• 
There’s no direct relationship between gender and energy efficiency. Planners often tend to 
overlook the potential of the new, user-friendly energy efficient equipment which will 
facilitate more jobs for women. 
• 
Inefficient to be involved in decision making. In a male dominated sector, participation of 
women in decision making isn’t encouraged. It’s very rare to find women entrepreneurs, MDs 
and CEOs that are actively involved in planning and management. 
• 
Restriction on mobility. Most women in rural regions are discouraged to go beyond the 
boundaries of their village or travel for work. Their mobility should be within their permissive 
boundaries. Barriers on mobility have also reduced work opportunities. 
Women both skilled and unskilled work in mills and perform domestic chores as well. Most of the 
existing misconceptions are led by the patriarchal structure of society which limit women 
empowerment. Training and skill development could break many barriers for women to be better able 
to compete with men and progress financially.  
 
12Interviews with Facility lead, MDs and CEOs, informed that the brands are conscious of their social impact 
and influence manufacturers to adhere to their social and gender policies and standards.  
13 The brands signed the ACCORD agreement and its obligatory for their manufacturing units to comply with 
the prescribed standards and agree for sudden site inspections/investigations. 
247

=== PAGE 251 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
11 
 
I 
3.3. 
Institutional arrangements (Legal and administrative) 
Women holding the seats of Prime Minister, speaker of parliament, opposition leader and Foreign 
Minister, Bangladeshi women have experienced a great deal of political empowerment. The 
empowering policy, laws and institutions have been discussed below.  
3.3.1. Policy 
Bangladesh’s National Women Development Policy of 201114 mandates to incorporate gender 
perspective in matter of innovation, import and application of new technology. Further, to take 
initiatives to purge the harmful elements, if any, from the technology by conducting research on it if 
the application of such innovated technology affects adversely the interest of the women and make 
necessary legislations, in favour of the women in the field of technology.  
Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP), 200915 is a 10-year program (2009 – 
2018) of the country to meet the challenge of climate change. BCCSAP addresses the needs of the 
poor and vulnerable, including women and children to be mainstreamed in all the activities under the 
Action Plan. 
Bangladesh Climate Change and Gender Action Plan (ccGAP), 2013 by Ministry of Environment and 
Forest discusses the climate vulnerabilities and gender action plan for four priority areas namely food 
security social protection and health; comprehensive disaster management plan; infrastructure; 
mitigation and low carbon development. 
The National Action Plan16 to prevent violence against women and children (2013-2025) encompasses 
all strategic and practical issues involved in the four pillars of the Women, Peace and Security Agenda: 
Participation, Prevention, Protection, and Relief and Recovery. 
3.3.2. Laws 
The government has undertaken various programs to materialize Vision 202117 for establishing rights 
of women, their empowerment and mainstreaming them in the overall development. Amendments 
have been made to the existing laws and new legislations have been made for protection of women 
and children.  
 Mobile Court Act, 2009:  The executive magistrate was given power to take steps by linking 
Section 509 of the Bangladesh Penal Code in the schedule of Mobile Court Act. This would 
resist and prevent eve teasing and sexual harassment of the girls and women. 
 Citizenship Act (amended), 2009: The provision for giving citizenship by mother to child was 
made by the national parliament by amending the citizenship act in 2009. 
 Dowry Prohibition Act, 1980: Prevention of financial obligation to provide gifts and assets 
 Women and Children Repression Prevention Act, 2000: To ensure the safety and protection 
to women at homes and their surroundings. 
 
14https://mowca.portal.gov.bd/sites/default/files/files/mowca.portal.gov.bd/policies/64238d39_0ecd_4a56_b
00c_b834cc54f88d/National-Women-Policy-2011English.pdf 
15 https://www.iucn.org/downloads/bangladesh_climate_change_strategy_and_action_plan_2009.pdf 
16https://mowca.portal.gov.bd/sites/default/files/files/mowca.portal.gov.bd/page/bcf75e01_95e3_48ba_bfe4
_3d88ea5f593c/Bangla-National-Actional-Plan-2013-2025.pdf 
17 The Government of Bangladesh has declared ‘Vision 2021’ with a target to make Bangladesh as a middle-
income country using Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and development of favourable 
business 
environment 
for 
innovative 
companies. 
(http://bhtpa.portal.gov.bd/sites/default/files/files/bhtpa.portal.gov.bd/page/8f8ac427_fca2_4875_bf9a_650
51666d011/Mission%20&%20Visson.pdf) 
248

=== PAGE 252 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
12 
 
I 
 Domestic Violence (Prevention and Protection) Act, 2010: Prevention of domestic 
violence, protection of women and children from domestic violence 
 Prevention and Suppression of Human Trafficking Act, 2012: To prevent trafficking for 
slavery, sexual interests and bonded labour. 
 High Court (2009) ruled to include mother’s name in all official documents, school admission 
forms, either alone or with that of the father. Consequently, climate change and its impacts 
are enhancing vulnerabilities for women due to the lack of climate adaptive capacities.  
 The Bangladesh Labour Act, 2006 amended in 2013: promotes equality of opportunity in 
employment and provides for equal pay amongst men and women.  
 Bangladesh’s Labour Rule, 2015: Mandate for strict rules for misconduct and punishments, 
provident fund, health and fire safety, wages, holiday and bonuses. Especially for women, 
there is a relaxation as the rules prohibits extreme jobs like lifting, carrying or discharging 
weights with hands or head outside the permitted quantity and if pregnant, any of these is 
completely prohibited; Inclusion in the apprenticeship program; provision of separate toilets 
for women; provision of child care or Crèches and consent form for women working in night 
shifts. 
The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women, 2011 in the Forty-eighth session 
indicated that the persistence of discrimination against women in the labour market, occupational 
segregation, has a wide gender wage gap and the exploitation of girls is also prevalent.18 
3.3.3. Institutions 
The country has significantly progressed by making and adopting integrated gender sensitive national 
policies and institutional arrangements. Since gender is a cross cutting issue, there are a number of 
institutions that are responsible for the recent development in women’s status. Especially, the 
initiatives undertaken by the government institutions like MOWCA19  which is mandated by the 
government to act as a focal point and a catalyst in action for women equality and development 
through different government agencies.  
Table 4: Institutional framework relevant to the programme 
Organisation  
Role 
1. Ministry of Women 
and Child Affairs 
 
Overall development of women, empowering the women and preserving 
their rights and socio-economic development of women by   
 Awareness creation 
 Establishing the social, political and legal rights of women 
 Creating equal opportunities for women 
 Providing technical and vocational training  
 Creating bridges for the interest of women with relevant government 
& non-government organizations at Home and abroad 
 Initiating involvement of women in the national development 
activities, arranges conferences, seminars and workshops regarding 
the interest of women 
 A Policy Leadership and Advocacy Unit (PLAU) provides technical 
support to MOWCA in coordinating women’s advancement activities 
within the Government 
2. Department 
of 
Women 
Welfare 
(MOWCA) 
3. Jatiya 
Mohila 
Sangstha (MOWCA) 
 
4. Parliamentary 
Standing 
Committee 
(MOWCA) 
 
18 BANGLADESH CLIMATE CHANGE AND GENDER ACTION PLAN 
(http://cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/iucn__bangladesh_climate_change___gender_action_plan__1.pdf) 
19 Ministry of Women and Child Affairs, Bangladesh (https://mowca.gov.bd/) 
249

=== PAGE 253 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
13 
 
I 
5. The 
National 
Council for Women 
and 
Children 
Development 
(NCWCD) 
Chaired by the Honourable Prime Minister to provide guidance through 
laws and rules for protection of women and children and monitor the 
implementation of critical policy decisions 
6. Women 
In 
Development Focal 
Point (WIDFP) 
Focal points Mechanism established in 1990 has a designated focal point 
from each ministry to ensure women concerns are integrated in policy, 
plans and programmes, District and Thana level WID coordination 
committees. The WIDFPs of all ministries lead to address gender concerns 
within the policies and plans of their respective ministries through its three 
working legs20: 
 WIDFP Implementation and Evaluation Committee (WIDFPIEC) 
 Women In Development Focal Point Coordination Committee 
(WIDFPCC) 
 Women In Development Focal Point Network Committee (WIDFPNC) 
7. District 
and 
Upazilla Levels   
District Women Affairs Officer and Upazilla Women Affairs Officer in 
coordination with other concerned officials shall discharge their 
responsibilities in implementation of all the programs undertaken for the 
development of women. 
-One Stop Crisis Centre and Cells 
-National Trauma Counselling centre 
8. Grassroots Level 
In village and Unions, the women have been organized as self-sustained 
groups. To strengthen these groups, they are transformed into a registered 
organization under different government organizations. 
9. NGOs and Social 
Organizations 
National Schemes and programs are adopted and implemented with 
assistance from these institutions to change social attitude towards 
women and expedite the process of women empowerment. 
10. International 
Co-
operation 
International, regional and sub-regional co-operation is encouraged 
through bilateral and multilateral financial and technical co-operation and 
exchanges of experience and technology aimed at empowerment of 
women21. 
11. Helpline Centres 
National Helpline Centres for violence against women and children 
Helpline No. 10921 
 
Ministry of Finance in 2003, established a monitoring and reporting facility named Recurrent, Capital, 
Gender, and Poverty model which assess the percentage of allocated funds that contribute to poverty 
reduction and gender equity. Women Abuse Prevention Cell and rehabilitation centres for abused 
women have been established to give legal assistance and counselling for prevention of women and 
children abuse. 
Most recently, Bangladesh’s women launched a resistance movement to combat SGBV22 after a series 
of brutal attacks in October 2016. Since the turn of the century, Bangladesh has weathered many 
conflicts with neighbouring states, India and Myanmar, as well as internal conflicts. In addition to 
these conflicts, women still face domestic violence and acid attacks. 
 
20 Report of the National Human Rights Commission, Bangladesh 
(http://nhrc.portal.gov.bd/sites/default/files/files/nhrc.portal.gov.bd/page/348ec5eb_22f8_4754_bb62_6a0d
15ba1513/NHRC%20Report%20on%20CEDAW%20Sate%20Report.pdf) 
21 National Women Development Policy 2011 
22 Sexual and Gender Based Violence 
250

=== PAGE 254 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
14 
 
I 
3.3.4. Accords and Conventions 
Bangladesh has been actively participating in many international human rights conventions, treaties, 
agreements and instruments and endorsed the Beijing Platform for Action (BPFA). It also adopted 
the United Nations Millennium Declaration (2000) and committed to the goals and targets known as 
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Few of the key relevant commitments are listed below. 
 
Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord  
The struggle for promoting the role of women in conflict resolution was a challenge especially in case 
of the Chittagong Hill Tribes region in Bangladesh where many women were widowed during the 
conflicts. Through the peace accord, the regional council gave the opportunity to women to access 
decision-making bodies. The Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord23 also known as Chittagong Hill 
Tracts Treaty, 1997 mandated to have 3 (three) seats for women in every Hill District Council and one-
third of the said seat for non-tribal women. 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) 
Bangladesh ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 
in 1984 and has submitted seven progress reports on its implementation and participated in meetings 
of the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. 
ACCORD 
The Accord on Fire and Building Safety in Bangladesh24 helps ensure that no worker needs to fear fire, 
building collapses or other accidents that can be prevented with reasonable health and safety 
measures. This agreement was signed in the immediate aftermath to the Rana Plaza building collapse 
on 24 April 2013, which killed 1,133 workers and critically injured thousands more. The Accord 
protects workers' rights to: 
 Refuse unsafe work 
 Participate in the work of their factory Safety Committee 
 File a complaint when they see a safety problem in their factory 
 Protection against reprisal for reporting safety-related matters 
 Freedom of Association in relation to protecting their own safety 
4. Situational analysis: understanding vulnerabilities through Gender Assessment  
 The situational analysis is based on the real time data collected on field through survey interviews 
with the managers, workers and other stakeholders. 
4.1. 
Socio-economic assessment 
The socio-economic assessment will determine the way the proposed infrastructure development 
programme will affect or change the lives of current or future workforce in textile sector.  
4.1.1. Average age of women in working in textile units 
Approximately, 80 percent25 women workers in textile fall under the age group of 18 to 45 years of 
age.  Most of them tend to leave this sector during mid-40s or early 50s. 
 
 
23 https://peaceaccords.nd.edu/sites/default/files/accords/Chittagong_Hill_Tracts_Peace_Accord.pdf 
24 https://bangladeshaccord.org/ 
25 Of the total women respondents 
251

=== PAGE 255 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
15 
 
I 
   
Figure 2: Percentage of Textile workers belonging to various age groups  
4.1.2. Marital status and average household size (adults and children) 
As per the field survey, above 60% of the men and women both in textile labour is married and 
has dependents. Forty five percent survey respondents have an average HH size above 4 
members and the rest of the workers have less than 4 members in the households. 
    
Figure 3: Marital status of men and women  
4.1.3. Education Status 
Women and men workers in textile units hold at least primary education and the highest being HSC 
as observed in the case of men. For women, Primary education is held by the most and very few have 
any education above SSC level (see figure 4). 
15-19, 
8%
20-24, 
11%
25-29, 
14%
30-34, 
13%
35-39, 
13%
40-44, 
10%
45-49, 
10%
50-54, 
8%
55-59, 
6%
60-64, 
3%
65+, 4%
AGE GROUP OF MALE WORKERS
15-19, 
7%
20-24, 
13%
25-29, 
17%
30-34, 
15%
35-39, 
15%
40-44, 
10%
45-49, 
9%
50-54, 
6%
55-59, 
5%
60-64, 
2%
65+, 1%
AGE GROUP OF FEMALE WORKERS
Single
30%
Married
70%
Divorced
0%
Widow 
0%
Others
0%
MEN: MARITAL STATUS 
Single
18%
Married
80%
Divorced
0%
Widow 
2%
Others
0%
WOMEN: MARITAL STATUS 
252

=== PAGE 256 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
16 
 
I 
 
Figure 4: Gender wise education status of textile worker group 
4.1.4. Skills and trainings (acquired personally and with support from employer) 
Approximately 60% of the workforce admits that they are given training and orientation before they 
are given responsibility for a task or operations on a machine. Women are given training for skills and 
capacity development on the job as women rarely pursue vocational trainings. While below 10% men 
have undertaken higher/vocational trainings the others undertook trainings at work. 
Table 5: Responses of the textile workers on trainings and skill development 
Trainings undertaken by all workers 
Women 
Men  
Vocational 
5% 
0 
6% 
On the job  
87% 
100% 
83% 
No training 
8% 
0 
11% 
4.1.5. Gender ratio in textile workforce 
Survey reveals that the textile labour comprises of below 30% of women labour. The reasons for this 
disparity have already been discussed in the previous sections.  
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
25.00
30.00
35.00
40.00
45.00
50.00
Uneducated  =1 Can read and write
only = 2
Primary =3
SSC  =4
HSC  = 5
Bachelor/Master
=6
Education Level
Women
Men
253

=== PAGE 257 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
17 
 
I 
4.1.6. Average work hours 
The survey suggests, there are three, 8 hours shift in medium and large textile units and small textile 
units usually have two, 12 hours shift. Women mostly serve 8 hours shift during day hours.  
As per the Labour Act, No adult worker shall ordinarily work or be required to work in an establishment 
for more than 48 (forty-eight) hours in a week, however, any deviation may happen only as per the 
clauses mentioned. 
4.1.7. Sources of income, average income and expenditure 
Besides their main income source i.e. textile unit, workers that come from farming background make 
money through the agricultural produce, local shops in the area, etc. The analysis from the survey data 
speaks volumes about the disparities in income and wages for men and women (see figure 5). 
 
Figure 5: Gender wise break-up of the monthly income of textile worker group 
The above graph reveals that women worker are paid around 8 to 10% less on average than their male 
compatriots. Lack of skills/technical knowledge and experience, attrition due to unplanned pregnancy, 
selective availability for single day shift, unwillingness to stretch for more hours at work are the most 
frequently listed reason, as per the field survey. Government of Bangladesh through the Labour Rules, 
Labour Law and Women Development Policy have initiated change, but the disparities continue to 
exist in the system.  
4.1.8. Female led households, house ownership and tenancy 
Female led house-holds are those where women provide for the basic needs of the family like buying 
food, clothes, house rents. Apparently, above 30% of the respondent (both men and women) stated 
that women provide for the basic needs of the family which is close to the national statistics26. 
Supplemented saying men invest their income as savings, house maintenance and other agricultural 
farms. Most survey respondents reported that they are living in a rented accommodation away from 
their village. The men and women respondents gave an average estimate of their monthly rents which 
varies from 2,500 BDT to 4,500 BDT a month depending on their requirement (no. of family members 
and assets). 
 
26 Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Bangladesh 
http://bbs.portal.gov.bd/sites/default/files/files/bbs.portal.gov.bd/page/a1d32f13_8553_44f1_92e6_8ff80a4f
f82e/Bangladesh%20%20Statistics-2017.pdf 
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
Below 8, 000  BDT
8,000  - 13, 000 BDT 13,000 – 18,000 BDT 18,000-23,000 BDT
Above 23,000
%
Monthly Income from Job at Textile Unit: Men and Women 
Men
Women
254

=== PAGE 258 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
18 
 
I 
4.1.9. Savings and loans 
According to the Global Findex Database 201727, Bangladesh has approx. 30% gender gap in account 
ownership. Above 90% women and men textile workers do not have a savings and resort to local 
lending in times of needs. The workers that do have savings, have it either in banks or local 
cooperatives. The ease of savings mobilization, availability of savings instruments and the presence 
and intensity of social safety nets determine the savings behaviour.28 As per the responses, 80% men 
and 75% women do not have loans and those who do, have personal loans. Loans for house, vehicle 
and educated hasn’t been reported.  
4.1.10. Provident fund/life Insurance 
All the respondents stated that their employers do not give or facilitate provident fund opportunity. 
The respondents, either men or women do not have any kind of insurance either personal or provided 
by the employer. Recently, the labour rules have mandated the provision of Provident Fund by the 
employer and laid out clauses for the same and also for the obligatory group insurance policy by the 
employer. 
4.2. 
Health and Safety assessment 
4.2.1. Health issues faced by men and women in textile units 
Its known that the textile units have a low air quality index and a high suspended particulate matter 
which is suffocating and in the long-term lead to bronchial diseases. Besides, there’s heat and 
chemicals in the work premises that the employs work with.29 As reported by the workers, there are 
frequent instances of burning from the heated machinery and effluents and chemical reactions by the 
dyes and colours. 
4.2.2. Health camps and medical facilities (like dispensary) and health insurance 
Men and women in large industries reported that their employers conduct health camps in association 
with government and private hospitals. Similarly, it was reported that there are 24*7 functional 
dispensaries in the large units that are looked after by government certified doctors. While the 
workers in small and medium textile units reported that there are no health camps or in-house medical 
facilities made available by their employer and they are directed to local medical practitioner in the 
vicinity. 
In case of accidents and injuries at workplace in larger units, if the damage cannot be handled by a 
resident doctor, the victims are rushed to the nearby medical facility and the finances are covered by 
the employer.  
The respondents shared there are no health insurance being provided by the employers.  
4.2.3. Maternity leaves 
Respondents shared that there is a provision of maternity leaves for 2 to 4 months and the 
Government also has legalised the maternity leave for 6 months and the female workers can also opt 
for maternity benefit during their absence. However, there isn’t provision for paternity leaves. 
4.2.4. Violence and abuse at work 
Men and women responded of not having been abused at work in large and medium units, however, 
in smaller units a few instances of verbal abuse have been reported. Most of the instances of verbal 
 
27 World Bank Global Findex 2017 (https://globalfindex.worldbank.org/) 
28 Savings and Income Inequality in Bangladesh 
(https://www.bb.org.bd/pub/research/workingpaper/wp1617.pdf) 
29 World Bank EHS Guideline for textile sector 
255

=== PAGE 259 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
19 
 
I 
abuse have been reported due to work related issues and incompetency to work on complex 
machine systems or carry out extreme tasks like carry, shift, load, the material.  
The Labour Rules 2015 has prescribed a limited load quantity to be carried by both men and women 
and anything over and above that is an offence as per the rules. 
4.2.5. Injuries and Accidents  
Of the total respondents, 25% of women and men did mention of having experienced an injury at work 
while 15 % women and 25% men shared their experiences of having witnessed accidents and injuries 
due to fire or other occupational hazards like heated boilers, hot dyeing machines and hot dyed 
material taken off the dyeing machines for cooling and finishing, chemical dyes, generators and 
electric equipment, Switch boards while power on/off and much more. The cost of damage is mostly 
covered by the employer if the accident/injury takes place at workplace. The Labour Rules has set 
rules in favour of the workers where they/their dependents can seek money from the employer 
through the Labour Court. Also, The owner shall place Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) of dangerous 
materials in an easily noticeable place so that the employed worker can be well informed about the 
possible hazards. 
4.2.6. Safety precautions, trainings and tools 
Typical risks in a textile factory have previously been discussed. To prevent accidents and injuries and 
reduce the intensity of disaster, there are specific guidelines that needs to be followed while operating 
on machines, doing manual labour, dealing with electricity or heat.  
There needs to be protection for respiratory health, eyes, fingers and limbs, for which the employer 
must mandatorily provide with necessary safety attire like safety shoes, helmets, goggles, masks, 
hand gloves, ear muffs, ear plugs, waist belts, aprons etc. and arrange training programs for the 
workers in using these materials and ensure their usage. Also, Employment of children, teenage 
laborers in the activities that are declared as dangerous from time to time by the Inspector General 
or his representative is prohibited30. 
. The following issues were discussed with the respondents and their responses were recorded. 
Table 6: Responses of textile labour on respective issues 
Specific issues 
Yes: Male (% 
of total) 
Yes: Female 
(% of total) 
No (% of 
total) 
Don’t Know (% 
of total) 
Trainings on health safety and 
security issues 
47 
34 
10 
9 
Trainings on fire safety and 
rescue 
25 
19 
33 
23 
Trainings on handling of heavy 
machines and chemicals 
29 
22 
43 
6 
Awareness of the safety rules 
and policies in the work place  
59 
37 
3 
1 
 
For safe machinery operation, refer to the Labour Rules 2015. 
4.2.7. Compensation to victims 
All women respondents and 80% men respondents agreed that their employer does provide 
compensation and medical support in times of loss that has happened during the work hours, at the 
 
30 Bangladesh Labour Rules 2015 
256

=== PAGE 260 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
20 
 
I 
workplace. Also, Labour Rule sates ‘All Owners, to whom Section 99, applies shall initiate group 
insurance policy for each worker.’ Hence, under damage/death, relevant compensation would be 
provided. 
4.3. 
Sanitation and access to basic facilities 
4.3.1. Access to drinking water, washrooms and sanitation facilities (soaps, sanitary napkins, etc) 
As per the site visits, the drinking water available for the workers are from the government’s water 
pipeline being provided for the locality. The size of the textile units determines if the water is further 
processed by in-house water filters. Out of 20 units that were visited 17 units had water purification 
facility.  
Similarly, hygiene and washroom facilities are dependent on the size of the textile units. The larger 
the set-up and workforce, the better facilities are provided. As observed, separate washrooms are 
provided if the facilities are medium to large scale and have a bigger workforce.  
However, Labour Rules state ‘there will be provision of pure drinking water in easily accessible and 
suitable place for all workers in each firm and the water should be stored in a hygienic way’ and lays 
down rules for Toilets and washrooms- the number, location and cleanliness of the toilets and wash 
room should be in accordance and in case of female workers, one toilet for each 25 females up to the 
first 100 and one for each 50 next. 
 
 
257

=== PAGE 261 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
21 
 
I 
5. Qualitative Gap Analysis 
Background research and field survey show similar picture of the status of the gender issues in the sector. Since the gap analysis is based on  a comparative 
analysis of both genders, so, gender balance was essential in analysing gaps in this exercise. The respondents from both genders were interviewed from the 
worker and manager groups in textile sector to discusses about the differential needs and Inequalities (accessibility/provision of services, opportunities, etc). 
Table 7: Gender biases in textile sector in Bangladesh 
Basic Rights 
(determining 
factor) 
IFC Guidelines31 
National 
Guidelines/initiatives 
Disparities/Inequalities as observed 
Men  
Women  
Education 
Education 
programs 
or 
improved 
infrastructure 
to 
facilitate increased access to 
education 
Emphasis will be given on 
women's education to ensure 
women's 
comprehensive 
development 
and 
empowerment and women’s 
participation in a balanced 
social advancement32 
Male members of the society are 
more highly educated across all 
age groups. 
Females have been facilitated by 
the different programmes and 
initiatives of the government and 
that has led to a change in trends 
and more educated young women 
workers. 
On field, the male workforce 
ranges from uneducated to higher 
degrees while women mostly 
belonged to the Primary to HSC 
range. This indicates that women 
workers usually have the basic skill 
set and the men have higher 
degrees. Besides, there are job 
opportunities for uneducated men 
as well and women have to fulfil a 
certain criterion to get onboard 
with the textile firms. 
Skill training 
Provide training opportunities 
to allow for more equal access 
• 
The arrangement of own 
training 
facilities 
on 
Male worker group is observed to 
be skilled and better adapted to 
Women have a low presence in 
textile labour force and they aren’t 
 
31 IFC Gender Toolkit: Unlocking Opportunities For Women And Business 
 
32 Bangladesh’s National Education Policy, 2010 
258

=== PAGE 262 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
22 
 
I 
to alternative livelihood and 
employment opportunities 
necessary efficiency for 
the positions for which 
the workers are supplied 
or agreement with any 
such approved training 
providing 
organization 
which 
can 
provide 
training.33 
• 
The 
National 
Skills 
Development 
Policy 
(NSDP) 2011 emphasized 
on quality vocational and 
technical education for 
women 
considering 
market needs.34 
working 
on 
technologically 
complicated machinery.   
usually trained and delegated to 
operate on machinery. 
Jobs 
The client will not make 
employment decisions on the 
basis of personal characteristics 
based on as gender, race, 
nationality, ethnic, social and 
indigenous origin, religion or 
belief, disability, age, or sexual 
orientation35 
The client will identify migrant 
workers and ensure that they 
are engaged on substantially 
equivalent 
terms 
and 
The Bangladesh Labour Act, 
2013 provides for equal pay 
for equal work,  
women 
friendly 
working 
environment, 
maternity 
leave, and redress against  
harassment at the workplace. 
 
To undertake all out initiative 
for 
employment 
of 
the 
educated 
and 
illiterate 
women labour.36 
More opportunities for men due 
to the nature of work and 
technological competence. 
No such evidence has been 
reported where migrant workers 
have experienced discrimination. 
Less job opportunities due to lack 
of skills and labour intensive 
operations. 
Women 
often 
experience 
discrimination due to physical and 
technological incompetence, lack 
of 
relevant 
skills, 
uncertain 
maternity breaks, etc. 
 
33 Bangladesh Labour Rues 2015 
34 CEDAW: Eighth periodic report of States parties due in 2015 
35 IFC Performance Standard 2: Labour  
36 National Women Development Policy 2011 
259

=== PAGE 263 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
23 
 
I 
conditions 
to 
non-migrant 
workers carrying out similar 
work 
Wages 
Identify and close gender-
based 
disparities 
in 
compensation including salary, 
benefits, 
and 
bonuses—
awarded to men and women 
who hold equivalent jobs in the 
company. 
In determining wages or  
fixing the minimum rate of 
wages for any worker, the 
principle of equal wages for 
male, 
female 
and 
handicapped 
workers 
for 
work of equal nature or 
standard or value shall be 
followed; 
and 
no 
discrimination shall be made 
in this respect on the ground 
of being male, female or 
handicapped.37 
Competitive 
wages 
due 
to 
skilfulness and great competence 
gained 
over 
processes 
and 
equipment. 
Despite government’s initiatives 
to reduce wage gaps, women 
experience low wages due to 
negligible 
skills 
and 
low 
competence 
over 
equipment 
handling as compared to men.  
Savings and 
loans 
Employer may provide financial 
support, 
including 
no/low 
interest loans, salary advances, 
or support paying  
medical bills to women in need 
and 
experiencing 
Intimate 
Partner Violence 
The banking system provides 
loan facilities to all, including 
women for housing, business, 
and personal purpose. The 
collateral requirements for 
higher amount of loan often 
make women ineligible for 
lending as they lack assets to  
mortgage. 38 
Given that textile labour has 
reported zero savings, it’s only a 
few men who have savings either 
in banks or cooperatives.  
Very few men have reported 
loans and that only for personal 
use.  
Women have informal saving 
pockets.  
Most women respondents have 
denied having a savings account in 
a bank. 
House and 
Asset 
Ownership 
Provide assistance to support 
equal access to Land titles: 
Divorcees and widows are in 
particular need of assistance 
Limitation of resources is 
there in attaining the desired 
target 
of 
women 
development. 
The house ownership is mostly in 
the name of the male member of 
the family. 
Most women have been observed 
to have comparatively lower 
 
37 Bangladesh’s Labour Act, 2013 
38 CEDAW: Eighth periodic report of States parties due in 2015 
260

=== PAGE 264 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
24 
 
I 
here. They may face cultural, 
political, or legal difficulties in 
accessing their right to their 
land. Also note that in some 
contexts, women who hold the 
formal title to land may still 
face cultural, procedural, or 
customary law barriers to 
exercising this right. 
Support for women’s land 
ownership and land titling.39 
To give women the rights to 
wealth and resources earned 
through income, succession, 
loan/credit, land and market 
management. 
To 
include 
women 
perspective in the housing 
plan and shelter arrangement 
in the countryside and the 
urban areas 40 
ownership over land, house and 
other assets. 41 
Dependents 
Make sure that female-headed 
households receive the same 
benefits 
as 
male-headed 
house-holds. 
Make sure to include single,  
pregnant, 
elderly, 
female-
headed households, and any 
other vulnerable groups in 
these consultations. 
Create 
a 
more 
inclusive, 
gender-supportive 
worksite 
culture and Support flexible 
work arrangements.42 
Out of 40% population of 
Bangladesh living under the 
poverty line, two-thirds of 
them are women and female 
headed families are greater in 
number among them. 
Traditionally, men have provided 
for the basic needs of the family 
like food and shelter.  
Of late, the respondents have 
reported a change in ideologies 
and role play. With more women 
earning, the dependence of family 
members has been shared by 
them with their partners.  
 
39 IFC Gender Toolkit: Unlocking Opportunities For Women And Business 
40 National Women Development Policy,2011 
41 Khan, Issa et al. “The right of women in property sharing in Bangladesh: Can the islamic inheritance system eliminate discrimination.” SpringerPlus vol. 5,1 1695. 3 Oct. 
2016, doi:10.1186/s40064-016-3347-2 (Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5047860/) 
42 IFC Gender Toolkit: Unlocking Opportunities For Women And Business 
261

=== PAGE 265 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
25 
 
I 
Health 
Assessment of health risks and 
provision of health care centres  
The 
National 
Industrial 
Health and Safety Council has 
drafted 
an 
Occupational 
Safety and Health Policy 
Allergies and Lung issues are 
common to both men and 
women. 
Women experience unfavourable 
conditions 
during 
their 
menstruation, pregnancy, etc.  
Low air quality index and a high 
suspended particulate matter is 
suffocating and in the long-term 
lead to bronchial diseases43  
Safety 
The client will provide a safe 
and healthy work environment, 
taking into account inherent 
risks in its particular sector and 
specific classes of hazards in 
the 
client’s 
work 
areas, 
including physical, chemical, 
biological, 
and 
radiological 
hazards, and specific threats to 
women.44 
Every worker shall be made 
aware of the hazards of work 
through training in order to 
ensure the protection and 
safety of his professional 
health in the place of  
work.45 
Men are more vulnerable to 
accidents during operations and 
disasters  
Women are equally vulnerable to 
safety risks and hazards in the 
workstation.  
The major risks from handling of 
heat 
and 
chemicals 
can 
be 
reduced only upon trainings on 
safety management. 
However, survey reveals, women 
have had less opportunities for 
trainings on safety and health 
precautions. 
Violence and 
Abuse 
The client will take measures to 
prevent 
and 
address 
harassment, 
intimidation, 
and/or exploitation, especially 
in regard to women. 
MOWCA 
has 
formulated 
National 
Action 
Plan 
to 
prevent 
Violence 
Against 
Women and Children  
2013-2025 to protect and 
ensure 
women’s 
human 
rights.46 
The Multi-Sectoral Program 
on Violence Against Women  
Men have not reported any cases 
of violence and abuse. 
Women have reported verbal 
abuse in smaller textile units. 
 
43 World Bank EHS Guideline for textile sector 
44 IFC Performance standards 2 
45 Bangladesh’s Labour Act, 2013 
46 CEDAW: Eighth periodic report of States parties due in 2015 
262

=== PAGE 266 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
26 
 
I 
(MSP-VAW) provides health 
care, police assistance, DNA 
test, social services, legal  
assistance, 
psychological 
counselling and shelter for 
the woman victims through  
8 One-stop Crisis Centres 
(OCCs). 
Sanitation 
facilities 
(Clean 
washroom, 
soap, etc) 
Guarantee equal or improved 
access to civic infrastructure, 
including 
water, 
sanitation 
(facilities such as toilets and 
bathing facilities)  
and fuel resources. 
In case of female workers, 
separate bathrooms must be 
arranged for them.  
Additionally, 
washing 
facilities must be covered in 
such a way so that the male  
workers cannot see the inside 
area of the bathrooms while 
working or moving. 47 
Men 
have 
provided 
neutral 
responses towards provision of 
sanitation facilities. 
 
Women 
reported 
to 
have 
experienced absence of women 
washrooms in smaller units and 
bad sanitation experienced due to 
sharing toilets with men.  
Also, women require and expect 
to have basic facilities like soap, 
sanitary 
napkins 
from 
their 
employer which in most cases isn’t 
taken care of.  
Planning, 
management 
and decision-
making 
Enable men’s  
and women’s voices to be  
heard in decision making and  
accountability mechanisms 
Women’s participation in the  
National Parliament and local 
government institutions has 
been ensured by reserving 
quota, in addition to their 
eligibility for the regular 
seats. Women are visible on 
boards 
of 
private 
corporations, 
in 
senior 
management, in  
Male dominated sector from 
planning and management to 
execution. 
Women are present at the 
planning 
and 
management, 
however, their engagement in 
decision-making is still unsure. 
Women at execution level also are 
very less. 
 
47 Labour Rules,2015 
263

=== PAGE 267 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
27 
 
I 
diplomatic missions and in 
armed forces. There are more 
women in the departments  
and directorates engaged in 
service delivery, such as 
teachers, health and family 
planning assistants, nurses, 
etc. There are 23 per cent of 
women in the judiciary.  
 
 
Evidently, presence of women in the sector is very less. Only a few women have been reported to be leading the textile units as Managing Directors and CEOs. 
There is a dire need to address inequalities being experienced by the respective genders in different cases. The development programmes in textile sector in 
Bangladesh must address gender issues for growth and social welfare. 
 
264

=== PAGE 268 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
28 
 
I 
6. Bridging Gaps: gender sensitivity and applicability of the programme 
As per the GCF’s Gender Policy, the following must be considered for the Gender Action Plan 
intended to  
6.1. 
Inclusivity 
in 
stakeholder 
approach 
(planning, 
management 
and 
implementation) 
Infrastructure development programmes with the GCF have a mandate to have a gender sensitive 
approach and gender inclusion in all activities including stakeholder engagement and consultations to 
operationalise fair and balanced programme actions. Since, there has been a proactive engagement 
of the stakeholders both men and women in planning and designing (consultations and surveys) of 
the programme, the existing issues in textile sector could surface. 
6.1.1. First stakeholder workshop 
A gender balanced scoping workshop on ‘Importance of energy efficiency in textile sector and its 
influence on environment, society and gender’ was conducted at Dhaka on 29th May 2019 to engage 
with stakeholders from ministries, associations, industry and civil society organisations and discuss 
issues related to gender parity in the sector. Respective stakeholders could communicate their 
concerns about the status and the impact of programme through various phases (planning, designing, 
and implementation). The discussions on average male female ratio, roles of gender in management 
and decision-making, the trends in perceptions and attitudes and enabling change for a balanced 
approached, paved way for an integrated programme that’s socially benefitting to the vulnerable 
group. 
6.1.2. Second stakeholder workshop  
A validation cum consultation workshop for dissemination of the findings of the gender assessment 
done through various stakeholder engagement methods (field survey, worker interviews, manager 
interviews, policy makers interviews, etc) was held titled ‘Impacts of Energy Efficiency on 
Environment, Social and Gender in Textile Sector of Bangladesh’ on 29th July 2019 in Dhaka.  Most 
of the distinguished stakeholders from ministries, associations, trade unions, industries, academicians 
and development professionals participated in the workshop to state views and comment on the 
observations and conclusions of the exercise.  
 
6.2. 
Monitoring interventions and Evaluation  
Gender sensitive vision and objectives has led to specific log-frame indicators to embed gender 
inclusion in programme design. The M&E log frame will measure the performance of the gender-based 
activities. The action plan will present: 
265

=== PAGE 269 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment Report 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
29 
 
I 
  
Figure 6: Elements of the Gender Action Plan 
Specialised monitoring framework to measure outputs and track progress of gender specific elements 
while evaluation framework to measure impacts of the gender specific activities in addressing gender 
biases. The monitoring and evaluation will feed a detailed gender action plan which will lay base for a 
gender-sensitive programme/programme. 
Work undertaken to address gender 
issues in the project/program
Targets and design features, included 
in the project/program to address 
gender concerns and ensures tangible 
benefits to women and men, 
especially from vulnerable 
communities 
Mechanisms to ensure 
implementation of the gender design 
elements 
Gender - sensitive monitoring and 
evaluation indicators 
266

=== PAGE 270 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
Gender Action Plan 
Activities 
 Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
Impact Statement:  
Enhanced livelihood opportunities and reduced inequalities at work through training and skill development to improve the productivity and competitiveness for 
both men and women from the implementation of energy efficient technologies and equipment in textile sector. 
Outcome Statement:  
Increased access of the textile sector to concessional financing for energy efficiency, leading to energy savings through large scale adoption of energy efficient 
technologies to reduce GHG emissions. 
Component 1: Concessional loans for energy efficiency in textile sector 
Output 1.1:  Women entrepreneur successfully engaged in the program 
Activity 1.1.1:  
Encouragement of women 
entrepreneur to venture in the 
textile sector   
 
Indicator 
Encourage loan application from textile units with 
significant 
participation 
of 
(Chairman/Any 
Director/MD/CEO) women entrepreneurs 
Target 
To approach minimum 05 (five) woman led textile 
business entities under the programme 
Minimum 01 woman 
led garment 
business entity will 
be approached in 
each year. 
 
Respective Business Units 
of IDCOL  
Funding Source: 
IDCOL 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
Within the  
“Project 
Management 
Cost” from 
IDCOL in line of 
regular business 
process 
Output 1.2: Investment to comply with national standards for women welfare and recover costs from the energy savings from programme/project 
implementation 
Activity 1.2.1: 
Reducing the gender wage 
gap 
(1) Unbiased employment as 
per the “Labour rules 
(2015)” 
(2) Encourage similar wages 
for men and women for 
similar work type as per 
the “National Wage Board” 
Indicator 
Encouraging women participation by providing unbiased 
employment opportunities and providing similar wages 
for same jobs to men and women 
Target 
Submission of existing pay scale ensuring similar wages 
for men & women or proposed pay scale with a time 
bound implementation plan ensuring such similar wages 
 
Number of such 
submission will 
depend on the 
number of end 
borrowers 
approaching IDCOL 
for their financing. 
There is no yearly 
target of how many 
end borrowers will 
End borrowers 
Funding Source: 
End borrowers  
Amount: XXXXX 
 
The cost of any 
such 
implementation 
will be borne by 
end borrowers & 
this will not be 
267

=== PAGE 271 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
be financed rather 
specific amount for 
each year & a total 
of entities have been 
mentioned in the log 
frame. 
So IDCOL will ensure 
submission 
of 
existing pay scale 
ensuring 
similar 
wages for men & 
women or proposed 
pay scale with a time 
bound 
implementation plan 
ensuring such similar 
wages in line with 
their actual financing 
in each year. 
 
 
part of GCF 
project cost 
Activity 1.2.2: 
Facilitate women participation 
in the sector through 
provision of: 
(1) Medical Facilities 
(2) Child care 
(3) Sanitation facilities 
 
Indicator 
Encouraging women participation by facilitating them 
with medical assistance, child care and sanitation as 
prescribed under Labour Rule 2015 & other regulatory 
compliances 
Target 
Share existing status of the mentioned parameters 
during loan application and ensure compliance with the 
national standards (if not already complied) within 12 
months of the loan disbursement.  
Number of such 
sharing will depend 
on the number of 
end borrowers 
approaching IDCOL 
for their financing. 
There is no yearly 
target of how many 
end borrowers will 
be financed rather 
specific amount for 
each year & a total 
of entities have been 
End borrowers 
Funding Source: 
End borrowers  
Amount: XXXXX 
 
The cost of any 
such 
implementation 
will be borne by 
end borrowers & 
this will not be 
part of GCF 
project cost 
268

=== PAGE 272 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
mentioned in the log 
frame. 
So IDCOL will 
ensure sharing of 
existing status of the 
mentioned 
parameters during 
loan application and 
ensure compliance 
with the national 
standards (if not 
already complied) 
within 12 months of 
the loan 
disbursement in line 
with their actual 
financing in each 
year within 05 years 
of GCF loan 
availability period. 
 
 
Component 2: Large scale adoption of Energy Efficient technologies and equipment 
Output 2.1: Energy Efficient technology upgrades in the textile units employing new programmed/automated processes 
Activity 2.1.1:  
Training and skill 
development for machine use 
and operating on 
programming software 
(1) Development of training 
modules 
(2) Periodic trainings and 
evaluation 
Indicator 
Ensure participation in skill development trainings 
leading to women empowerment by providing skill 
development through the technical assistance 
workshops 
Target 
Ensure women employee participation a minimum of 
25% in skill development and training workshop 
 
In Year 3 within 05 
years of GCF loan 
availability period 
 
 
 
IDCOL will ensure at least 
01 training for their 
respective end borrowers 
& ensure targeted women 
participation 
 
Funding Source: 
End borrowers & 
IDCOL 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
The cost of any 
such 
implementation 
will be borne by 
end borrowers & 
this will not be 
269

=== PAGE 273 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
part of GCF 
project cost. 
The cost of 
IDCOL will be 
within the  
“Project 
Management 
Cost” from 
IDCOL in line of 
regular business 
process 
 
Activity 2.1.2:  
Safety trainings while 
operating on new 
machinery/equipment 
(1) Development of training 
modules 
(2) Periodic trainings and 
evaluation 
Indicator 
Reduction in accidents and safety issues rising from 
new certified machinery for which due trainings have 
been provided to the workers including women. 
Target 
Ensure women employee participation a minimum 25% 
in the safety training for workers  
In Year 4 within 05 
years of GCF loan 
availability period 
 
 
 
IDCOL will ensure at least 
01 training for their 
respective end borrowers 
& ensure targeted women 
participation 
 
Funding Source: 
End borrowers & 
IDCOL 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
The cost of any 
such 
implementation 
will be borne by 
end borrowers & 
this will not be 
part of GCF 
project cost. 
The cost of 
IDCOL will be 
within the  
“Project 
Management 
Cost” from 
IDCOL in line of 
regular business 
process 
270

=== PAGE 274 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
Activity 2.1.3:  
Grievance Redressal 
(1) Formulation of a project 
committee for 
addressing grievance  
(2) Establishing grievance 
redressal process 
Indicator 
Encouragement for establishment of grievance  
redressed system  for enhanced women employee 
security  
Target 
An active grievance redressal system in place within 12 
months of project operation 
Number of such 
grievance redressal 
system will depend 
on the number of 
end borrowers 
receiving financing 
form this program. 
There is no yearly 
target of how many 
end borrowers will 
be financed rather 
specific amount for 
each year & a total 
of entities have been 
mentioned in the log 
frame. 
 
So IDCOL will 
ensure  such active 
grievance redressal 
system in place 
within 12 months of 
project operation in 
line with their actual 
financing in each 
year within 05 years 
of GCF loan 
availability period 
 
 
 
IDCOL & End borrower 
Funding Source: 
End borrowers & 
IDCOL 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
The cost of any 
such 
implementation 
will be borne by 
end borrowers & 
this will not be 
part of GCF 
project cost. 
The cost of 
IDCOL will be 
within the  
“Project 
Management 
Cost” from 
IDCOL in line of 
regular business 
process 
 
 
Component 3: Gender balanced participation during the Implementation/operationalization of the project/programme 
Output 3.1: Women Participation during project implementation 
Activity 3.1.1:  
Formulation of a project 
committee with women 
participating for monitoring of 
Indicator 
Gender balanced project/programme committee in 
IDCOL  
Target 
To form a Project 
committee within 06 
months after signing 
the Funded Activity 
           
IDCOL  
Funding Source: 
IDCOL 
Amount: XXXXX 
 
271

=== PAGE 275 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
the activities under the 
program. 
To ensure women participation in the Project Committee 
& ensure at least 01 female member participation 
Agreement (FAA) 
with GCF  
The cost of 
IDCOL will be 
within the  
“Project 
Management 
Cost” from 
IDCOL in line of 
regular business 
process 
Activity 3.1.2:  
Training & skill development 
of relevant Business Units of 
IDCOL 
Indicator 
Increased women skills & participation in various 
management aspects of the program 
Target 
To ensure women employee participation (from IDCOL) 
in the relevant capacity building initiatives as beneficiary 
• 
1st  workshop in 
Year-2 
• 
2nd  workshops in 
Year-5 
(Please see project 
Implementation Time 
table) 
 
IDCOL  
Funding Source: 
GCF 
Amount: USD 
78,133.00 (for 
entire activity) 
 
Activity 2.3.2: 
Conduct  
capacity building 
workshops and 
training sessions 
for IDCOL, 
stakeholders and 
end borrowers 
(participants from 
the textile 
industry 
irrespective of 
being eligible for 
component 01)   
who are the 
applicants for the 
loan on the tools 
and requirements 
to be fulfilled for 
272

=== PAGE 276 ===
Annex VIII – Gender Action Plan 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
I 
 
successfully 
securing the loan 
 
 
273
