=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.12.20048
creationDate: D:20201019135953+09'00'
modDate: D:20201021114050+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
9 – 13 November 2020 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 11 
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
21 October 2020 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum V 
Funding proposal package for FP145 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "RELIVE – REsilient LIVElihoods of vulnerable
smallholder farmers in the Mayan landscapes and the Dry Corridor of Guatemala";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
75 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
76 
Secretariat’s assessment 
78 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
91 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
101 
Gender documentation 
103

=== PAGE 3 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 1 OF 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme title: 
RELIVE – REsilient LIVElihoods of vulnerable 
smallholder farmers in the Mayan landscapes and the 
Dry Corridor of Guatemala 
Country(ies): 
Guatemala 
Accredited Entity: 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Date of first submission: 
2019/11/04  
Date of current 
submission  
2020/09/22 
Version number 
[V.015]

=== PAGE 4 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 2 OF 72 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-FAO-Guatemala-LA-2019”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 72 
Acronyms 
ASIS   
 
Agricultural Stress Index System  
CADER 
 
Learning Centers for Rural Development 
COCODE 
 
Community Development Council 
COMUDE 
 
Municipal Development Council 
CONRED  
 
National Coordinator for Disaster Reduction 
CPF  
 
 
Country Programming  
CSA  
 
 
Climate Resilient Agriculture  
CSO  
 
 
Civil Society Organizations  
ECLAC  
 
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 
EE  
 
 
Executing Entity  
EM-DAT  
 
The Emergency Events Database 
FAO  
 
 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
FEWS NET 
 
Famine Early Warning Systems Network  
FS 
 
 
Feasibility Study  
GCF  
 
 
Green Climate Fund 
GDP  
 
 
Gross Domestic Product 
GIZ 
 
 
The German Society for International Cooperation 
GOG 
 
 
Government of Guatemala 
GRMS   
 
Global Resources Management System 
INAB 
 
 
National Forest Institute  
INE 
 
 
Institute of National Statistics 
INSIVUMEH 
 
Seismology, Volcanology, Meteorology and Hydrology Institute 
IUCN   
 
International Union for Conservation of Nature  
KOICA   
 
Korea International Cooperation Agency 
LMCC   
 
Climate Change Framework Law  
M&E 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MAGA  
 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food 
MARN  
 
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources 
NAP agriculture  
Integrating Agriculture in National Adaptation Plans  
NAP 
 
National Adaptation Plan  
NDA 
 
National Designated Authority  
NDC  
 
Nationally Determined Contributions 
NGOs  
 
Non-Governmental Organizations  
OED  
 
FAO Office of Evaluation  
PANCC  
 
National Climate Change Action Plan  
PINPEP  
 
Forest Incentive Program for Small-Holders  
PMU  
 
Project Management Unit 
PROBOSQUE  
Incentive Program for the establishment, recovery, management, production and 
protection of forests in Guatemala 
PSC  
 
 
Project Steering Committee  
RCP  
 
 
Representative Concentration Pathway  
RELIVE  
REsilient LIVElihoods of vulnerable smallholder farmers in the Mayan landscapes and 
the Dry Corridor of Guatemala 
RLC 
 
 
FAO Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean  
SDG 
 
 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SEGEPLAN 
 
Planning and Programming Secretariat of the Presidency  
SESAN  
 
Secretariat for Food and Nutritional Security 
SINCC   
 
National System for Information on Climate Change  
 
SLM  
 
 
FAO Sub-regional Office for Mesoamerica 
SNER   
 
System for Rural Extension 
TC  
 
 
Technical Committee

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 72 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or private 
sector 
Public 
 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
Not applicable  
 
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it. 
The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation:   
 
☐ 
Low-emission transport:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:  
 
☐ 
Forestry and land use:   
 
 
 
 
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
 
  
☒ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security: 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment:  
 
 
 
☒ 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution:  
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
 
 
52%1 
18% 
Enter number% 
30% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  
 
A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  
Direct Beneficiaries: 
 
Total = 116,353 
Female = 46,541 Women 
 
0,7% of National population 
20 % of population in target 
area 
Indirect Beneficiaries 
 
Total = 583,146     
Female = 300,320 
3.9% of National Population 
      
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  
66,677,169 USD  
A.9. Project size 
Medium (Upto USD 
250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
29,837,169 USD 
For multi-country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17. 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒ Grant 
29,837,169 
 
☐ Loan 
Enter number 
☐ Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐ Equity  
 
Enter number 
☐ Results-based  
 
     payment 
 
Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
Indicate the number of years 
and months the project/ 
programme is expected to be 
implemented. 
7 years  
A.12. Total lifespan 
Indicate the maximum number 
of years over which the 
impacts of the investment are 
expected to be effective. 
20 years  
 
1 Refer to Section C.2 for the detailed calculation.

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 5 OF 72 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/ 
programme, if available.  
10/31/2019 
A.14. ESS category  
Refer to the AE’s safeguard 
policy and  GCF ESS 
Standards to assess your FP 
category. 
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme? 
Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food (MAGA) 
National Forest Institute (INAB) 
The German Society for International Cooperation (GIZ) 
Each Executing Entity will only be responsible for specific Project Activities as set out in Section 
B.4 - Table 7. 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
1. The project REsilient LIVElihoods of vulnerable smallholder farmers in the Mayan landscapes and the Dry Corridor 
of Guatemala (RELIVE) aims to build the resilience of Guatemala’s most vulnerable farmers and their livelihoods 
against the impacts of climate change. The project will promote drought-resilient crop production systems by 
adopting a package of proven and validated adaptation measures. It will also be transformative in its focus on 
promoting women’s equitable representation in project activities and enabling women’s greater economic 
empowerment and participation in decision making. RELIVE project will overcome critical barriers to strengthen the 
resilience of vulnerable farmers against the impacts of climate change through the implementation of climate-
resilient agricultural and water management practices, resulting in improved food security and more sustainable 
and resilient livelihoods.  
2. In Guatemala, around 76% of the rural population and 79% of the indigenous people live in poverty.2 Chronic 
malnutrition affects 53% of children in rural areas and 61% of children from indigenous origin. Poverty and food 
security are growing challenges in Guatemala, and this will be exacerbated by the effects of climate change which 
represents a significant threat to agriculture. The majority of the population in the country are smallholder farmers3 
engaged in rain-fed agriculture, which is highly sensitive to climate change. Infra-subsistence* and subsistence** 
family farmers are the most vulnerable population to the effects of climate change in Guatemala as they depend 
solely on agriculture for both food security and income generation. Guatemala is the second most vulnerable country 
to climate change in Latin America4 and 11th worldwide5 in terms of exposure and vulnerability. In the period 1960 
– 1990 and 1990 – 2016 climate change, manifested through significant temperature increase and uncertain 
changes in precipitation patterns in the Mayan Lowlands and the Dry Corridor. Climate projections consistently 
indicate an increase in temperature and changes in precipitation patterns during both the dry and wet seasons, thus 
affecting livelihoods, especially those dependent on agriculture. As a result of these changes, there is a high risk 
for increase in aridity. An assessment on the aridity index shows an increase in aridity by 2030 in the project area 
with reference to baseline period 1961 – 1990 using RCP 4.5. Potential impacts from the increase in the aridity 
 
MAGA, 2016. Política Agropecuaria de Guatemala 2016 – 2020:   
*Infra-subsistence family farmers – Majority are indigenous people living in poverty and extreme poverty do not produce enough for the family's consumption. 
They maintain a permanent risk of food and nutrition insecurity, which manifests itself in high chronic malnutrition, episodes of acute malnutrition. Their access 
to productive resources and markets is low or null;  
** Subsistence family farmers -Families in a situation of poverty, with limited land ownership, produce for self-consumption and exchange or sell locally a 
small part of their production. Temporary work outside their plot are used to supplement their basic needs. They produce the largest volume of food for 
national consumption, they influence the advance of the agricultural frontier. 
2 Guatemala. Instituto Nacional de Estadística (INE). (2016). Encuesta Nacional de Condiciones de Vida. 2014. Tomo I. Guatemala: Instituto Nacional de 
Estadística.. 
3 Average size of land properties is 0.7 hectares. 
4 Mapplecroft, 2014.  Indice de vulnerabilidad y adaptatción al cambio climático en la región de América Latina y Caribe. Banco de Desarrollo de América 
Latina. Corporación Andina de Fomento. 
5 Mapplecroft, 2014. Indice de vulnerabilidad y adaptatción al cambio climático en la región de América Latina y Caribe. Banco de Desarrollo de América 
Latina..

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 6 OF 72 
index could result in an increase in drought stress6, drying or regressive death in plants and trees. Maize and beans 
are the main staple crops, they are highly sensitive to changes in aridity. Reduction of crop yields will put the food 
security of subsistence farmers at high risk. Especially given the tight association between precipitation cycles and 
agricultural calendars that determine the sowing and harvesting cycles. 
 
3. The business-as-usual agricultural strategies in Guatemala focus solely on crop productivity and result in long-term 
loss in soil moisture and nutrients. These strategies are also promoted for subsistence and infra-subsistence 
farmers.  Without a change in production practices, crop losses will be significant and rural livelihoods will be 
undermined. Achieving reduced vulnerability and increased resilience requires a shift in agricultural practices to 
improve soil humidity and introduce efficient irrigation systems and new seed varieties tolerant to droughts and heat 
waves.7 This will prevent the expected crop losses and help the country reach its target in terms of food security.  
 
4. GCF funding will support agricultural transformation amongst the most vulnerable people8. The beneficiaries of the 
project will be infra-subsistence and subsistence smallholder farmers, the majority of whom are indigenous people, 
who are the most exposed and vulnerable to the impacts of climate-induced droughts and heat waves.9 The project 
will directly support 116,353 people (0.7% of the national population and 20% of the population in the project area), 
of which 46,541 female, in the Departments of Alta and Baja Verapaz, Petén, Zacapa and Chiquimula. The indirect 
beneficiaries of the project are estimated at 583,146 farmers (3,9% of the population), of which 300,320 female. 
 
5. The project will be implemented over seven years and generate three key outcomes:  
1. Critical production systems are climate resilient and farmers have enhanced, food-secured and adapted 
livelihoods;  
2. Water resources at micro-basin level are sustainably managed and landscapes are restored to ensure stable 
supply of water for farming amidst CC-induced drought conditions;  
3. Local and national institutions adopt governance mechanisms and have strong capacities to implement climate 
change adaptation measures.  
 
6. The total project cost is USD 66.7 million, of which USD 29.8 million is GCF financed and USD 36.84 million is co-
financed by MAGA, INAB and the Korea International Cooperation Agency (KOICA). FAO, the AE, will act as the 
Executing Entity (EE) for some activities under the project and will be responsible for the GCF proceeds and for the 
overall quality assurance and oversight of the project. The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food (MAGA) and 
the National Forestry Institute (INAB) will be Executing Entities and will be responsible to manage their co-financed 
funds but will not execute any GCF Proceeds. Both MAGA and INAB are mandated to coordinate and oversee the 
implementation of the project. GIZ will be an Executing Entity of a part of the KOICA co-financing.  
 
6 Malhi, Y., Aragao, L., Galbraith, D., Huntingford, C., Fisher, R., Zelazowski, P., & al., e. (2009). Exploring the likelihood and mechanism of a climate-
change-induced dieback of the Amazon rainforest. Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences of United States of America (PNAS), 106(49), 
20610-20615 
7 Altieri M. et al. 2015. Agroecology and the design of climate change resilient farming systems. Agronomy for sustainable development 35-3 
8 The small farmers who have limited access to markets, financial instruments, agricultural and climate technological advice and who suffer from poor basic 
infrastructure. 
9 CONRED, 2017. Humanitarian needs overview 2017.

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 7 OF 72 
 
(a) Indigenous groups include: K'iche', Q'eqchi, Kaqchikel, Achi, Ch’orti’, Poqomchi y Mam, 
(b) The main products are staple crops - maize, beans and sorghum, and cash crops - coffee, cocoa, cardamom, fruits, vegetables, and forest products, 
mainly timber. 
10 Mapplecroft, 2014. Indice de vulnerabilidad y adaptatción al cambio climático en la región de América Latina y Caribe. Banco de Desarrollo de 
América Latina. Corporación Andina de Fomento. 
11 Eckstein, Künzel & Schäfer, 2018. GLOBAL CLIMATE RISK INDEX 2018. Who Suffers Most From Extreme Weather Events? Weather-related Loss 
Events in 2016 and 1997 to 2016. Bonn: Germanwatch e.V. Downloaded from https://germanwatch.org/en/download/2043 
12 INE, 2003. Características de la población y de los avitantes censados. Guatemala: INE 
13 Pons, Brincker & Castellanos, 2018. Asegurando la resiliencia ante el CC en los paisajes Mayas de Petén, Verapaces y el Corredor Seco. Producto 1. 
Documento de análisis de los efectos del Cambio climático a nivel nacional y local. Documento de consultoría. Guatemala. 
14 INE, 2015. República de Guatemala: Encuesta Nacional de Condiciones de Vida 2014. Principales resultados. Guatemala: INE. 
15 CEPAL. (2018). La economía del Cambio Climático en Guatemala. Documento técnico 2018. Santiago de Chile: Naciones Unidas. 
16 IARNA. (2010). Evaluación de la Seguridad Alimentaria y la Agricultura en Guatemala: Diagnóstico y Propuestas de Acción. Guatemala: IARNA. 
17 Anderson, T., Anchukaitis, T., Griffin, D., Pons, D., & . Taylor, M. (s.f.). (2019).  Climate sensitivity and potential vulnerability of Guatemalan fir 
(Abies guatemalensis) forests in Totonicapán, Guatemala" in Journal of Latin American 
B.1. Climate rationale and context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Socio-economic context  
7. One of the main economic activities generating foreign exchange in Guatemala is agriculture, which depends greatly 
on the availability of water resources from precipitation (Pons, Taylor, Griffin, Castellanos and Anchukaitis, 2017). 
Guatemala is the second most vulnerable country to climate change in Latin America and the 11th worldwide.10,11  
This situation is reflected in the high human and economic costs that extreme meteorological events have had in the 
country (INSIVUMEH, 2002; CEPAL, 2005; EMDAT, 2017) and the limited resilience of affected communities to face 
these challenges. Approximately 51% (15.6 million) of Guatemala’s population live in rural areas, of which 41% are 
indigenous peoples (a) the majority of whom live in poverty conditions.12,13 Poverty among the indigenous population 
is 1.7 times higher than among the non-indigenous population.14 Chronic malnutrition affects 53% of children in rural 
areas, most of which are children from indigenous communities. Poverty and food security are growing challenges in 
Guatemala, and this will be exacerbated by the effects of climate change and its impacts on agriculture.15,16 In 
Guatemala, subsistence agriculture comprises 53% of producers and is responsible for the production of 67% of the 
country's basic grains.  
 
8. The direct beneficiaries of the proposed project are infra-subsistence and subsistence farmers living in regions highly 
exposed to aridity due to climate-induced droughts and heat waves. The project will be implemented five departments 
located in the Dry Corridor and the Mayan Lowlands (Figure 3).  
 
9. There is a clear link between climate change and rural livelihoods, since the expected climate impacts would result 
in lower yields of staple crops (maize and beans), on which the vast majority of the prioritized population depend for 
their subsistence. Moreover, the evidence shows that in certain areas, small farmers may lose their harvests as a 
result of extended dry spells. As for cash crops that account for a significant part of the local economy, such as coffee 
and cacao, climate change will result in lower yields and the presence of pests and the appearance of diseases will 
not only affect yields, but also the quality of the production. As such, scenarios are set to have a severe impact on 
the livelihoods of these already vulnerable small farmers.  
 
Historical climate trends 
10. Guatemala experiences a bimodal seasonal rainfall climate, with a rainy boreal summer season and a dry boreal 
winter season. The rainy season begins in April or early May with two peaks near June and September and a period 
of decreased rainfall called “canicula” or midsummer drought (MSD) between July and August. The MSD can last on 
average from 5 to 15 days. Evidence shows that MSD has experienced an increment in duration and a trend towards 
a dryer period, changes that are critical for determining agricultural calendars across Guatemala.17  
 
11. Climate in Guatemala has already experienced a change in temperature in most of the territory,  affecting crop 
yields, as measured by all the available methods, including: weather stations, satellite-derived imagery, reanalysis 
datasets. . For assessing the historic trends of both temperature and precipitation the CRU dataset for the periods 
1960-1990 and 1990-2016 was used. A detailed overview of historic climate change – drawing on available literature 
and additional analysis done by FAO – is outlined in Sections C1 and C2 of the Feasibility Study. A summary is 
presented below: 
• 
Temperature: Analysis show that the average annual temperature increased with 0.6C since 1971 in the Mayan 
Lowland region and in the Dry Corridor. More importantly, in these time periods, the inter-annual distribution of 
changes in mean temperature in both regions show increases with up to 0.8C in specific months important for 
the agricultural production (January, June and December).

=== PAGE 10 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 8 OF 72 
 
18 Ibid. 
19 Steinhoff, D. F., Monaghan, A. J., & Clark, M. P. (2015). Projected impact of twenty-first century ENSO changes on rainfall over Central America and 
northwest South America from CMIP5 AOGCMs. Climate Dynamics, 44(5), 1329-1349. doi:10.1007/s00382-014-2196 
20 Diaz, H. F., Hoerling, M. P., & Eischeid, J. K., (2001). ENSO variability, teleconnections and climate change. International Journal of Climatology, 
21(15), 1845-1862. doi:10.1002/joc.631 
21 EM-DAT 2017. The international Disaster database. URL: https://www.emdat.be [Accessed December 2018] 
22 SESAN, 2014. Informe de daños ocasionados por la canícula prolongada 2014. Guatemala: SESAN.  
23 Cerda et al., 2014. Contribution of cocoa agroforestry systems to family income and domestic consumption: looking toward intensification. Agroforestry 
Systems, 88(6), 957-981. doi:10.1007/s10457-014-9691-8 
• 
Precipitation: Despite of a non-significant upward trend in precipitation for the country, the monthly assessment 
shows that certain months have experienced a decrease in the total precipitation for specific months, which are 
critical for agricultural production. In particular, the precipitation in August has seen an overall reduction, 
associated to the drying trend of the MSD.18 
 
12. Despite that the precipitation showed a less clear trend in the historical record, the increase in mean 
temperature would result in increase of evapotranspiration with potential negative effects to agriculture. In 
project region, the temperature in June is critical for the development of the crops planted in May. A decrease in soil 
moisture due to increased temperatures is expected to negatively impact the development of the staple crops like 
maize. 
 
13. The influence of El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) on Guatemala's climate has an important influence on 
the territory's precipitation and temperature. 19It has been attributed to the ENSO around 25% of the variability 
in the temperature and up to 85% on precipitation scales.20 
 
14. In the last 20 years, the occurrence and intensity of extreme weather events has increased, especially droughts and 
floods.21  Between 1988 – 1999 altogether 17 extreme events occurred, while in the period 2000 – 2017 altogether 
53 events occurred. The 2014 drought caused the yield loss of 80% for maize and 63% for beans, which led to an 
economic loss of USD 61 million for the country. In the regions of the Dry Corridor and the Mayan Lowlands 
(where the five departments of the project area are located), the drought affected 40% (12,090 ha) of the 
project area causing partial or total crop losses of 58,636 subsistence families, resulting in USD 11.6 millions 
of economic impact.22 The high temperatures and rainfall variation in September in 2012, led to a severe outbreak 
of coffee rust which led to the loss of 15% of the coffee production.23  
 
Climate change projections 
 
15. In order to integrate a metric that would allow for temperature changes (associated to soil moisture loss via 
evapotranspiration processes) and future rainfall estimates, FAO decided to work with aridity. Aridity is a metric that 
combines atmospheric demand for humidity via temperature and available precipitation. Aridity integrates these two 
climate variables and allows for impacts on vegetation to be accounted for, if a change in any of the variables occurs 
(available water vs evapotranspiration). Because monthly temperature and annual precipitation are available as 
products of future climate scenarios, we decided to work with this metric using the Thornthwaite equation for potential 
evapotranspiration (since models do not produce other variables for more complex PET formulas). 
 
16. The Penmam model cannot be use towards the future, as the climate models used in this study do not produce the 
needed variables (e.g. wind speed and direction). Hence, we selected the Thornthwaite equation, which only 
demands monthly temperature and annual precipitation, reducing the uncertainties associated to more complex, far 
more intricate variables towards the future like wind. A simple model with less assumptions adding to uncertainty is 
preferred over a more complex, less certain one. 
 
17. FAO followed WMO guidance and used the CRU observation dataset justification for grant. This dataset is a common 
product for this type of analysis and is currently being used worldwide to cross-validate and verify multi-model 
ensembles for new forecast systems. FAO confirms that the length of this data set used is the only that allows 
formulating the two climatologies (1960-1990 and 1990-2016)

=== PAGE 11 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 9 OF 72 
 
24 Neelin et al., 2006, Neelin, J., Münnich, M., Su, H., Meyerson, J., & Holloway, C. (2006). Tropical drying trends in global warming models and observations. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 103, 6110–6 
25  Karmalkar, A., Bradley, R., & Díaz, H. (2011). Climate change in Central America and Mexico: regional climate model validation and climate change 
projections. Climate Dynamics, 37, 605-629. 
26 Magrin, et al., 2014, Magrin, G., Marengo, J., Boulanger, J., Buckeridge, M., Castellanos, E., Poveda, G., . . . Vicuña, S. (2014). América Central y del Sur. 
En V. C. Barros, Cambio climático 2014: Impactos, adaptación y vulnerabilidad. Parte B: Aspectos regionales. Contribución del Grupo de trabajo II al Quinto 
Informe de Evaluación del Grupo Intergubernamental de Expertos sobre el Cambio Climático (págs. 1499-1566). Cambridge, Reino Unido y Nueva York, NY, 
Estados Unidos de América: Cambridge University Press 
27 Karmalkar,A.V., Bradley, R.S. and Dfaz, H.F, (2011). Climate  change in Central America and Mexico: regional climate model validation and climate 
change  projections,Climate Dynamics 37: 605-629. 
28 Imbach P, Chou SC, Lyra A, Rodrigues D, Rodriguez D, Latinovic D, et al. (2018) Future climate change scenarios in Central America at high spatial 
resolution. PLoS ONE 13(4): e0193570. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0193570 
29 Rivera, P. F., Bardales Espinoza, W. A., & Ochoa, W. (2019). Escenarios futuros de cambio climático para Guatemala. En E. J. Castellanos, A. Paiz-
Estévez, J. Escribá, M. Rosales-Alconero, & A. Santizo (Eds.), Primer reporte de evaluación del conocimiento sobre cambio climático en Guatemala. 
Guatemala: Editorial Universitaria UVG 
30 Imbach P, Chou SC, Lyra A, Rodrigues D, Rodriguez D, Latinovic D, et al. (2018) Future climate change scenarios in Central America at high spatial 
resolution. PLoS ONE 13(4): e0193570. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0193570 
30 Rivera, P. F., Bardales Espinoza, W. A., & Ochoa, W. (2019). Escenarios futuros 
31 Pons, Brincker, & Castellanos, 2018. Asegurando la resiliencia ante el CC en los paisajes Mayas de Petén, Verapaces y el Corredor Seco. Producto 1. 
Documento de análisis de los efectos del Cambio climático a nivel nacional y local. Documento de consultoría. Guatemala. 
32 Government of Guatemala. Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources/ Ministerio de Ambiente y Recursos Naturales (MARN). 2015.  Second 
National Communication on Climate Change /Segunda comunicación nacional sobre cambio climático Guatemala. Guatemala. Available at: 
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/gtmnc2.pdf 
33 CEPAL. (2018). La economía del Cambio Climático. Documento técnico. Santiago de Chile: Naciones Unidas. 
18. Climate projections consistently indicate increase in temperature and change in precipitation patterns during 
both the dry and wet seasons, thus affecting livelihoods, especially those dependent on agriculture.24,25,26 
Most general circulation models agree that temperatures in Guatemala will increase in the coming decades and that 
long-term rainfall will drop in most of the Central American territory. 27,28 A regional climate projection using RCP 4.5 
shows increase in temperature in the region with the highest increases expected in Guatemala by 2030 in the project’s 
intervention areas (Figure 1). A detailed overview of climate projections and methodology used is outlined in Section 
C3 of the Feasibility Study. A summary is presented below: 
• 
Temperature: increasing trend in both scenarios (Scenario A2 and B1) with changes between 1.1 and 1.2 ° C 
for the 2020s, between 1.3 and 1.5 ° C for the 2030s, between 2 and 2.7 ° C for the 2050s, between 2.5 and 
4.1 ° C for the 2070s, and between 3.3 and 5.4 ° C for the 2090s29. Projections from General Circulation Models 
(GCMs) also suggest an increase in temperature towards the 2030s of up to 2.2 ° C under the RCP4.5 scenario 
for all the seasons in Guatemala.30 
• 
Precipitation: Projections show overall decrease of rainfall starting from 2030. It is expected that by 2050, 
rainfall will decrease between 9.5% and 12.4%, and 18.4% and 28.9% by 207031. The same trend is observed 
in both projections, but in scenario A2 the changes are more abrupt compared to scenario B1.32  
 
19. The projected increase in mean temperature and decrease in precipitation, is expected to result in an increase 
in aridity in the country, which will negatively affect the phenology and water requirements of crops. Due to 
the high dependence on rainfed agriculture in Guatemala, the increase in aridity will likely result in severe impacts on 
the crop yield reaching reductions of up to 57% in certain crops.33

=== PAGE 12 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 10 OF 72 
 
34 Malhi, Y., Aragao, L., Galbraith, D., Huntingford, C., Fisher, R., Zelazowski, P., & al., e. (2009). Exploring the likelihood and mechanism of a climate-
change-induced dieback of the Amazon rainforest. Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences of United States of America (PNAS), 106(49), 
20610-20615 
35 Cox, P., R, B., Jones, C., Spal, l. S., & Totterdell, I. (2000). Acceleration of global warming due to carbon-cycle feedbacks in a coupled climate model. 
Nature, 408, 184-187 
36 Pons, Brincker, & Castellanos, 2018. Asegurando la resiliencia ante el CC en los paisajes Mayas de Petén, Verapaces y el Corredor Seco. Producto 1. 
Documento de análisis de los efectos del Cambio climático a nivel nacional y local. Documento de consultoría. Guatemala 
37 Idem 
38 GoG, 2015. Second National Communication on Climate Change: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/gtmnc2.pdf 
39 Avelino et al. 2015. The coffee rust crises in Colombia and Central America (2008–2013): impacts, plausible causes and proposed solutions. Food 
Security, 7(2), 303-321. doi:10.1007/s12571-015-0446-9 
Figure 1.  Temperature change in degrees Celsius and mean precipitation change (mm/day) projected  for Central 
America  for the (a) DJF, (b) MAM, (c)JJA, and  (d) SON seasons. (Imbach et al, 2018). 
 
20. An assessment on the aridity index shows an increase in aridity by 2030 in the project area with reference to baseline 
period 1960 – 1990 using RCP 4.5 (Figure 2) . Potential impacts from the increase in the aridity index could result in 
an increase in drought stress34, drying or regressive death in plants and trees35.  At the same time, the simulations 
suggest an expansion from the eastern dry corridor area to the western dry corridor and increased aridity in certain 
areas of the Department of Zacapa that shift from the "semi-arid" class to the "arid" class. A detailed overview of 
climate projections and methodology used for the estimating the aridity index is outlined in Section C4 of the Feasibility 
Study. 
 
21. The departments located in the Dry Corridor (Petén, Alta and  Baja Verapaz), where part of the project area is located, 
will be among the most affected regions by 2050.36 Larger precipitation reductions are expected during the rainy 
season, resulting in a longer MSD. Evidence shows that MSD in Guatemala are becoming more prolonged, 
increasingly variable, and harder to predict. During these periods, precipitation may decline by up to 40% from the 
maximum summer rainfall and its variable characteristics, including the timing, duration, and magnitude have 
significant influences on planting dates and crop yields.  Evidence shows that smallholder farmers across Central 
America have experienced crop losses and reductions in yields  due to change in distribution and intensity of rainfall.37 
Assessments show that farmers loose, on average, 55% of their basic grain production (maize and beans) during 
drought periods.38 Additionally, the projected  increase in temperatures and change in precipitation will influence the 
incidence and severity of rust in coffee plantations and pests and diseases in cacao, causing production losses.39

=== PAGE 13 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 11 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2:  Projections for the annual average rainfall, mean temperature and aridity index, under the RCP 4.5 scenario for 2030 and, 
2050 (with baseline 1960 – 1990). (Note: The project area is delineated)

=== PAGE 14 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 12 OF 72 
 
40 ECLAC, 2018. La economía del Cambio Climático en Guatemala. Documento técnico 2018. ECLAC: https://repositorio.cepal.org/handle/11362/43725 
41 Álvarez, 2010. Influencia de la cobertura de bosque nativo en la generación de escorrentía en el sur de Chile: estudio comparativo de microcuencas (Tesis 
de Maestría). Santiago de Chile: Universidad de Chile. Obtenido de http://repositorio.uchile.cl/handle/2250/102485 
Vulnerability of smallholder farmers to climate change 
22. Smallholder farmers cultivate marginal lands (e.g. steep hillside slopes, areas with poor soils or areas prone to soil 
erosion and water scarcity) and depend on rain-fed agriculture.  The increase in aridity in the project are is the major 
climate risk. Maize and beans are the main staple crops, they are highly sensitive to change in aridity and moreover, 
the seeds used are of low quality and very sensitive to precipitation and temperature changes. Current agricultural 
practices such as slash and burn result in long-term loss of soil moisture and nutrients making the lands unproductive 
and leading to the conversion of forests to agricultural lands. Reduction of crop yields will put the food security of 
subsistence farmers at high risk. Projected impacts of climate change on crop yield for the project area by 2030 are 
shown in Table 1. 
 
Table 1. Projected climate change impacts on crop yield by 2030 for the project area with baseline mean annual yield between 2001 
– 2009.40 
 
Departments 
Scenario B2 
Scenario A2 
Maize 
Beans 
Coffee 
Maize 
Beans 
Coffee 
Alta Verapaz 
-5,1% 
6,6% 
-3,6% 
-8,7% 
-3,6% 
-1,4% 
Baja Verapaz 
-2,2% 
4,8% 
-3,8% 
-1,7% 
-0,9% 
0,2% 
Petén 
-10,3% 
-7,7% 
-18,9% 
-13,3% 
-11,5% 
-13,8% 
Chiquimula 
- 9,2% 
- 4,7% 
-9,5% 
-13,1% 
-11,9% 
-8,7% 
Zacapa 
-8,8% 
-6,8% 
-11,3% 
-11,4% 
-12,3% 
-8,6% 
 
23. The impacts of climate change on agriculture would result in serious socio-economic implications leading to 
increase in poverty, food insecurity, malnutrition, and migration.  The majority of smallholder farmers in the 
Mayan Lowlands and the Dry Corridor, live in poverty conditions, which affects their capacity to cope with climate 
change due to lack of adequate climate information, limited knowledge of and access to adaptation solutions and 
insufficient income sources to purchase food in times of crises. Crop failure and land degradation have given rise to 
high migration levels of men abroad, thus leaving many women to head the household and the agricultural activities 
alone. Even coffee and cocoa producers and field workers are vulnerable to climate change as they depend only on 
these crops for income, therefore have low productive diversification and consequently run high financial risks. 
24. To address the abovementioned climate change threats, several measures are needed to enhance the 
resilience of ecosystems which sustain agricultural production, adapt the agricultural systems to achieve 
food security and build resilient livelihoods.  A combination of improved basin management, water-conservation 
technologies and improved seeds, will  enable the shift towards adapted agricultural systems to new climate regimes. 
Tailored climate information services will be critical to inform farmers on the effective application of those practices 
and would be essential for wider adaptation efforts at a national level. Adequate management of forest cover can play 
a fundamental role in water resource regulation and availability in dry seasons. Resilient forestry can result in up to 
25% more water during the dry season compared to vulnerable and poorly managed areas. 41 At present, land 
degradation and deforestation are an underlying contributor to the sensitivity of the ecosystems and their hydrological 
services in the target regions.  To enable these changes, public and private stakeholders at national and local level 
will require enhanced capacity and coordination.  The links between these actions and the key climate change impacts 
& challenges outlined above are summarized in the Table 2.

=== PAGE 15 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 13 OF 72 
 
42 National Strategy for Chronic Malnutrition: http://www.sesan.gob.gt/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Estrategia-para-la-Prevencion-de-la-Desnutricion-
Cronica.pdf 
Table 2.  Key climate change threats, associated impacts and adaptation measures needed. 
Key climate change threats 
in the project area 
Major climate change impacts  
 
Adaptation measures needed 
Temperature increase will 
increase evapotranspiration 
resulting in increased aridity. 
Farming systems:  
• 
Increasing evapotranspiration 
and crop water requirements 
at farm/field level (even if 
overall water supply is not 
declining across the basin in 
the short run). 
• 
Loss of crop yield of staple 
and cash crops 
Farmers’ livelihoods: 
• 
Increased food insecurity and 
malnutrition 
• 
Migration 
• 
Increased poverty  
Support climate resilient community 
micro-basin planning and 
management to ensure sustainable 
water management under different 
climate regimes.  
Increased variability and 
distribution of precipitation.  
Support farmers in adopting water and 
soil conservation practices for the 
agricultural systems and the use of 
climate information services especially 
relevant for drought conditions.  
Increased risk of extreme 
weather events (droughts).  
Enhance forest management to 
ensure the provision of hydrological 
services which sustain the agricultural 
systems. 
 
 
 
Prioritization of project areas 
25. The prioritization process of the project areas considered a combination of criteria relevant to climate risk and 
exposure combined with socio-economic indicators, which characterize the adaptive capacity of the population.  The 
prioritization was conducted at two levels: (1) Areas with high climate risk and (2) Municipalities with low adaptive 
capacity of the population: 
1) Areas with high climate risk: The prioritization criteria at this level considered a Risk Index that was 
developed to determine, which rural agricultural communities are (i) most exposed (as a % of the 
municipal territory dedicated to annual agriculture and/or coffee); (ii) there is high restoration potential 
(as a % of the municipal territory with forest restoration potential); and (iii) experience the highest climate 
threat (as a % change in aridity). 
2) Municipalities with low adaptive capacity of the population: The prioritization criteria at this level included 
(i) total poverty higher than the national average; (ii) extreme poverty is higher than the national average; 
and (iii) high and very high level of chronic malnutrition42.  
26. Once the municipalities with high and very high-risk levels were identified, the municipalities which already are 
implementing projects relevant to climate change were excluded from the selection process.   The final project area 
is comprised of five departments (Alta Verapaz, Baja Verapaz, Petén, Chiquimula and Zacapa) with 29 municipalities.  
The smallholder farmers in the prioritized project area practice subsistence agriculture  and have high dependence 
on maize, beans, coffee, cocoa and family gardens both for food security and for income generation. Figure 3 shows 
the map of prioritized Municipalities. A detailed description of the prioritization criteria and process is included in 
Section D.2 of the Feasibility Study.

=== PAGE 16 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 14 OF 72 
 
Figure 3 - Maps illustrating the prioritization process to identify project target areas: a) Map of risk index for 2030, b) Prioritization of regions with high 
risk and c) Municipalities with high and very high risk (red) and municipalities where other adaptation projects are being implemented (grey).  The 
Municipalities in red color are the prioritized areas, where the project will be implemented. 
Because the total number of municipalities (and hence the working area) was very large (73 in total, as shown in red in figure 2.c), 
a second prioritization was done based on the population vulnerability to CC. The following indicators were used for this purpose: 
(1) higher total poverty than the national average (more than 61%); (2) extreme poverty higher than the national average (higher 
than 25%); and (3) municipalities prioritized by the National Chronic Malnutrition Strategy (areas with high and very high chronic 
malnutrition).  
 
Related projects/interventions 
27. Guatemala has experience with implementing climate change projects. The RELIVE project will build upon the lessons 
learned and seek coherence with: (i) Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) funded project “Recovery of the Natural 
Capital of the Dry Corridor and Climate Adaptation of its Population”; (ii) The Adaptation Fund project “ Project on 
Productive Landscapes Resilient to Climate Change and Strengthened Socioeconomic Networks in Guatemala”; (iii) 
the Forest Investment Program “Forest Governance and Livelihoods Diversification” and “Sustainable Forest 
Management”. See Section A4 – Table 13 of the Feasibility Study for detailed description of complementarity with 
other climate investments in Guatemala. The RELIVE project will also complement projects currently in 
implementation in the country such as the GCF - funded project “Building livelihood resilience to climate change in 
the upper basins of Guatemala’s highlands” (2019 – 2026) implemented by the International Union for Conservation 
of Nature (IUCN). RELIVE project will not overlap with this project but they will complement each other based on 
different geographic location, different beneficiary groups and different proposed activities.  Additionally, RELIVE 
project will seek synergies with two GCF projects by CABEI – (1) Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate 
resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic (under review) and (2) 
Productive Investment Initiative for Adaptation to Climate Change (CAMBio II) (approved). While these projects will 
work in the Dry Corridor, the project sites will not overlap with RELIVE project, but as they will work in a similar context, 
there is a high potential for synergies and complementarity (see Figure 4). In particular, on one hand replication of 
RELIVE agricultural resilient practices by CABEI project areas and on the other hand, RELIVE will explore the 
suitability of the financial mechanisms promoted by CABEI projects for the specific adaptation solutions and 
beneficiary groups. For detailed description of recent and on-going projects and their relation to the RELIVE project 
see Section A.4 of the Feasibility Study.

=== PAGE 17 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 15 OF 72 
 
Figure 4 – Project sites of  CABEI, IUCN and RELIVE projects 
 
28. Coordination with CAMBIO II is extremely important, since it aims to institutionalize the provision of financial and 
technical assistance to the banking sector across seven countries (Guatemala included), thus removing barriers to 
access financial services for adopting and implementing climate change adaptation measures. While the beneficiaries 
of CAMBio II are micro, small and medium sized enterprises, the project is serving as a demonstration platform to 
prove that investments on adaptation practices in agriculture can be attractive to commercial banks and financial 
institutions previously not experienced in environmental/adaptation projects. Both projects will work closely together, 
so the financial mechanisms promoted by CAMBio II can be also available for the specific adaptation solutions and 
beneficiary groups of RELIVE. 
 
29. The project is aligned with Guatemala’s NDC adaptation commitments, which prioritize agriculture, livestock, and food 
security, with focus on food production for self-consumption and subsistence, forestry, conservation and management 
of strategic ecosystems, integrated approach to water resources, and a risk-reduction integrated approach. For more 
detailed information on other policies that this project supports and complements, refer to section B.5 of the FP. 
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) 
Barrier analysis 
30. There are several critical barriers to achieve climate resilient agriculture in Guatemala. A description of the barriers 
is presented below and a summary on how the project will address these barriers is presented in Table 3. 
1) Information barriers 
- 
High uncertainty and lack of adequate local data to produce downscaled climate information for agriculture 
– National institutions such as INSIVUMEH and MAGA have made important efforts in coordinating and 
complementing information and produce monthly bulletins on crop prices and hydrometeorological information. 
However, there are still constraints for farmers to effectively use the seasonal forecasts, such as: forecasts arrive 
too late to inform farmers, lack of information about season onset or length; coarse spatial scale lacks local 
information. Although a network of hydrometeorological stations is in place in the target micro-basins, they are not 
enough to generate accurate and downscaled information needed by farmers. Therefore, there is a need to upgrade 
existing stations and install new ones.   
- 
Lack of tailored climate information and inequitable access - Extension officers have limited knowledge on how 
to use climate information, which hinders their capacities to make informed decisions regarding resilient agricultural 
strategies. Additionally, majority of farmers have limited knowledge and unequal access to climate information. 
Currently, it is delivered on a regional scale through monthly newsletters using format and communication channel 
that are not adequate for farmer needs and do not exist in local language. 
 
2) Technical barriers 
- 
Limited knowledge and capacity of farmers on water resource management and CC resilient agricultural 
practices - Actions implemented by national and local authorities, local farmers, and other users impact 
hydrological regulation and threaten food security especially during drought conditions. Additionally, farmers employ 
unsustainable practices described earlier and conventional crop varieties, and do not have a reliable and affordable 
means of accessing resilient alternatives that are compatible with decreasing water availability. Smallholder farmers

=== PAGE 18 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 16 OF 72 
 
43 https://elperiodico.com.gt/inversion/2018/01/04/mujeres-obtienen-menos-creditos-y-tasas-mas-altas/ 
are often unaware of or do not have access to adequate information and adaptation solutions that will reduce their 
vulnerability and increase the resilience of their livelihoods.  
- 
Limited capacity of extension services to provide tailored technical assistance on climate change - The 
extension services have a good knowledge of aspects related to the production of basic grains, coffee and cocoa, 
however, their knowledge in applying a climate change approach is limited. Current trainings and capacity building 
of extension services workers by the System for Rural Extension (SNER) do not integrate CC topics. The extension 
services face severe financial constraints that limit the ability of staff to travel to rural areas and work with smallholder 
farmers. The existing Learning Centers for Rural Development (CADER) are lacking the required capacity and access 
to information on CC to advice farmers. 
- 
Inadequate water and land-use management planning – At present there is a lack in planning instruments at 
national level to guide local water resource and land-use management. This often results in unsustainable land and 
water use in the watersheds. In a context of decreasing water availability due to CC in the prioritised areas of the 
project, the lack of water and land-use management plans will exacerbate water scarcity problems and agricultural 
impacts.   
3) Financial barriers 
- 
Relatively high cost of upfront investments - Small-scale farmers in rural Guatemala generate insufficient cash 
surpluses to build their own resilience. It is therefore difficult for them to afford the up-front costs of many climate 
resilience investments (new seed varieties, water storage infrastructure, irrigation systems, etc.).  Similarly, farmers 
cannot afford the up-front cost of technical studies and land title required to access the INAB forestry incentives. 
The same poverty that forces dependence on rainfed agriculture limits efforts to adopt climate resilient practices.  
- 
Refusal of  commercial banks to lend for climate resilience-agriculture activities - Critical resilience activities 
are not directly revenue generating and they do not generate appropriate collateral for commercial borrowing -At 
present farmers are highly vulnerable to climate risks and often their yield and quality of crops is conditioned by 
climate variability and may suffer high loss, making it impossible for farmers to generate any surplus income. As a 
result commercial banks consider small farmers to be high risk clients and therefore are unable or unwilling to 
provide capital required to invest in climate resilience measures.   
 
4) Social barriers 
- 
Women are disadvantaged regarding access to resources and information – Women are usually the 
demographic group that stays working at the farms (men often migrate to the city and abroad for better jobs). They 
only have access to smaller credit lines and usually at higher interest rates than men.43 A detailed analysis of the 
gender gaps in Guatemala and in the project area is presented in the Gender Assessment (See Part I of Annex 8). 
- 
Language barriers - To access knowledge and acquire skills regarding the management of natural resources, 
indigenous peoples face linguistic barriers as many do not speak Spanish. Critical information, including the 
requirements of the government institutions to access available support mechanisms such as the INAB forestry 
incentives such as PINPEP and PROBOSQUE, is available solely in Spanish.  
 
5) Institutional barriers 
- 
Weak local and national governance of water resource management and climate change – Institutions have 
limited capacity to lead multi-stakeholder collaboration processes on climate resilient agriculture and water resource 
management at different governance levels. Although the Government has well-developed technical capacities, it 
lacks the financial and technical resources required to meet the additional challenges posed by CC, and to bring 
about the paradigm shift that is needed in the provision of institutional support to those affected by CC impacts.  
- 
Limited capacity for knowledge management and sharing on climate change to inform policy making – 
Although there are existing systems and sharing platforms for knowledge generation and management of climate 
information, these lack capacities and coordination mechanisms for exchanging knowledge and lessons learned to 
support farmer decision-making and inform policies. 
 
Table 3. Summary of the adaptation barriers (information, technical, social, financial and institutional barriers) and how the project will address them. 
 
Adaptation barriers 
How the project will address the identified barriers 
Information 
barrier 
Insufficient accuracy and lack of 
downscaled climate information for 
agriculture 
The project will strengthen the generation of and access to 
tailored climate information and improve capacities of farmers 
and extension workers to use the information for decision making 
(Output 1.1 and Output 1.2). The project will support the generation 
of climate information specifically tailored to the agricultural production 
systems: maize, beans, cocoa and coffee. It will improve access of 
smallholder farmers (especially indigenous population and women)

=== PAGE 19 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 17 OF 72 
Lack of tailored climate information and 
inequitable access 
through culturally adapted information channels, such as SMS, in local 
languages.  
Technical barriers 
 
 
Limited knowledge and capacity of 
farmers on water resource management 
and resilient agricultural practices 
The project will enhance knowledge sharing and capacity at 
multiple levels on climate resilient strategies for agriculture and 
water resources (Output 1.2, Output 2.1 and Output 2.2).  The 
project will implement validated climate resilient agricultural 
practices and water management micro-infrastructure tailored to 
the specific conditions of the project area and needs of the 
population (Output 1.2 and 2.3). Training and capacity building 
approaches are tailored to address the specific knowledge and 
capacity needs of male and female farmers to effectively adopt climate 
resilient agricultural practices.   
 Limited capacity of extension services to 
provide tailored technical assistance on 
climate change  
The project will strengthen capacities of extension services to 
provide informed and tailored technical advice on climate 
resilient agricultural practices (Output 1.2 and 3.2) 
Inadequate water and land-use 
management planning 
The project will strengthen capacities of local actors and support 
the development of community-led water management plans for 
the prioritized micro-basins (Output 2.1).  
Financial barriers 
Relatively high cost of  upfront 
investments 
(1) The project helps to buy-down the up-front costs to access the 
forest incentive program for the poorest and most vulnerable 
beneficiaries. To ensure sustainability and scalability the project 
will work in close collaboration and will provide capacity building 
for the municipal forest agencies in order for them to prepare 
such technical studies at a very low/affordable price for the 
farmers. (Output 1.2)  
(2) The project will strengthen community-based organisations 
such as cooperatives, micro-enterprises, and farmers 
associations to facilitate access to afordable inputs and 
marketing products. The project will further promote seedbanks and 
"chain pass" (solidarity networks) to distribute vegetative material in 
municipal, community and MAGA nurseries in order to reduce the cost 
of acquiring seeds, plants and other vegetative materials (Output 1.2) 
(3) The project activities help to improve output, ensure a 
predictable yield and increase prices earned by growers, thereby 
making them more bankable.  The project will create access to 
markets by linking with the private sector and Government institutions 
that will purchase RELIVE’s production (Output 1.3.)  In addition, the 
project promotes alternative strategies for income generation and 
forest incentives (under the PINPEP and PROBOSQUE programs) 
focusing on agroforestry systems to ensure that smallholder farmers 
have a safety net to avoid food insecurity in case of a drought (Output 
1.3 and Output 2.2). 
(4) The project will strengthen community-based organizations 
such as cooperatives, micro-enterprises, and farmers 
associations to facilitate access to finance from commercial 
banks for climate resilience-agriculture activities (in coordination 
with the CAMBio II project). RELIVE will gather information from 
CAMBio II, to link commercial banks with RELIVE’s beneficiaries to 
have access to loans. (output 1.2.) 
Refusal of commercial banks to lend for in 
climate resilience-agriculture activities 
Social barriers 
 
 
Women are disadvantaged regarding 
access to resources and information  
Project activities consider gender-sensitive and transformative 
actions by adopting strong participatory approach and focusing 
specific activities to empower women and improve their 
economic situation (Output 1.2 and 2.2). The project promotes 
women-led seed banks as a key strategy for agricultural resilience. 
Additionally, a central focus of the project is to facilitate women-owned 
farms to access forest incentives for implementation of agroforestry 
and diversification through PINPEP and PROBOSQUE.  
Local traditions and language  
The project ensures that all activities will consider the collection 
of local traditional knowledge and integrate it in science-related

=== PAGE 20 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 18 OF 72 
information to provide culturally relevant adaptation solutions 
and information in local languages.  
Institutional barriers 
Weak local and national governance of 
water resource management and climate 
change 
The activities will enhance capacities of local and national 
institutions to develop governance mechanisms for water 
management and climate change (Output 3.1 and 3.2). This will be 
achieved through capacity building for mainstreaming climate change 
in existing governance mechanisms and establishment of multi-
stakeholder dialogues.  It includes facilitating MAGA and MARN 
planners to design and institutionalize a National Climate Change 
Adaptation Program, which will allow the channeling of public policy 
instruments to producers, both in the Project's area of influence and in 
other regions of the country.  This will support the scalability of the 
project results.  
Limited capacity for knowledge 
management and sharing on climate 
change to inform policy making.  
 
31. The theory of change builds on the fact that reducing the vulnerability of smallholder farmers depends on maintaining 
or increasing agricultural production under various climate change scenarios and on promoting climate resilient 
livelihoods. By also promoting an enabling environment, the project will encourage such transformation through 
favorable policies and capable institutions. The transformational aspect of this project comes from its integrated 
approach, where strategies proposed at landscape (micro-basin level) and farm level are complementary. The project 
addresses specific needs of most vulnerable farmers using the combination of traditional and innovative climate 
resilient techniques for soil and water conservation.  The sustainability and resilience of farm livelihoods depend on 
the appropriate management of water resources and restoration of lands. Farm management contributes to the 
ecological and hydrological functioning of the watershed as a whole. This represents a new model for climate-resilient 
rural development in Guatemala that combines integrated adaptation solutions focused on livelihoods and 
agroecosystem-based adaptation. The theory of change for the paradigm shift to be delivered through the project is 
illustrated in Figure 5. At farm level, Outcome 1 introduces tailored and accurate climate information accessible to 
farmers to better inform their climate resilient strategies and implements these practices. At watershed-level, 
Outcome 2 fosters planning processes for water resource management at micro-basin scale and invests in the 
restoration of degraded areas. Both outcomes will contribute to farmer-led planning, technology development and 
knowledge management needed for a transformational change to climate resilient livelihoods. Outcome 3 
strengthens institutional capacities for governance and knowledge management at all levels in the context of climate 
change to allow for sustainability and scaling up.

=== PAGE 21 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 19 OF 72 
 
44 Poor: the part of the population that does not reach the minimum income to cover a basket that meets their food and non-food needs. Extreme poor: those 
who are unable to cover the cost of minimal food consumption.  
45 Limited Access to productive land and capital resources; Predominant use of family labor. The head of the household takes part directly 
in the productive process; in other words, although there may be some division of labor, the head of the household does not act exclusively 
as manager, but is one of the workers in the household; agricultural/forestry/fishing aqua cultural activity is the household’s main source of 
income, and may be complemented by other non-agricultural activities performed inside or outside the family unit (services related to rural 
tourism, environmental benefits, production of crafts, salt agro industries, occasional jobs, etc.).  
 
Figure 5.  Theory of change for the paradigm shift to be delivered through the project.  
 
 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) 
Project objective 
32. The project aims at building the resilience of Guatemala’s most vulnerable farmers and their livelihoods against the 
impacts of climate change. The project will promote drought-resilient crop production systems by adopting a package 
of proven and validated adaptation measures. It will also be transformative in its focus on promoting women’s 
equitable representation in project activities and enabling women’s greater economic empowerment and participation 
in decision making. This project will address national climate change priorities, and government stakeholders 
including MARN, MAGA and INAB will have an active role. The project will select its beneficiaries using the general 
criteria: (i) Farmers who live in extreme poverty44 and their production is below subsistence (ii) Farmers practice 
Family Agriculture (FA)45, and (iii) Farmers owning up to 1 ha of available land for agricultural activity (own or rented).  
Section B.3 summarises the eligibility criteria used in the selection of the project beneficiaries.. The project will focus 
on the most vulnerable region of Guatemala to the effects of CC, namely the Departments of Petén, Alta Verapaz, 
Baja Verapaz, Zacapa and Chiquimula. The project has three key outcomes:  
1. Critical production systems sustain productivity under droughts and heatwave, farmers have enhanced, food-
secured and adapted livelihoods;  
2. Water resources at micro-basins are sustainably managed and landscapes are restored to ensure stable supply 
of water for farming amidst drought conditions; and 
3. Local and national institutions and governance mechanisms have enhanced capacities to implement adaptation 
measures to climate change.   
 
Project Components  
33. The objectives of the project will be achieved through three interlinked components (Figure 6). The first component 
will target agricultural climate resilience actions at local level, the second component will ensure access to water 
resources and management at watershed scale, and the third component will facilitate the necessary enabling 
conditions:  
Component 1. Implementing climate resilient agricultural practices and enhancing farmers’ livelihoods 
Component 2. Supporting efficient water management for agriculture to reduce the impact of increased water scarcity 
Component 3. Improved enabling conditions for climate resilient livelihoods

=== PAGE 22 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 20 OF 72 
 
Figure 6. Structure of RELIVE project.  
 
34. The technical solutions proposed by RELIVE in components 1 and 2, adopt tested solutions, which have proven to 
build resilience in the agricultural systems. The proposed adaptation solutions are based on the experience and 
lesson learned from initiatives implemented in other countries by FAO and the Tropical Agricultural Research and 
Higher Education Center (CATIE). They consist of innovative practices for the country and especially for the 
smallholder farmers in the project area, who currently use conventional and often unsustainable agricultural practices. 
Details on the innovative aspects of the proposed adaptation measures are described in Section D.6.2 of the 
Feasibility Study. 
Component 1.  Implementing climate resilient agricultural practices and enhancing farmers’ livelihoods   
GCF:     USD 14,108,106 
KOICA: USD   5,699,160 
MAGA: USD    5,740,000 
 
35. Component 1 is designed to promote resilience of agricultural producers at farm level. It will improve the capacity of 
farmers to reduce drought-related production losses by using climate information and adopting climate resilient 
agricultural practices.  Table 4 lists a set of proposed selection criteria for beneficiaries additional to the general 
selection criteria. These criteria ensure that the farmers most in need will benefit from the project interventions (see 
Section C.3 of the Feasibility Study for more information on beneficiary selection). 
 
Table 4. List of selection criteria for beneficiary selection under project activities under Output 1.2 and Output 1.3. 
Project activity 
Criteria for project beneficiary selection 
 
Implementing adaptation 
practices for basic grains and 
family gardens 
1. Farmers engage in growing maize and/or beans and possess family gardens 
2. Household with 6 or more members.  
3. Children under 7 with some degree of malnutrition. 
 
Implementing adaptation practices 
for coffee and cocoa 
The same criteria as above and additionally include: 
1. Possess up to 1 ha of available land for the agricultural activity (own or rented
they can prove it) 
2. Engage in coffee growing with shade.

=== PAGE 23 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 21 OF 72 
 
46 Agricultural Stress Index System (ASIS): http://www.fao.org/resilience/news-events/detail/en/c/296089/ 
47 Famine Early Warning System Network (MFEWS): http://fews.net/es/central-america-and-caribbean 
48 Government of Guatemala. National Institute of Seismology, Volcanology, Meteorology and Hydrology (INSIVUMEH).  
https://insivumeh.gob.gt/meteorologia/pronostico-wrf/wrf-kainfritsch/ 
 
 
36. Output 1.1: Climate and agro-weather information improved and tailored to the needs of vulnerable 
smallholder farmers to inform adaptation measures. 
The project will address the lack of accurate and tailored climate information, while promoting equitable access to 
climate information needed by smallholder farmers to prevent damage to agricultural production. The activities will 
focus on improving collection, interpretation and dissemination of reliable downscaled climate information relevant 
for staple crops (maize and beans) and cash crops (coffee and cocoa). This information will allow farmers to make 
better decisions and manage climate variability and climate-related shocks for improved food security. For staple 
crops, the project will work with FAO developed Agricultural Stress Index System (ASIS)46 and Famine Early Warning 
System Network (MFEWS)47 (See Section B.3 of the Feasibility Study). An innovative aspect at regional level is that 
forecasts will be for the coming three months t, which will allow farmers to select the suitable seed variety and 
adaptation practices to be used in a timely manner. For coffee, the project will work with the Coffee Cloud application 
of ANCAFÉ (for more information on this, see section C.6 of Feasibility Study). For cocoa, a specialized tool will be 
developed to allow farmers to access timely climate information and recommendations for adaptation solutions. 
Although there are advances in monitoring of climate variability at a local scale, the available equipment is not 
sufficient to generate the required accurate climate information at a local scale. The project will install 13 
hydrometeorological monitoring equipment as part of INSIVUMRH network system of monitoring stations in targeted 
areas of the project (for details on the installation sites see section C5 of the Feasibility Study).  
 
37. INSIVUMRH will receive capacity building on the generation of agro-weather information and will continue managing 
and using the newly installed equipment (with GCF proceeds) after the project ends. This equipment will provide real 
time climate information needed by farmers. The project will enhance the coordination of agencies engaged in 
collection and dissemination of climate information. Climate information and agricultural advice will be delivered in 
local language and in a gender-sensitive manner via SMS, extension officers and existing local organizations. The 
use of the information will be encouraged through awareness raising on the importance of the information for 
adaptation strategies and local agro-ecological centers for climate change adaptation that will provide an 
experimentation field.  All measures will be demonstrated through field visits to share knowledge on how to improve 
crops under different climate scenarios 
 
38. MAGA extension workers will support the design of the agro-meteorological monitoring systems, they will support the 
provision and collection of information to respond to the needs of stakeholders, provide advice on the format and 
language employed for information dissemination, and the mechanisms to present information.  KOICA will fund the 
Implementation of 4 agro-ecological centres for climate change adaptation and knowledge  generation, from which 
GIZ will built 3 of them and one (already existing) will be renewed  by GIZ., dissemination and use of tailored climate 
information products and   awareness rising on policy instruments in support of agroforestry production, water 
resource management and production and marketing with a climate change approach. Project activities are designed 
and will be implemented in accordance with the Gender Action Plan to ensure the adoption gender sensitive approach 
(see Part II of Annex 8). KOICA will fund the Implementation of 4 agro-ecological centres for climate change 
adaptation and knowledge generation, from which GIZ will built 3 of them and one (already existing) will be renewed 
by GIZ  Each of the agro-ecological center will have: 1) a capacity building room where key stakeholders will 
participate in training processes; and 2) experimental field plots where the climate resilient practices will be tested 
and validate. The location of the centers (Activity 1.1.4) follows a preliminary scoping that considered the assessment 
of similar initiatives in the project region, to avoid duplication and to ensure that the project is well represented in the 
different project districts.  
 
39. An innovative aspect of the agro-weather information is the use of detailed satellite climate information such as the 
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) and data from the Climate Hazards Group InfraRed Precipitation 
with Station (CHIRPS). Another system that will be used is the Agricultural Stress Index System (ASIS) developed 
by FAO to detect agricultural areas where crops could be affected by drought. This system is based on 10-day 
satellite data (decadal) of vegetation and land surface temperature produced by the METOP-AVHRR sensor that has 
a resolution of 1 km. Additionally, the very innovative meteorological forecast system developed for Guatemala by 
INSIVUMEH (2020)48 will also be an instrument made available to extension officers and farmers to access accurate 
and timely meteorological information relevant for the successful implementation and management of climate resilient 
agricultural systems.  The climate data generated by the two existing platforms (platforms ASIS and CHIRPS) 
mentioned above and from INSIVUMEH will be used by the project free of charge.  NDVI (Normalized Difference

=== PAGE 24 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 22 OF 72 
Vegetation Index), refers to information that can be obtained from available free of charge remote sensing imagery, 
such as LANDSAT 7 and LANDSAT 8 and SENTINEL.   
 
Activity 1.1.1 Organize workshops for extension technicians and farmers regarding the importance of climate 
information and use in decision-making  
Activity 1.1.2 Install 13 hydro-meteorological monitoring equipment for drought to inform climate resilient agricultural 
management strategies. 
Activity 1.1.3 Disseminate climate information and response adaptation measures using locally-relevant delivery 
mechanisms as virtual platforms, electronic means, telecommunication and visits of the extension workers. 
Activity 1.1.4 Implement 4 local agro-ecological centers for climate change adaptation for knowledge generation and 
sharing 
  
 
Output 1.2: Adaptation measures adopted to foster the resilience of coffee, cocoa and basic grain production 
systems  
40. The project will promote practices that will reduce farmers’ vulnerability to crop losses caused by drought and 
heatwaves. This will be achieved through the implementation of gender-sensitive agricultural adaptation packages 
for staple crops (maize and beans) and cash crops (cocoa and coffee), which will bring together climate resilience 
agricultural practices. Each gender-sensitive agricultural adaptation package is described below listing practices 
and their expected adaptation results (Table 5). The proposed practices will be targeted and adjusted as necessary 
to reflect farm-specific, culturally-relevant and gender-responsive needs and priorities. 
 
41. The project will overcome the limited purchase capacity and high up-front investments for agricultural inputs by the 
creation of community seed banks and farmer “solidarity networks” such as the so called “chain pass” (pase en 
cadena). These community-led mechanisms will be managed by women groups to distribute vegetative material in 
municipal, community and MAGA nurseries will reduce the cost of acquiring seeds, plants and other vegetative 
materials, thus provide incentives for new farmers to replicate the agricultural adaptation packages.  Additionally, 
savings strategies will be promoted, such as Contingency Funds or Savings Groups, especially for women producers. 
These strategies contribute to strengthening entrepreneurial capacities of women via the management of seed 
nurseries and creating sources for alternative income generation, thus making them more resilient in cases where 
events of climate variability occur that affect productive systems. An innovative aspect of the proposed project 
interventions includes the development of a platform to provide timely information to seed suppliers on seed 
availability enabling producers to have a seed portfolio available and climate adapted. The access of farmers and 
extension services to technical assistance with a specific focus on climate change consist an innovative measure as 
well. 
 
42. The proposed climate resilient agricultural measures are based on traditional practices in the region, enhanced with 
scientific knowledge and know-how to better address climate challenges such as droughts. This includes improved 
drought-resistant seeds and varieties, sustainable land management, diversification through the introduction of trees 
of nutritional value and post-harvest management for the conservation of seed for sowing and self-consumption. To 
enhance the wide adoption and replication of the agricultural resilient practices, the project applies a multi-level 
strategy for capacity building and technical advisory.  The capacity building strategy is mainstreamed across the 
project activities and summarized in Figure 7. The 3-levels capacity building strategy consists of:    
- 
Level 1: The project will train 90 extension services and other technical staff from MAGA and INAB (Output 3.2, 
Activity 3.2.1) 
- 
Level 2: MAGA and INAB will train 300 community promoters, 80 CADERs, and 100 SNER experts (Output 3.2, 
Activities 3.2.2 and 3.2.3) 
- 
Level 3: The promoters, CADER and SNER will support 6195 family farms, represent a total of 37,770 direct 
beneficiaries, who will have direct support for the implementation of the agricultural resilient practices. (Output 
1.2, Activity 1.2.2)  
The activities in Output 1.2 are focused on local level interventions and the project will support the delivery of the capacity 
building sessions aimed for farmers (Level 3) with Activity 1.2.2.

=== PAGE 25 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 23 OF 72 
 
49 These measures have been proven to be effective in other projects implemented by FAO such as Prácticas resilientes and Mesoamerica sin hambre. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Multi-level approach to enhance the adoption of agricultural resilient practices. 
 
The training and technology transfer process will be based on the existing MAGA and INAB platform, which will be 
reinforced by the project. For this, Farmer Field Schools, demonstration farms, training courses, and a learning-by-doing 
process will be used. As a result, the project will strengthen existing national agricultural platforms and it will foster the 
initiative to be scaled up to a greater number of beneficiaries.  Farmers in Level 3 will further promote the agricultural 
resilient practices, especially within the same indigenous groups (where the same indigenous language is spoken), in 
other areas of the country. This will open the possibility to scale up the RELIVE model to other small farmers in the 
country.  Capacity built in this output (Level 3) will unlock access of farmers and women in particular to financial services, 
which will be coordinated with CAMBio II project. 
 
 Activity 1.2.1 Fund the implementation of the adaptation practices and gender-sensitive technology packages for 
staple crops, coffee and cocoa in 6,195 family farms. 
 Activity 1.2.2 Implement at least 10 trainings to enhance the technical and organizational capacity of 6,195 
farmers for climate-risk informed planning and implementation of agricultural adaptation measures at farm level   
Activity 1.2.3 Establish 28 women-led, farm-level seed nurseries for resilient crops and community forest nurseries 
Activity 1.2.4 Extension workers provide technical assistance through regular consultation sessions and field visits 
to 6,195 small farmers. 
 
Table 5. Description of practices considered in the gender-sensitive agricultural adaptation packages and their adaptation benefits for basic grains, 
cocoa and coffee production systems   
 
Gender-sensitive 
agricultural 
adaptation packages and activities 
Adaptation benefits 
Gender-sensitive agricultural adaptation packages for staple crops 
The package includes the provision and use of drought-resilient varieties of maize and beans. This will maintain or increase the 
productivity of the crops, even during droughts and prolonged heat waves while contributing to food security. The package promotes 
the adoption of practices at farm-level to improve soil moisture retention capacity using agroecological approaches (for detailed 
description of the agroecological practices see section C.6 of the Feasibility Study). It promotes agrobiodiversity in family gardens 
by planting locally accepted species of fruit trees, timber trees and diversification with varieties of roots (see the list of selected tree 
varieties in Section C.6, Table 32 of the feasibility study).  This will create microclimate and help ensure stable yields for food 
security49.  
Prepare a seeds catalogue at community 
level and adopt climatically adapted 
seed varieties in collaboration with 
farmers and women’s groups 
- Reduced crop failure in the event of rainfall failure during critical growth periods  
- Reduced harvest failure in the event of excessive rainfall during harvest  
90 technical 
members from 
MAGA and 
INAB 
80 CADERs 
RELIVE 
Technical 
Support 
6,195 family 
farms 
300 community 
promoters 
100 experts 
from SNER 
37,170 direct 
beneficiaries 
Level 1 
Level 2 
Level 3

=== PAGE 26 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 24 OF 72 
 
 
50 Cerda et al., 2017. Primary and Secondary Yield Losses Caused by Pests and Diseases: Assessment and Modelling in Coffee. 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0169133 
51 Cerda, R. D. (2014). Contribution of cocoa agroforestry systems to family income and domestic consumption: looking toward intensification. Agroforestry 
Systems, 88(6), 957-981. doi:10.1007/s10457-014-9691-8 
 
Diversify and adopt agrobiodiversity 
principles to create a favorable 
microclimate in the agriculture plot 
- Maintenance of microclimate conditions, resulting in reduced loss of soil moisture 
- Improved infiltration of runoff, recharging soil moisture reserves and contributing to 
aquifer recharge and stream flow stabilization at landscape level.  
- Input of soil organic matter, resulting in increased soil moisture retention.  
Improve organic matter content and soil 
moisture retention capacity  
- Increases in soil moisture reserves during unseasonal drought periods, associated 
with increased organic matter content  
- Reduced evaporative demand from crops  
- Maintenance of soil cover protects against temperature increases and resulting loss 
of soil moisture due to evaporation and decomposition of soil organic matter. 
- Reduction of soil disturbance and maintenance of cover reduces runoff and erosive 
losses during increasingly intense extreme rainfall events  
Post-harvest handling of basic grains  
Improved grain storage technology for maize and beans to protect from extreme 
weather and pests to preserve them for longer periods, thus contributing to food 
security. The storage technology will be tailored to enhance resilience to climate 
change e.g. proper ventilation to avoid grain damage from excessive heat and 
moisture, and associated insects.  
Gender-sensitive agricultural adaptation packages for coffee and cocoa productive systems 
The package promotes gradual renewal of coffee and cocoa productive systems with improved varieties. This is expected to result 
in an overall improvement of coffee production by 76% in 7 years with new varieties compared to business of usual scenario.50 
Additionally, other three species will be introduced for shade to increase resilience of coffee and cocoa planting. See list with 
proposed species for planting in section C.6 of Feasibility Study). 
Establishment of improved coffee and 
cocoa hybrids tolerant to rust and drought 
Improved drought-resilient variety of coffee and cocoa decreasing the impacts form 
prolonged droughts, pest, diseases and coffee rust. The proposed varieties have 
already been used and are well accepted in other countries in the region as well as in 
other Departments in Guatemala (for more information see section C.6 of the 
Feasibility Study). 
 
 
 
 
Adaptation and diversification of the 
structure of shade canopy for greater 
resilience to climate change  
 
- Maintenance of microclimate conditions, resulting in reduced losses of soil moisture  
- Improved infiltration of runoff, recharging soil moisture reserves and contributing to 
aquifer recharge and stream flow stabilization at landscape level.  
- Coffee: Density, spatial arrangements and pruning techniques allow for greater 
aeration in the coffee plantation to counteract temperature increases, and the 
particular architecture of the coffee plants allows better ventilation into the interior 
plants, especially in times of heavy rain, so that diseases such as rust cannot thrive.  
- Cocoa: The shade provides protection to cocoa plants from strong winds. Also, the 
shade contributes to cycling of nutrients, decrease in runoff (in the agroforestry 
system, runoff is 3% lower in comparison with full sun systems). 51 Finally, the 
arboreal component helps to create favorable microclimate conditions for the growth 
of the main crop and is unfavorable for the development of diseases. 
Management of the nutrient balance of 
the coffee agroforestry system 
Maintaining soil with the necessary nutrient stocks using compost and organic 
fertilizers will help plants to be less vulnerable to attack by pests and diseases and 
more likely to withstand extreme weather events. Climate information will inform 
farmers on the timing and amount of product application. 
Management 
of 
coffee 
pests 
and 
diseases with emphasis on rust 
Increased resilience of coffee towards pests and diseases by climate informed 
management practices e.g. the early warning for drought will inform farmers when to 
take specific measured to decrease the risk of pests and diseases.

=== PAGE 27 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 25 OF 72 
 
 
Output 1.3:  Promotion of the resilience of livelihoods through productive diversification and market access 
43. The project will promote alternative strategies for income generation to ensure that smallholder farmers create 
sustainable climate resilient assets as a safety net to avoid food insecurity in periods of crisis and total yield loss due 
to drought or heatwaves. Key diversification strategies will support climate-resilient value chain development for 
cocoa and coffee, diversification with family gardens and poultry, enhancement of business skills for better access 
to the market. Small-scale vegetable production and poultry to ensure greater dietary diversity will provide women 
with income-generating opportunities. The project will strengthen community-based organisations, such as 
cooperatives, micro-enterprises, and farmers associations to help linking small-scale rural entrepreneurs with private-
sector players along the value chains in the long run.  
 
44.  Diversification is a climate risk-coping strategy. When smallholder farmers depend on limited number of climate-
sensitive activities, this makes them highly vulnerable to climate risks such as prolonged drought. Diversification 
provides an opportunity for spreading the climate risk across different activities, therefore minimizing overall impacts 
and providing a safety net in the case of extreme drought.  With more diverse production and activities, smallholder 
farmers will be given more options for coping strategies during prolonged droughts, thus increasing their resilience. 
The project will collaborate with the Government of Guatemala to link its nationally funded school meals program 
with the farmers and help catalyze the creation of a market for communities and stimulate local production and 
purchase.   The smallholder farmers, beneficiaries of the RELIVE project, will be registered as suppliers of Family 
Agriculture (FA) and accredited by MAGA and Ministry of Education (MINEDUC) in order to participate in the selection 
of suppliers for the School Feeding Programs. The project will seek to create a formal agreement with the schools in 
the project region to purchase the farmers’ products. Activity 1.3.1 includes proper coordination with MAGA, 
MINEDUC and local schools to ensure that the School Feeding Programs purchase this production, thus opening 
market opportunities for the 2,500 farm families.  
 
45. The RELIVE project will promoting an inclusive and value-added innovative marketing model, focusing on quality 
analysis coffee, which will allow for coffee growers to be better positioned in specialised and competitive markets of 
high-quality coffee. Due to the potential and increased consumption of quality coffee at the national level, the 
roasting of specialty coffee will be promoted, by establishing coffee roasters in rural territories creating employment 
for women and young people. 
 
Activity 1.3.1   Promote diversification of productive units in home gardens for 2,500 farm families and install 370 
greenhouses micro-tunnel facilities for vegetables and poultry 
Activity 1.3.2  Organize training for 2,500 farmers to improve technical skills for enhancing coffee and cocoa value 
chains and to strengthen organizational capacities of producers’ associations to access markets infrastructure. 
 
46. Trainings will include strategies to introduce coffee and cocoa products into the national and local market and adding 
value to retain it at the origin, thus improving their income as a way of increasing their resilience. Market access 
based on the differentiated characteristics of the national product will be promoted, by developing links to local and 
national markets through the association with coffee and cocoa guilds identified in a participatory manner by the 
farmers. Thus, the project will unlock potential private sector engagement with companies that will purchases 
RELIVE’s production. 
 
Component 2. Supporting efficient water management for agriculture to reduce the impact of increased water 
scarcity 
GCF:     USD 13,584,641 
INAB:    USD 24,100,000 
KOICA: USD      328,442 
 
47. Component 2 is designed to strengthen capacities of local actors to better manage water resources under conditions 
of projected increase in water scarcity due to CC. Community-led planning of water resource management at micro-
basin level will secure water availability needed by smallholder farmers to achieve resilience to drought and

=== PAGE 28 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 26 OF 72 
 
52 in accordance with the format approved by INAB 
53 certification issued by the Mayor of the municipality 
54 certification issued by the Mayor of the municipality 
55 in the case of owners, certification from the Property Registry, and, in the case of social groups with legal status, occupying land owned 
by the municipalities, certification of the act in which the Municipal Council agrees that the social group will occupy land owned by that 
municipality 
heatwaves.  The selection criteria for the beneficiaries of the activities in addition to the general criteria is described 
in Table 6 lists a set of (see Section C.3 of the Feasibility Study for more information on beneficiary selection).  
 
Table 6: List of selection criteria for beneficiary selection under project activities under Output 2.2 
Project activity 
Criteria for project beneficiary selection 
 
Forest incentives: for forest 
management for water protection 
and provision forest management 
for water production and provision 
and agroforestry systems. 
Small landholders and landowners in the project area with a hectare or less of 
land for forestry activities in the above-specified incentive modalities and in 
accordance with the requirements of the current legislation on forest 
incentives. 
• 
Forestry Law (Decree 101-96): in its chapters I, Forest Incentives, and II, 
Incentives for small owners); 
• 
For PINPEP: Law on forest incentives for holders of small areas of land 
suitable for forestry or agroforestry (PINPEP, Decree 51-2010) and its 
regulations. The criteria includes: 
a) Guatemalan nationality; b) More than 18 years of age; c) Free exercise 
of civil rights; d) Forestry or agro-forestry land holders; e) The  land size 
eligible for receiving incentives should be  between 0. 1ha and 15ha; f) 
Submitted application to PINPEP Programme 52; g) Hold of document 
certifying possession of the land53; (h) A copy of the applicant's identity 
card; i) a forest management plan drawn up by a technician registered with 
the National Forestry Register (INAB).  
 
• 
For PROBOSQUE: Law to Promote Forest Establishment, Recovery, 
Restoration, Management, Production and Protection in Guatemala 
(PROBOSQUE, Decree 02-2015) and its regulations. The criteria 
includes:  ) Submitted application; b) Forest management plan prepared 
by a technician or professional registered with the National Forestry 
Registry (INAB); c) Hold of document certifying rights on the land54; 55; d) 
copy of the personal identification document. 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2.1: Community-led Water Management Plans developed and implemented at micro-basin level to 
promote climate resilience and enhance economic productivity    
48. Activities under this output will address the lack of planning instruments for water resource management at micro-
basin level and strengthen local governance. The project will support the creation of Local Water Committees at 
micro-basin level on the basis of existing local organizational structures, engaging other relevant key actors who 
have a role in water management in the area. The Committees will have the mandate to ensure climate risk-informed 
integrated water resource management at a micro-basin level and under climate change scenario. Increased water 
scarcity has resulted in water-related conflicts and the committees will act as platforms for planning, dialogue and 
conflict resolution. (more information on the key local organizations involved in water management, criteria for 
selection, are described in section C4 of the Feasibility Study).  The Local Water Committees will develop climate 
risk-informed water management plans at micro-basin level, which will guide land restoration and agricultural 
activities. The project will provide technical assistance in the form of capacity building on climate-informed planning 
of water resources, strengthening organization capacity and facilitation to coordinate with other regional and local 
organisations. MARN and INAB subnational representatives will support the development of Local Water 
Committees. With the support of MAGA´s extension workers, the technical team of the project will also provide 
technical assistance on the topics required by the watershed board members, especially on those issues related to 
development of watershed plans, basin governance and management, water monitoring, climate change monitoring 
and adaptation. Project technical staff, with MARN’s team support, will be in charge of the support for climate risk-
informed water management plans. Project activities are designed and will be implemented in accordance with the 
Gender Action Plan to ensure the adoption gender sensitive approach (See Part II of Annex 8).

=== PAGE 29 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 27 OF 72 
 
56 Precipitation analyzes in the study area indicate that in 2070 the total annual rainfall will be approximately 16.2 billion cubic meters per year, when analyzing 
the total volume of water stored by the water harvesting and irrigation systems this volume is approximately 0.0007 % with which two things can be concluded. 
The first is that there is enough water to carry out the proposed activities, and the second is that the volume of water to be used does not affect the water recharge 
or the hydrological cycle of the work area.   
 
Activity 2.1.1 Establish or strengthen the capacity of 14 Local Water Committees for climate risk-informed 
integrated water resource management and planning instruments related to public policy on climate change 
Activity 2.1.2 Provide technical assistance to Local Water Committees to develop and implement 14 climate risk-
informed water management plans at micro-basin level which correspond to the project site. 
 
Output 2.2: Landscapes are climate resilient and sustain critical ecosystems services for water availability in 
drought periods 
49. The activities under this output will focus on watershed restoration as an adaptation strategy to increase forest cover, 
improve the hydrological cycle and increase the amount of available water. This is critical for agricultural production 
and underpins food security. The micro-basin water management plans will inform the planning of reforestation 
activities by prioritizing the key areas with high potential for restoring the hydrological cycle. This prioritization will be 
carried out together with the Local Water Committees. The project will deliver this output through the forest incentive 
programs PINPEP and PROBOSQUE.  PINPEP and PROBOSQUE incentive programs are managed by INAB and 
that INAB will provide its co-financing through them (see Section C.6 in Feasibility Study).  Without RELIVE project, 
the forest incentives will not be directed towards climate resilient practices and will remain largely inaccessible to the 
most vulnerable population. Therefore, the project aims to redirect INAB investment to support climate resilient 
practices such as agroforestry systems.  Therefore, the project will work together with INAB to make sure that GCF 
project beneficiaries, who will adopt climate resilient practices, will become priority for granting incentives. 
Additionally, the improved access of smallholder farmers (in particular women farmers) to forest incentives to promote 
agroforestry are important for the sustainability of the project since disbursements will continue to be made once the 
project ends. 
50. The beneficiaries for the forest incentives are identified by FAO (with MAGA support) using the pre-defined general 
criteria and specific criteria (Table 6).  Only the beneficiaries who are selected by FAO under Activity 2.2.1 are eligible 
to benefit from INAB’s incentive payments made under Activity 2.2.4. Once the beneficiaries are identified, FAO 
supports them with awareness and knowledge of forestry incentive programs (PINPEP and PROBOSQUE) so that 
the beneficiaries can decide whether or not to apply for incentives from these programs for reforestation projects, 
agroforestry systems or forest protection. Subsequently, FAO supports the beneficiaries to prepare the required 
application packages e.g. forest management plans. The beneficiary, with FAO's technical assistance, submits the 
application for its proposed project to INAB, who evaluates the applications and, if they qualify, INAB approves the 
incentives and notifies the landholder or owner.  Agroforestry systems will be promoted in addition to protection and 
forest management. As agroforestry systems are a relatively new practice for INAB under PINPEP, technical 
expertise is limited, which limit the process. The project, via the co-financing of KOICA, will provide technical support 
to INAB and facilitate the access of smallholder farmers to the incentives, especially for women-owned farms. Project 
activities are designed and will be implemented in accordance with the Gender Action Plan to ensure the adoption 
gender sensitive approach (Part II of Annex 8). 
 
Activity 2.2.1 Technical support to 19,239 smallholder farmers (women in particular) to access forest incentives 
Activity 2.2.2 Training of 90 technicians from extension services, forest regents and INAB   
Activity 2.2.3 Restore 13,000 ha through reforestation and agroforestry 
Activity 2.2.4 Evaluate forest management plans and certify their compliance to manage and allocate the 
necessary funds to reforest and manage 13,000 hectares of plantations and agroforestry systems 
 
Output 2.3: Local water collection and irrigation farm systems implemented to secure water supply for resilient 
livelihoods  
51. The project will ensure the reliable supply of water for agricultural needs, even during drought by installing rooftop 
rainwater harvesting systems and farm-level drip irrigation system for using harvested water. 56  The Local Water 
Committees will be responsible for the overall management, maintenance and operation of the water harvesting and 
irrigation systems. As the water harvesting and irrigation systems will be at farm level, it is envisioned that the project 
will train the farmers on how to repair the irrigation system (for more information see Annex 21 for the O&M). For 
more significant repairs and maintenance costs, the Local Water Committees will be able to cover them with savings 
or contingency funds created for this purpose. FAO will support the setting up of such savings mechanisms as it has 
a long-standing experience. The Water Local Committees will be registered as members of the Community Councils 
of Urban and Rural Development (COCODE) and will be able to apply for municipal funds to sustain financially the 
operation of the irrigation system.   Technical staff of the project with the support of subnational representatives of

=== PAGE 30 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 28 OF 72 
MARN will develop the capacity building process of Municipalities, MAGA INAB, and community organizations’ 
technical staff.  
52. An innovative aspect of the rainwater collection systems are empirical techniques that have been developed over 
time in the Central American region, however they will be innovative for the smallholder farmers in the project area.  
Farmers will collect rainwater on the roof of a house, shed or building and then use drip irrigation by gravity.  
 
Activity 2.3.1 Provide trainings to improve technical capacity of 2,500 local officials and members of community 
organizations on the implementation and maintenance of micro-basin infrastructure  
Activity 2.3.2   Install farm-level drip irrigation system for using harvested water on 250 ha of farmland 
 
Component 3: Improved enabling conditions for climate resilient livelihoods 
 
GCF: USD 518,133 
 
 
53. Component 3 will focus on strengthening the institutional capacities at all levels for comprehensive and climate risk-
informed governance of water resources at a landscape level, by enabling inter-institutional platforms for coordination 
and enhancing knowledge management. These enabling factors will ensure the effective implementation and long-
term sustainability of the activities under Components 1 and 2. This component is crucial to achieve replicability and 
upscaling of resilient agricultural practices at a landscape level and to accomplish the expected paradigm shift.  
 
Output 3.1: Institutional systems strengthened to govern climate resilient initiatives at national and local level 
54. The project will improve the comprehensive governance of climate adaptation and water resources by strengthening 
national and municipal environmental departments, CSOs, and communities, in order to promote effective water 
governance via water committees. To enable this, the project will create inter-institutional platforms and regional 
water roundtables to foster dialogue on climate adaptation and water resource management at the national and local 
level, through multi-level. MAGA and MARN are the key government institutions with a mandate for water 
management in the country, therefore they will lead the dialogues to mainstream climate change in water related 
sectors and territorial planning documents, guiding a common vision for integrated water resource management. In 
addition, MAGA and MARN will integrate the project’s lessons learned and a catalogue with climate resilient 
agricultural practices in a National Climate Change Adaptation Program. This will ensure the scaling up of such 
practices at a national level.  Project activities are designed and will be implemented in accordance with the Gender 
Action Plan to ensure the adoption gender sensitive approach (see Part II of Annex 8). 
 
Activity 3.1.1 Provide training to 100 technicians from 28 municipal environmental units and other local 
government agencies on climate adaptation planning and climate resilient agricultural solutions  
Activity 3.1.2 Facilitate 4 meetings of 2 water management and climate change thematic roundtables including 
the participation of MAGA, MARN and other relevant actors to integrate agricultural resilience practices in the 
national action plan on adaptation to climate change. 
 
Output 3.2:  Strengthened knowledge transfer and awareness raising among institutions at national, sub-
national and local levels   
55. The project will address the need to build the capacity of national, subnational and local institutions on climate change 
adaptation. At national level, the project will build on advances made by MARN and other organizations on 
establishing the National System for Information on Climate Change (SINCC); as well as MAGA's efforts to 
incorporate the Agricultural sector within the climate change agenda (NAP Agriculture Agenda). The key value added 
of the project will be to facilitate collaboration between the institutions by establishing dialogues, protocols and 
information channels to enhance the effective flow of information, between institutions at regional and local levels 
and farmers. At a subnational and municipal level, the project will work with SNER to provide training to its staff on 
analysis and use of climate information, for planning and development of strategies for resilient agriculture. This will 
directly enhance the delivery of technical assistance to beneficiaries in the 29 target municipalities. For these 
trainings, the project will work closely with the existing Learning Centers for Rural Development (CADER), which are 
field schools that are developed in a farming plot of a farmer in each community and works with around 30 producers 
to provide Training of Trainers  on climate resilient agricultural practices. At the local level, the project will ensure that 
80 CADER have strengthened capacity to further promote climate resilience agricultural practices in local languages 
at wider scale, (for more information on CADER see Section A.1.5.2 of the Feasibility Study).  Project activities are 
designed and will be implemented in accordance with the Gender Action Plan to ensure the adoption gender sensitive 
approach (see Part II of Annex 8).

=== PAGE 31 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 29 OF 72 
 
Activity 3.2.1 Train and assist 90 staff members from INAB, MAGA and MARN on the management and 
dissemination of climate information. 
Activity 3.2.2, Train 100 experts at departmental and municipal level and agricultural extension workers and 
other staff from SNER on climate risk-informed agricultural adaptation strategies.  
Activity 3.2.3 Train 300 community promoters on the use of climate information and planning instruments for 
agriculture adaptation strategies and strengthen the capacity of 80 CADERs 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
 
56. The following mechanisms for project execution, coordination and oversight have been agreed in close consultation 
with the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARN, the GCF NDA), the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock 
and Food (MAGA) and the National Forestry Institute (INAB).  
 
Governance arrangements 
57. The project will be governed by the following entities: 
• 
FAO, the Accredited Entity (AE), will act as an Executing Entity (EE) to some project activities and will be 
responsible for the GCF proceeds and for the overall quality assurance and oversight of the project. 
• 
MAGA and INAB will be Executing Entities (EE) and will be responsible to manage and execute their co-financed 
funds but will not execute any GCF Proceeds. Both MAGA and INAB are mandated to coordinate and oversee 
the implementation of the project through the PSC.  
• 
The Project Steering Committee (PSC), the highest level of project governance, will guide the overall project 
implementation and ensure inter-institutional coordination. The PSC will be comprised of high-level 
representatives from MARN and from the MAGA and INAB, along with SEGEPLAN. The MARN will chair the 
PSC and FAO will act as the Secretariat. MARN is the climate change authority of the country and it’s the National 
Designated Authority for GCF. In addition, MARN coordinates the Inter-Agency Coordination Group (GCI), which 
is the mechanism where MARN, MAGA and INAB review the national climate change agenda and the 
conservation of natural resources. FAO will keep the documentary and logistical record for the operation of the 
PSC. 
• 
The Technical Committee (TC) will be responsible for the overall project coordination and for ensuring its 
strategic approach, coordination among the partners and consistency of the outputs with the strategic framework. 
The TC will be comprised of technical staff from MAGA and INAB and chaired by technical staff from the MARN. 
FAO will act as the technical secretariat and provide support to the TC.  
• 
For the execution and implementation of the project, a Project Management Unit (PMU) will be responsible. 
The PMU is the technical-administrative unit for the project. The PMU will be established in Guatemala City, 
either at MAGA’s headquarters, campus or other premises, and will coordinate and support project 
implementation and day-to-day activities during the project lifecycle, in close consultation with the governing 
structures of the project.  The PMU will only be located physically at MAGA´s headquarters, and it will be under 
the supervision of FAO, as implementing agency. The PMU will follow FAO´s operative procedures and will 
operate according with the Annual Work Plan approved by the Steering Committee and the Technical Committee 
of the project. All the administrative matters of the project:  acquisition plan, financial plan, periodic reports, will 
be approved by the Steering Committee and the Technical Committee.  
• 
The day-to-day project monitoring and implementation responsibility rests on a National Coordinator that will lead 
the PMU. S/he will be supported by a technical officer, a financial officer, thematic advisers, a monitoring and 
evaluation specialist and administration and operational staff. At the local level, Territorial Operating Units will 
be established to serve as the key channel of communication between the PMU and local stakeholders and to 
assist with the implementation of stakeholder participation and engagement plan. They will comprise 
representatives of municipalities, local staff from MAGA and INAB, Civil Society Organizations (CSO), Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs) producer associations, representatives of project beneficiaries, and project 
staff such as the local technical staff, gender experts, among others. The aim of the Project is for the Territorial 
Operating Units to be established at MAGA or INAB 
 
58. The governance and implementation structure and flow of funds for the project are shown below (Figure 8). A detailed 
organigram of the PMU is included in Section C.6.1 of the Feasibility Study:

=== PAGE 32 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 30 OF 72 
 
 
Figure 8: Governance structure of the project. 
 
59. Table 7 presents the roles and responsibilities of key entities involved in project execution and oversight. 
Annual reports 
60. The PMU will prepare the Annual Report for each year of implementation and FAO will review/clear the annual reports. 
The Project Director of the PMU and the M&E Specialist will ensure that the indicators in the results framework are 
monitored annually. The Annual Reports will be shared with the TC and other stakeholders. The annual performance 
reports will be due to GCF 60 days after the end of the calendar year. The final project annual report and the terminal 
evaluation report will serve as the final project report package.  
 
Table 7: Roles and responsibilities of the key governance entities. 
 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
Steering Committee (PSC) 
• 
Provide political and strategic orientation to the implementation of the 
Project 
• 
Provide highest-level political decision-makers and sectors actors 
information on project progress, results and impacts. 
• 
Ensure alignment of the project with national policies 
• 
Ensure transparency of processes 
• 
Permit ownership of actions for addressing climate issues by national 
authorities 
• 
Ensure sound inter-institutional coordination 
• 
Ensure sound inter-institutional coordination 
• 
Ensure co-financing from government agencies is delivered in a timely 
manner

=== PAGE 33 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 72 
 
57 Secretaria General de Planificación (SEGEPLAN) 
Technical Committee (TC) 
• 
Review and approve the annual work plans and budget 
• 
Monitor implementation, and safeguards compliance 
• 
Invite, where relevant, representatives of accompanying institutions. 
• 
Mobilize timely technical expertise from the participating institutions as per 
agreed annual work plan. 
• 
Serve as a key channel of communication between PMU and key local 
stakeholders 
• 
Assist in the implementation of the stakeholders’ participation and 
engagements plan 
• 
Assist in communication strategy of the project at the local level 
Project Management Unit (PMU) 
Prepare the annual work plan and budget for review and approval by the PSC 
and FAO 
Reports to FAO on execution (physical and financial) 
Establish and supervise the Territorial Operating Units for project 
implementation at the local level.  The PMU will establish three Territorial 
Operating Units (Las Verapaces, Sur de Petén, and Easter Dry Corridor) to 
ensure sound implementation at the local level. 
Ensure recommendations of the Territorial Operating Units are discussed and 
addressed ensuring project adaptive management. 
Manage the procurement, contracting, administrative and accounting process 
needed under the direct and permanent control, monitoring and supervision 
of FAO.  
Collect data and ensure reporting to the PSC in accordance with the reporting 
to be provided to GCF. 
 
FAO 
Responsible for the reporting, monitoring, implementation and fiduciary 
management of activities funded by the GCF Proceeds 
Responsible for the reporting, monitoring, implementation and financing of 
the co-financed activities. 
Responsible for supervising the performance of the PMU and the timely 
delivery of management services provided by the PMU. 
 
Financial flow 
61. FAO is the AE and will act as the Executing Entity (EE) for some project activities. FAO is the AE to the GCF and, at 
the request of MARN (the NDA) it will also act as Executing Entity (EE) for the GCF Proceeds, through the FAO-
Guatemala Country Office.  FAO in its role of EE will manage the GCF funds, manage financial expenditures against 
budgets, execute payments, and provide technical and secretariat assistance to the PSC and TC. The GCF and FAO 
will enter into a FAA, under which FAO shall administer the relevant GCF Proceeds to be used for the financing of 
the project, in accordance with the FAA and AMA. Accountability on the use of financial resources will be facilitated 
through the review of annual and bi-annual project reports, as well as through audit and monitoring reports.  
 
62. MAGA and INAB will not execute any GCF proceeds. These institutions will only be responsible to manage and 
execute their co-financed funds (the in-kind contribution from MAGA and the PINPEP/PROBOSQUE incentives from 
INAB) in accordance with the annual work plan of the project as approved by the PSC.  KOICA’s co-financing of USD 
7,000,000 will be executed through FAO (USD 5,000,000) and GIZ (USD 2,000,000). FAO will have an agreement  
with KOICA as a co-financing entity, and will sign co-executing agreement with GIZ as an EE. MARN and SEGEPLAN 
will not execute any project activities.  MAGA, INAB and GIZ are Executing Entities. 
 
63. FAO in its role of AE shall sign a Project Agreement with SEGLEPLAN57 which is mandated as the only government 
entity in Guatemala in charge of Non-Reimbursable International Cooperation. It is legally responsible to sign on 
behalf of the government.  Under its status, SEGEPLAN is to represent Guatemala for the implementation of the 
entire project and thus will represent MAGA and INAB.  SEGEPLAN, will sign the project agreement, and MAGA and 
INAB will be part of the agreement as executing entities of the project.   SEGEPLAN will delegate the execution of 
the project to MAGA and INAB and will not be stated as an Executing Entity (EE). The Project Agreement will:  
• 
Include the obligation of INAB and MAGA to provide their co-financing, 
• 
reflect the governance arrangements,

=== PAGE 34 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 72 
• 
govern the implementation of the project,  
• 
be legally binding,  
• 
detail the roles and responsibilities of FAO, MAGA and INAB,  
• 
contain the relevant provisions for FAO’s compliance with the requirements from the AMA and FAA  that need to 
be transferred to the co financiers and co executing entities,  
• 
contain provisions on the applicability of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized 
Agencies (the “the Specialized Agencies Convention”) to FAO, including to the GCF Proceeds held by FAO. 
 
64. MAGA and INAB will be directly accountable to FAO for the performance of their respective obligations under the 
Project Agreement, such that FAO can enforce those obligations directly against MAGA/INAB without reference to 
SEGEPLAN. 
 
65. Every year the PMU will prepare the annual work plan and budget including a rolling procurement plan for the next 
18 months. The TC will approve the plan and FAO will spend funds according to its covenants, rules and standards. 
A yearly financial and results-based report will be submitted to the GCF Funds from the co-financiers will be managed 
by MAGA and INAB respectively. KOICA’s co-financing will be managed by GIZ and FAO. 
 
Track record of the AE and EEs 
FAO 
66. FAO promotes climate resilient agriculture as a way to increase productivity, adapt and build the resilience of food 
systems and, wherever possible, reduce GHG emissions. As an example, the FAO project Climate Smart Agroforestry 
Systems for the Dry Corridor of Central America supports farmers in Guatemala and Honduras to increase the uptake 
of climate resilient agroforestry systems through the farmer field school approach. Many of these lessons learned are 
applied to this project.  
FAO Guatemala 
67. FAO Guatemala’s efforts have been directed toward the development of agriculture in the rural environment, climate 
change adaptation, and the strengthening of public policies to guarantee food and nutritional security. The Country 
Programming Framework (CPF) 2017-2021 identifies the support of national efforts to respond to climate change 
impacts as a priority and defines three priority areas: a) Food and nutritional security; b) Territorial rural development; 
and c) climate change adaptation and mitigation to support resilience and integrated management of renewable 
energies. FAO Guatemala has implemented several projects on climate resilient agriculture sector (See Section A.5 
of the Feasibility study).  
 
68. FAO Guatemala has a robust fiduciary and technical oversight and quality assurance system with specific functions 
carried out by a segregated quality assurance process, which include:  FAO-Guatemala Country Office, the sub-
regional Office for Mesoamerica (SLM), the Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean (RLC) and 
Headquarters. This process ensures independent project oversight and monitoring. In SLM and RLC, there is a team 
of officials and specialist consultants in the areas of forestry, natural resources, risk management, and climate change, 
who are available to assist with the implementation of the project, in coordination with FAO Headquarters personnel. 
In addition, The FAO Guatemala office has professional full-time staff and specialized national consultants with a wide 
thematic experience to support the implementation of the project.  Table 8 shows a detailed description of funding 
source and responsible Executing Entity per activity.  
 
Table 8: Detailed list of activities with financing source and responsible Executing Entity  
 
Component 
Output 
Activity Title 
Financing 
source 
Executing 
Entity 
EE engage a 
procured party 
Beneficiaries 
Major 
contractual 
arrangements 
Compone
nt 1 
Output 
1.1 
Activity 1.1.1 Organize workshops for 
extension technicians and farmers 
regarding the importance of climate 
information and use in decision-making  
KOICA 
FAO 
 
Extension Technicians 
/small farmers

=== PAGE 35 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 72 
Activity 1.1.2 Install 13  hydro-
meteorological monitoring equipment for 
drought to inform climate resilient 
agricultural management strategies. 
GCF 
FAO 
X 
INSIVUMEH  as a direct 
beneficiaries/ MARN/ 
Small farmers as indirect 
beneficiaries 
Contracts for services 
(ITB, RFP) 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS) 
Activity 1.1.3 Disseminate climate 
information and response adaptation 
measures using locally-relevant delivery 
mechanisms as virtual platforms, 
electronic means, telecommunication and 
visits of the extension workers. 
GCF 
FAO 
X 
INSIVUMEH / GCI 
Institutions (MARN 
MAGA/INAB/CONAP)/Sm
all farmers 
Purchase of 
equipment (ITB), 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS),  
Travel  (ITV) 
Activity 1.1.4 Implement 4 local agro-
ecological centers for climate change 
adaptation for knowledge generation and 
sharing 
KOICA 
GIZ 
X 
The direct beneficiaries 
will be the MAGA´S 
Extension Technicians / 
and as Indirect 
beneficiaries are the small 
farmers 
 
Output 1.2 
Activity 1.2.1: Fund the implementation 
of the adaptation practices and gender-
sensitive technology packages for staple 
crops, coffee and cocoa in 6,195 family 
farms. 
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Small farmers 
Purchase of seeds, 
fertilizers, and plants  
(ITB), Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Activity 1.2.2 Implement at least 10 
trainings to enhance the technical and 
organizational capacity of 6,195 farmers 
for climate-risk informed planning and 
implementation of agricultural adaptation 
measures at farm level   
KOICA 
Level 
1:FAO;  
Level 
2 
MAGA 
/ INAB;  
Level 
3: 
MAGA 
 
Technicians of MAGA 
and INAB,  Small 
farmers/  
 
Activity 1.2.3 Establish 28 women-led, 
farm-level seed nurseries for resilient 
crops and community forest nurseries 
KOICA 
FAO 
 
Women small farmers 
 
Activity 1.2.4 Extension workers provide 
technical assistance through regular 
consultation sessions and field visits to 
6,195 small farmers. 
MAGA 
MAGA 
 
Small farmers 
 
Output 1.3 
Activity 1.3.1   Promote diversification of 
productive units in home gardens for 
2,500 farm families and install 370 
greenhouses micro-tunnel facilities for 
vegetables and poultry 
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Small farmers 
Contracts for services, 
and Purchase of 9 
vehicles  (ITB), 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Activity 1.3.2 Organize training for 2,500 
farmers to improve technical skills for 
enhancing coffee and cocoa value chains 
and to strengthen organizational 
capacities of producers’ associations to 
access markets infrastructure  
KOICA 
FAO 
 
Small farmers / Producers 
organizations / 
 
Component 2 
Output 2.1 
Activity 2.1.1 Establish or strengthen the 
capacity of 14 Local Water Committees 
for climate risk-informed integrated water 
resource management and planning 
instruments related to public policy on 
climate change 
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Water committes 
Purchase of office 
furniture and 
equipment (ITB) 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Activity 2.1.2 Provide technical 
assistance to Local Water Committees to 
develop and implement 14 climate risk-
informed water management plans at 
micro-basin level which correspond to the 
project site. 
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Water committes 
Procurement of 
services (ITB, RFP), 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Output 2.2 
Activity 2.2.1 Technical support to 
19,239 smallholder farmers (women in 
particular) to access forest incentives 
KOICA 
FAO 
 
Small farmers 
 
Activity 2.2.2 Training of 90 technicians 
from extension services, forest regents 
and INAB   
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Technicians from 
extension services, forest 
regents and INAB 
Letters of 
Agreements, and 
procurement of 
services (ITB, RFP ) 
Contracts of

=== PAGE 36 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 72 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Activity 2.2.3 Restore 13,000 ha through 
reforestation and agroforestry 
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Small farmers 
Contracts for services, 
and Purchase (ITB, 
RFP) 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Activity 2.2.4  Evaluate forest 
management plans and certify their 
compliance to manage and allocate the 
necessary funds to reforest and manage 
13,000 hectares of plantations and 
agroforestry systems 
INAB 
INAB 
 
Small farmers 
 
Output 2.3 
Activity 2.3.1 Provide trainings to 
improve technical capacity of 2,500 local 
officials and members of community 
organizations on the implementation and 
maintenance of micro-basin infrastructure  
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Local officials and 
members of community 
organization/Community 
Procurement of 
services (ITB), 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Activity 2.3.2   Install farm-level drip 
irrigation system for using harvested 
water on 250 ha of farm land 
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Small farmers 
Contracts for services, 
and Purchase (ITB) 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Component 3 
Output 3.1 
Activity 3.1.1 Provide training to 100 
technicians from 28 municipal 
environmental units and other local 
government agencies on climate 
adaptation planning and climate resilient 
agricultural solutions  
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Technicians from 28 
municipal environmental 
units and other local 
government agencies/ 
Gobernment Local 
/Technicians of Local 
producer organizations 
Procurement of 
services (ITB) 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Activity 3.1.2 Facilitate 4 meetings of 2 
water management and climate change 
thematic roundtables including the 
participation of MAGA, MARN and other 
relevant actors to integrate agricultural 
resilience practices in the national action 
plan on adaptation to climate change. 
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Representatives from 
MAGA, MARN, 
INAB, CONAP, 
MINECO, 
SEGEPLAN, 
academia, private 
sector  and civil 
society 
Procurement of 
services (ITB), 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Output 3.2 
Activity 3.2.1 Train and assist 90 staff 
members from INAB, MAGA and MARN 
on the management and dissemination of 
climate information. 
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Staff members from 
INAB, MAGA and MARN 
Procurement of 
services (ITB, RFP), 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Activity 3.2.2, Train 100 experts at 
departmental and municipal level and 
agricultural extension workers and other 
staff from SNER on climate risk-informed 
agricultural adaptation strategies.  
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Agricultural Extension 
workers at departmental 
and municipal level 
Procurement of 
services (ITB), 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
Activity 3.2.3 Train 300 community 
promoters on the use of climate 
information and planning instruments for 
agriculture adaptation strategies and 
strengthen the capacity of 80 CADERs 
GCF 
FAO 
X 
Community promoters at 
the CADERs 
Procurement of 
services (ITB), 
Contracts of 
personnel (CQS), 
Travel  (ITV) 
 
PMC 
PM
C 
PMC Project Management Costs 
GCF 
FAO 
 
 
 
 
 
  
KOICA 
FAO

=== PAGE 37 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 72 
 
58 Source from SIFGUA website SIFGUA is a project that belongs to the Forestry Sector of Guatemala, and which is supported by the International 
Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) which consolidates, analyzes and disseminates information generated from the main forestry activities in the 
country: http://www.sifgua.org.gt/Pinpep.aspx  
59 These funds will be executed through FAO (5 millions) and GIZ ((2 millions). 
Co-financing entities 
69. MAGA and FAO Guatemala have been collaborating on projects linked to adaptation for the last 10 years (See Section 
A.3 of the Feasibility Study). Through the FAO projects, and many others with various IFIs and other multilateral 
organizations, MAGA has gained practical experience on climate issues and with inter-institutional coordination and 
developed competencies in planning and organization based on a shared vision and common goals around climate 
change adaptation. The governance structures established during the implementation of FAO-supported projects, 
especially those for climate change adaptation purposes and territorial planning, serve as a strong foundation for this 
project. These prior experiences will support the implementation of the project.  
 
70. The project will also work with the INAB. INAB has a forest incentive program called PINPEP (Forest Incentive 
Program for Small-Holders) to promote forestry and agroforestry systems (See section B5 for more details on the 
additionality of PINPEP incentives and Table 10 Section A.3.1 of the feasibility study “Strength and weakness analysis 
of National Forestry Institute legal instruments linked to the project”). This program promotes forestry development 
through sustainable management of forests, reducing deforestation on land with forest vocation, promoting 
reforestation on forest areas currently without forest, and raising productivity. PINPEP stems from a perpetual law 
and the minimum forest parcel size eligible for incentives under PINPEP can be as small as 0.1 ha. Natural forest 
management is promoted through command-and- control mechanisms, for which the main instrument is forest 
licensing. In the past 6 years, INAB has invested over US$32 million58 under PINPEP and has currently formally 
committed at least US$24.1 million to be invested in the project area during the life of the project. In addition to 
PINPEP, INAB implements the PROBOSQUE Incentive Program, which also provides incentives to producers who 
develop forest landscape restoration practices, including plantations, natural forest recovery, agroforestry systems 
and plantations.  This program applies at the national level and to small-scale producers (0.5 ha onwards), with 
registered land ownership, whether individual or as a group. 
 
71. Both institutions MAGA and INAB have important comparative advantages linked to their technical human resources, 
infrastructure, presence in the territories, and implementation of policies linked to land management, water, forestry, 
agriculture, and climate change. They have personnel with wide experience and subject expertise, and territorial 
presence. 
 
72.  MARN is the National Designated Authority (NDA) and in accordance with its mandate as the government body that 
coordinates watershed management and water resource management policies (jointly with MAGA), it will lead the 
political dialogue with MAGA to strengthen the institutionalizing of a national climate change adaptation programme. 
This intersectoral dialogue will seek to foster the integration of projects lessons learned and best practices on 
resilience agricultural measures in agricultural, public and private sectors. These sectors will be encouraged to apply 
instruments promoted by the Law on Climate Change and of the National Plan of Climate Change (PANC). This will 
reinforce the intersectorial dialogue in the framework of the National Council of Climate Change that presides the 
President of the Republic of Guatemala. 
 
73. KOICA has been working in Guatemala since 2004, promoting initiatives related to rural development, environment, 
and women (among others). Since 2018 the agency has been developing projects related to climate change, such as 
Building livelihood resilience to climate change in the upper basins of Guatemala's highlands and Adaptation of rural 
communities to CC (Managed by FAO). KOICA will co-finance the project with USD 7 million59, with special focus on 
activities under Components 1 and 2. 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
 
74. The proposed GCF project will overcome critical barriers to strengthen the resilience of vulnerable farmers against 
the impacts of climate change through the promotion of climate-resilient agricultural and water management practices, 
resulting in improved food security and more sustainable and resilient livelihoods. The additional value of the GCF 
involvement will be the delivery of climate-resilient agriculture benefits by scaling-up proven practices that increase 
the food security of vulnerable farmers in Guatemala. GCF involvement is required because of the limited

=== PAGE 38 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 72 
 
60 MARN, 2016. Documento base del Pacto Ambiental en Guatemala. URL:http://www.marn.gob.gt/Multimedios/2547.pdf   
61 Deuda pública: Banco de Guatemala. (4 de Julio de 2019). Banco de Guatemala. Estadísticas macroeconómicas. Sector Fiscal. Obtenido de  
http://www.banguat.gob.gt/inc/main.asp?id=115099&aud=1&lang=1 
62 https://elperiodico.com.gt/inversion/2018/01/04/mujeres-obtienen-menos-creditos-y-tasas-mas-altas/ 
63 The cap for funding is USD 10 million per project for the GEF and USD 10 million pountry for the Adaptation Fund. 
Therefore, the proposed project cannot be funded by these funds.     
availability of public and private funding to support transformation in Guatemala’s rural agricultural and water 
sector: 
 
75. GCF grant support is required to overcome the barriers to climate resilience among vulnerable farmers in Guatemala. 
The project seeks the minimum possible level of concessionality within the context of Guatemala’s economic situation. 
Although the Government of Guatemala (GoG) is taking actions to implement climate change related food security 
initiatives and to build a policy and legal framework to enable climate change action, structural barriers to accessing 
finance remain. Public resources are insufficient to achieve meaningful reductions in climate change vulnerability, to 
improve resilience of beneficiary farmers and to reach the NDC goals. Per capita public financing on environmental 
issues in Guatemala is the lowest in the Central American region60.  In the case of Guatemala, public revenues in 
2017 were USD 8 billion and public debt USD 18 billion. The debt balance as a percentage of tax revenue is 220%.61 
The threshold recommended by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) is 250%, the country's economy barely 
produces and sells enough goods and services to pay off its debts without incurring more debt. Guatemala spent 
USD 301 million on climate change adaptation in 2014 (MARN, 2016), approximately 0.5% of GDP. Taking into 
account the modelled scenarios in which the climate change burden will reach between 38% and 64% of GDP in 
2100, climate change actions are clearly severely under budgeted. It is beyond the country’s means to fully address 
this financing gap using internal resources.  Due to the nature and extent of the climate change risks, the 
government is not able to build resilience of farmers at scale without grant support from the GCF.  
 
76. Given the national debt, financial instruments such as loans and guarantees are not appropriate financial instruments 
for this project, as this would increase the country’s public debt burden even further. Among the causes of low 
economic development of the country is the budget deficit that Guatemala has been incurring at least since 1999. 
Although the total size of the fiscal deficit is low (-2% on average), it demonstrates structural failures to finance public 
spending. These include low tax collection rates and a commercial deficit ranging from 9.68% - 10.92% of GDP in 
2015 and 2016 respectively. Guatemala has the lowest tax collection record in Latin America, equivalent to 12.4% of 
GDP, compared to an average of 22.8% for the region.  
 
77. Reimbursable grants are not an appropriate financial instrument for the project because the proposed project focuses 
on the poorest regions of Guatemala, and interventions will have limited income generation. Economic benefits of 
these activities include improved food security and reduced need for investment in measures to remedy health and 
livelihood impacts from climate change. However, the effects of the proposed practices will take place over time and 
will be financially viable in a 20-year horizon. In the municipalities targeted by the project, rates of poverty (in some 
municipalities it reaches 96%) are extremely high, with a majority of farmers being poor or extremely poor. The 
beneficiary farmers generate insufficient cash surpluses to build their own resilience while reimbursing the cost of 
GCF support (as described in Annex 3). Women, usually the demographic group that stays working at the farms (men 
often migrate to the city for better jobs), obtain smaller credit lines and usually at higher rates than men62. The adoption 
of climate resilient agricultural techniques needs to be undertaken with urgency, since family farmers are already 
facing climate related stress due to changing weather conditions. In the short term it is necessary to provide limited 
“pump-priming” investment support to resource and asset poor family farmers (for example in the form of additional 
agricultural inputs and equipment) to overcome barriers to uptake. The urgent need to help infra-subsistence and 
subsistence farmers address food security and livelihood challenges caused by climate change, coupled 
with the inability of this population to afford debt finance for the proposed activities, justifies grant funding, 
which is not available at the scale needed from sources other than the GCF.63 
 
 
78. The target population of RELIVE, vulnerable infra-subsistence and subsistence smallholder farmers (mostly 
indigenous people) are most exposed and vulnerable to the impacts of climate-induced droughts and heat waves:

=== PAGE 39 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 72 
• 
Direct beneficiaries 116,353 people (0.7% of the national population and 20% of the population in the project 
area), of which 46,541 female.   
• 
Indirect beneficiaries 583,146 farmers (3,9% of the population), of which 300,320 female 
 
79. They will benefit from reduced vulnerability through the use of improved climate information systems, adoption of 
improved crop varieties and soil and water management techniques, as well as income diversification.  Crop failure 
and land degradation have given rise to high migration levels of men abroad, thus leaving many women as household 
–heads and in charge of the agricultural activities. Even coffee and cocoa producers and field workers are vulnerable 
to climate change as they depend only on these crops for income, therefore have low productive diversification and 
consequently run high financial risks. 
 
80. At the same time, small farmers that are beneficiaries of the project do not have access to credit, due to the refusal 
of commercial banks to lend for climate resilience-agriculture activities. At present farmers, are highly vulnerable to 
climate risks and often their yield and quality of crops are conditioned by climate variability and may suffer high loss, 
making it impossible for farmers to generate any surplus income. As a result, commercial banks consider small 
farmers to be high-risk clients and are unable or unwilling to provide capital. This creates a vicious circle where a 
lack of credit means farmers cannot invest in climate resilience measures that would help make yields more 
predictable and make the farmers more bankable. The project will invest in strengthening community-based 
organizations such as cooperatives, micro-enterprises, and farmers associations to facilitate access to finance from 
commercial banks for climate resilience-agriculture activities 
 
81. The Government makes available some resources (via PINPEP, the forest incentives program) to promote 
afforestation/reforestation, however improvements are required in the modalities and use of these incentives to make 
them accessible to poor farmers.  The introduction of new and more adapted measures promoted by RELIVE will 
address these constraints and make the difference.  For example, current forest incentives are not directed towards 
climate resilient practices such as agroforestry and are not attuned to the needs of the most vulnerable population. 
Among other challenges, the incentive program requires an up-front financial investment in technical studies to 
document land ownership and land use management plans, which poorer farmers cannot afford. GCF grant support 
will redirect INAB investment to support climate resilient practices such as agroforestry systems, thus greatly 
leveraging an existing resource to achieve resilience against aridity and drought, and contributing to the project’s 
sustainability. The GCF grants will support (1) trainings to extension technicians and INAB staff to better integrate 
agroforestry systems in their standards and requirements and strengthen the technical capacities and effective 
support to smallholder farmers (Activity 2.2.2) and (2) the planning and implementing of forest conservation 
interventions on 13,000 ha through reforestation and agroforestry (Activity 2.2.3). GCF grants will create long-term 
impacts by integrating a climate lens in the forest incentives program thus providing opportunities for smallholder 
farmers to access finance for climate resilient agricultural practices. To ensure sustainability and scalability the project 
will work in close collaboration with and will provide capacity building to the municipal forest agencies in order for 
them to prepare the management plans and the required technical information to access incentives  at very 
low/affordable price for the farmers.  
 
 
82. In conclusion, GCF support is essential to introduce climate resilient agricultural measures and agro-ecological 
landscape management, increase knowledge and institutional governance capacity to support vulnerable producers, 
and improve climate information services at scale. Without GCF involvement to reinforce and transform national 
efforts, address farmer capacity building requirements and to crowd-in investment, the GoG would not be able to 
invest in all the actions required to help farmers prepare for growing climate impacts. Without GCF support the majority 
of Guatemala’s small farmers would remain vulnerable to climate hazards that threaten their livelihoods. GCF grant 
support will provide the minimum concessional funding necessary to make the project viable. Concessional GCF 
support will address several market barriers (described in Guatemala’s NDC) including food security (with priority 
given to those actions dedicated to food production for self-consumption and subsistence), and the need for small-
scale farmers (and especially women and indigenous people) to access information, knowledge, and technology to 
address the challenges of climate change. 
 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 40 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 72 
 
83. The sustainability of the project is ensured by creating a virtuous circle where farmers who adopt climate resilient 
practices become more creditworthy and thus better able to make such investments in future. Sustainability is further 
ensured by involving the relevant actors since the beginning of its planning and throughout its implementation. These 
stakeholders include Government institutions involved in the project, particularly MARN, MAGA and INAB. 
Additionally, consultations were carried out at different levels of government in prioritized territories to define the most 
important issues (that were incorporated into the project) and working directly with them, promotes ownership of the 
actions by local actors. As such, these stakeholders will also participate financially to the execution of the project 
through their in-kind contributions (work days and working spaces in the communities). Project sustainability will be 
ensured in the long run through the following features of the project: 
 
Country ownership  
84. FAO projects implemented in Guatemala have always ensured the active engagement of decision-makers from 
partner institutions. The proposed project objectives and activities are fully aligned with the national policies on climate 
change and food security (See Section D.5). National institutions have been closely involved in project planning and 
will participate fully during project implementation. The project will receive policy support and access to financial and 
in-kind resources from MAGA and INAB. This will guarantee GoG commitment to systematically drive investment in 
adaptation beyond project lifetime, in the framework of the institutionalization of a National Plan for Adaptation to 
Climate Change with emphasis on the (agro) forestry sector.   
 
Engagement with local communities and institutions  
85. Private sector need to understand the importance of supplying improved varieties to the farmers, and also of being 
willing to pay higher prices for more sustainably produced items. The project has been designed to create enabling 
conditions for the effective and sustained participation of private sector actors (i.e. beneficiary farmers under 
components 1 and 2 and the private sector actors in the agriculture value chain such as fertilizer and seed providers, 
the wholesalers who buy coffee and cacao from the farmers) and public sector actors involved in the climate change 
and development agenda. The project has been formulated from the beginning in close consultation with and 
involvement of relevant government agencies, beneficiaries in farming communities and other stakeholders (i.e. 
COCODEs and CADER as well as newly formed Local Water Committees), in order to maximize buy-in and long-
term ownership. The proposed activities have been identified through a participatory approach engaging both women 
and men and based on community priorities (See Annexes 7 and 8).  In the case of O&M during the project 
implementation period the total cost will be USD 5,954,426 and will be covered by KOICA, GCF, and small producers 
Local producers, and organizations of small producers will be in charge or the operation and maintenance of the 
equipment provided by the project such as the cleaning, supervision of pipes, collection structures and water storage 
tanks, or the cleaning and revision of the macro-tunells (further details are provided in Annex 21. Operations & 
Maintenance) 
 
86. The proposed project will also focus on supporting the establishment of the Local Water Committees in the project 
area. The Local Water Committees will have a traditional water-sharing arrangement and will be responsible for 
monitoring irrigation channels and responsible use of water resources. This will be an important element of the overall 
response, especially to ensure long-term sustainability of the management of the catchment area. The formation and 
function of these Local Water Committees will seek formal recognition in the Decentralization Law of Guatemala. 
Identifying viable future revenue streams will be critical for the Local Water Communities to effectively fulfil their role. 
These are: payment for ecosystem services (PES) related to climate-resilient micro-watershed protection 
interventions to safeguard the sustainable supply of water quantity and quality, including water source protection, 
changes in the tax code, etc.)   
 
87. Farmer organizations will receive training to undertake the O&M of the equipment provided by the project beyond the 
project lifetime. To help with the strain on public resources, financial mechanisms and enhanced data collection for 
analyses are integrated into each of the outputs to support planning and sustainability.

=== PAGE 41 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 72 
 
64 Institutional arrangements will be defined to facilitate political processes between the central government, local 
governments and the project and will establish the roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder, in particular in relation to 
operations and maintenance of project infrastructure. 
88. The project will allow beneficiaries to access financing for adaptive practices. The investment cost of these 
technologies ranges per hectare and per year from US$266.85 (basic grain production systems) to US$465.5 (Cocoa 
production systems) in and USD 292.4 per hectare and per year in the case of the Family Gardens irrigation systems 
(see Annex 4). The beneficiaries targeted in the project are in a climate induced precarious situation with little ability 
to service loans. With better capacities to cope with climate change, beneficiaries will have access to financial 
services.  
89. Additionally, the creation of links to the private sector will open market niches to ensure the farmers’ production is 
purchased and access to national and local markets will increase farmers’ income, thus guaranteeing the 
continuous implementation of resilient practices.  
 
Capacity building for locally owned solutions on climate resilient agriculture and water resource management 
90. The  key objective of Component 3 is to strengthen the capacities of local institutions (such as the existing 
decentralized extension services for local farmers and producers, and the municipal forestry, water and gender offices 
and Local Water Committees) to plan for and implement climate-risk informed local water management solutions, 
adopt technologies and systems for climate resilient agricultural production, sustain climate resilience infrastructures 
and integrate climate information and advisories for water management ensuring their financial viability post-project. 
These local institutions are key to ongoing operations and maintenance of project infrastructure 64 after project 
implementation ends. 
 
91. Institutional arrangements have been defined to facilitate political processes between the central government, local 
governments and the project and to establish the roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder, in particular in relation 
to operations and maintenance of project infrastructure. More details on how the sustainability of operation and 
maintenance of acquired equipment will be guaranteed is explained in section C.6 of the feasibility study.  
 
Effective knowledge transfer and dissemination of information on benefits 
92. Under Component 3, the project will strengthen knowledge management at the local and national levels and 
systematize and disseminate the results of economic analyses of returns achievable from climate resilient 
investments. Knowledge and learning will be promoted through a participatory approach including the use of CADER 
which will provide spaces for farmers to share experiences, test and validate alternatives, and innovate in order to 
develop sets of adaptation measures that are farmer-driven.  
 
93. The uptake of climate services and alternative livelihood strategies by farmers will create conditions for investments 
by public and private sector actors. Farmers will see concrete benefits in a variety of ways, for example through better 
allocation of resources, increased productivity, and better access to markets. By delivering a tangible economic 
benefit to beneficiaries that adopt climate-resilient agriculture and efficient water management practices, the project 
will stimulate economic activity in Guatemala’s rural areas even under conditions of climate change.

=== PAGE 42 ===
C
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 72 
 
 
C. FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
29,837,169  
million USD ($)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(vi) 
Grants 
29,837,169  
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing information 
Total amount 
Currency 
36.84million 
million USD ($) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
KOICA 
Grant 
7  
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
MAGA 
In kind 
5.74 
million 
USD ($) 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
INAB 
Grant 
24.1 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
66.7 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max 0.5 page) 
94. The MAGA has estimated its in-kind support to a total US$5.74 million and will be 
provided mostly in the form of personnel for institutional involvement and support 
to the project (both from central and municipal offices) specifically integrating 
climate change aspect in the extension services.  Operational costs of field 
activities will be considered as well.    MAGA will invest the co-financing in the 
creation and support (providing salaries) of a climate change Task Force 
consisting of agricultural extension workers. The Task Force will promote the 
institutionalization of climate change in MAGA through thematic meetings and 
bring transformation of the extension services towards climate agricultural 
resilience. Additionally, MAGA will provide technical training on climate change 
and resilient agriculture.  The institution will further supervise the professionals for 
agricultural extension processes (extensionists). This in-kind contribution is 
supported by letters from MAGA. See Annex 13. 
 
95. In the project 7 years, INAB has formally committed at least US$24.1 million in the 
form of financial incentives under the PINPEP and PROBOSQUE forest incentive 
program to be invested in the project area during the life of the project, provided 
local producers can qualify. The forestry incentive program includes various 
production modalities, including agroforestry systems, timber plantations, forest 
restoration and management of natural forest for protection or production 
purposes. For local producers to access these resources they need to meet a 
series of technical requirements. Most of the beneficiary farmers do not have the 
capacity to apply for PINPEP and PROBOSQUE incentives and the GCF support 
will help to remove the technical barriers preventing them from accessing these 
incentives. The concessional grant co-financing from INAB will be combined with 
capacity building to farmers using GCF grant resources. GCF grant support will 
catalyse funds from PINPEP and PROBOSQUE for the benefit of project 
beneficiaries who would otherwise not access them. 
On the other hand, KOICA will co-finance the project with USD 7 million, with special 
focus on activities under Components 1 and 2. 
C.2. Financing by component

=== PAGE 43 ===
C
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 72 
 
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrume
nt 
Amount 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Component 1 
Implement 
climate 
resilient 
agricultural 
practices and 
enhance 
farmer’s 
livelihoods 
Output 1.1: 
Climate and 
agro-weather 
information 
improved and 
tailored to the 
needs of 
vulnerable 
smallholder 
farmers to 
inform 
adaptation 
measures 
3,628,043 
 
978,934 
Grants 
2,649,109 
Grants 
KOICA 
 
Output 1.2: 
Adaptation 
measures 
adopted to foster 
the resilience of 
coffee, cocoa 
and basic grain 
production 
systems 
18,785,389 
12,582,869 
Grants 
462,520 
 
5,740,000 
  
Grants 
 
In-kind 
contribution
s 
KOICA 
 
MAGA 
 
Output 1.3:  
Promotion of the 
resilience of 
livelihoods 
through 
productive 
diversification 
and market 
access 
3,133,833 
546,303 
Grants 
2,587,531 
Grants 
KOICA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Component 2. 
Supporting 
efficient water 
management 
for agriculture 
to reduce the 
impact of 
increased 
water scarcity 
Output 2.1: 
Community-led 
Water 
Management 
Plans developed 
and 
implemented at 
micro-basin level 
to promote 
climate 
resilience and 
enhance 
economic 
productivity 
1,130,222 
1,130,222 
Grants 
 
Grants 
 
 
Output 2.2: 
Landscapes are 
climate resilient 
and sustain 
critical 
ecosystems 
services for 
water availability 
in drought 
periods 
32,948,939 
8,520,497 
Grants 
328,442 
 
24,100,000  
Grants 
 
 
Grants 
KOICA 
 
 
INAB 
 
Output 2.3: 
Local water 
3,933,922 
3,933,922 
Grants 
 
Grants

=== PAGE 44 ===
C
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 72 
 
collection and 
irrigation farm 
systems 
implemented to 
secure water 
supply for 
resilient 
livelihoods 
Component 3: 
Improved 
enabling 
conditions for 
climate 
resilient 
livelihoods 
Output 3.1: 
Institutional 
systems 
strengthened to 
govern climate 
resilient 
initiatives at 
national and 
local level 
285,220 
285,220 
Grants 
 
 
 
 
Output 3.2: 
Strengthened 
knowledge 
transfer and 
awareness 
raising among 
institutions at 
national, sub-
national and 
local levels 
232,914 
232,914 
Grants 
Enter amount 
Choose an 
item. 
Click here to 
enter text. 
M&E Unit 
853,130 
853,130 
 
PMC Project Management 
Costs 
1,745,556 
 
773,158 
 
972,398      Grants KOICA 
 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
66,677,169 
29,837,169 
7,000,000 KOICA 
24,100,000 INAB 
5,740,000 MAGA 
 
 
Table below lists the project outputs under their corresponding GCF result areas and indicates the share of GCF 
contribution for each result area. 
 
Result area A1: Most vulnerable people, communities and regions 
GCF Contribution 
(USD) 
Share of GCF
contribution  
Output 1.1: Climate and agro-weather information improved and tailored to the needs of 
vulnerable smallholder farmers to inform adaptation measures  
978,934  
Output 1.2: Adaptation measures adopted to foster the resilience of coffee, cocoa and basic 
grain production systems  
12,582,869  
Output 1.3:  Promotion of the resilience of livelihoods through productive diversification and 
market access 
546,303  
Output 3.1: Institutional systems strengthened to govern climate resilient initiatives at national 
and local level 
285,220  
Output 3.2: Strengthened knowledge transfer and awareness raising among institutions at 
national, sub-national and local levels 
232,914  
Total Result area A1 
14,626,240 
52% 
Result area A2: Health and well-being, and food and water security 
 
 
Output 2.1: Community-led Water Management Plans developed and implemented at micro-
basin level to promote climate resilience and enhance economic productivity 
1,130,222  
Output 2.3: Local water collection and irrigation infrastructure implemented to secure water 
supply for resilient livelihoods  
3,933,922

=== PAGE 45 ===
C
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 72 
 
Total Result area A2 
5,064,144 
18% 
Result area A4: Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
  
Output 2.2: Landscapes are climate resilient and sustain critical ecosystems services for 
water availability in drought periods 
8,520,497  
Total Result area A4 
8,520,497 
30% 
  
  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF financing fund capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF financing fund technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
96. GCF resources will be invested in building capacity for climate-resilient, integrated solutions for water resource 
management and agriculture. The project promotes institutional planning and coordination across government 
officials and communities to overcome the sectoral and piecemeal approach to agriculture that had been adopted in 
the past. The project aims to enhance organizational capacity of farmers to plan for and implement resilient local 
agricultural and water management solutions, adopt technologies and systems for climate-smart agricultural 
production, ensuring their financial and human resource viability post-project. In particular, the activities that will fund 
capacity building are conducted at three governance levels: (1) Local level trainings for farmers and promoters 
(Activities 1.1.1, 1.2.2 and 3.2.3) and water communities (Activity 1.2.2); (2) Municipal level trainings (Activity 3.1.1 
and 3.2.2) and (3) National/institutional level trainings for extension services officers and technicians from INAB, 
MAGA and MARN (Activities 2.2.2 and 3.2.1). Capacity building to women will include improvement of capacities on 
how to apply for PINPEP incentive and also on how to apply for commercial loans. 
97. The project will develop and transfer a set of adaptation technologies and practices to ensure that household 
resilience is strengthened. A detailed description of the technologies is presented in Table 3. Activity 1.2.1 will 
provide  gender-sensitive technology which will include: (i) Improved, drought-resistant and open pollination basic 
grain seeds; (ii) Agrobiodiversity diversification, (iii) Improving the organic matter content and soil humidity retention 
capacity; (iv) Post-harvest management to prevent maize production losses; (v) Rain water harvesting for families’ 
productive systems; (vi) Improved, rust and drought-resistant coffee hybrids; (vii) Cacao pest and disease 
management practices; (viii) Coffee and cocoa plant spatial arrangement and architecture to minimize climate 
change effects forecasted for the region, among others.

=== PAGE 46 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 72 
 
 
 
D. EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
98. The proposed GCF project helps vulnerable farmers in Guatemala to adapt to the impacts of climate change 
through the adoption of climate resilient agriculture and water management practices. As a result, food security 
will be improved to enhance livelihood resilience in conditions of climate-induced droughts and heatwaves. 
Smallholder farmers will benefit from reduced vulnerability through the use of improved climate information 
systems, adoption of improved crop varieties and soil and water management techniques, as well as income 
diversification.  
 
99. The project prioritizes measures to address the resilience needs of small farmers - who have limited access to 
markets, financial instruments, agricultural and climate technological advice and who suffer from poor basic 
infrastructure – and of vulnerable groups such as women and indigenous people. The project will benefit 
116,353people will benefit directly (0.7% of the national population and 20% of the population in the target area), 
of which over 40% are women, who are vulnerable to drought and prolonged heatwaves. Around 583,146 farmers 
are expected to benefit indirectly (3.9% of the population). The beneficiaries of the project will be infra-
subsistence, subsistence and surplus smallholder farmers the majority of whom are indigenous people (see 
methodology for selection of beneficiaries in section C 3.2 of the Feasibility Study). The project aims to have 40% 
of women as part of the beneficiaries considering their important role in rural agriculture. The gender assessment 
and the action plan describe how all project activities have been designed considering the differing roles played 
and challenges faced by women and girls. Women’s active participation during the implementation stages will be 
promoted to favor inclusion and promote their contribution to the sustainability of food systems and the use and 
management of natural resources.   
 
100. 
The project has been designed to deliver on the adaptation goals set out in Guatemala’s National Climate 
Change Strategy and the NDC and to contribute to three of the GCF’s adaptation results areas:  
• 
GCF adaptation results area 1 (A1) – Increased resilience of vulnerable people, communities and regions: The 
project will increase the resilience of 115,434 vulnerable farmers (19,239 families) in the Departments of Alta 
and Baja Verapaz, Petén, Zacapa and Chiquimula of Guatemala against drought and heatwaves. Of this total, 
an estimated 13,800 people are adult women, who tend to be more vulnerable than men, and 23,600 are 
indigenous people. See section C.3.2: Estimate of the Number of Beneficiaries of the Feasibility Study for further 
details on the methodology used to estimate the number of beneficiaries). 
• 
GCF adaptation results area 2 (A2) – Increased resilience of health and well-being, and food and water security: 
The project will contribute to food and water security by encouraging resilient agricultural practices that reduce 
climate change related crop losses, by diversifying incomes, and by encouraging improved water management. 
The project works in an area where households already are facing significant food insecurity; the project will 
maintain or increase the numbers of food secure households in the project area despite climate impacts. Actions 
to increase access to safe water supply will ensure that 20,000 families will be water secure in the face of drought 
and heatwaves (See section C.3.2 of the feasibility study). 
• 
GCF adaptation results area 4 (A4) – Increased resilience of ecosystem and ecosystem services: The project 
will contribute to improving ecosystems and ecosystem services by promoting soil and water conservation, 
agroforestry activities, and appropriate basin-scale management measures. The project will help community 
members manage ecosystem services on a watershed level. As part of project co-financing the national forest 
incentive program PINPEP will provide funding for 13,090 hectares of climate resilient agroforestry measures.  
 
101. 
The project will also contribute to the following GCF outcomes:  
GCF Outcome (A5):  The proposed GCF project will engage Guatemalan institutions as implementing partners, 
enhancing the capacity of these actors, including those at the local governmental and community levels (extension 
services and farmer organizations), to promote climate change adaptation mainstreaming. Specific project activities 
are aimed at improving institutional coordination and local governance.  
GCF Outcome A6 and A7 Strengthened): Activities under Component 1 will enhance the generation and use of 
improved climate and weather information tailored to the needs of vulnerable smallholder farmers and will strengthen

=== PAGE 47 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 72 
 
 
 
their adaptive capacity and reduce their exposure to climate risks. The climate information systems are expected to 
directly inform adaptation measures undertaken during the project and beyond project closure. 
GCF Outcome A8: Awareness raising activities under component 3 will strengthen awareness of climate threats and 
risk reduction process. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
102. The proposed GCF project will lead to a paradigm shift away from an agricultural system that is highly sensitive 
to climate change to drought-resilient crop productive systems which ensure food security for infra-subsistence 
and subsistence farmers. Achieving reduced vulnerability and increased resilience requires a shift in agricultural 
practices in Guatemala. GCF funding will support agricultural transformation amongst the most vulnerable group 
of people. As a result of the project, agro-ecological landscapes and production systems in the Departments of 
Alta and Baja Verapaz, Petén, Zacapa and Chiquimula in Guatemala will be climate resilient and support 
vulnerable farmers’ adaptation and livelihood diversification measures amidst drought conditions. The proposed 
practices will improve soil humidity and introduce efficient irrigation systems and new seed varieties tolerant to 
droughts and heat waves to prevent the expected crop losses and help the country reach its target in terms of 
food security.  
 
103. The project will overcome information, technical, financial, social and institutional barriers that prevent a 
transition from conventional practices by delivering a package of proven and validated measures that improve 
the resilience of local production systems, increase the efficiency of agricultural water management at the basin 
and farm level, and improve inter-institutional coordination and local governance capacity. The project is also 
transformative in its focus on promoting women’s equitable representation in project activities and enabling 
women’s greater economic empowerment and participation in decision making. 
 
104. The paradigm shift will be achieved by adopting a systemic approach to replication and scaling-up of the 
project’s results. The project will set a transformational process in motion, and enable government, farmers and 
other stakeholders to continue driving this process – replication and scaling up– to achieve impact beyond the 
project investments and project closure. In order to achieve this, the project design integrates a range of 
institutional, financial and policy mechanisms. These mechanisms ensure that the replication and scaling-up 
pathways will achieve a Guatemala’s transformational towards climate resilient agricultural systems. The 
mechanisms include: 
 
- 
The project will strengthen technical and operational capacities of the agricultural extension 
services and technical staff from INAB at a national level and provincial levels to enable the 
replication of project best practices in other provinces in Guatemala. Thus, the project ensures that 
there is the needed capacity at local and provincial levels to promote the replication of the resilient 
agricultural practices through Farmer Field Schools, CADRs and climate centers beyond the project. The 
agricultural adaptation packages will be demonstrated on pilot farms and further promoted through MAGA 
extension services, farmer-to-farmer schools, producers’ organizations at a national scale.  
- 
The project will provide incentives to smallholder farmers to encourage the wider adoption of the 
agricultural adaptation practices. Smallholder farmers beneficiaries to the project will further increase 
local awareness of and the demand for these climate adaptation approaches to farming for a mass 
number of farmers, especially farmers of indigenous origin (Indigenous population accounts for 43.8% - 
8.7 million - of the total population).

=== PAGE 48 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 72 
 
 
 
- 
 Example of such incentives include: 
o 
Incentives for new farmers to access affordable and improved seeds and tree seedlings via 
established community-led seed banks and solidary networks (chain pass). The establishment of 
women-led seed banks in the form of micro enterprises will aim to collect, store, exchange and 
locally sell seeds such as coffee, cocoa, tree seedlings and basic grain seeds. This will address 
the need of smallholder farmers to purchase improved and affordable seeds at a more 
appropriate scale and schedule while contributing to improve livelihoods of women (Project 
Output 1.2). Demonstration of the effectiveness of the seed banks will encourage other 
communities / municipalities to create seed banks. Additionally, the project will facilitate the 
creation of a regional network of seedbanks to allow for exchange of seeds. 
o 
Enhancing cooperation and collaboration for replication of knowledge and practices through 
regional and national farmers’ networks as such as CADER that will support dissemination of 
lessons learned and promotion of the implemented approaches beyond the target areas.  
- 
The project will provide incentives for adopting integrated and climate resilient micro-basin 
management. The Local Water Committees will be responsible for the maintenance of the irrigation systems 
and oversee the water management activities in the micro-basin. These Committees will be registered as 
members of the Community Councils of Urban and Rural Development (COCODE), which belong to the 
National System of Development Councils of Guatemala. Once the Local Water Committees are registered 
with COCODE, they will be able to apply for funding from the regional budget thus ensuring financial 
sustainability of the irrigation systems. (Project Output 2.2) 
- 
The project will seek to catalyze institutional and policy change by demonstrating the effectiveness 
and efficiency of practices, technologies and models, thereby removing barriers to uptake by a 
larger number of practitioners. The project aims to mainstream project’s lessons learned in national 
climate change and agricultural strategies. Key policy and financial mechanisms supporting this pathway 
include: 
o 
Forest incentive programs (PINPEP and PROBOSQUE) will finance climate resilient practices 
such as agroforestry systems and will be widely accessible for smallholder farmers and women in 
particular, at a national scale. 
o 
The demonstration of effective adaptation measures will result in a portfolio of measures to be 
integrated as best practices in the National Action Plan on Climate Change (PANCC) and 
mainstreamed in the agricultural sector.  
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
105. 
The project will contribute to the achievement of several U.N. Sustainable Development Goals in Guatemala: 
SDG1, SDG2, SDG5, SDG6, SDG13, and SDG 15. More specifically, the project will deliver the following co-
benefits: 
 
106. 
Environmental co-benefits: Project activities will deliver a number of specific environmental benefits that 
include:  
a. soil conservation and reduction of erosion of approximately 250,000 tons during the seven years of the 
project;  
b. The restoration of degraded lands will reduce the runoff by 35 million cubic meters in the seven years of the 
project. 
c. improved tree cover in home gardens and river basin areas, which will have several interlinked 
environmental benefits, such as improved micro-climate, improved soil structure, and increased biodiversity; 
d. restoration of ecosystem integrity, functions and services; and  
e. conservation of biodiversity in home gardens, forests  
 
107. 
The project will improve habitat value and biological connectivity in the selected micro-basins and river buffer 
zones and enhance ecosystem services (e.g. protection of water sources, water cycle regulation, nutrient 
cycle regulation) as a result of the restoration of 13,090 ha of degraded lands. Reforestation of upstream 
watershed areas, protecting village forests and increasing tree cover in home gardens will yield multiple 
environmental benefits. Soil conservation measures introduced in upstream farms and home gardens will not

=== PAGE 49 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 72 
 
 
 
only prevent siltation of reservoirs and micro-infrastructure for water harvesting, but also increase soil 
moisture and improve ground-water yields by allowing greater percolation, thus sustaining river flows within 
and beyond the project areas. Improved water yields will have a positive impact on water availability during 
the dry season to both humans and wildlife. 
 
108. 
Climate change co-benefits: crop emission reductions through the reforestation activities will result in 
approximately 988,260 tons of CO2  over the lifespan of the project and 345,891 Ton CO2eq over the 7 years 
of the project implementation 
 
109. 
Economic co-benefits: The project will enhance the agricultural production of 19,239 smallholder farmer 
families (115,404 people) and increase productivity and incomes through improved access to stable water 
provision for irrigation, adoption of climate resilient agricultural practices, and improved market linkages. In 
addition, the building of micro-infrastructure for water will create seasonal employment in the targeted 
communities. This is estimated to generate altogether 12,500 work days which will benefit around 2,500 
families. Indirect employment opportunities will also be created, as the local economy will be stimulated by 
the project activities. The project will support the community productive assets (e.g. soil and water 
conservation measures, resilient seed nurseries, coffee and cocoa processing tools, etc.) with multiple 
benefits. Increased agricultural activity, resulting from enhanced provision of climate-oriented technical 
support and inputs such as drought-tolerant beans and maize varieties and high value tree crops, will result 
in surplus production for income generation. Moreover, the project proposes to substantially improve decision 
making among farmers by providing climate information coupled with a greater understanding of climate 
related food security and climate risk management issues. This will allow farmers to rationalize their inputs 
and assess cultivation options for the coming months, preventing undue losses of crops and inputs.  
 
110. 
Social co-benefits: Through training and through experience gained during project implementation, farmers 
will increase their capacity to engage with government officials and the private sector in the agriculture value 
chain. By working in partnership with community groups, the project will create significant social capital 
through co-designing and co-managing the agricultural adaptation strategies. The micro-basin water 
management plans will act as a conflict management instrument for the use of water resources; thus, the 
project will indirectly promote social cohesiveness among upstream and downstream villages. Moreover, by 
ensuring sustained water availability in drought conditions, the project will ease the pressure on farmer 
households, especially on women-owned farms and house gardens. Additionally, the project will result in 
health and nutritional improvement for the participating families. This is an indirect benefit of increases in crop 
diversity aimed at reducing exposure to the risks of climate change-related crop failure.  
 
111. 
Gender-sensitive development impact: The project will result in positive outcomes related to access 
resources, improve livelihoods, and income generation for women through the various project interventions 
(especially Output 1.2 and 2.2). The project will engage women in project planning, investment and decision 
making from the start. With opportunities to generate additional income, women will be more likely to respond 
to incentives that address their family’s basic needs, such as better health and nutrition, linking to agriculture 
and food security improvements. Women will benefit from training and educational activities related to climate 
change, agriculture, water management, leadership, entrepreneurship and decision making. More 
information on gender-sensitive impacts can be found in Part I of the Annex 8. 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
112. 
Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects 
Guatemala is the second most vulnerable country to climate change in Latin America and the 11th 
worldwide. 65 & 66 Around 76% of the rural population and 79% of the indigenous people live in poverty 
 
65 Eckstein, Künzel & Schäfer, 2018. GLOBAL CLIMATE RISK INDEX 2018. Who Suffers Most From Extreme Weather Events? Weather-related Loss 
Events in 2016 and 1997 to 2016. Bonn: Germanwatch e.V. Available at: https://germanwatch.org/en/download/2043  
66 Mapplecroft, 2014. Indice de vulnerabilidad y adaptación al cambio climático en la región de América Latina y Caribe. Banco de Desarrollo de 
América Latina. Corporación Andina de Fomento.

=== PAGE 50 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 72 
 
 
 
conditions.67 Poverty among the indigenous population is 1.7 times higher than among the non-indigenous 
population.68 Chronic malnutrition affects 53% of children in rural areas and 61% of children from indigenous 
origin. Rural production systems are highly dependent on rain fed agriculture, therefore climate change 
threatens to worsen an already untenable situation. Poor farmers rely on family labour and have limited 
access to the human, physical and financial resources required for adaptation.  
 
113. 
Vulnerable farmers are at the greatest risk of being pushed into conditions of extreme food insecurity due to 
climate change. Climate change projections show that the project’s implementation areas are expected to be 
the worst affected areas in the country. The effects of climate change include reduced precipitation, increased 
numbers and duration of heat waves, decreased agriculture productivity levels, and decreased water 
availability.69 Land is primarily used for agriculture, due to the lack of conservation practices and poor soil 
management, 3.9 million ha (36%) are degraded with high levels of soil erosion. 70 Such management 
practices and loss of forest cover reduce the landscape's capacity to regulate the hydrological cycle. The 
baseline scenario will result in significant water scarcity as climate change affects the region in the long term. 
  
114. 
Due to the predominantly male labour migration, rural population are mostly women, who face structural 
difficulties in accessing finance. They traditionally manage household water and family gardens and are thus 
on the frontline of managing the impacts of reduced water availability and crop failure. In the project area, 
women are particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts. This poses threats to their families’ food 
security, especially in periods of prolonged droughts. Further information regarding women’s vulnerability to 
climate change is presented in Part I of the Annex 8.  
 
115. 
The project design is informed by the outcomes of a series of stakeholder consultations at national and 
local levels. At local level there were eight stakeholder consultations with 165 representatives of indigenous 
organizations and 184 persons representing the communities (women - 104 and men - 80). The outcomes 
of these consultations provided key information regarding specific needs of men and women to better adapt 
to climate change and highlighted the importance of integrating traditional knowledge in the adaptation 
solutions. At a national level a number of work meetings have been convened between FAO, MAGA, 
MARN and INAB to define the project design. In March 2019 took place the validation workshop for the 
RELIVE project, which resulted in technical inputs regarding information gaps and identification institutional 
coordination mechanisms for knowledge transfer. The project proposal was approved by all stakeholders. 
Details on the consultation process and outcomes is included in Annex 7. 
 
116. 
The project will address the needs of the most vulnerable groups identified to be the infra-subsistence and 
subsistence farmers who are highly dependent on rain-fed agriculture and suffer food insecurity due to 
climate-induced prolonged drought periods (see Section C.3.4 from the Feasibility Study). The project will 
build their resilience through tested climate resilient soil and water management practices and landscape 
restoration practices. Climate resilient production and livelihood diversification strategies are expected to 
reduce production losses and improve food security of the beneficiaries. At the same time, the project will 
generate capacities among the rural population and public institutions to incorporate climate information into 
territorial planning to improve adaptive capacities. It will further promote improved coordination and 
knowledge sharing among national and local actors to create enabling conditions for resilience of smallholder 
farmers. 
 
Absence of alternative sources of financing and need for strengthening institutions and capacity 
 
 
67 Pons, Brincker & Castellanos, 2018. Asegurando la resiliencia ante el CC en los paisajes Mayas de Petén, Verapaces y el Corredor Seco. Producto 
1. Documento de análisis de los efectos del Cambio climático a nivel nacional y local. Documento de consultoría. Guatemala. 
68 INE, 2015. República de Guatemala: Encuesta Nacional de Condiciones de Vida 2014. Principales resultados. Guatemala: INE. 
69 INSIVUMEH, 2018. Variabilidad y Cambio Climático en Guatemala. Guatemala: Instituto Nacional de Sismología, Vulcanología, Meteorología e 
Hidrología (INSIVUMEH). 
70 Mesa de Restauración del Paisaje Forestal de Guatemala, 2015.

=== PAGE 51 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 72 
 
 
 
117. 
While Guatemala is a medium-income country and has the largest economy in Central America, it also has 
one of Latin America’s highest rates of inequality and among the highest rates of poverty and malnutrition, 
especially in areas with high percentage of indigenous population. Public investment is essential to overcome 
poverty and climate change vulnerability; however, it is constrained by lack of resources. As described in 
Section B.4 the current budgetary situation of the GoG limits its ability to invest in building climate resilience 
for family farmers. 
 
118. 
Additionally, the Government of Guatemala has limited capacity to mobilise sustainable, local-level public 
financing for sustainable land and water resource management. It lacks adequate financial resources and 
the technical capacity to implement specific projects to promote climate resilient agriculture and restore 
degraded lands. The lack of resources also limits the ability of the government to collect, manage and 
disseminate agro-weather information that is needed to guide the government’s and farmers’ decisions. The 
MAGA extension service, SNER, is constrained by workforce and resource shortages. 
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
119. 
The project has been designed to align with national and sub-national development policies, strategies and 
plans on development, climate change and food security in Guatemala. A summary of the project alignment 
and contribution to government priorities is presented in Table 3. 
 
National climate strategy 
120. 
Guatemala’s legal framework on climate change actions is led by the Climate Change Framework Law 
(LMCC). The LMCC regulates the reduction of vulnerability, the mandatory adaptation to the effects of climate 
change, and the mitigation of greenhouse gases (Decree 7-2013). The implementation of the LMCC is via 
the National Climate Change Action Plan (PANCC). The project is aligned with PANCC and specifically 
supports several adaptation objectives.71 For detailed description on the Legal Framework on Climate 
Change in Guatemala see Section A.2 of the Feasibility Study. 
 
Alignment with existing policies such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs 
121. 
The project is aligned with Guatemala’s NDC commitments which include as adaptation priorities the 
following sectors: human health, agriculture, livestock, and food security – with priority given to those actions 
dedicated to food production for self-consumption and subsistence, forestry, conservation and management 
of strategic ecosystems, integrated approach to water resources, and a risk-reduction integrated approach. 
On adaptation, the NDC prioritises actions that have a direct effect on food production, mainly for self-
consumption and subsistence in priority areas and provide producers with the necessary tools and technology 
to deal with climate change and encourage the adjustment of agro-productive systems to the changing 
environment of the climate and its derivations. RELIVE project directly contributes to abovementioned 
adaptation priorities. The project will contribute specifically to continuity in implementation and compliance 
with forest management policy instruments. Chief among these are forest recovery, restoration, 
management, production and protection in Guatemala (PROBOSQUE, Decree 02-2015), the Forest Incentive 
Program (PINFOR) and the Forest Incentive Program for Holders of Small Tracts of Land suitable for Forestry 
or Agro-Forestry (PINPEP, the National Strategy for Restoration of the Forest Landscape, the Strategy on 
the Links among Forests, Industry and the Market and the National Strategy for Combating Illegal Logging. 
 
122. 
The project is also aligned with and will learn from the NAP-Agriculture - Integration of Agriculture into the 
National Adaptation Plan (see Section A.2 from Feasibility Study). NAP-Agriculture aims to improve irrigation, 
 
71 1) Strengthening early warning systems on food and nutritional security and harvest forecasting for vulnerable farmlands; 2) Providing technical 
assistance to agriculture and livestock producers to implement adaptation and water and soil conservation practices; 3) Increased food productivity 
through adaptation activities to reduce the vulnerability of families affected by climate change and guarantee their food and nutritional security; 4) 
Reduction of losses in the agricultural sector caused by climate events; 5) Promoting the establishment of agroforestry systems in areas repeatedly 
affected by the effects of climate change; and 6) Sustainable management of forest ecosystems to reduce vulnerability to climate change.

=== PAGE 52 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 72 
 
 
 
adaptation to climate change in the country's agricultural sector and the institutional capacities through the 
development or improvement of policy and planning instruments at the national, sectoral and local levels. 
Finally, the project is aligned with the forest policy as it will contribute to the continuity of the implementation 
and compliance of forest management policy instruments such as the PINPEP. Further information related 
to the national legal and political framework is provided in section A.4 of the Feasibility Study.  
 
Table 8: Project alignment with government priorities 
Project Components 
NDC 
PANCC 
LMCC 
Forest 
Policy 
Component 1.  Implementing climate resilient agricultural practices and 
enhancing farmers’ livelihoods   
X 
X 
X 
 
Component 2. Supporting efficient water management for agriculture to reduce 
the impact of increased water scarcity 
X 
X 
 
X 
Component 3: Improved enabling conditions for climate resilient livelihoods 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
GCF country program and other GCF projects in Guatemala 
123. 
The Country Programming Framework (CPF) 2017-2021 identifies the support of national efforts to respond 
to climate change impacts as a priority and defines three priority areas: a) Food and nutritional security; b) 
Territorial rural development; and c) climate change adaptation and mitigation to support resilience and 
integrated management of renewable energies. The RELIVE project is directly contributing to the three 
priority areas with particular focus on addressing the specific needs of indigenous populations. While there 
are other GCF approved projects in Guatemala, RELIVE is the only project that directly benefits the 
indigenous populations, which are considered to be the most vulnerable to climate change in the country.  
RELIVE project will complement projects currently in implementation in the country such as the GCF - funded 
project “Building livelihood resilience to climate change in the upper basins of Guatemala’s highlands” (2019 
– 2026) implemented by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and will seek synergies 
with two GCF projects by CABEI – (1) Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the 
Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic (under review) and (2) 
Productive Investment Initiative for Adaptation to Climate Change (CAMBio II) (approved).  RELIVE project 
will generate lessons learned and best practices for agricultural resilience and promote their replication in 
CABEI project areas. Additionally, RELIVE will learn from the financial mechanisms promoted by CABEI 
projects for the specific adaptation solutions and beneficiary groups and explore the suitability of such 
mechanisms for the project area. Section B.1 (para 23) provides a map and description of the synergies and 
complementarity between these projects and RELIVE project. Section A.4 of the feasibility study describes 
how the proposed project will learn from these projects and coordinate with them.  
 
Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver 
124. 
The FAO Guatemala country office was established on 1964. FAO has been supporting the Guatemalan 
Government in the development of agricultural, food and nutritional security, climate change and sustainable 
management of natural resources policies, through a territorial rural development approach and through the 
construction of institutional capacities in such issues. (See Section A5 of the feasibility study for more details).  
 
125. 
FAO Guatemala has implemented projects on: (1) production and post-harvest management; (2) processing 
and commercialization of agricultural and forestry products; (3) fisheries development; (4) use and 
conservation of natural resources; (5) sustainable rural development; (6) food and nutritional security; (7) 
poverty reduction; and (8) strengthening of the legal framework. FAO Guatemala is authorized to perform all 
financial, administrative, and managerial processes for the execution of projects funded by different donors.

=== PAGE 53 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 72 
 
 
 
126. 
Both MAGA and INAB are mandated to coordinate and oversee the implementation of the project. They have 
extensive past experience in executing large foreign funded projects and are also currently managing an 
ongoing portfolio of foreign and government funded development projects.  
 
Role of the National Designated Authority 
127. 
The GCF NDA is the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARN). MARN requested FAO to 
develop the project, and has been actively involved in its design, as well as in the project validation workshops 
The project enjoys strong political support from MARN which will have a leading role in the project as the 
chair of the Project Steering Committee and the Technical Committee. This will ensure that the project is 
being implemented according to the proposed objectives and are aligned with the overarching climate 
national policies.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
128. 
The total Project cost is USD 66.7  millions, comprising USD 36.8 millions of co-financing (USD 24.1 million 
in the form of financial incentives under the INAB/PINPEP and PROBOSQUE programs, 5.7 million in the 
form of in-kind contribution from MAGA and USD 7 million in the form of grants from KOICA) and USD 29.8 
millions of GCF funding in the form of grants. This corresponds to a co-financing ratio of 1:1.1.  
 
129. 
The request for grant financing is justified by i) the needs of the recipient, which includes some of the poorest 
farming communities in Guatemala (mainly of indigenous descendent), and ii) lack of viable climate resilience 
alternative measures. Even though Guatemala has the status of upper-middle-income country72, it is one of 
the poorest countries in the region73 with the most unequal distributions of income74 and is marked by social 
indicators that often fall below those of countries with far lower per capita income. More than half of 
Guatemala’s population lives in rural areas 75, and of that 70 % live in poverty. Indigenous people in 
Guatemala (main beneficiaries of this project76) account for 43.8% (8.7 million) of the total population and 
79% of these communities live in poverty. As a result, indigenous communities are often excluded from the 
political and social mainstream, making this group particularly vulnerable to climate change. The project will 
benefit the indigenous population by providing opportunities for higher net incomes at household level and 
reinforcing the opportunity for a self-financed investment in climate resilient agriculture in a long run. Thus, 
indigenous communities will become less risk-averse to climate change and have access to equal 
opportunities to improve their livelihoods. 
 
130. 
The Government of Guatemala and in particular the Ministry of Agriculture does not offer financial 
mechanisms that serve smallholder farmers in poverty conditions. With no access to banking services and 
producer credit, a grant is the only option to address the underlying barriers to equitable access to financial 
resources that hinder farmers’ resilience. 
 
131. 
The GCF support in the form of grant is a key element to reduce market barriers that are currently affecting 
vulnerable farmers (See Section B.2 for more details on the market barriers):  
• 
The project will serve to decrease information asymmetries, by demonstration and dissemination to other farmers 
and public institutions for which the set of environmentally-friendly and climate resilient agricultural practices 
constitute a practical and viable alternative for adaptive capacity, strengthening food security and increasing 
production. This is a key element of the project, as it is expected to be replicated in other areas of the country.  
• 
The project will support smallholder farmers with the elaboration of the technical studies requested to access the 
forest incentives under PINPEP. 
 
72 https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups 
73 Overall, 62.46% of the population in Guatemala is poor and 29.6% lives in extreme poverty. 
74 2016 Guatemala Gini Index 48.3, and Latina America Gini index 46.2 
75 http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4124e.pdf 
76 The project will work with the Q'eqch, Achi, Poqomchi and Chori Indigenous ethnic groups

=== PAGE 54 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 72 
 
 
 
• 
The project will provide access of smallholders to public services, such as extension, technical assistance, 
innovation and knowledge. Also, with the project it is expected that farmers will have access to quality inputs, 
such as quality seeds.  
• 
The project will give value to non-market ecosystem services through the restoration of degraded areas. The 
project will create positive environmental externalities for services that don’t have markets, such as erosion 
prevention.  
• 
GCF grant support will provide the minimum concessional funding necessary to make the project viable. 
Concessional GCF support will address several market needs including food security, and the need for small-
scale farmers to access information, knowledge, and technology to address the challenges of climate change. 
 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness of the project 
 
132. 
The economic and financial analyses of RELIVE indicate that it is a strong project with the capacity to create 
economic value chains for the society, with due consideration to the productive, environmental and climatic 
impacts.  The marketable (agricultural production) and non-marketable benefits (the three ecosystem 
services considered) are aggregated to obtain the overall estimation of the economic value of the project, 
considering the total investment cost of US$66.7 million (US$29.8 million from Green Climate Fund, US$7 
from KOIKA, US$5.7 million from MAGA and US$24.1 from INAB). This corresponds to a co-financing ratio 
of 1:1.1. 
 
133. A financial analysis was performed to evaluate the results of four adaptation packages in a midterm horizon: 10 
years.   
 
134. The results show that only Basic Crops presents a positive incremental net present value in a midterm analysis 
of 10 years horizon. The medium-term profitability indicators in 3 of 4 packages are negative in financial terms, 
which is due to the high initial investment and to the fact that the results of the system improvements are observed 
gradually over time. 
135. If the project lifespan is considered (20 years) all adaptation packages generate financial benefits to rural families 
that are higher than costs. The IRR ranges from 15% to 22%. This means that families will have new income 
generating opportunities, equivalent to US$14/ha and US$177/ha per year as a result of the adoption of the 
agronomical practices that also promote restoration of the landscape and provision of ecosystem services. The 
difference between 10 and 20 years analysis is due to the fact that the adaptation packages present incremental 
negative cash flows during first 4 years for cocoa, coffee and family gardens, but from then on cash flows are in 
all cases significantly superior to the without-adaptation option. This result is not unexpected since the benefits 
of the restoration of degraded landscape will be evident at a longer period.  In addition, both operational centers 
to add value to coffee and cocoa are financially viable. The EFA considers the benefits generated from these 
investments in technology packages and takes into account all investment costs of the project, from all sources 
of financing. 
136. 
It should be noted that RELIVE will contribute to strengthening the resilience of other ecosystem services 
whose value has not been quantified: biodiversity conservation, genetic resources conservation, medicinal 
resources and recreation. Nor was possible to quantify important social benefits that have a direct impact on 
the well-being of families, such as the impact of food production on family health and the foregone time to 
fetch water. None of these important benefits was possible to quantify in the economic analysis due to lack 
of information..77 (For more details see Annex 3: Economic/Financial Analysis). 
 
77 In a 20 years horizon, all adaptation packages are financially viable with IRR that ranges from 15% to 22%. This means that families will 
have new income generating opportunities, equivalent to US$14/ha and US$177/ha per year as a result of the adoption of the agronomical 
practices that also promotes restoration of the landscape and provision of ecosystem services. Also, both operational centers to add value 
to coffee and cocoa are financially viable. 
67 Examples of initiative includes the one developed by the “Consejo Nacional de Áreas Protegidas” (CONAP) in the protected area 
Sipacate-Naranjo, Defensores de la Naturaleza in the river basin of Río Lato.

=== PAGE 55 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
137. 
The economic net present value per beneficiary integrates two key aspects: (1) the majority of beneficiaries 
are located in remote areas and therefore they often remain neglected by projects due to higher costs for the 
interventions and (2) the majority of the beneficiaries are indigenous communities and the introduction of 
innovative climate resilient agricultural practices needs to be carefully tailored and translated in local 
languages. These two aspects incur additional costs to the project interventions.  
 
 
138. 
The effectiveness of the proposed adaptation solutions is based on evidence and has been validated in a 
number of FAO projects at varying scale in the Central American region and worldwide (See section B5 of 
Feasibility Study). This project builds on those lessons of cost-effectiveness and efficiency of delivery. The 
project will build synergies with other projects in the same geographical location and working on same issues 
as water resource development and management, forest management and climate resilience to maximize 
effectiveness (For more information on these projects see Section B4 of Feasibility Study).  
 
139. 
Costs of the infrastructure investments have been estimated using comparable benchmarks from other 
projects.   The micro-infrastructure for water harvesting can support varying number of farm-level irrigation 
systems. On average the cost of the construction and the implementation of the micro-infrastructure and the 
irrigation systems, is about in USD 5,000 (more details in Section C.6 of the feasibility study). Average costs 
for implementation of adaptation practices (agroforestry, USD 2,000) and construction of community seed 
nurseries (USD 4,000), infrastructure for the processing of coffee (USD 1,500) and cocoa (USD 83,000) have 
been derived from the benchmarks of other projects discussed in Section A4 of Feasibility Study.  
 
140. 
Finally, community participation in the implementation and operational stages will ensure cost-effectives of 
the investments. Previous experience shows that in some instances (e.g. for river basin protection) labor is 
usually volunteered. 78 The micro-basing water management plans will be managed by the community, 
thereby reducing the operation and maintenance costs for the governance in the long term. Similarly, the 
community contribution to the management of hydro-meteorological stations can make the maintenance cost-
effective because this will reduce the inputs (travel, salaries and accommodation) from the project.  
 
Application of best practices 
141. 
This project includes the uptake of agricultural management and ecosystem restoration measures to improve 
climate resilience of smallholder farmers. All of the proposed measures have been extensively tested through 
other FAO projects and research studies in comparable conditions in Guatemala and elsewhere in the region 
(See section A.5 of the feasibility study). The gender-sensitive agricultural adaptation packages promoted in 
Output 1.2 (see table 3) as well as the diversification of the productive systems in Output 1.3 were developed 
based on lessons learned from experiences in Latin America and the Caribbean on solutions for climate 
resilient agriculture for food security.79  The resilient agricultural practices in Output 1.2 were further tailored 
through a preliminary option analysis conducted by CATIE and described in detail in Section C.6 of the 
Feasibility Study. The project will also build on the lessons learned and best practices developed through the 
IDB project “Recovery of the Natural Capital of the Dry Corridor and Climate Adaptation of its Population”  
and the project “Adaptation to Climate Change in the Dry Corridor of Guatemala” implemented in the same 
targeted project area.  
 
142. 
RELIVE seeks to strengthen the farmer ownership of the agricultural resilient practices by encouraging them 
to cover for O&M costs of the equipment and productive infrastructure. This approach was used by the project 
“Reducción de Vulnerabilidades para Contribuir al Desarrollo Rural en cinco Municipios de las Cuencas de 
los Ríos Coatán y Alto Suchiate en el Departamento de San Marcos” implemented from 2010 to 2014 
 
 
79 AECID, 2018. Lecciones Aprendidas sobre sobre agricultura resiliente al cambio climático para contribuir a la seguridad alimentaria y al derecho a 
la 
alimentación 
en 
América 
Latina 
y 
el 
Caribe. 
URL: 
http://www.aecid.es/Centro-
Documentacion/Documentos/Publicaciones%20AECID/Agricultura_resiliente.pdf

=== PAGE 56 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 72 
 
 
 
by. Lessons learned from this project have been incorporated in two on-going projects: “Practicas resilientes” 
and “Mesoamerica sin hambre”.  In these two projects, smallholder farmers were provided with macro-tunnels 
facilities and rainwater collection bins for drip irrigation. RELIVE draws on lessons learned from these projects 
aiming to replicate sustainability aspects that are at the same time accompanied by extension and capacity 
building activities (workshops and trainings) to strengthen local technical capacities and allow producers to 
be able to operate and maintain the equipment not only during the life of the project but also after the project 
finishes.

=== PAGE 57 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 72 
 
 
 
E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes 
as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both. 
☐ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.2. Core indicator targets 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A. 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq 
Lifetime 
Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation only) 
(a) Total project financing 
    66,677,169    USD    
(b) Requested GCF amount  
    29,837,169     USD 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
_____  t CO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
_____   Choose an item. / t 
CO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed 
(e = b / c) 
_____   Choose an item. / t 
CO2eq 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation only) 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
36,840,000   USD 
(g) Public source co-financed 
36,840,000   USD 
(h) Private source finance leveraged  
                     USD 
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
1.23    
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
1.23  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
                      
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
116,353  
40% of female 
Indirect 
 583,146 
 35% of female 
For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 17. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
 0.7%   (Expressed as %) of country(ies) – 69,242 males and 
46,162 females 
 
Indirect 
 3.39%   (Expressed as %) of country(ies)   
For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.

=== PAGE 58 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 72 
 
 
 
E.3. Fund-level impacts 
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and corresponding indicators 
from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected impact result. The result 
areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above. Add rows as needed.  
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of the 
most vulnerable 
people, 
communities and 
regions 
A1.2 Number of males 
and females benefiting 
from the adoption of 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.) 
 
 
National 
livelihood 
survey80 
0 
Total = 40,402 
farmers 
Female = 16,160 
farmers 
Male = 24,241 
farmers 
Total = 115,434 
farmers 
Female = 
46,174 farmers 
Male = 69,260 
farmers 
Adequate uptake of 
improved practices 
and replicated 
traditional practices 
secures buy-in from 
communities and 
long- term 
commitment to 
promoted climate 
resilient actions  
 
A2.0 Increased 
resilience of health 
and well-being, 
and food and 
water security 
A2.2 Number of food 
secure households (in 
areas/periods at risk of 
climate change 
impacts) 
National 
livelihood 
survey81 
 
0 
3,000 food secure 
households  
6,195 food 
secure 
households  
 
Absence of extreme 
natural disasters 
and economic 
shocks affecting 
yields and 
household 
economie; migration 
patterns do not 
significantly affect 
the number and 
status of 
households. 
 
A2.3 Number of males 
and females with 
yearround access to 
reliable and safe water 
supply despite climate 
shocks and stresses 
 
National 
livelihood 
survey82 
0 
Total = 5,000 
farmers 
Female = 2,000 
farmers 
Male = 3,000 
farmers 
Total = 14,700 
farmers  
 
Female = 5,880 
farmers 
 
Male = 8,820 
farmers 
 
A4.0 Improved 
resilience of 
ecosystems and 
ecosystem 
services 
A4.1 Coverage/scale 
of ecosystems 
protected and 
stregnthened in 
response to climate 
variability and change 
 
Annual Forest 
Statistics 
Bulletin83  
Catalogue of 
GIS maps 
 
0 
6,500 ha  
 
13,000 ha  
No perverse 
incentives (policies, 
prices, monoculture 
industries that affect 
natural capital) are 
introduced in the 
project area. 
 
The project’s area is 
not seriously 
disrupted by a major 
climate extreme 
event affecting 
restored areas. 
 
 
 
 
 
80 The National Livelihood Survey is conducted each 3 years by the National Statistics Institute 
81 The National Livelihood Survey is conducted each 3 years by the National Statistics Institute 
82 The National Livelihood Survey is conducted each 3 years by the National Statistics Institute 
83 The Forest Statistics Bulletin is prepared and published by the Forest Information System in Guatemala (SIFGUA in Spanish)

=== PAGE 59 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
84 The meeting report is part of an institutional reporting process coordinated by the Inter-Institutional Coordination Group and presented at 
the National Climate Change Roundtable 
85 The National Livelihood Survey is conducted each 3 years by the National Statistics Institute 
86 The baseline for the selected crops is derived from: FAO/CATIE (2018).  
E.4. Fund-level outcomes 
 
Expected 
Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baselin
e 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
for climate-
responsive 
planning and 
development 
A5.2 Number and level 
of effective 
coordination 
mechanisms  
Inter-ministerial 
meeting report84 
 
0 
1 national water 
management 
and climate 
change inter-
ministerial 
working group  
1 national water 
management 
and climate 
change inter-
ministerial 
working group  
Constructive 
relations for 
collaboration 
between 
Government 
agencies, 
municipalities and 
social organizations 
to refine policy, 
regulatory and 
planning 
frameworks.  
A6.0 Increased 
generation and 
use of climate 
information in 
decision-making 
A6.1 Use of climate 
information 
products/services in 
decision-making in 
climate sensitive 
sectors  
Interim 
Evaluation and 
Final Evaluation 
report 
Published 
agrometeorologi
cal bulletins 
0 
Total = 8,000 
farmers using 
climate 
information 
products in 
decision-making 
to use resilient 
agricultural 
practices  
 
Female = 3,200  
farmers using 
climate 
information 
products in 
decision-making 
to use resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
 
Male = 4,800  
farmers using 
climate 
information 
products in 
decision-making 
to use resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
Total = 19,239  
farmers using 
climate 
information 
products in 
decision-making 
to use resilient 
agricultural 
practices   
 
Female = 7,696  
farmers using 
climate 
information 
products in 
decision-making 
to use resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
 
Male = 11,543  
farmers using 
climate 
information 
products in 
decision-making 
to use resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
Relevant national 
organisations are 
willing to invest to 
provide climate 
services to the 
required standards 
and number of 
people  
Beneficiaries are 
interested in climate 
information  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity 
and reduced 
exposure to 
climate risks 
A7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and public-
sector services of 
Fund-supported tools 
instruments, strategies 
and activities to 
respond to climate 
change and variability 
Interim 
Evaluation and 
Final Evaluation 
report 
National 
livelihood 
survey85 
Maize:86  
1.3 – 3.8 
ton/ha 
Beans:  
0.74 
ton/ha 
Coffee: 
1.05 ton 
/ha 
Cocoa: 
275 
kg/ha  
Increased 
agricultural yield 
(30%) due to 
watershed 
restoration and 
adaptation 
practices  
Increased 
agricultural yield 
(50%) due to 
watershed 
restoration and 
adaptation 
practices 
 
The agro- 
meteorological 
network managed 
by the 
Meteorological 
Institute is 
strengthened and 
provides adequate 
coverage in the 5 
targeted 
municipalities / 
project sites. 
      
A7.2 Number of males 
and females reached 
by [or total geogrpahic 
Interim 
Evaluation and 
0 
Total = 15,000  
 
Female = 6,000 
Total = 41,900

=== PAGE 60 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
 
87 The Semi-annual Progress Report is a reporting process performed by FAO. 
88 The Annual Progress Report is a reporting process performed by the EE institutions (MAGA and INAB) as part of their institutional 
reporting. 
90 MAGA, 2012.  
coverage of] climate-
related early warning 
systems and other risk 
reduction measures 
established/strengthen
ed 
Final Evaluation 
report 
 
Guatemala 
National 
Meteorological 
Institute report 
 
 
Male = 9,000 
Female = 
16,790 
 
Male = 25,100 
A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of 
climate threats and 
risk-reduction 
processes 
A8.1 Number of males 
and females made 
aware of climate 
threats and related 
appropriate responses 
 
 
Interim 
Evaluation and 
Final Evaluation 
report 
 
Training report 
 
 
0  
Total = 81,447 
people 
Female = 
32,578 
Male = 48,869 
Total = 116,353 
people 
Female = 
46,541 
Male = 69,812 
Farmers remain 
interested and 
actively participate 
in project activities  
 
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators 
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre-existing 
conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows 
as needed. 
Expected 
Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
Component 1:    Implementing climate resilient agricultural practices and enhancing farmer livelihoods 
1.1 Climate and 
agro-weather 
information improved 
and tailored to the 
needs of vulnerable 
smallholder farmers 
to inform adaptation 
measures 
 
Number male and 
female farmers use 
climate information to 
inform agricultural 
practices 
Semi-Annual 
Project 
Progress 
Report87  
 
Annual Project 
Progress 
Report88 
 
Interim 
Evaluation and 
Final 
Evaluation 
report 
 
 
0 
Total = 8,000 
farmers  
 
Female = 
3,200 farmers 
 
Male = 4,800 
farmers 
Total = 19,239 
farmers 
 
Female = 7,696 
farmers 
 
Male = 11,543 
farmers 
Farmers remain 
interested and actively 
participate in project 
activities  
 
1.2 Adaptation 
measures adopted 
to foster the 
resilience of coffee, 
cocoa and basic 
grain production 
systems  
 
% of farmers (gender 
desegregated) adopt 
climate resilient 
agricultural practices 
on their fields  
Semi-Annual 
Project 
Progress 
Report  
 
Annual Project 
Progress 
Report 
 
Interim 
Evaluation and 
Final 
Evaluation 
report 
 
0 
At least 70% 
of farmers (of 
which 40% 
female) 
At least 90% of 
farmers (of 
which 40% 
female) 
Prices of agricultural 
inputs remain stable.  
1.3 Promotion of the 
resilience of 
livelihoods through 
productive 
diversification and 
market access 
% of increased income 
of smallholder farmers 
due to diversified 
activities 
Semi-Annual 
Project 
Progress 
Report  
 
USD 
750/year90 
5% increase in 
income 
20% increase in 
income 
Prices of key cash 
crops remain stable.

=== PAGE 61 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
89 The National Livelihood Survey is conducted each 3 years by the National Statistics Institute 
91 The Forest Statistics Bulletin is prepared and published by the Forest Information System in Guatemala (SIFGUA in Spanish) 
  
Annual Project 
Progress 
Report 
 
National 
livelihood 
survey89 
The project’s area is 
not seriously disrupted 
by a major climate 
extreme event 
affecting agricultural 
production. 
 
Component 2. Supporting efficient water management for agriculture to reduce the impact of increased water scarcity 
2.1 Community-led 
Water Management 
Plans developed and 
implemented at 
micro-basin level to 
promote climate 
resilience and 
enhance economic 
productivity 
Number of micro-basin 
plans developed and 
implemented 
Published 
micro-basins 
plans in the 
municipality 
and national 
information 
portals 
 
0 
7 Micro-basin 
plans  
14 Micro-basin 
plans  
Local organizations 
and communities 
support the initiative 
and are willing to 
participate 
2.2 Landscapes are 
climate resilient and 
sustain critical 
ecosystems services 
for water availability 
in drought periods 
Area (ha) with 
established incentive 
mechanism for 
adaptive forest 
management and 
agroforestry systems 
Annual Forest 
Statistics 
Bulletin91  
 
0 
6,500 ha 
13,000 ha 
The project’s area is 
not seriously disrupted 
by a major climate 
extreme event 
affecting restored 
areas 
2.3  Local water 
collection and 
irrigation farm 
systems 
implemented to 
secure water supply 
for resilient 
livelihoods  
Area (ha) of arable 
land under assured 
irrigation via water 
harvesting and drip 
irrigation farm systems 
 
Semi-Annual 
Project 
Progress 
Report  
 
Annual Project 
Progress 
Report 
Interim 
Evaluation and 
Final 
Evaluation 
report 
0 
480 ha 
1000 ha 
Water supply is not 
disrupted by a major 
drought event. 
 
Total local water 
collection capacity 
from rainwater 
harvesting systems 
(m3/year)  
Semi-Annual 
Project 
Progress 
Report  
 
Annual Project 
Progress 
Report 
 
Interim 
Evaluation and 
Final 
Evaluation 
report 
0 
70,000 
m3/year 
150,000 m3/year 
Component 3: Improved enabling conditions for climate resilient livelihoods 
3.1 Institutional 
systems 
strengthened to 
govern climate 
resilient initiatives at 
national and local 
level 
Number of national 
policy instruments 
integrating agricultural 
resilience practices 
 
Semi-Annual 
Project 
Progress 
Report  
 
Annual Project 
Progress 
Report 
 
Inter-
ministerial 
         0 
1 national 
policy 
instrument 
 
 
1 national policy 
instrument 
 
 
  
National government 
maintain political 
commitment to 
mainstream climate 
change in policy 
instruments

=== PAGE 62 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 60 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
92 The meeting report is part of an institutional reporting process coordinated by the Inter-Institutional Coordination Group and presented at 
the National Climate Change Roundtable 
meeting 
report92 
 
Number of 
municipalities with 
improved capacity 
provide technical 
assistance 
Semi-Annual 
Project 
Progress 
Report  
 
Annual Project 
Progress 
Report 
 
Interim 
Evaluation and 
Final 
Evaluation 
report 
 
Training report 
0 
18 
Municipalities 
28 Municipalities   
Municipalities attract 
and retain trained 
personnel in charge. 
 
Local government 
maintain political 
commitment to 
support climate 
resilient agricultural 
practices. 
3.2 Strengthened 
knowledge transfer 
and awareness 
raising among 
institutions at 
national, sub-
national and local 
levels 
 
Number of technical 
officers supporting 
national level 
adaptation planning in 
relevant government 
institutions (MAGA, 
MARN and INAB) 
Semi-annual 
and Annual 
Project 
Progress 
Report 
 
Interim 
Evaluation and 
Final 
Evaluation 
report 
 
Training report 
0 
 
National level: 
70 
 
 
National level: 
90 
 
Institutions attract and 
retain trained 
personnel in charge of 
offering technical 
assistance. 
Number of male and 
female farmers have 
access to technical 
assistance on resilient 
agricultural practices 
provided by the 
Learning Centers for 
Rural Development 
(CADER) 
Semi-annual 
Project 
Progress 
Report  
 
Annual Project 
Progress 
Report 
 
Interim 
Evaluation and 
Final 
Evaluation 
report 
 
Training report 
0 
Total = 1,000 
farmers 
 
Male = 600 
farmers 
 
Female= 400 
farmers 
Total = 2,000 
farmers 
 
Male = 1,200 
farmers 
 
Female = 800 
farmers 
Centers attract and 
retain trained 
personnel in charge of 
offering technical 
assistance. 
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in the 
implementation timetable. Add rows as needed. 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Component 1 Implementing climate resilient agricultural practices and enhancing farmers’ livelihoods   
Output 1.1: Climate and agro-weather information improved and tailored to the needs of vulnerable smallholder farmers to inform 
adaptation measures 
1.1.1 Organize 
workshops for 
extension technicians 
and farmers regarding 
the importance of 
climate information 
and use in decision-
making 
Improve the accessibility and use 
of real-time climate information for 
decision-making on the 
implementation of adaptation 
practices.  
1.1.1.1 Awareness raising of communities on using 
agro-weather information products 
1.1.1.2 Develop agro-weather newsletters for water 
management and application of agricultural practices 
for maize, beans, coffee and cocoa among other 
crops.  
 
 
Awareness raising 
knowledge products 
such as newsletters, 
posters and short 
videos.

=== PAGE 63 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 61 OF 72 
 
 
 
1.1.2 Install 13 hydro-
meteorological 
monitoring equipment 
for drought to inform 
climate resilient 
agricultural 
management 
strategies. 
Improve the generation of real-
time and downscaled agro-
weather information to inform 
agricultural practices.  Install agro-
weather advisories and warnings 
for both agriculture and water 
management and dissemination 
through media including SMS and 
radio. 
1.1.2.1 Training of field officers and other municipal 
and local staff on operations & maintenance of 
equipment 
1.1.2.2 Install and operate agro-meteorological 
stations in key agricultural zones to monitor weather 
and climate conditions in real time  
1.1.2.3 Install and operate automatic rainfall gauges 
to improve the coverage for rainfall monitoring in the 
selected micro-basins  
Installation and 
operational guidelines 
for agro-
meteorological 
equipment 
1.1.3 Disseminate 
climate information 
and response 
adaptation measures 
using locally-relevant 
delivery mechanisms 
as virtual platforms, 
electronic means, 
telecommunication 
and visits of the 
extension workers. 
Tailor the climate information and 
translate in local language. The 
agro-weather advisories will be 
especially for the production of 
staple grains (maize and beans) 
and cash crops (coffee and 
cocoa). Disseminate the climate 
information products via  
appropriate communication 
channels with consideration of the 
gender dimension.  
1.1.3.1 Identify the specific needs of all groups of the 
beneficiaries with regards to the access to climate 
information  
1.1.3.2 Synthesize and tailored information on 
prolonged droughts and heatwaves through mobile 
and other platforms 
1.1.3.3 Identify and develop the most appropriate 
delivery mechanisms 
 
Protocols of the 
design and use of the 
information delivery 
mechanisms 
1.1.4 Implement 4 
local agro-ecological 
centers for climate 
change adaptation for 
knowledge generation 
and sharing 
Implement 4 local agro-ecological 
centers for climate change 
adaptation to enhance the 
knowledge generation and sharing 
for the smallholder farmers. 
1.1.4.1 Identify key locally relevant climate 
knowledge to be included and disseminated through 
the centers 
1.1.4.2 Establish the 4 agro-ecological centers for 
climate change. 
Management plan of 
the agro-ecological 
centers 
Output 1.2: Adaptation measures adopted to foster the resilience of coffee, cocoa and basic grain production systems 
1.2.1  Fund the 
implementation of the 
adaptation practices 
and gender-sensitive 
technology packages 
for staple crops, coffee 
and cocoa in 6,195 
family farms. 
 
Provide technical assistance for 
the adoption of the integrated 
packages of agricultural 
adaptation measures  
 1.2.1.1 Co-design and tailor the agricultural 
adaptation measures for the specific needs of 
farmers (especially women-led farms) 
1.2.1.2 Provide technical assistance for the 
application of agricultural resilience measures  
1.2.1.3 Provide materials and equipment for the 
application of climate change adaptation measures  
Catalogue with 
tailored and gender-
sensitive agricultural 
adaptation measures  
  
1.2.2  Implement at 
least 10 trainings to 
enhance the technical 
and organizational 
capacity of 6,195 
farmers for climate-
risk informed planning 
and implementation of 
agricultural adaptation 
measures at farm level   
Support government extension 
services to develop and promote 
tailored and tested agriculture 
adaptation through the Learning 
Centers for Rural Development 
(CADERs).  
1.2.2.1 Conduct Training of Trainers for the 
implementation of climate resilient agricultural 
practices  
1.2.2.2 Provide technical assistance to farmers for 
the implementation of agricultural adaptation 
packages  
 
Trainer of Trainers 
Manual for the 
implementation of 
climate resilience 
agricultural practices 
1.2.3 Establish 28 
women-led, farm-level 
seed nurseries for 
resilient crops and 
community forest 
nurseries 
 
Create community-led seed banks 
and promote the leadership and 
entrepreneurial skills of women 
groups to manage them. 
1.2.3.1 Train women groups on the identification, 
presentation and storage of seeds. 
1.2.3.2 Construct seeds banks with species adapted 
to climatic, cultural and commercial conditions of the 
area. 
Catalogue of local and 
improved seeds 
and Manual for 
preservation and 
storage practices 
1.2.4 Extension 
workers provide 
technical assistance 
through regular 
consultation sessions 
and field visits to 
6,195 households. 
  
Provide technical assistance on 
resilient agricultural practices via 
extension workers.  
1.2.4.1 Identify smallholder farmers needs for 
technical assistance 
1.2.4.2 Conduct regular consultation sessions led by 
the extension workers 
1.2.4.3 Conduct short trainings and demonstration 
field visits 
 
Catalogue with 
tailored and gender-
sensitive agricultural 
adaptation measures  
 
Output 1.3:  Promotion of the resilience of livelihoods through productive diversification and market access 
1.3.1  Promote 
diversification of 
productive units in 
home gardens for 
2,500 farm families 
and install 370 
greenhouses micro-
tunnel facilities for 
vegetables and poultry 
Collaborate with the Government 
of Guatemala to link its nationally 
funded school meals program with 
the farmers and help catalyze the 
creation of a market for 
communities and stimulate local 
production and purchase.  
 1.3.1.1 Market study to establish potential revenue 
generating services for agricultural, water 
management and drought information/warnings in 
the micro-basins 
 
Catalogue with 
tailored and gender-
sensitive agricultural 
adaptation measures

=== PAGE 64 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 62 OF 72 
 
 
 
1.3.2  Organize 
training for 2,500 
farmers to improve 
technical skills for 
enhancing coffee and 
cocoa value chains 
and to strengthen 
organizational 
capacities of 
producers’ 
associations to access 
markets infrastructure 
 
Improve the value chain of cocoa 
and cacao via resilient 
infrastructure for processing to 
protect from unfavorable weather 
conditions as prolonged drought 
and extreme temperatures. The 
project will encourage the 
organization of producers in local 
associations and facilitate the 
access to the market.  
1.3.2.1 Promote the organization of smallholder 
farmers in local producers’ associations for cocoa 
and coffee  
1.3.2.2 Train coffee and cocoa producers on 
business development and management skills for 
better access to market 
1.3.2.3 Construct /rehabilitate community-level 
climate-proof infrastructure for storage/ processing 
for cocoa and coffee 
1.3.2.4 Develop participatory market mapping and 
support market linkages between smallholder 
producers and private sector actors for coffee, cocoa 
and vegetables production. 
Training manual on 
business development 
and management for 
smallholder producers’ 
associations 
 
Component 2. Supporting efficient water management for agriculture to reduce the impact of increased water scarcity 
Output 2.1: Community-led Water Management Plans developed and implemented at micro-basin level to promote climate resilience 
and enhance economic productivity   
2.1.1Establish or 
strengthen the 
capacity of 14 Local 
Water Committees for 
climate risk-informed 
integrated water 
resource 
management and 
planning instruments 
related to public policy 
on climate change 
 
Strengthen the organizational 
capacities of existing  Local Water 
Committees at micro-basin scale 
or create new.  
2.1.2.1 Validate participatory mapping of 
stakeholders to determine the structure of the Local 
Water Committees 
2.1.2.2 Facilitate the legal registration of Local Water 
Committees in micro-basins 
2.1.2.3 Assist in the management and administration 
of the Local Water Committees 
 
  Manual on the 
management of the 
Local Water 
Committees 
2.1.2   Provide 
technical assistance 
to Local Water 
Committees to 
develop and 
implement 14 climate 
risk-informed water 
management plans at 
micro-basin level 
which correspond to 
the project site. 
 
 
Develop micro-basin level water 
management plans and guidelines 
in a participatory, multi-
stakeholder approach. Improve 
collaboration for planning and 
equitable water sharing between 
users in the micro-basin. The 
plans will be implemented through 
the Local Water Committees and 
farmer committees. 
2.1.2.1 Develop multi-stakeholder, climate-risk 
informed cascade level water resources 
development and management plans for micro-
basins.  
 
Water Management 
Plans  
Output 2.2: Landscapes are climate resilient and sustain critical ecosystems services for water availability in drought periods 
2.2.1  Technical 
support to 19,239 
smallholder farmers 
(women in particular) 
to access forest 
incentives 
 
Facilitate the access of 
smallholder farmers to forest 
incentives from the program 
PINPEP/INAB. The activity will 
invest in technical support to 
facilitate smallholder farmers, 
especially women, to qualify for 
forest incentives and promote 
agroforestry systems. 
 
2.2.1.1 Evaluate conservation and restoration 
opportunities in the micro-basin  
2.2.1.2 Assist the beneficiaries (especially women) 
for the preparation of technical reports required for 
accessing forest incentives. 
 
Technical reports 
required for accessing 
forest incentives. 
 
2.2.2  Training of 90 
technicians from 
extension services, 
forest regents and 
INAB   
Conduct trainings to extension 
technicians and INAB staff to 
better integrate agroforestry 
systems in their standards and 
requirements and strengthen the 
technical capacities and effective 
support to smallholder farmers. 
2.2.2.1 Support extension technicians and INAB staff 
and provide technical assistance in the supervision 
of the implementation of agroforestry systems  
Training manual on 
the supervision of the 
implementation of 
agroforestry systems 
2.2.3   Restore 
13,000 ha through 
reforestation and 
agroforestry  
Assist in the planning and 
implementing of forest 
conservation interventions to 
manage the forest cover and 
ensure the generation of 
environmental goods and 
 
2.2.3.1 Plant agroforestry systems in designated 
areas according to the Micro-basin Water 
Management Plans  
2.2.3.2 Implement forest conservation practices as 
controlled fire and forest management 
Monitoring report for 
the restoration 
activities.

=== PAGE 65 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 63 OF 72 
 
 
 
services, mainly the provision and 
regulation of water resources.  
2.2.4   Evaluate forest 
management plans 
and certify their 
compliance to 
manage and allocate 
the necessary funds 
to reforest and 
manage 13,000 
hectares of 
plantations and 
agroforestry systems 
 
INAB will perform technical 
evaluation of the application 
packages for funds received by 
the smallholder farmers and will 
follow required procedures for the 
allocation of approved 
applications and required funds. 
2.2.4.1 Prepare protocols for the evaluation of the 
proposal packages 
2.2.4.2 Conduct an evaluation process for the 
application packages. 
Guidelines for 
application to access 
forest incentives 
Technical reports on 
compliance with 
agroforestry projects 
Output 2.3: Local water collection and irrigation farm systems implemented to secure water supply for resilient livelihoods 
2.3.1  Provide 
trainings to improve 
technical capacity of 
2,500 local officials 
and members of 
community 
organizations on the 
implementation and 
maintenance of micro-
basin infrastructure  
 
Strengthen the technical 
knowledge and skills of local 
communities and organizations for 
the installation and maintenance 
of water collection and irrigation 
infrastructure. This will ensure the 
long-term maintenance of the 
infrastructure through local 
capacities and will encourage 
ownership.  
2.3.1.1 Train local community to construct rooftop 
rainwater collection tanks for domestic purposes 
2.3.1.2 Conduct capacity building for farmers on 
installing/upgrading agriculture irrigation systems. 
Technical manual for 
the construction of 
rooftop rainwater 
collection tank and 
installation of micro-
irrigation system  
 
2.3.2  Install farm-level 
drip irrigation system 
for using harvested 
water on 250 ha of 
farm land 
Design and install/upgrade 
community-based water irrigation 
systems and roof-top water 
collection tanks by combining 
traditional and new technology 
design elements. This activity will 
upgrade/Install village irrigation 
systems and rooftop tanks and 
improve water access in 
prolonged drought conditions.  
2.3.2.1 Design and install rooftop water collection 
tanks  
2.3.2.2 Upgrade and climate-proof village irrigation 
systems 
2.3.2.3 Develop a multi-year maintenance and 
financing plan for each irrigation system 
 
Installation guidelines 
and protocols for farm-
level drip irrigation and 
water harvesting 
system 
 
Component 3: Improved enabling conditions for climate resilient livelihoods 
Output 3.1: Institutional systems strengthened to govern climate resilient initiatives at national and local level 
3.1.1 Provide training 
to 100 technicians 
from 28 municipal 
environmental units 
and other local 
government agencies 
on climate adaptation 
planning and climate 
resilient agricultural 
solutions . 
 
Strengthen the national and 
municipal environmental units, 
local development associations, 
and communities, to promote their 
active participation in water 
administration boards and 
contribute to water collection, 
management, and sustainable use 
with a landscape approach. 
 
3.1.1.1 Capacity building of local level institutions, 
organizations on coordination and management  of  
water resource management 
Technical manual on 
climate risk -informed 
water resource 
management for local 
actors.  
 
 
3.1.2 Facilitate 4 
meetings of 2 water 
management and 
climate change 
thematic roundtables 
including the 
participation of MAGA, 
MARN and other 
relevant actors to 
integrate agricultural 
resilience practices in 
the national action 
plan on adaptation to 
climate change. 
 
Promote an interagency dialogue 
on climate adaptation and water 
resource management at the 
national and local level. This 
activity will fund the creation of a 
national inter-institutional platform 
and micro-basin water 
roundtables for participatory and 
multi-governance dialogues on 
water resource management and 
climate change.  
3.1.2.1 Promote of discussion platforms, dialogues 
and thematic roundtables for inter-institutional 
coordination of water resources. 
3.1.2.2 Facilitate water and climate change 
roundtables for inter-institutional collaboration at all 
levels. 
 
Meeting report 
Output 3.2:  Strengthened knowledge transfer and awareness raising among institutions at national, sub-national and local levels

=== PAGE 66 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 64 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
3.2.1  Train and assist 
90 staff members from 
INAB, MAGA and 
MARN on the 
management and 
dissemination of 
climate information  
Raise awareness and strengthen 
the capacities of national 
institutions to generate and 
transfer knowledge regarding 
climate change adaptation. The 
activity will invest in   
Strengthening the National 
System for Information on Climate 
Change (SINCC).  
 
 
3.2.1.1 Raise awareness and strengthen capacities 
of 3 governmental institutions (INAB, MAGA, MARN) 
at national level on climate adaptation planning 
including gender sensitization. 
3.2.1.2 Support the collection and dissemination of 
climate information for agriculture to complement 
SINCC.    
3.1.2.3 Build awareness and train municipal staff and 
local communities on climate-risk informed planning 
and management of water resources at micro-basin 
level 
 
Guidelines on climate 
adaptation planning  
 
 
 
3.2.2  Train 100 
experts at 
departmental and 
municipal level and 
agricultural extension 
workers and other staff 
from SNER on climate 
risk-informed 
agricultural adaptation 
strategies   
Conduct training for extension 
service agents to provide 
extension support during the life of 
the project, the project will invest 
in the training of in-house SNER 
technicians in order to develop 
their capacities to design and 
promote adaptation strategies 
beyond the life of the project, 
thereby contributing to innovation, 
sustainability and scaling up of 
impacts. 
3.2.2.1 Build awareness and train municipal staff and 
local communities on climate-risk informed planning 
and management of water resources at micro-basin 
level 
3.2.2.2 Capacity building to SNER technicians on the 
design and promotion of adaptation strategies 
Catalogue with 
tailored and gender-
sensitive agricultural 
adaptation measures  
 
3.2.3  Train 300 
community promoters 
on the use of climate 
information and 
planning instruments 
for agriculture 
adaptation strategies 
and strengthen the 
capacity of 80 
CADERs    
 
Build awareness through, 
exchange visits and training to 
CADERs, Local Water 
Committees, COCODES and 
other local governance 
organizations to support 
integrated water resource 
management based on physical 
parameters, water availability, 
climatic conditions and forecasts.  
3.2.3.1 Strengthen CADERs as local knowledge 
hubs for the project and as coordination and 
communication mechanism for the climate- resilient 
integrated agricultural solutions  
3.2.3.2 Provide awareness building and capacity 
strengthening to local governance organizations as 
COCODES to use climate information for decision-
making community-level planning for resilience. 
 
Knowledge products 
such as posters, 
videos, presentations 
and flyers on climate 
change risks, 
vulnerabilities and 
adaptation solutions 
for agriculture and 
livelihoods in different 
local languages  
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, 1 page) 
143. 
In its role as Accredited Entity, FAO will oversee and supervise the implementation of this project in 
accordance with the agreement signed between FAO and the GCF. FAO will be responsible for the establishment 
of the M&E Unit. Throughout the reporting period, the project-level monitoring and evaluation will be performed by 
FAO Guatemala in compliance with FAO policies. FAO Guatemala will implement tools and methods to facilitate 
monitoring and evaluation of the project. The logical framework contains performance indicators by component and 
sub-component, which will be jointly monitored by the TC and FAO during program implementation via two six-
monthly supervision missions and via regular monitoring and evaluation procedure established for the 
project at inception.    
144. 
The M&E Unit will set up a monitoring system to be staffed by project officers in connection with the three core 
project components. Table 9 shows the staff that will form the M&E Unit. 
 Table 9. Staff of the M&E Unit. 
OED Evaluation Team Leader 
External Evaluation (short term consultancy) 
OED Evaluation Team Leader  / Midle 
evaluation 
External Evaluation (short term consultancy) 
OED Evaluation Team Leader 
External Evaluation (short term consultancy) 
OED Evaluation Team Leader / Final 
Evaluation 
External Evaluation (short term consultancy) 
Consultants field monitoring 
To be hired by the project, under the 
supervision of the National Project 
coordinator 
National consultants for field monitoring 
Base line 
Contract for base line 
 
145. 
Within the monitoring system, specific attention will be given to articulate the project workplan and the action 
plans for gender, indigenous people, biodiversity and the social and environmental framework to safeguard and

=== PAGE 67 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 65 OF 72 
 
 
 
ensure a comprehensive and holistic monitoring system. Project components will be monitored separately as well as 
in relation to the achievement of higher-level project results and overall GCF goals.  The project will put particular 
attention in ensuring the monitoring of differential impacts by sex, age and vulnerability. Particular attention will be 
placed in monitoring project relevance to indigenous people. 
 
146. 
The PMU will be responsible for the day-to-day project monitoring and implementation. It will use specific tools 
to monitor activities and prepare reports to the TC, that combine financial reporting and progress toward achieving 
results as set out in the logical framework.  The methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key outcomes of 
the project will be elaborated in a detailed monitoring plan that will be discussed at inception. The methods used will 
support vertical monitoring, from the beneficiaries to management, and will facilitate comparative and standardized 
monitoring. Monitoring of impacts and results will be guided by the logical framework, which will be the basis for the 
Performance Management Framework. The first activity will be to verify and update the baseline information included 
in this proposal. Monitoring of results will take place on a biannual basis, with the Territorial Operating Units 
providing inputs to the PMU. FAO will assist with the development of tools and methodologies for efficient data 
collection.  
 
147. 
The Territorial Operating Units and project beneficiaries will be directly involved in the monitoring and evaluation 
processes. The PMU will ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility and 
accountability in monitoring and reporting project results. The PMU will inform the TC and FAO Country Office of any 
delays or difficulties during implementation, including M&E plan, so that appropriate and corrective measures can be 
adopted. Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and troubleshooting support will be provided by FAO 
as needed.  
 
148. 
Mid-term and final evaluations (see Annex 11 for more details on the monitoring and evaluation plans) 
In accordance with the AMA between FAO and GCF, the FAO Office of Evaluation  will be responsible for the 
independent interim and final evaluations. The evaluations will be conducted using a question-driven approach, and 
may include assessments against the criteria of relevance, effectiveness and sustainability, among others. The 
interim evaluation will be instrumental in contributing – through operational and strategic recommendations –to 
improve implementation, setting out any necessary corrective measures for the remaining period of the project. The 
final evaluation will assess the relevance of the intervention, its overall performance, as well as sustainability and 
scalability of results, differential impacts and lessons learned. The evaluation should also assess the extent to which 
the intervention has contributed to the Fund’s higher-level goal of achieving a paradigm shift in adaptation to climate 
change in Guatemala .To measure attributable changes, the evaluation will draw on mixed-methods, using qualitative 
methods (e.g. participatory rural appraisal) in combination with counterfactual analysis (e.g. quasi-experimental 
methods, depending on the existence of reliable control group data from the project’s baseline and completion 
surveys, which will be confirmed during project inception). In addition to primary data collected by the evaluators and 
secondary national data, both interim and final evaluations will draw on the monitoring reports and activities prepared 
by project staff. Careful attention will be paid to the disaggregation of data, results and outcomes by gender.

=== PAGE 68 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 66 OF 72 
 
 
 
 
F. RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing 
(ML/TF), sanctions, prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from 
being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability 
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact 
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as 
well as fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Turnover of key project personnel and related technical and coordinating staff of implementing agencies could impact 
the pace of the project implementation and delay decision-making processes.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The risk that new officials will not support the project will be mitigated through information sessions to update them on 
the project actions and benefits to their constituencies. The development of micro-basin water management plans under 
Component 2 and inter-institutional arrangements under Component 3 will guide the work of new staff. The on-going 
capacity-building processes and the preparation of project reports and institutional reports and processes will also allow 
for knowledge transfer for new staff.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Changes of central and local government leadership and in overarching policy priorities can lead to a lack of support 
for project activities. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The alignment of project activities with multiple overarching development policies, mainly the Framework Law for 
Climate Change and the National Action Plan for Climate Change, NDC, K’atun 2030, as well as Forest Law makes 
this a medium risk. While one or more government policies may change the project is likely to remain in alignment with 
at least some of these policies. Additionally, under Component 3 the project will help strengthen implementation and 
institutional arrangements that mitigate this risk and increase the likelihood that project activities in the territories will 
continue uninterrupted.  
The institutional arrangements strengthened throughout the project will facilitate political processes between the central 
government, local governments and the project. The implementation of agreements at the micro-basin level will enable 
the engagement with local government. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Poor coordination / communication among stakeholders at the national and local level can lead to inefficiencies in the 
implementation and impact of the project. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The FAO will develop cooperation agreements with government agencies and the key stakeholders that will establish 
clear communication channels and procedures for project coordination with stakeholders involved in the project.

=== PAGE 69 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 67 OF 72 
 
 
 
The PMU team involves stakeholders from key institutions and  is set to be maintained throughout the timeframe of the 
project in collaboration with the Territorial Operational Units. The PMU will ensure that communication and technical 
actions can continue. Under Component 3, institutional agreements will be established to share information between 
INAB and MAGA, which will improve the collection and dissemination of agro-climate information to farmers. Both 
agencies are full partners in the project, with roles and responsibilities to be clearly delineated at inception.   
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
The institutions linked to the development of the project do not have the personnel and / or resources required to 
carry out the project activities.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Under component 3, clear institutional arrangements with MAGA and INAB will allow the project to use their institutional 
capacities and human resources across the targeted municipalities to reach the identified target communities. FAO has 
access to skills and experience across its international team and will play a strong role in monitoring the actions and 
goals proposed in the institutional agreements with the partners. FAO will assess partners’ capacity, provide real-time 
monitoring and feedback, and where appropriate will provide technical support to ensure effective and efficient project 
delivery. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Cultural barriers limit the participation of women, youth and ethnic groups. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The consultative process was carried out with the participation of women and indigenous groups to ensure that 
consultations were responsive to various gender needs and roles and cultural aspects such that project activities 
effectively respond to the unique needs of women and girls, men and boys, and promote equal opportunities to 
participate, and receive comparable social and economic benefits. Capacity building sessions, training and 
communication materials and technical assistance will be provided in local languages to ensure the engagement of 
indigenous families and that they benefit equally from the project and support its activities. The training processes will 
consider topics discussing the importance of the participation of all family members and ethnic groups in the decision-
making spaces. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Unfavorable changes in market prices of coffee, cacao and staple crops and in the prices of agricultural inputs. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Local farmers have limited ability to affect volatile global commodity prices. Instead this risk will be mitigated by 
reducing exposure. Many of the crops supported by the project are for local consumption, not for sale to wholesalers. 
For cash crops, the project will identify niche markets, develop differentiated products and partner with supply chain 
actors willing to pay fair prices. In addition, the project aims to enhance alternative sources of revenue and help 
farmers diversify incomes. In case of low prices of a crop that generates cash, the family will have other products for 
sale, which will help to offset the decrease in income. 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact

=== PAGE 70 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 68 OF 72 
 
 
 
Other 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Extreme climate events and climate shocks could affect the successful implementation of project activities. For 
example, crop demonstrations could be hindered by drought and heatwaves. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Technical training sessions will help beneficiaries understand the impacts of climate change and the benefits of 
investing in climate resilient agriculture techniques. The monitoring and use of climate information will be promoted 
not only amongst project beneficiaries, but also project implementation teams, in order to ensure timely corrective 
and security actions, in case extreme events are forecasted to affect project activities. The use of demonstration plots 
will help farmers gauge the comparative benefits of climate resilient agricultural techniques, even in times of climate 
stress. While traditional crops varieties may outperform in normal years, the benefits of more resilient varieties will 
become more apparent during extreme events. 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Security challenges could hinder the ability of the project team / extension agents to work with farmers. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Security risks are an ongoing challenge for extension services in Guatemala. The project will reduce the risk of 
security related disruptions through a combination of informal and formal measures. To the extent possible, project 
staff will be recruited locally. Project staff will receive detailed briefings prior to working in areas with known security 
challenges and receive training on how to react to potential security events. The project team will liaise with local 
leaders and seek their active endorsement when starting activities in a prioritized area. More broadly, project 
activities will promote family cohesion and reduce livelihood challenges that contribute to insecurity by directly 
involving vulnerable groups in project activities.

=== PAGE 71 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 69 OF 72 
 
 
 
G. GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
.  
149. 
During the development of this funding proposal, an environmental and social management framework has 
been developed. An initial risk assessment has been carried out against FAO ́s environmental and social safeguards 
and the project is considered to be medium risk. While negative impacts from the project are not expected, the 
project activities are focused on the territories of indigenous peoples. This implies a series of important 
considerations in the formulation of the project, to avoid affecting their livelihoods, exclusion and inequality. 
Therefore, FAO led a Free, Prior and Informed Consent process described below.  
150. 
The Social and Environmental Impact Assessment (Annex 6) classified project risk as moderate, although 
large-scale, significant or irreversible environmental impacts are not expected. The potential impacts identified are 
mainly impacts associated with activities that include community participation, especially of indigenous communities, 
on a purely voluntary and on-demand basis, which can be mitigated effectively and are addressed through the 
project’s selection criteria and social and environmental plan of action.  
 
151. 
Potential environmental impacts identified include: 
(i) Proliferation of pests and diseases due to poor water storage conditions; 
(ii) Environmental pollution by the discarded materials from the greenhouses built; 
(iii) Seed losses due to poor storage conditions in silos. 
 
152. 
The project will proactively work to lessen environmental impacts in fragile areas through the following 
mitigation actions: 
(i) 
promote integrated pest management approach only to control pests and diseases in buffer zones and 
other areas;  
(ii) 
strengthen capacities for good practices based on traditional knowledge for collection and conservation of 
open pollinated seeds and engage especially with indigenous populations; and  
 
153. 
Potential social impacts identified include:  
1) inequality and exclusion of vulnerable populations (women, youth and indigenous communities) from the 
activities and benefits of the project due to discrimination; and  
2) initial decrease in the income of families in the short term; and  
3) exclusion of potential beneficiaries due to lack of ownership of the land.  
 
154. 
To address such risks, the project includes the following mitigation actions:  
(i) promoting alternative activities for women-led households (such as seed nurseries) and establish a mechanism 
for participatory monitoring, evaluation and delivery of agricultural inputs with broad participation of women's 
organizations;  
(ii) preparing and disseminating culturally tailored materials, capacity building and technical assistance in local 
languages;  
(iii) introducing alternative strategies for income generation will compensate for the initial decrease in production 
and in medium term, the impact will be reversed as new plantations begin to produce and obtain higher yields; 
and  
(iv) establishing a working group to work on tenure solutions, this will include assess the type of land ownership of 
beneficiaries and identify the tenure situation to provide adequate technical assistance to farmers with focus 
on addressing barriers for women. 
155. 
Environmental and Social Management Plans will be developed as necessary and mitigation actions will be 
monitored throughout the life of the project. A project level grievance mechanism will be established to ensure all 
stakeholders the possibility to file grievances if needed.

=== PAGE 72 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 70 OF 72 
 
 
 
156. 
All stakeholders of the project were identified and engaged with, from national to local authorities, community 
level associations, academia, farmers, etc. The process was organized in 4 stages and resulted in proactive 
involvement in the initial phase and validation of the proposal (See Annex 7).  
 
157. 
FAO consulted with the indigenous communities in the project area to ensure that the GCF supports concrete 
actions for the indigenous peoples in a way that protects their rights and respects their social and cultural identity, 
including customs, traditions and institutions. A process to obtain Free, Prior and Informed Consent was carried out 
in January 2019 by FAO in collaboration with MAGA. The process engaged with indigenous populations within the 
jurisdiction of the 29 municipalities that comprise the project area, including Maya Q'eqchi, Maya Poqomchi, Maya 
Achi, and Maya Ch'orti. The consultation process was implemented through eight sessions where the project was 
presented, and views were discussed. In total, 184 people (of which 57% women) participated. Consent was given 
for the implementation of the project and active engagement with indigenous communities is foreseen for the 
successful achievement of objectives. 
 
158. 
A detailed Environmental and Social Risk Assessment together with the Free, Prior and Informed Consent are 
provided in Annex 6. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
159. 
FAO undertook a gender assessment based on consultations and statistical analysis to identify principal gender 
gaps. The report “Gender evaluation and action plan: Ensuring the resilience of smallholder farmers to climate 
change in the Mayan landscapes of Petén and Verapaz and the Dry Corridor of Guatemala” was finalized in January 
2019. The study concluded that in the country, and especially in the project areas, women are particularly vulnerable 
given the identified gender gaps, such as lack of access to education and limited political participation. A 
considerable number of women only speak their local language and are illiterate in Spanish, which is a barrier in 
their attempts to access technical and financial assistance. Women have less access than men to productive 
resources such as land, credit, housing, and basic services. Such gender inequalities affect the adaptive capacity 
of women and lead to their high vulnerability to climate change impacts. In the rural context of Guatemala, women 
are responsible for the household and family care, food production and the supply of drinking water. In the project 
areas, this context is exacerbated by the increasing trend of migration of men who seek employment in other regions 
or abroad, leaving the women with more responsibilities and in charge of family and farms. The projected climate 
impacts in the Departments of Verapaz, Petén, Zacapa and Chiquimula will put food security and water availability 
at risk, which will particularly affect women.  
 
160. 
The design of the project integrates gender sensitive planning and implementation, particularly for women 
farmers and women-headed households. Within the project design and implementation, the interventions will provide 
gender responsive and transformative results. As women are key players in the agricultural sector and therefore, in 
food security, livelihoods and water management, this project seeks to address the identified gender gaps. 
Mechanisms to ensure women’s participation have been developed in different components and indicators. Around 
30% of the households in the project areas are female-headed. At least 10,000 women in the project areas will 
benefit from alternative income opportunities and the implementation of climate resilient agriculture technologies 
and market linkages. About 10,000 women will benefit from empowerment, skills development and technical 
assistance. Selection criteria will assign a weight to women’s participation in access to technical assistance, their 
level of participation in local organized structures, land ownership and access to incentives.  
 
161. 
The project will promote gender equality by giving rural women access to and control of the productive 
resources needed for agricultural development. Specific outcomes under the first and second components include 
increased opportunities for women to strengthen food security and to generate additional income through diversified 
activities.  The project will promote tailored trainings, which address the specific needs of women (especially 
indigenous women) and enable them to be risk informed and adopt resilient agricultural practices to secure food 
even in drought periods. In particular, the project will address specific limitations that women encounter in earing 
income and accessing to financial incentives. The proposed diversified activities particularly focus on opportunities

=== PAGE 73 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 71 OF 72 
 
 
 
for women such as managing seed nurseries and adopting agroforestry systems through forest incentives under the 
PINPEP program.   
 
162. 
The project was designed in consultation with women’s organizations and CBOs in the field and through a 
structured consultation. In addition, project actions will be developed in alignment to the National Policy for the 
Promotion and Integral Development of Guatemalan Women - Equity Opportunities Plan 2008 – 2023, and the 
Gender Environment Policy, the Institutional Strategy on Gender Equity with Ethnic and Cultural considerations, 
adopted by INAB. A detailed Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan is provided in Annex 8. 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
163. 
Financial control and procurement processes will be implemented as per FAO rules and regulations, which 
were certified as acceptable to the GCF in the FAO accreditation process. FAO has an Administrative Manual 
organized across various Chapters covering Finance, Human Resources, Travel and Procurement. The FAO 
Intranet provides access to this Manual and to other procedures, information and guidance via the “FAO Handbook”.  
164. 
FAO has deployed an Oracle based ERP system the Global Resources Management System" (GRMS) to its 
world-wide offices, which provides all FAO employees, in all locations globally, with travel, human resource, 
procurement and finance functionalities. Using GRMS improves the flow of financial information, supports financial 
monitoring and reporting, increases transparency and visibility, and strengthens internal control.  FAO maintains a 
chart of accounts which is used by the whole organization and that allows for a separation of income and expenditure 
by donor and project and support and provides a standardized coding structure that enables data to be recorded, 
classified and summarized to facilitate internal management and external reporting requirements.  
165. 
Procurement and Letters of Agreement Services are managed under CSAP which provides policy and 
operational support to ensure the Organization procures goods, works and services based on "Best Value for Money" 
principles as embodied in the Manual Section 502 and for Letters of Agreement under Manual Section 507.  
166. 
As mentioned in Section C.4. FAO as the Accredited Entity of the GCF will have overall responsibility for quality 
assurance and oversight of co-executing entities. In addition to this, FAO will be responsible for the financial 
execution of GCF funds according to FAO rules and regulations mainly contained and detailed in the FAO Handbook 
(including those referred to financial monitoring, audit and procurement).  
167. 
During implementation, FAO will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and 
procedures. This may include monitoring missions, spot checks and participation at TSC meetings. The project will 
be subject to FAO’s audit regime of FAO, including the external audit and internal audit functions.  
168. 
FAO Guatemala’s Country Representative or FAOR is responsible for financial monitoring and is supported by 
a management team comprised of a Program Assistant, Management Assistant, and a Strategic Operations Officer. 
Such team will interact and support the work of the PMU. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
  
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 74 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 72 OF 72 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA No-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure template provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☒ Others (Environmental and Social Management Framework –ES 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plans (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22 
The Roles of Municipalities and Community-Based Organizations in Ensuring the Sustainability of 
Project Actions 
☒ 
Annex 23  FP_Temporary annex on co-financing 
☒ 
Annex 24  Carbon balance

=== PAGE 75 ===
( u-:; su;;wfpn,
rk {!J/{;r,11/J<'.l)(/d 11,,,.-a.kt1
.Y <@a?'nbi", ?f3lhnrfliJ,(,,,
Mr. Yan nick Glemarec 
Executive Director 
MINISTERIO DE AMBIENTE Y RECURSOS NATURALES 
GUATEMALA, C.A. 
Guatemala, 03 de abril 2020 
Oficio No. VRNyCC-165-2020/FACB-skg 
Green Climate Fund ("GCF") 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by FAO regarding Project RELIVE- REsilient LIVEiihoods of vulnerable 
smallholder farmers in the Mayan landscapes and the Dry Corridor of Guatemala -. 
Dear Sir, Glemarec 
We refer to the project RELIVE- REsilient LIVEiihoods of vulnerable smallholder farmers in the 
Mayan landscapes and the Dry Corridor of Guatemala - as included in the funding proposal 
submitted by FAQ to us on May 29th , 2019. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment and 
Natual Resources, The National Designated Authority of Guatemala. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, 
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
a.
The government of Guatemala has no-objection to the project as included in the
funding proposal;
b.
The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Guatemala's
national priorities, strategies and plans;
c.
In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards 
1J Camhio C{ima 
i 
ri'() u ,.lQtffllt y 1(ecursos
7 Avenida 03-67 zona 13, Ciudad de Guatemala 
PBX: 2423-0500 
http://www.marn.gob.gt 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 76 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
RELIVE – Resilient LIVElihoods of vulnerable 
smallholder farmers in the Mayan landscapes and 
the Dry Corridor of Guatemala  
Existence of subproject(s) to be 
identified after GCF Board approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO) 
Environmental and social safeguards 
(ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific location(s) of 
project or target country or 
location(s) of programme 
Guatemala 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited entity’s 
website 
  
Friday, May 15, 2020/ Monday, May 18, 2020 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish 
Explanation on language 
Spanish is the official language of Guatemala and 
the language understandable to affected 
peoples/stakeholders. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
http://www.fao.org/3/ca9109en/ca9109en.pdf  
 
Spanish: 
http://www.fao.org/3/ca9109es/ca9109es.pdf  
Other link(s) 
FAO disclosure portal: 
http://www.fao.org/environmental-social-
standards/disclosure-portal/en/ 
 
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources 
(MARN) website: 
http://marn.gob.gt/paginas/Proyecto_RELIVE  
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a 
category B project is contained in the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF). 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited entity’s 
website 
 Friday, May 15, 2020/ Monday, May 18, 2020 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish 
Explanation on language 
Spanish is the official language of Guatemala and 
the language understandable to affected 
peoples/stakeholders. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
http://www.fao.org/3/ca9109en/ca9109en.pdf  
 
Spanish: 
http://www.fao.org/3/ca9109es/ca9109es.pdf

=== PAGE 77 ===
Other link(s) 
FAO disclosure portal: 
http://www.fao.org/environmental-social-
standards/disclosure-portal/en/ 
 
MARN website: 
http://marn.gob.gt/paginas/Proyecto_RELIVE  
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a 
category B project is contained in the ESMF 
(Appendix 1). 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited entity’s 
website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Monday, May 18, 2020 
Place 
FAO Representative Office in Guatemala: 
7a Avenida 12-90, Zona 13 
Interior Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganadería y 
Alimentación (MAGA) 
Edificio FAO 
Ciudad de Guatemala 
CP:01013 
Guatemala 
 
Please see link for additional details: 
http://www.fao.org/guatemala/fao-en-
guatemala/es/  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s Board 
meeting 
Monday, June 22, 2020 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Tuesday, June 23, 2020 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 78 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 78 
 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP145 
Proposal name: 
RELIVE – REsilient LIVElihoods of vulnerable smallholder 
farmers in the Mayan landscapes and the Dry Corridor of 
Guatemala 
Accredited entity: 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
Country: 
Guatemala 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
Appropriate targeting to the most vulnerable 
smallholder farmers and indigenous groups 
based on climate change impacts, food 
insecurity and poverty  
Need to ensure complementarity and 
coherence with the other GCF approved 
project (FP087 IUCN Guatemala), and the 
forthcoming Dry Corridor funding proposal 
with the Central American Bank for Economic 
Integration 
Adequate adaptation packages for small-scale 
farmers and crops with an emphasis on a 
gender-sensitive approach 
Need to explore ways to increase the number 
of indirect beneficiaries through the scaling 
up and replication mechanisms  
Adoption of agro-biodiversity and creation of 
favorable microclimate in agricultural 
landscapes 
 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XXIII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background 
3. 
Guatemala is one of the most vulnerable countries to the impacts of climate change in 
Latin America. The country has been experiencing an annual average temperature increase of 
0.6 °C and a 2.5 per cent increase in the number of hot days per decade since 1960. The average 
annual precipitation at the national level has increased by 52 millimetres since 1981, although 
the number of consecutive dry days has also increased. In the past 20 years, the occurrence and 
intensity of extreme weather events have increased, notably droughts and floods, leading to 
significant economic losses in the country. 
4. 
The project proposes to address these observed and projected climate impacts and to 
build the resilience of the most vulnerable and the poorest farmers in the Mayan landscapes and

=== PAGE 79 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 79 
 
 
 
Dry Corridor of Guatemala. The project will be implemented for seven years, with a requested 
GCF grant of USD 29.8 million and co-financing from the Korea International Cooperation 
Agency (KOICA) of USD 7 million, Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food of Guatemala 
(MAGA) of USD 5.7 million and the National Forest Institute (INAB) of USD 24.1 million. 
5. 
The project will directly benefit 116,353 people in 29 municipalities and 14 micro-
basins through the introduction of drought-resilient crop production systems, accessing 
national forest incentives, increased water security through local water collection and 
irrigation, and strengthened capacity at local and institutional levels through farmer field 
schools (FFS) and climate information. An additional 583,146 people across the 29 
municipalities will be indirectly benefited through enhanced climate information and climate-
resilient agricultural advisories and institutional capacity development.  
6. 
The project is structured into three components: 
(a) 
Implementing climate-resilient agricultural practices and enhancing farmers’ 
livelihoods; 
(b) 
Supporting efficient water management for agriculture to reduce the impact of 
increased water scarcity; and 
(c) 
Improved enabling conditions for climate-resilient livelihoods. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Component 1: Implementing climate-resilient agricultural practices and enhancing farmers’ 
livelihoods (total cost: USD 25.5 million; GCF cost: USD 14.1 million, or 55 per cent) 
7. 
Output 1.1 will install 13 hydro-meteorological monitoring equipment for droughts to 
inform climate-resilient agricultural management strategies, and disseminate the climate 
information to farmers through local delivery mechanisms. Overall, this component will 
generate localized, accurate and tailored climate information and promote equitable access to 
the information for smallholder farmers. 
8. 
The feasibility study highlights the current gaps in the number of weather and 
hydrological stations and their limitations in providing real-time reporting. The current 
meteorological and hydrological stations do not meet the standards and criteria of the World 
Meteorological Organization (WMO), and there are uncoordinated systems generating climate 
information with duplication of effort by multiple institutions. The key to success of this 
component is therefore to improve the quality of data, so that it meets the WMO standards, and 
to improve coordination among different agencies working on climate information. The project 
will address these two issues. It is positively assessed that the hydro-meteorological monitoring 
equipment will be integrated into the centrally coordinated Seismology, Volcanology, 
Meteorology and Hydrology Institute (INSIVUMEH), the national institution in Guatemala. 
9. 
Output 1.2 will fund the implementation of gender-sensitive agricultural adaptation 
packages for staple crops (maize and beans) and cash crops (cocoa and coffee) that are tolerant 
to droughts and heatwaves. The methods proposed through the packages – improved drought-
resistant seed varieties and creating microclimates by establishing fruit, timber and service 
trees – are new to smallholder farmers and should be accompanied by sufficient skills 
development and capacity-building. The adaptation packages are assessed to be adequate and 
suitable for the local context. 
10. 
The adaptation packages are expected to incentivize local farmers to adopt drought-
resilient agriculture. In terms of beneficiaries, the packages will directly benefit 6,600 family 
farms, who represent a small proportion of the total direct beneficiaries of this project. As the 
packages cannot be extended to the entire direct beneficiaries, the proponent should develop a

=== PAGE 80 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 80 
 
 
 
concrete replication and scaling up strategy to reach more beneficiaries in order to transform 
the agricultural system.  
11. 
Lastly, output 3 will promote alternative strategies for productive diversification, 
including installation of 370 greenhouses micro-tunnel facilities for vegetables and poultry, and 
training 3,300 farmers in methods for developing climate-resilient coffee and cocoa value 
chains. This output aims to establish a safety net to avoid food insecurity in droughts and 
heatwaves. The output can be an opportunity to work with the private sector involved in the 
value chains, to empower poor and vulnerable smallholder farmers. The training to be 
conducted should therefore involve the private sector to identify viable and sustainable 
investment opportunities with the smallholder farmers.  
Component 2: Supporting efficient water management for agriculture to reduce the impact of 
increased water scarcity (total cost: USD 38.0 million; GCF cost: USD 14.1 million, or 37 per cent) 
12. 
Component 2 focuses on increasing water security for agriculture, with three outputs: 
(1) developing community-led water management plans and strengthening local water 
committees; (2) watershed restoration of 13,000 hectares and improving the hydrological cycle; 
and (3) installing rooftop rainwater harvesting systems and farm-level drip irrigation systems 
on 250 hectares of farmland. 
13. 
The first output will establish 14 local water committees and a corresponding 14 climate 
risk-informed water management plans at the micro-basin level. Although it is necessary to 
have planning instruments and local governance structures for water resource management, it 
is also important that such instruments and governance structures are coordinated and 
continue after the project, through integration into the Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources and INAB. Budgetary resources should be allocated to ensure that the management 
plans developed are implemented after project completion. 
14. 
Restoration of watersheds is a proven ecosystem-based adaptation method and an 
effective way of improving hydrological cycles around the basins. This proposed output will be 
implemented in collaboration with the Government’s national forestry incentive schemes 
(PINPEP and PROBOSQUE), and is expected to incentivize local communities to participate in 
forest restoration. GCF funding is expected to widen the coverage of beneficiaries and increase 
the impacts by equipping the poorest farmers to meet the technical specifications and 
prerequisites to access the incentives. The technical prerequisites are assessed to be in line with 
GCF objectives and will contribute to both adaptation and mitigation to climate change.  
15. 
The proposed irrigation schemes will be supplied by water from rainwater harvesting 
systems. Historical observations show a net increase of average annual precipitation by 18 per 
cent in May and October, and water is expected to be harvested in these periods. However, given 
that the number of consecutive dry days is increasing, and that the future projections show an 
overall decrease of rainfall in the future, there should be alternative ways to collect and manage 
water other than reliance on rainwater harvesting systems. 
Component 3: Improved enabling conditions for climate-resilient livelihoods (total cost: USD 0.5 
million; GCF cost: USD 0.5 million, or 100 per cent) 
16. 
Component 3 will strengthen the institutional capacity for different governmental and 
local staff to carry out the project activities, which include managing water resources and 
landscapes, and handling climate information and resilient agriculture as adaptation strategies. 
17. 
The need for the first two proposed outputs is acknowledged, and it is positively 
assessed that adequate capacity-building and institutional strengthening are followed by hard 
measures, given that most of the proposed adaptation activities are new to the beneficiaries. 
The key success factor of this component will be the establishment of a coordination mechanism 
among the different institutions at the local and regional levels, in order to effectively and 
efficiently deliver the knowledge and technologies to the poorest and the most vulnerable

=== PAGE 81 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 81 
 
 
 
farmers. It is important that the activities undertaken under this component are properly 
documented and shared, with concrete outputs generated, so that they can be sustained, scaled 
up and replicated into other regions of the country.  
Project management (total cost: USD 1.7 million; GCF cost: USD 0.8 million, or 47 per cent) 
18. 
The last component is the project management cost for the implementation of the 
project. The GCF portion of the project management cost is around 3 per cent of the total 
requested GCF funding, and is compliant with the GCF policy on fees. 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
                                    Scale:  Medium 
19. 
The proposal aims to reach 0.7 per cent of the total national population and 20 per cent 
of the population in target municipalities. The project’s direct beneficiaries of 116,353 people 
will benefit from the drought-resilient crop production systems, accessing national forest 
incentives, increased water security through local water collection and irrigation, and 
strengthened capacity at the local and institutional levels through FFS and climate information. 
Some 583,146 people across the 19 municipalities will be indirect beneficiaries through 
enhanced climate information and climate-resilient agricultural advisory bodies and 
institutional capacity development.  
20. 
Targeting of the project areas was done in a rigorous manner, using the composite risk 
index informed by the methodology suggested in the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2013). The variables used are climate hazard 
(change in aridity), exposure (percentage of the municipal territory used for annual agriculture 
and/or coffee) and vulnerability (percentage of the municipal territory suitable for forest 
restoration). Based on this general mapping exercise, secondary site selection was conducted 
using defined selection criteria including the water balance, deforestation rate, land uses for 
agriculture and others. The criteria used are in line with the GCF objectives and are deemed to 
be appropriate. 
21. 
Climatic evidence and justification are provided in an adequate manner in the proposal. 
Guatemala has been experiencing an annual average temperature increase of 0.6°C and a 2.5 per 
cent increase in the number of hot days per decade since 1960. The average annual 
precipitation at national level has increased by 52 mm since 1981, although the number of 
consecutive dry days has increased. Increasing temperatures and dry days are expected to 
increase soil aridity, resulting in the intensification of droughts and floods. Together, these 
impacts will decrease water availability for both crops and livestock, and will also affect the 
quantity and quality of agricultural production in the country.  
22. 
The project has substantial mitigation potential through the planned restoration of 
13,000 hectares of lands through reforestation and agroforestry. The carbon sequestration 
resulting from these actions should be properly monitored, verified and reported, and should be 
included in the country’s national greenhouse gas accounting system. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
          Scale: Med/High 
23. 
The project is expected to transform the agroecological landscape and production 
system in Guatemala’s Dry Corridor by shifting smallholder farmers’ conventional agriculture 
practices, which are highly sensitive to climate change, to drought-resilient crop production 
systems that will ensure food security for subsistence farmers. The shift of the agricultural 
system to one that is more drought tolerant and with a reliable supply of water is acknowledged

=== PAGE 82 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 82 
 
 
 
as positive. The project will also benefit from the co-financing by government departments, 
which will be used to incentivize farmers to restore and sustainably manage the degraded lands. 
Sustainability and scaling up of this shift will depend on further investment after project 
completion. 
24. 
The project also has good potential for scaling up and replication within the target areas 
and in other regions of the country. The accredited entity (AE) provided detailed information on 
pathways for strategic replication and scaling up, including through extension services by 
MAGA, FFS and a range of incentives for farmers to access improved seeds and to encourage 
wider adoption of the adaptation practices. Scaling up and replication are also expected to be 
achieved through mainstreaming of adaptation measures into national institutions and in 
climate change policies. With appropriate capacity-building, institutional strengthening and 
knowledge-sharing, the project will create a positive enabling environment for national and 
local stakeholders to replicate and scale up agricultural adaptation. It is also important to fully 
involve the private sector in agricultural value chains, widening opportunities for smallholder 
farmers to add value to their products and create sustainable financing opportunities, which 
will gradually reduce the need for full grant support in the future. 
25. 
The proposal provides good potential for knowledge-sharing and learning through the 
implementation of the agroecological centres and various capacity-building activities through 
FFS. Output 1.3 is expected to contribute to the creation of an enabling environment for access 
to market through training events and diversification of agricultural production, but the scope 
and extent of the actual market stimulation depends on the participation of the private sector in 
agricultural value chains. 
26. 
The proposal provides a solid post-project operation and maintenance plan with an 
estimated budget. A significant part of the cost is expected to be covered by the small farmers’ 
associations, but such a commitment has not yet materialized. The AE should ensure that the 
established infrastructure and assets are properly operated and maintained after project 
completion by enabling full government and community ownership of the assets.  
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
                    Scale: High 
27. 
The proposal provides sound justification for its potential to generate positive 
environmental, social and economic externalities. The proposed adaptation and technology 
packages include generally proven practices that have positive environmental impacts, such as 
creating positive microclimates and improving soil conditions. No harmful environmental 
impacts are foreseen to be associated with the selected seeds in the packages, although the 
processing of the resulting commodities should be carefully monitored to avoid negative 
environmental externalities. 
28. 
The proposed water supply and agricultural adaptation packages will enhance food 
security and generate an increase in farmers’ incomes, and the economic co-benefits are 
assessed as substantial, particularly from the production of cash crops (coffee and cocoa). The 
potential for social benefits is also assessed as high: diversified agricultural production with 
climate information and better water management will directly benefit society in the long term, 
in that it will be better prepared and equipped for current and future climate change impacts. 
29. 
Gender considerations have been included in the project design with an emphasis on 
gender-sensitive agricultural adaptation packages. The proposal highlights that the project will 
promote women-led seed banks and facilitate women-owned farms to access the forest 
incentives. A detailed gender assessment and action plan has been developed and was 
submitted as an annex.

=== PAGE 83 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 83 
 
 
 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
30. 
The vulnerability of the country and the target beneficiaries and their adaptation needs 
are generally explained throughout the proposal, but without detailed descriptions of the scale 
and intensity of the country’s exposure to climate risks. The impacts of climate change, 
particularly incidents resulting from droughts and heatwaves, on agricultural production and 
livelihoods are presented. The vulnerability of smallholder farmers, including women, is 
acknowledged and their losses due to the climatic events are noted.  
31. 
Although Guatemala is an emerging medium-income country, the proposal justifies the 
full grants request by highlighting the level of poverty of the project beneficiaries. The proposal 
also notes the high rate of inequality and the need for public investment for addressing the 
impacts of climate change. 
32. 
The proposal explains the needs of the recipient based on the degree of poverty and 
vulnerability of smallholder and indigenous farmers. Although such justification is 
acknowledged, the justification could have been strengthened by providing a wider investment 
strategy, including a financial estimation of the cost of implementing climate change adaptation 
measures in agriculture at the national level, and the associated shortfalls in the national 
budget. Such an exercise would have provided a clear road map or pathway for climate 
resilience building in the sector from a financial perspective, and would clarify the level of 
contribution from GCF. 
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
33. 
The proposal demonstrates that the project contributes to the country’s nationally 
determined contribution and its various national development and climate change strategies. It 
may have been more compelling if the proposal had delineated in a more concise manner how 
and to what extent the project will contribute to Guatemala’s resilience building in the 
agriculture sector in the nationally determined contribution. 
34. 
As the executing entity (EE), FAO Guatemala has demonstrated its track record of 
supporting the Government of Guatemala since 1964 in projects ranging from agriculture, food 
and nutritional security, to climate change and sustainable development. The country office has 
implemented many projects in the country in these areas. MAGA and INAB will be the co-EEs for 
the execution of the project but without channelling GCF proceeds. GIZ will also be the co-EE for 
their respective co-financed activities. 
35. 
The project was designed on the basis of rigorous consultations with relevant 
stakeholders, including the GCF national designated authority. A stakeholder engagement plan 
was submitted as an annex to the funding proposal. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
                         Scale: Medium 
36. 
The proposed structure is assessed to be adequate and reasonable, considering the level 
of poverty of the target beneficiaries who are identified as the poorest smallholder farmers and 
indigenous groups of farmers.  
37. 
The proposal demonstrates the economic viability of the project, with a positive net 
present value (NPV) and economic internal rate of return from the economic model for all the 
crops except for coffee with a 12 per cent discount rate. The highest NPV is expected from the 
operational centre to add value to cocoa, amounting to USD 153,473. The analysis shows that all 
adaptation packages and operational centres will be economically viable in a 20-year time-
horizon.

=== PAGE 84 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 84 
 
 
 
38. 
The proposal also demonstrates cost-effectiveness using a well-established financial 
modelling methodology. The project is expected to generate positive financial net present value 
for most of the crops, with operational centres for coffee (USD 183,585) and cocoa (USD 23,471) 
generating the highest value and financial internal rate of return (20.4 and 12.6 per cent, 
respectively). Adaptation packages for coffee, cocoa and family gardens will generate 
incremental negative cash flows for the first 4 years, but are expected to turn into positive after 
this period. The results of the financial model show the marginal financial profits for the 
adaptation packages, and therefore request for grants is deemed to be appropriate. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
39. 
The AE has classified the project as moderate (category B) based on the environmental 
and social screening checklist of the AE, and consideration of other environmental and 
sociocultural factors related to the project. The Secretariat confirms the category B classification 
given that the activities are expected to have potential limited adverse environmental and/or 
social risks and impacts that individually or cumulatively, are few, generally site-specific, largely 
reversible, and readily addressed through mitigation measures. An environmental and social 
management framework (ESMF) was developed as a guidance document for use when assessing 
potential risks and impacts of the project and to provide direction when incorporating 
measures that may be needed to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate for any adverse 
impact that the project may have on people and the environment. 
40. 
Since project activities will be located principally within indigenous territories, and 
indigenous peoples are key beneficiaries of the project, a free, prior and informed consent 
process was designed and carried out by the AE and partnering government entities. The ESMF 
summarizes the key recommendations and inputs of indigenous peoples during the process that 
have been incorporated into project design. The ESMF also provides a rating system to evaluate 
the scale or degree of negative impacts generated by project activities, with each identified 
impact evaluated in terms of level of severity. The AE determined that, on the basis of this 
evaluation, the environmental and social benefits of the project outweigh its likely negative 
impacts. Among the most significant social impacts noted are the likelihood of indigenous 
peoples being excluded from the project because of their lack of title to land, and associated 
risks related to unequal treatment of indigenous peoples and women. Regarding risks to 
indigenous peoples’ communities, an initial guidance document for developing an indigenous 
peoples plan is provided, and the ESMF includes a commitment to developing a full indigenous 
peoples plan upon project approval should there be indigenous peoples living in the project 
area where activities will take place. Other impacts include potential economic impacts caused 
by reduced crop yields or fluctuations in produce prices, and negative environmental impacts 
due to use of agrochemicals and generation of wastes. The ESMF describes how the identified 
risks and impacts will be prevented, controlled or mitigated through the development of 
mitigation measures and approaches to enhance positive impacts, including providing budget 
for implementing such measures. The ESMF discusses the conditions under which 
environmental and social management plans will be required, and also provides guidance on 
the general elements of an environmental and social management plan.  
41. 
The AE is recommended to refer to GCF standards, including the Indigenous Peoples 
Policy, noting also that in cases where there is a gap between International Finance 
Corporation’s Performance Standards 7 (IFC PS7) and the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the 
Indigenous Peoples Policy will be upheld. Safeguard 9.2 provides that an indigenous peoples 
plan is only necessary in certain circumstances, namely: “In cases where the project is for both, 
indigenous and non-indigenous peoples, an Indigenous Peoples' Plan will be required only if a

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 85 
 
 
 
substantial number of beneficiaries are Indigenous Peoples.” Paragraph 38 of the GCF 
Indigenous Peoples Policy requires only the presence of indigenous peoples for an indigenous 
peoples plan to be necessary; it does not state that they need to be the substantial number of the 
beneficiaries. Where indigenous people are a minority it might be more appropriate to develop 
a community development plan.  
42. 
The “Summary of Stakeholder Consultations and Participation Plan” (annex 7 to the 
funding proposal) details the overall consultations, the methodology for obtaining free, prior 
and informed consent and the processes undertaken in preparation for the proposed project, 
and includes details of those who participated and their recommendations for moving forward. 
It also summarizes consultations and training workshops that were held with government 
stakeholders and other interested participants in the project. The document further describes 
the plan for stakeholder engagement, including presenting the governing stakeholder 
engagement in Guatemala, the importance of multi-stakeholder engagement, a description of 
the AE’s recommended practices for participatory engagement, and information on what 
constitutes effective stakeholder engagement. While the AE commits to following good practice 
on implementing stakeholder engagement, a more detailed stakeholder engagement plan that is 
specific to the proposed project and diverse stakeholders and considers the risks that were 
identified in screening activities may need to be further developed during project 
implementation.  
43. 
The ESMF indicates that a project steering committee as well as a technical committee 
project management unit (PMU) will be responsible for the general coordination of project 
activities. The territorial operating units will be responsible for implementing the interventions, 
as well as for ensuring compliance with the ESMF and related safeguard documents. The ESMF 
includes a description of how grievances will be managed at the entity level based on the AE’s 
guidelines. At the project level, it describes a six-step approach to project-level grievance 
handling, including lines of responsibility, information disclosure, and elevation of complex or 
unresolved cases. It should be noted that the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy also states that the 
GCF Independent Redress Mechanism and the Secretariat’s indigenous peoples’ focal point will 
be available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made. 
4.2 
Gender policy 
44. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan, and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the Gender Policy of the GCF.  
45. 
The AE, through the gender assessment, affirms the country’s commitment to gender 
equality and women’s empowerment by providing information about the existing enabling 
environment. Under Guatemala’s constitution women and men are equal in terms of 
opportunities and responsibilities. The National Council for Urban and Rural Development is 
expected to “promote policies [...] that encourage the active and effective participation of 
women in decision-making, at the national, regional, departmental, municipal and community 
levels, as well as to promote community awareness of gender equity [...].” In addition, the 
National Food and Nutrition Security Policy and the Law on the National Food and Nutrition 
Security System (point 9.3) provide for the promotion of women’s participation, and points 9.4 
and 10.5.5 of the law provide for prioritizing groups including those experiencing high food 
vulnerability, such as pregnant women.   
46. 
The assessment, which was prepared on the basis of secondary sources and 
consultations, presents findings which indicate that, despite the existence of favourable policies 
and commitments, women in Guatemala remain highly vulnerable. This is particularly true for 
rural and indigenous women, who more often live in poverty or extreme poverty. Women face 
systemic discrimination in education (and there is evidence that some are illiterate and/or 
monolingual), employment and earnings, and participation in decision-making at various levels.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 86 
 
 
 
They are not represented well in the various community councils and when they are present in 
such councils their role tends to be reserved in expressing their views. Further, women spend 
most of their time (a significant amount of time) working and are engaged in unpaid activities as 
they engage in reproductive and community-wide activities in addition to some productive 
activities. Women in Guatemala have less access to land and natural resources, preventing them 
from accessing credit from financial institutions. Although land might bear the names of both 
the husband and wife, control of the land still defaults mostly to the men, because they are 
considered as heads of household. Existing stereotypes expect women to remain engaged in 
reproductive works while men are expected to work outside the home and bring in an income. 
Women may make decisions on the activities that are their responsibility, but women generally 
do not have a say on how earned income is spent or invested. One of the reproductive roles that 
is time-consuming and a barrier to women to fully engage in various activities is childcare. As a 
result, women may not be able to engage in training and capacity-building activities in various 
value chain development activities. 
47. 
Although women may be disadvantaged in many regards, women do contribute 
significantly to the food and nutrition security of their households. They engage in various 
backyard activities such as growing green vegetables, raising birds and pigs, and sometimes 
even medicinal plants. These do not generate income or, in the cases where they do, they are 
very scarce and generally are significantly lower than the income that men generate. Women 
are responsible for fetching water to fulfil household water consumption needs, personal use 
and for tending to their backyard gardens, while men’s use of water is mostly for productive 
activities. They play the major role in water collection, transportation, management and use for 
their households. 
48. 
The fact that there are differentiated needs and uses for water presents differentiated 
impacts as climate change occurs. Women faced with water scarcity will have to walk longer 
distances and spend more time collecting water, thereby being exposed to greater physical 
hazards and more time spent on collecting water. The current water sharing arrangements in 
place are not tailored to the needs of women and indigenous peoples. Participation of women in 
the water-sharing arrangements is very low and even non-existent in some areas. Similar to the 
lack of decision-making on income generation, women also lack equal access to decision-making 
platforms on the distribution and use of water. 
49. 
The AE has, as per the requirements of the Gender Policy of the GCF, submitted a gender 
action plan which includes activities that will respond to the challenges faced by women. The 
activities are supplemented with targets, indicators and required budget to implement the 
action plan. The implementation timeline of the gender action plan indicates that all the 
activities will be completed by the end of the project, which are included in the overall 
implementation timetable. The AE designated a gender expert based in Guatemala to support 
the implementation of the gender action plan. The AE will also be working with institutions 
which have gender policies and institutional strategies for gender equity and cultural relevance. 
The activities included in the gender action plan are aimed at ensuring that women receive 
climate-adapted information, are trained on agricultural adaptation measures, constitute a 
portion of seed banks to be established, engage in income-diversification strategies, receive 
technical support to access forest incentives, and –particularly female headed households – are 
trained on efficient water use and management practices, and access to rainwater collection 
systems in their homes. Cost-effective mobile-based childcare will be used to encourage women 
to enable themselves to participate in various activities of the project. Furthermore, there are 
some technical training activities are aimed at institutions, ensuring that they are able to target 
women as participants for various interventions. There are specific training activities to 
implement the findings and recommendations in the gender assessment for women, mixed 
groups and men. These training events will enhance women’s empowerment and address 
gender inequality.

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 87 
 
 
 
4.3 
Risks 
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium risk) 
50. 
The project aims at building the resilience of Guatemala’s most vulnerable farmers and 
their livelihoods against the impacts of climate change. The total project cost is USD 66.7 
million, of which USD 29.8 million is GCF financed and USD 36.84 million is co-financed by 
MAGA, INAB and KOICA.  
51. 
The AE, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), will act as 
the EE for all the activities under the project and will be responsible for the GCF proceeds and 
for the overall quality assurance and oversight of the project. MAGA and INAB will be 
responsible for managing their co-financed funds but will not execute any GCF proceeds. 
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk) 
52. 
FAO is the AE and the EE for channelling GCF proceeds. FAO has a track record in 
implementing agricultural and climate resilience projects in the country. It also has a local 
presence via the FAO-Guatemala country office, as well as via the sub-regional Office for 
Mesoamerica. FAO has executed 14 projects with the partners in this project, of which the first 
project was started in 1977. 
53. 
MAGA and INAB will not execute any GCF proceeds and will execute their co-financed 
funds (the in-kind contribution from MAGA and the PINPEP/PROBOSQUE incentives from 
INAB). INAB and MAGA have experience of working with FAO: since 1977, they have been 
partners in implementing 14 and 4 projects respectively with FAO. 
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
54. 
Participation: Low participation of local actors (e.g. as result of cultural barriers) would 
reduce the impact of the programme as well as the ability to catalyse INAB co-financing. The 
risk has been reduced as a result of the consultation process and because capacity-building 
sessions, training and communication materials and technical assistance will be provided in 
local languages to ensure the engagement of indigenous families and that they benefit equally 
from the project and support its activities. The training processes will consider topics discussing 
the importance of the participation of all family members and ethnic groups in decision-making 
processes. 
55. 
Operating environment: Security challenges could hinder the ability of the project 
team agents to work with farmers. Changes of central and local government leadership and in 
overarching policy priorities can lead to a lack of support for project activities. Security risks are 
partially mitigated by hiring local staff and engaging local leaders for support. Under 
Component 3, the project will help to strengthen implementation and institutional 
arrangements that mitigate this risk and increase the likelihood that project activities in the 
territories will continue uninterrupted. 
56. 
Co-financing risk: INAB has committed at least USD 24.1 million in the form of financial 
incentives under the PINPEP forest incentive programme to be invested in the project area 
during the life of the project, providing local producers can qualify.  If the local producers fail to 
meet the qualifying criteria, co-financing will be reduced as will the expected impacts to be 
achieved. Additionally, INAB states that the financing of the incentives is subject to the 
allocation that the Ministry of Finance makes available under the Organic Law of the Budget of 
the Republic of Guatemala, which is approved annually by the Congress. INAB financial

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 88 
 
 
 
incentives can also be applied outside of the project territories or be applied to producers that 
qualify without support of the project. 
57. 
Operational risk: Improper management of the storage supply systems would reduce 
the impact of the proposal. Sustainability of operation and maintenance of acquired equipment 
will be guaranteed in the budgets of the beneficiary institutions. Maintenance of village 
irrigation systems will be supported by farmers’ contributions, which are improved through 
project interventions on alternative income generation activities. The local water committees 
will be responsible for overseeing this infrastructure after project completion. Training 
programmes will be developed for farmers and municipal representatives in water supply 
system construction, operation and maintenance. 
4.3.4. 
Project viability and concessionality 
58. 
The economic internal rate of return of the project is high, at 33.9 per cent over a period 
of 20 years. It should be noted that the coffee and cocoa modules of the project are profitable 3 
to 4 years post investment for beneficiaries but are grant funded. The AE notes that the GCF 
grant financing for coffee and cocoa modules is justified by the needs of the recipient, which 
includes some of the poorest farming communities in an already poor country, and by the lack 
of viable alternative financial instruments for building climate resilience. The country has not 
previously designed financial mechanisms to serve smallholder farmers in poverty conditions. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
59. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6. 
Compliance (medium risk) 
60. 
A review of the proposed activities under the funding proposal does not indicate any 
unusually high inherent risk for money laundering, financing of terrorism or prohibited 
practices. Nevertheless, the capacity of implementers may vary in terms of integrity controls. 
The AE has indicated that it has policies and procedures in place that will monitor and mitigate 
any risks effectively. Based on the information provided, the compliance risk is assessed as 
medium, subject to change if circumstances warrant otherwise. 
4.3.7. 
Recommendations 
61. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment 
Rationale 
Overall programme 
Medium 
Security challenges could hinder the 
ability of the project team / agents to 
work with farmers. Low participation 
of local actors (e.g. as result of cultural 
barriers) would reduce the impact of 
the programme as well as ability to 
catalyze INAB co-financing. Comfort is 
derived from local experience of FAO 
with the other MAGA and INAB. 
Accredited entity/executing 
entity capability 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 89 
 
 
 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
62. 
The AE for the project, FAO, will perform the dual role of EE for all the activities under 
the project and will be responsible for the GCF proceeds and for the overall quality assurance 
and oversight of the project. As an AE, FAO shall sign a project agreement with SEGLEPLAN 
representing the Government of Guatemala, and the Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources representing the GCF national designated authority. The project agreement will be 
also co-signed by the governmental co-financiers and co-executing entities (MAGA and INAB) 
and will reflect the governance arrangements, govern the implementation of the project, be 
legally binding, detail the roles and responsibilities of FAO, MAGA and INAB, contain the 
relevant provisions for FAO’s compliance with the requirements from the accreditation master 
agreement (AMA) and funded activity agreement (FAA), including the applicability of the 
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies to FAO project. 
63. 
As an EE, FAO will manage the GCF funds, manage financial expenditures against 
budgets, execute payments, and provide technical and secretariat assistance to the project 
steering committee and technical committee. The GCF and FAO will enter into a FAA, under 
which FAO shall administer the relevant GCF proceeds to be used for the financing of the 
project, in accordance with the FAA and AMA. Accountability on the use of financial resources 
will be facilitated through the review of annual and bi-annual project reports, as well as through 
audit and monitoring reports. 
64. 
The project will be governed by a project steering committee which will guide the 
overall project implementation and ensure inter-institutional coordination. It will also have a 
technical committee that will be responsible for the overall project coordination and for 
ensuring its strategic approach, coordination among the partners and consistency of the outputs 
with the strategic framework. For the execution and implementation of the project, a PMU will 
be established in Guatemala City in the office of the FAO, and this unit will coordinate and 
support project implementation and day-to-day activities during the project lifecycle, in close 
consultation with the governing structures of the project.  
65. 
FAO will contract the PMU in accordance with its policies and procedures. The day-to-
day project monitoring and implementation responsibility rests on a nationally recruited 
coordinator who will lead the PMU. The coordinator will be supported by a technical officer, a 
financial officer, thematic advisers, a monitoring and evaluation specialist and administration 
and operational staff. At the local level, territorial operating units will be established to serve as 
the key channel of communication between the PMU and local stakeholders and to assist with 
the implementation of the stakeholder participation and engagement plan. The PMU will 
prepare the annual report for each year of implementation and FAO will provide inputs to the 
annual reports. The annual reports will be shared with the technical committee and other 
stakeholders. The annual performance reports will be due to GCF 60 days after the end of the 
calendar year. The final project annual report and the terminal evaluation report will serve as 
the final project report package. 
66. 
The financial management and procurement function under this project will be guided 
by relevant FAO rules and regulations, as well as relevant provisions in the AMA signed by FAO 
and the GCF. In the project execution, GCF resources will be managed directly by FAO in 
accordance with its rules, regulations, policies and procedures.  
67. 
The project will be subject to the audit regime of FAO, including the external audit and 
internal audit functions. During implementation, FAO will provide oversight and quality 
assurance in accordance with its policies and procedures, which may include monitoring 
missions and spot checks. FAO has deployed an Oracle-based enterprise resource planning 
system called the Global Resources Management System, which will improve the flow of 
financial information, support financial monitoring and reporting, increase transparency and 
visibility, and strengthen internal control. FAO maintains a chart of accounts that allows for the

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.05 
Page 90 
separation of income and expenditure by donor and by project, to facilitate internal 
management and external reporting requirements.  
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
68.
Overall, the funding proposal and logical framework adequately apply the results
management framework and performance measurement framework indicators. The GCF Office
of Portfolio Management engaged very closely with the proponent to ensure that the monitoring
and accountability requirements are included in the funding proposal. After several iterations,
the revised logical framework meets the GCF requirements on monitoring and reporting the
anticipated results of the intervention. The project-level results have now been aligned with the
fund-level impact and outcomes. That is expected to provide sufficient basis for measuring
delivery of results.
69.
Implementation timetable: The implementation timetable has been provided in a
format that would enable progress assessment during the implementation period. It shows the
activities and key milestones and deliverables appropriately. The timetable contains
information on reporting schedule including the submission of annual performance reports, as
well as interim and final evaluations and completion reports. However, there have been some
changes in the activities which warrant adjustments in the milestones and delivery timelines.
4.6 
Legal assessment 
70.
The AMA was signed with the AE on 8 June 2018, and it became effective on 4 October
2018.
71.
The AE has provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all internal approvals
and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.
72.
The proposed project will be implemented in Guatemala, a country in which GCF is not
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further
assessed. The Secretariat submitted the first draft of the privileges and immunities agreement
to the Government of the Republic of Guatemala on 30 September 2015. The draft agreement is
currently under negotiation. The latest communication in that regard was sent by the
Government of the Republic of Guatemala to the Secretariat on 23 November 2017.
73.
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with relevant
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are
made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.
74.
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made
subject to the following conditions:
(a)
Signature of the FAA in a form and substance satisfactory to the Secretariat within 180
days from the date of Board approval; and
(b)
Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 91 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP145 
Proposal name: 
RELIVE – REsilient LIVElihoods of vulnerable smallholder 
farmers in the Mayan landscapes and the Dry Corridor of 
Guatemala 
Accredited entity: 
Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
Country/(ies): 
Guatemala 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium 
1. 
Guatemala is a Latin American country with high vulnerability to climate change. About 
51 per cent of its 15.6 million population lives in rural areas, whereas 41 per cent of the rural 
population belongs to indigenous groups. The country experiences a high incidence of poverty. 
Currently, 61 per cent of the population has been suffering from poverty, while 25 per cent 
experiences extreme poverty. In rural areas poverty may be attributed to the high degree of 
dependence on agriculture, which relies predominently on a rainfed production system 
involving staples such as beans and maize. The farmers also grow cocoa and coffee. Because of 
overdependence on a rainfed production system and rainfall variability at both temporal and 
spatial scales, farmers occasionally suffer from low productivity of major crops. This translates 
into occasional food insecurity and high incidence of poverty.  
2. 
The funding proposal and its associated documents, including the feasibility study 
report, indicate low density of meteorological observation data across the country, especially in 
the target regions (i.e. the dry corridor and the Mayan low lands) of Guatemala. The country 
exhibits diverse topography ranging from central highlands and mountains (average annual 
temperature being 20 ℃ and 15 ℃, respectively), tropical semi-arid savannah, tropical jungle in 
the northern lowlands, and humid coastal areas (average annual temperature being 25 ℃ to 30 
℃). The country also has variable rainfall distribution in both spatial and temporal dimensions. 
For example, the coastal zone generally receives the most rainfall amounts in an average year, 
while most of the country receives on average 1,000 to 1,200 mm rainfall. The inland areas 
exhibit a shorter rainy period spanning from May to October. The coastal areas, however, 
exhibit an extended rainy period starting in May but ending in December.   
3. 
Based on available meteorological data, the trend of average annual rainfall over 
Guatemala suggests that it can generally be regarded as a country with low water stress. The 
climate-related information for a fairly long period of observation is presented for two cluster 
regions representing the two target regions. The analysis indicates that: (a) the average annual 
temperature has been increasing steadily, with significant inter-annual variability; and (b) the 
average annual (total) rainfall exhibits either only slight to moderate increase or maintains a 
steady state over a lengthy observation period. Since 1960, the net change in average 
temperature over the country as a whole is 0.6 ℃, and the increment in average temperature is 
found across seasons with a slight inter-seasonal variation. An inter-seasonal variability in total 
rainfall is also observed, however the nominal increment in annual rainfall is primarily 
observed predominantly in the wet season and the drier months are found to be increasingly

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 92 
 
 
dry. For example, the total monthly rainfall in the months denoting the beginning and end of the 
rainy season are found to be 68 mm and 60 mm higher than the usual amounts, respectively. 
This indicates wetter onset as well as wetter ending (i.e. departure) of the rainy season across 
the country. However, in contrast, the drier months are found to be increasingly dry over the 
same observation period. 
4. 
The dry corridor is identified as such on the basis of acute inter-seasonal distribution of 
available rainfall. The long-term data and subsequent trend analysis indicates that a 
combination of increasing surface temperature across seasons and simultaneous decrease 
and/or stagnant total dry season rainfall has given rise to gradually increasing trends of 
drought over the entire landscape in the target regions. The Thornthwaite equation has been 
applied to long-term datasets and the results for 3-month, 6-month and 12-month analyses of 
Standardized Precipitation Evapo-transpiration Indices (SPEI) values bear evidence that 
drought has been occurring in the target regions in Guatemala.  
5. 
The funding proposal claimed that the target dry corridor has been experiencing 
medium to high susceptibility of drought. Without presenting any threshold for “hot days”, it is 
claimed that the number of hot days has been increasing by 2.5 per cent per decade. It is also 
claimed that consecutive dry days have increased over the observation period. Since the wet 
season has become wetter, one may infer that the increase in consecutive dry days has occurred 
in the dry season. The relevant analysis, however, has not ventured into seasonal analysis to 
provide greater understanding on that matter. 
6. 
The funding proposal has also presented projection-based modelling outputs and 
subsequent analyses. As expected for any General Circulation Model (GCM), the future 
projection under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5 (RCP 4.5) for the country reveals a 
rise in average temperature, and also exhibits a continued rising trend with higher levels of 
forcing and over time. Unlike the steady increase in average annual rainfall, as demonstrated by 
long-term data for the two meteorological stations, the projection starts with a decline in 
rainfall, especially after 2030. The analyses clearly demonstrate that the total average rainfall in 
both June and July will be much higher than usual, while the decline in rainfall will tend to begin 
in the month of August. The projection also indicates that the October rainfall will be 
significantly lower than usual during the 2030s. The rise in surface temperature with a 
simultaneous increase in moisture deficit generally indicates a change in evapo-transpiration 
(ET0), that would affect standing crops such as beans and maize. 
7. 
The ensemble analysis of 36 GCMs is indicated in the funding proposal, which is set to 
derive future projection climatologies for the 2030s and 2070s using both RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 
scenarios. The SPEI trend analyses clearly indicate gradual changes in SPEI values, providing 
insights into gradual build up of moderate drought during the 2030s. A crop calender analysis 
indicates that both the field crops (i.e. maize and bean, both being essential parts of staple diet 
for the Guatemalan population) are susceptible to drought and their reproductive and maturity 
stages overlap with periods when rainfall deficits will start in August. Therefore, one may infer 
that, even during the 2030s, the staple field crops in the two target regions will be adversely 
affected by droughts. 
8. 
For the estimation of extent of dryness, outputs of another GCM are used for the 
estimation of ET0 by using the Thornthwaite equation. As anticipated, with projected decline in 
available rainfall the ET0 values are found to be increasing along with increasing surface 
temperature. The analysis is then extended to estimate crop yields in each of the target 
departments for major field crops such as bean and maize, and cash crops such as cocoa and 
coffee. For both RCP 2.6 and RCP4.5 scenarios, the yields of these crops are found to be 
generally lower than expected. 
9. 
Since the major climate change-related issue is agricultural drought, one expects to plan 
for responses which would address drought impacts. Indeed the project has considered

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 93 
 
 
addressing drought primarily by providing support to enhance the adaptive capacities of 
farmers in the target areas. The project is expected to generate three outcomes: “(1) critical 
production systems are climate resilient and farmers have enhanced, food-secured and adapted 
livelihoods; (2) water resources at micro-basin level are sustainably managed and landscapes 
are restored to ensure stable supply of water for farming amindst CC-induced drought 
conditions; and (3) local and national institutions adopt governance mechanisms and have 
strong capacities to implement climate change adaptation measures.” The project’s core entry 
point is increased rainfall deficits in the future, leading to projected increased ET0 losses.  
10. 
The targeting of the area is biased to poverty-related indicators. It is however claimed 
that the high poverty indices are due to overdependence on rainfed agriculture and occasional 
failure of staple crops due to invigorated droughts. The preferential choice of the dry corridor as 
one of the two target regions partly justifies the targeting of location. A much better targeting of 
stakeholders is accomplished when project beneficiaries in the target areas are identified. 
However, as the delineation of areas is weak, the overall targeting efficiency is also weak. 
11. 
According to the funding proposal, the project will be implemented over seven years at a 
total cost of USD 66.7 million, of which USD 29.8 million is requested to GCF as grants. There is a 
considerable amount of co-financing (USD36.84 million). The project is expected to benefit 
116,353 people directly representing 29 municipalities and 14 micro-basins of Guatemala, 
particularly in the departments of Alta and Baja Verapaz, Peten, Zacapa and Chiquimula in the 
central dry lands. Out of the 116,353 beneficiaries, an estimated 46,541 will be women (40 per 
cent). The total direct beneficiaries constitute only 0.7 per cent of national population. The 
indirect beneficiary base is bigger, estimated at 583,146, of which 300,320 are women. 
Therefore, the proportion of indirect beneficiaries with respect to national population is 3.9 per 
cent only. 
12. 
It must also be highlighted that an ongoing GCF funded project (i.e. FP087), which is 
implemented by the International Union of Conservation of Nature (IUCN) in Guatemala, has 
been credited to upscale regional and national efforts for climate data generation. The results of 
such efforts are yet to be seen. The current project is requesting additional grants to cover the 
cost of establishing additional meteorological data logging equipment, and must therefore be 
carefully coordinated with the above-mentioned GCF funded project in order to avoid 
duplication of efforts in the name of drought monitoring.  
13. 
There are weaknesses in the targeting process, which is biased towards poverty-
stricken areas. There is also a scope for potential duplication of efforts using GCF finances from 
more than one project, which needs to be avoided to optimize GCF value for money. In view of 
the above analysis, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) is of the opinion that the 
impact potential is medium. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium 
14. 
According to the funding proposal, an effort has been made to identify key barriers that 
are detrimental towards intensifying livelihood challenges of drought-affected poor farming 
communities in the intervention areas. The project is designed to address the following 
barriers: 
(a) 
Information barriers – (i) insufficient accuracy and lack of downscaled climate 
information for agriculture, and (ii) lack of tailored climate information and inequitable 
access to information; 
(b) 
Technical barriers – (i) limited knowledge and capacity of farmers regarding water 
resources management and climate resilient agricultural (CRA) practices, (ii) limited 
capacity of extension services, and (iii) inadequate water and land-use planning;

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 94 
 
 
(c) 
Financial barriers – (i) relatively high cost of upfront investment, and (ii) refusal of 
commercial banks to lend for CRA activities; 
(d) 
Social barriers – (i) women are disadvantaged regarding access to resources (i.e., 
smaller credit lines, higher interest rates than those for males) and information, and (ii) 
language barrier; and 
(e) 
Institutional barriers – (i) weak local/national governance of water resources 
management and climate change, and (ii) limited capacity for knowledge management 
and sharing on climate change to inform policymaking. 
15. 
In a bid to address the above-mentioned barriers, the project is designed to deliver the 
following three components: (a) implementing CRA practices and enhancing farmers’ 
livelihoods; (b) supporting efficient water management for agriculture to reduce the impact of 
increased water scarcity; and (c) improving enabling conditions for climate resilient livelihoods. 
The adaptive responses to the barriers identified above are clustered around the three 
components.   
16. 
The solutions proposed to address the above-mentioned barriers are not innovative. 
The core of the project deals with water management so that climate-induced drought may be 
ameliorated by the application of irrigation. For poor rural farmers, affordability of irrigation 
equipment is an issue and is compounded by limited access to credit support and high interest 
rates. Social barriers make it harder for women farmers to access resources to address drought. 
Moreover, despite having drought-tolerant crop varieties and seeds, due to poor extension 
services, farmers have limited choices to combat drought. Therefore, an overwhelming amount 
of effort and associated budget (about 84.7 per cent of the total) is dedicated to addressing the 
two broad aspects of the project, namely water management and finance for equipment. This 
leaves little room for innovation. However, considering a large proportion of the farmers 
represent indigenous communities, a holistic package already offers a viable mechanism to 
withstand increasing and more intense droughts under climate change. The prospect appears 
interesting, if not innovative as such. 
17. 
The approach is to channel the above-mentioned efforts through public expenditure and 
to involve public institutions. There is therefore very little involvement of the private sector. 
The project will assist farmers to have greater access to markets for their produce (sub-
component 1.3), enabling them to interact with the private sector operators and to optimize 
their relative gains from agricultural production and marketing.  
18. 
Since this project is designed for the dry corridor, it may be assumed that the impact of 
drought on staple crops and the two cash crops is particularly high in this region. Sector-wide 
replication potential (i.e. scalability) in the near future in other areas appears medium, despite 
the arrangements indicated in the theory of change. This is partly because drought intensity 
elsewhere in the country is not expected to be higher than that of the dry corridor, and by the 
2030s the projected increase in drought intensity is only moderate compared to the baseline. In 
general, in addition to the issues regarding climate-induced drought in the dry corridor, many of 
the barriers hold true for rural farming communities throughout the country. Therefore, sector-
wide replication of efforts will be possible, especially if availability of information, support for 
accessing credits at nominal interest rates, and institutional governance are established 
adequately. 
19. 
The project has sub-components for knowledge generation and learning. Significant 
progress will be made through the implementation of component 3 of the project where 
technicians and local government actors will be provided with technically oriented training to 
establish good governance. Component 3.2 will be dedicated to knowledge transfer (i.e. training 
of staff members, experts and community promoters). For the agricultural producers, there will 
be 10 different types of trainings to build capacity on climate-risk informed planning and 
implementation of agricultural adaptation measures at farm level. However, the latter training

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 95 
 
 
will target only about 6,195 farming households. Since efforts will be made to build capacities 
and to train extension officials, there is considerable potential for them to interact with farming 
communities beyond the duration of the project. 
20. 
Creation of an enabling environment is likely to be achieved through activities under 
sub-component 1.1 (establishment of meteorological data loggers) and the entire component 3 
(knowledge generation and learning). Although meteorological data acquisition in Guatemala is 
already funded by GCF through the implementation of FP087, additional data logging 
arrangements will feed into the national meteorological database for long-term use (provided 
the relevant national organization performs well). The capacity-building efforts designed under 
component 3 of the project will certainly enhance the institutional capacities of relevant 
institutions. If the Government of Guatemala can arrange finance, good replication potential 
exists beyond this project through knowledge management and training at farmers’ level 
involving the agricultural extension services. However, the project does not contribute to 
market development as such. It only promises to link farmers with markets thus offering them 
greater commercial access. 
21. 
The project does not intend to change incentives for market participants by reducing 
costs and risks for the deployment of climate resilient solutions. There is no visible effort to 
create incentives for women farmers to access credit at lower interest rates, although such an 
issue is critical for their successful integration into CRA. The project provides technical support 
to 19,239 smallholder farmers (women in particular) to access “forest incentives”, although the 
Government of Guatemala already provides this facility for poor smallholder farmers. It is not 
understood why the smallholder farmers could not have access to such Government incentives 
and why an external project is needed to push this national agenda. The relevant activity under 
sub-component 2.2.1 appears superficial for accessing a national incentive on forest restoration. 
22. 
There is no activity to strengthen regulatory frameworks and policies to drive 
investments towards improving climate-responsive planning. However, an activity (sub-
component 2.1) is dedicated to developing community-led water management plans and this is 
likely to contribute to creating micro-scale regimes to sustainably manage water resources and 
address drought.  
23. 
The potential for expanding the project’s impact without equally increasing its cost base 
is low. In fact, a good number of projects are being financed for improving farm productivity and 
reducing poverty amongst smallholder farmers, including women and indigenous groups, both 
in the target dry corridor and elsewhere in Guatemala. Considering that such efforts in the 
recent past should have contributed to reducing poverty of rural smallhoder producers, the 
actual progress has been painfully slow.1 In addition to climate change-induced drought, there 
must be other dominant factors that contribute to the vicious cycle of low-productivity, low-
output, low-income involving poor producers. The theory of change addresses only a few issues 
and appears inadequate to challenge the core of the problem, involving sustainable agricultural 
development and including forest restoration at landscape level.  
24. 
In view of the above discussions, the independent TAP finds the paradigm shift potential 
to be medium. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
          Scale: Medium to High 
25. 
The project will directly contribute to the following Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs): 
 
1 It is reflected in the currently high incidence of poverty in rural areas, particularly involving crop farmers and 
indigenous groups. Data is provided in the Feasibility Study report (for reference, Table 1 and also under sub-
section B.1.3 of Annex 2).

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 96 
 
 
(a) 
SDG 2 (Zero hunger) – by reducing the adverse effects of climate change-induced 
droughts, thereby preventing crop loss and augmenting productivity in the longer run, 
especially for rural smallholder producers including women; 
(b) 
SDG 5 (Gender equity) – by helping smallholder farmers including women farmers with 
drought-tolerant seeds, establishing drought-tolerant nurseries involving women and 
by providing training and climate information to take necessary steps towards reducing 
impacts of drought;  
(c) 
SDG 6 (Sustainable management of water) – by engaging relevant stakeholders towards 
formulating area-wide sustainable water management plans, judicious allocation and 
subsequent utilization of water to address droughts; and 
(d) 
SDG 13 (Enhanced climate action) – by addressing climate change-induced drought 
management and also by helping poor smallholders to have greater access to the 
Government’s forest incentives for forest conservation. 
26. 
In addition to the above-mentioned direct contributions, the project will indirectly 
contribute to SDG 1 (no poverty), by engaging with poor smallholders including women to 
practice CRA techniques, so that in the longer run they can overcome poverty. An indirect 
contribution is also expected through SDG 15 (use of terrestrial ecosystems, manage forests and 
combat desertification), where rangeland afforestation and agroforestry will be incentivised by 
involving poor communities. However, all these contributions to SDGs are limited to only a few 
thousand poor smallholders and women in the target region.  
1.3.1. 
Economic co-benefits 
27. 
The project will enable some 6,195 smallholder farmers including women farmers to 
gain from avoided crop losses due to drought management measures. In the longer run, they 
will also benefit from higher productivity due to the application of CRA. A limited number of 
women will gain from the establishment of 28 women-led, farm-level seed nurseries. Efforts 
towards diversification of productive units in home gardens involving 2,500 farm families will 
enable the recipients to gain financially. Moreover, about 19,239 smallholder (mostly women) 
farmers will receive support to access forest incentives, which will help the restoration of 
13,000 hectares of reforestation and agroforestry. The proceeds from these activities will help 
recipients to accrue financial benefits.  
1.3.2. 
Social co-benefits 
28. 
A significant proportion of the rural poor smallholders belongs to indigenous groups. 
Although there is no specific activity involving indigenous groups, their participation within the 
beneficiary groups in the Mayan landscape will enhance social inclusion, which will lead to 
social harmony.  
1.3.3. 
Gender equality 
29. 
The project focuses on greater access to water services and greater participation of 
women to access drought-tolerant seeds and CRA. The project promises to engage women in 
project planning and decision making from the beginning. Women are likely to benefit from 
training and awareness raising activities in relation to climate change, CRA, sustainable water 
management at the farm level, leadership and entrepreneurship and decision-making at both 
farm and community level. Although the ambition in terms of reaching adequate numbers of 
women-led farms and women farmers is relatively low, it will still have a significant 
contribution to achieving gender equality.  
1.3.4. 
Environmental co-benefits

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 97 
 
 
30. 
By virtue of climate change adaptation projects considered earlier and the technology 
packages available through national agricultural extension services, proven CRA techniques will 
be promoted in harmony with the local agroecosystem. Moreover, forest conservation practices 
at the landscape level involving about 13,000 hectares of forest lands will have potential to 
sequester carbon. The funding proposal estimates a sequestration potential2 of about 0.99 
million tons of CO2 equivalent over the lifetime of the project. A secondary environmental 
benefit will be accrued by establishing habitat connectivity and through the creation of forest 
buffer zones, which are critically important tools for the regeneration and restoration of forest 
ecosystems. This in turn will help forest biodiversity to prosper in and around the regenerated 
forest. It is claimed that, no environmentally damaging technology and/or technique will be 
employed to achieve the objective of the project.  
31. 
As indicated in the feasibility study and in the funding proposal, new seed varieties will 
be introduced (i.e. resilient/drought-tolerant seeds). As per the environmental and social 
management framework (annex 6 of funding proposal sub section 3.3), the project will not use 
genetically modified organisms. FAO does not foresee a request to use biotechnological 
products in any country for the reason that they normally are not a limiting factor for 
vulnerable communities of small farmers. FAO promotes the increase in productivity in a 
sustainable way that includes an increase in resilience.   
32. 
In view of the analysis regarding the contribution of the project to sustainable 
development, the independent TAP is of the opinion that the contribution is medium to high. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
          Scale: Medium to High 
33. 
According to internationally reputed assessments on climate change risks by countries, 
Guatemala possesses considerable high risk in global ranking (currently, 11th overall). This 
considerable level of risk is due to the exposure to climate change of rain-fed agriculture that is 
operated by poor smallholders with limited capacities. This is further compounded by the 
failure of national agencies to provide technologies and advisories where there is need and the 
failure to create access to soft credit support for poor and marginal producer groups. An 
overwhelming proportion of the rural population consists of indigenous groups, including of the 
Mayan civilization, who are engaged in staple cropping (i.e. maize and beans) and cash crop 
plantations (i.e. cocoa and coffee). As these groups are unable to invest in technologies to 
address the issues of drought and water management on their own, they remain perpetually 
vulnerable. The need for Guatemala to access international funds to develop its agriculture is 
well understood. However, there are government institutions including extension services that 
are intended to boost agricultural production through the adoption of advanced technologies as 
well as “forestry incentives” to prevent deforestation and incentivise forest conservation 
involving poor communities (PINPEP3 and PROBOSQUE4). There is also significant international 
support in development projects5 in relation to climate change adaptation, CRA and sustainable 
forest conservation and management. Despite the assistance available, the majority of the rural 
farming population remains in poverty and although the per capita income of Guatemala is 
significantly higher than that of a typical least developed country (LDC), the Government is 
 
2 Considering five components: (a) sequestration from basic grains; (b) from agroforestry and forest incentives; (c) 
conservation of forests; (d) coffee as an annual crop; and (e) cacao as an annual crop. The ExAct analytical platform 
is used for the analysis that indicates an annual sequestration potential of 49,413 tons of CO2 equivalent. 
3 In Spanish: Programa de Incentivos Forestales para Poseedores de Extensiones de Tierra de Vocación Forestal o 
Agroforestal  PINPEP is the law on forest incentives for holders of small areas of land suitable for forestry or 
agroforestry in Guatemala (Decree 51-2010). 
4 In Spanish: Ley De Formento al Establecimiento, Recuperacion, Restauracion, Manejo, Produccion y Proteccion de 
Bosque en Guatemala, PROBOSQUE, is an incentive programme for the establishment, recovery, management, 
production and protection of forests in Guatemala. 
5 The Feasibility Study report (Annex 2) lists some of these and summarizes their objectives and deliverables.

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 98 
 
 
unable to provide critically needed public finance to assist vulnerable smallholder farmers in 
rural areas,6 leading to continual inequity.  
34. 
Although the impact potential is rated medium and the number of recipient households 
is small (indicating low coverage), the gender-sensitivity and inclusion of indigenous groups 
indicate that the needs of the recipient groups are high.  
35. 
The proposal clearly explains why poor farmers are unable to address many of the 
pending issues. The need for institutional strengthening and capacity-building is also 
understood. The Government of Guatemala does invest in the creation of incentives such as 
forest incentives for the community-level forest conservation groups. However, accessing the 
incentives has remained an issue for the poor producers and forest conservation groups and 
apparently there is a dearth of finance on the part of the Government of Guatemala. Despite the 
availability of finance for grassroots institutions to support livelihoods and agricultural and 
meteorological services, and a plethora of externally supported projects (development and 
climate change adaptation), these efforts have been unable to overcome many of the known and 
long-term barriers. A thorough review could have been carried out to determine what is 
required to transform the sectors of predominantly crop agriculture and forestry over such vast 
landscapes. Even with the existing support of GCF through FP087 and the apparent success of 
the PROBOSQUE model, it has not been possible to reduce the needs, or improve the production, 
of smallholders living in the dry corridor or elsewhere in Guatemala. 
36. 
The funding proposal aims to strengthen water-related governance through a planned 
approach, strengthen institutional capacity to deliver CRA and provide a knowledge 
management sub-component. All these features will help energize the relevant public 
institutions deployed in the target region to deliver adaptation with a sequestration co-benefit. 
Apart from the risk of duplication of efforts in meteorological data acquisition and processing, 
the data logging equipment will certainly increase the coverage of the network of weather 
stations thus contributing to understand the climatology of various regions of the country in the 
long run. 
37. 
From the above analyses, the independent TAP assesses the overall needs of the 
recipient as medium to high. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
38. 
The project is found to be in alignment with Guatemala’s legal, policy and strategic 
positions on climate change-related issues. The Climate Change Framework Law provides the 
legal framework for climate change-related actions in Guatemala and the National Climate 
Change Action Plan regulates implementation of the law. The proposed project is in alignment 
with the action plan. Three major climate change-related documents, namely the nationally 
determined contribution, the nationally appropriate mitigation actions, and the national 
adaptation plan (NAP) have provided the right impetus and directions to develop the project. 
Guatemala has developed its agriculture-specific NAP (i.e. NAP-Agriculture), which allows the 
integration of agriculture within the adaptation framework. The project reflects the essence of 
NAP-Agriculture and is also aligned with the forest policy, including in the proposal to facilitate 
access to incentives for forest conservation. The project exhibits its firm commitment to 
implement the national forest policy by means of forest recovery, restoration, management, 
production and protection as foreseen under Decree 02, 2015 (i.e. PROBOSQUE). Overall, the 
project has strong synergy with national legal and policy instruments in relation to climate 
change. 
 
6 Paragraph 110 of the funding proposal.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 99 
 
 
39. 
The project is also a part of the Country Programming Framework for 2017–2021 
shared with GCF. In this respect, the project has a strong policy coherence with GCF 
programming. 
40. 
The FAO country office in Guatemala has been in operation for over five decades, 
assisting the Government on issues such as agricultural development, food and nutrition 
security, sustainable natural resources management and climate change. FAO has been active in 
building institutional and human resources capacity on those issues and has provided 
assistance to the Government of Guatemala on a number of projects in the past. For the current 
project, FAO will be supported by two national institutions as executing entities: (a) Ministry of 
Agriculture, Livestock and Food (MAGA); and (b) National Forest Institute (INAB). Both of these 
organizations have a mandate to coordinate and oversee implementation of a project such as 
this. These institutions have vast experience in executing externally funded projects and 
maintain a healthy portfolio of projects currently under implementation. 
41. 
The Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources is the national designated authority 
(NDA) for Guatemala. The NDA has been involved throughout the project design, including 
being represented in the project validation workshops. The NDA is proposed to be the Chair of 
the Project Steering Committee, thereby exerting its influence in bringing in political support for 
smooth implementation of the project. As indicated in the funding proposal, there have been a 
number of project validation workshops. It has been stated that a rigorous process of 
consultation has contributed to development of the project and that all major stakeholder 
groups have been invited and participated in this process. The focus on women may be one of 
the outcomes of stakeholder consultations in the design of the project. 
42. 
The independent TAP is of the opinion that strong country ownership is embedded in 
the design of the project. Country ownership is rated as high. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium 
43. 
The total project cost is USD 66.7 million, of which USD 36.8 million is co-financing (USD 
24.1 million in the form of financial incentives under the PINPEP and PROBOSQUE programmes 
implemented by INAB; USD 5.7 million in kind contribution from MAGA; and USD 7.0 million in 
the form of grants from Korean International Cooperation Agency, KOICA). GCF is requested to 
provide USD 29.8 million as grant. The co-financing is considerable, having a co-financing ratio 
of 1:1.23 (with respect to every GCF unit). 
44. 
The financial spread against specific components and sub-components indicates that the 
allocation has not followed the objectives of the project as indicated in the results areas. For 
example, the results area on ecosystem and ecosystem services is supposed to deliver 49 per 
cent of the adaptation of the project, as indicated in section A4 of the funding proposal. In 
reality, nearly 85 per cent of resource allocation in the budget spread is intended for adaptation 
through drought-tolerant agriculture (sub-component 1.2) and the entire component 2 on 
sustainable management of water resources at micro-basin level. The foreseen restoration of 
landscapes will ensure stable supply of water for farming amidst climate change induced 
drought conditions. An in-depth examination of budget heads reveals that a significant 
proportion of the budget is actually earmarked for consultancy as well as contractual services. 
The general approach to the project delivery involves national public funded institutions and 
yet there is greater reliance on consultancy and contractual services. Such mismatches and 
biased allocation of project resources generally indicate inefficient allocation of financial 
resources. 
45. 
Guatemala is a vulnerable country, however the country does not fall into any of the 
three categories of LDCs, the African Countries and the small island developing states. Yet full 
concessionality (i.e. grant) is requested. The budget analysis presented above and the request

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 100 
 
 
for grant support does not seem fully justified. Not does it seem justified to allocate grant 
support from GCF to access financial incentives already provided by the country party as co-
financing, without fully analyzing the prevailing governance structure and bottlenecks in 
delivering the forest incentive. Moreover, indirect adaptation benefits7 for managing drought 
from predominantly a sequestration action through forestry and agroforestry should also be 
considered.  
46. 
The funding proposal claims that economic analysis is performed considering only three 
sub-components (for Output 1.2, Output 1.3 and Output 2.2) due to the inability of quantifying 
benefits from other Outputs. Such selection of benefit streams leaves room for biased analysis, 
in favour of non-marketable benefits from forest conservation activities. Even if the tentative 
approach to economic analysis is accepted, it estimates a net benefit of USD 28.2 million and an 
Internal rate of return (IRR) of 50.0 per cent considering the project lifetime of 20 years and a 
discount rate of 12 per cent. The co-benefits accrued from forest ecosystem services in terms of 
erosion control, water provisioning and carbon sequestration actually represent 58 per cent of 
the total economic benefits. Since the core of the climate change discourse is drought 
management, the same project without the forest restoration and related incentives would not 
perhaps present impressive net present value and IRR, having other considerations constant in 
the economic analysis. 
47. 
The current project does not present any potential to catalyze private sector investment 
in drought management in agricultural production involving smallholders. Irrigation support 
and the promotion of drought-tolerant seeds are key for enhancing the adaptive capacity of 
poor farmers. For a 250-hectare agricultural area, drip irrigation with considerable high costs 
and a technically challenging technique is proposed, which may not be the best irrigation 
solution for the target population.  
48. 
The greenhouse gas emissions from the operation of irrigators has not been estimated 
as potential leakage emissions throughout the lifespan of the project. In absence of this potential 
leakage emissions, a total of 0.99 million tons of CO2 equivalent is estimated as the 
sequestration potential from afforestation and agroforestry activities in about 13,000-hectare 
land.  
49. 
Based on the above analysis, the independent TAP is of the opinion that the effectiveness 
and efficiency of the project is medium. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
50. 
The independent TAP recommends the Board to approve the medium sized project with 
the following condition: 
(a) 
Prior to the second disbursement in respect to the proposed project, the AE shall 
develop and submit to the Fund, in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF 
Secretariat, a meteorological data logger installation plan in consultation with the 
Seismology, Volcanology, Meteorology and Hydrology Institute, the ultimate recipient of 
the meteorological data collection equipment under Activity 1.1.2, in coordination with 
the AE under the GCF FP#087, to ensure optimal deployment of meteorological 
equipment and that there is no overlap or duplication in the areas or meteorological 
data collection activities covered by the Funding Proposal and those under GCF Funding 
Proposal 087.  
 
7 The sub-section A.4 of the funding proposal clearly states that the project only serves GCF result areas under 
adaptation and NOT for mitigation through forestry and land use.

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 101 
 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP 145) 
Proposal name: 
RELIVE – REsilient LIVElihoods of vulnerable smallholder 
farmers in the Mayan landscapes and the Dry Corridor of 
Guatemala 
Accredited entity: 
Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
Country/(ies): 
Guatemala 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
 
Impact potential 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
FAO would like to highlight that climate vulnerability is a function of both expected climate 
impacts and adaptive capacity. In the Dry Corridor, but not only, there is a direct correlation 
between poverty and adaptive capacity. Therefore poverty indices serve as an effective tool 
that has helped enhance targeting efficiency.  
 
With reference to the GCF FP FP #087 project, it is to be noted that UNDP and FAO led 
projects will be implemented in different geographical regions reducing the chances of 
overlapping and duplication.   In any case, the continued and strong coordination between the 
two AEs and the relevant Government agencies will ensure complementarity   The climate 
data generation activities described in FP087 and the meteorological data activities in the 
proposed RELIVE project will be coordinated through the INSIVUMEH1 to maximize 
complementarity and coherence. 
 
Paradigm shift potential 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
FAO would like to emphasize the importance of the proposed solutions to the barriers 
described in the FP in the local context with indigenous communities who otherwise would 
not be able to access such a holistic package of resilience measures. The proposed solutions 
are based on proven approaches that FAO has applied successfully in other contexts with 
similar characteristics and which have fostered a clear path towards sustainability, changes 
and scale. 
 
The key activity to strengthen policy/regulatory frameworks to drive investments is focused 
on making the forest incentive program more accessible to vulnerable small farmers and 
increasing its focus on climate resilience measures. 
 
1 INSIVUMEH: National Institute of Seismology, Volcanology, Meteorology and Hydrology

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.27/02/Add.05 
Page 102 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainable development potential 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
 
Needs of the recipient 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
 
Country ownership 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
While the ultimate project beneficiaries are vulnerable farmers, the project will engage 
private sector value chains to support delivery of resilience measures like climate resilient 
crop varieties and agricultural inputs. By overcoming the climate finance barriers for farmers, 
the project will strengthen markets for private sector value chain actors and promote greater 
engagement with farmers 
 
The use of ecosystem services for adaptation is a key pillar in the new promoted 
technological packages of project. In order to make such paradigm shift effective and 
sustainable for MAGA extension services, the project envisages a learning by doing for the 
technicians (through TA) to strengthen their skills and knowledge while ensuring project 
sustainability.   
 
The small drip irrigation systems proposed for small agriculture gardens to strengthen food 
security, have been promoted by FAO in the past and are adapted to the project conditions. 
Those small investments have a low cost, are easy to be transferred to the small farmers in 
the region and have a large impact.  The greenhouse gas emissions of each 1000 m2 systems, 
was not calculated due the low GHG impact expected.  
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
FAO thanks the independent Technical Advisory Panel for its review of the proposal and its 
recommendation to be approved by the Board. In addition, FAO acknowledges and agrees 
with the condition put forward prior to the second disbursement.

=== PAGE 103 ===
RESILIENT LIVELIHOODS OF VULNERABLE 
SMALLHOLDER FARMERS IN THE MAYAN LANDSCAPES 
AND THE DRY CORRIDOR OF GUATEMALA  
–RELIVE-GUATEMALA- 
 
 
 GENDER ANALYSIS AND EVALUATION AND ACTION PLAN 
(Annex 8) 
___________________________________________
May 22, 2020  
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Gender documentation for FP145

=== PAGE 104 ===
2 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
1. Acronyms ................................................................................................................ 4 
Part I: Gender Analysis and Evaluation ...................................................................... 5 
2. Introduction ............................................................................................................. 5 
3. General information at country level .................................................................... 6 
3.1 
The state of affairs of rural women in Guatemala ......................................................... 6 
3.2 
Demographic data........................................................................................................ 6 
3.3 
Rurality and rural women ............................................................................................. 6 
3.4 
The context of the project’s intervention areas ............................................................. 7 
3.4.1 
Alta Verapaz Department ..................................................................................................... 7 
3.4.2 
Baja Verapaz Department ..................................................................................................... 8 
3.4.3 
Petén Department .............................................................................................................. 11 
3.4.4 
Zacapa Department ............................................................................................................ 11 
3.4.5 
Chiquimula Department...................................................................................................... 12 
3.5 
Analysis of indicators in the project’s intervention area ...............................................13 
3.5.1 
Beneficiary population of the project ................................................................................. 13 
3.5.2 
Cultural and linguistic context ............................................................................................ 15 
3.5.3 
Economically active population (EAP)................................................................................. 15 
4. Gender gap analysis ............................................................................................. 16 
4.1 
Basic questions to contextualize the gender gaps in the present study .......................16 
4.2 
Use of time and non-remunerated work ......................................................................28 
4.3 
Heads of households ..................................................................................................29 
4.4 
Access to basic services .............................................................................................29 
4.4.1 
Education ............................................................................................................................ 29 
4.4.2 
Food and nutrition security and health .............................................................................. 29 
4.4.3 
Access to land ..................................................................................................................... 29 
5. Gender equality strategy ...................................................................................... 30 
Part II: Gender equality action plan ........................................................................... 32 
6. Bibliography .......................................................................................................... 39

=== PAGE 105 ===
3 
 
 
 
List of Tables 
Table 1: General information about the Alta Verapaz Department ................................................ 9 
Table 2: General information about  the Baja Verapaz Department ............................................ 10 
Table 3:: General information about the Petén Department ......................................................... 11 
Table 4: General Information about the Zacapa Department ....................................................... 12 
Table 5: General information about Chiquimula Department ...................................................... 14 
Table 6: Territorial extension and population to benefit from the project’s activities. ................ 15 
Table 7: Languages spoken in the municipalities selected for the project implementation ......... 15 
 
List of Figures 
Figure 1: Percentage of rural population by department in the implementation area of the Relive 
project ............................................................................................................................................. 7 
Figure 2: Mobile Childcare implementation during a training session in a FAO Project.  Part of the 
toys, materials, implements can be seen. ...................................................................................... 22 
Figure 3: One of the training participants is taking care of the kids,  during the training session.  
Later on, other woman will take her place. ................................................................................... 22 
Figure 4: Participants of a mixed training session on community mapping activities in Guatemala
....................................................................................................................................................... 26 
Figure 5: Participants of a women empowerment workshop drawing the body of a woman in 
Guatemala. .................................................................................................................................... 27

=== PAGE 106 ===
4 
 
 
1. 
Acronyms 
COCODE 
 
Community Development Council 
COMUDE 
 
Municipal Development Council 
DEMI  
 
Indigenous Women Ombudsman 
DMMS  
 
Municipal Directorates for Women  
ELCSA   
 
Latin American and Caribbean Food Security Scale  
ENCOVI 
 
National Household Livelihoods Survey  
INE  
 
 
National Statistics Institute  
MAGA  
 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food  
MARN   
 
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources  
MP 
 
 
Ministry of Public Defense (Ministry of Defense/Attorney General’s Office)  
MSPAS  
 
Ministry of Public Health and Social Assistance  
DDP 
 
 
Departmental Development Plan  
EAP  
 
 
Economically Active Population  
RECMURIC  
 
Central American Network of Indigenous, Rural and Agrarian Women 
SEGEPLAN 
 
Planning and Programming Secretariat of the Presidency  
SEPREM  
 
Presidential Secretariat for Women

=== PAGE 107 ===
5 
 
Part I: Gender Analysis and Evaluation 
2. Introduction 
1. The present document contains the gender analysis for the project entitled “RELIVE – REsilient 
LIVElihoods of vulnerable smallholder farmers in the Mayan landscapes and the Dry Corridor of 
Guatemala,” which will be presented by FAO before the Green Climate Fund for its approval.  
2. This gender analysis was carried out in order to comply with the Green Climate Fund’s Gender 
Equality Policy, which dictates that special attention shall be given to vulnerable populations 
and marginalized groups and individuals, as well as to local communities and indigenous peoples 
that are, or may be potentially, affected by the activities to be financed by the GCF (Córdova, 
2018). The Green Climate Fund likewise states that for all preparatory actions, equal 
opportunities to participate in consultations shall be offered to men and women regarding the 
expectation of the project, allowing them to provide proposals on the best way to implement 
the project’s activities. Among the main demands made by the concerned populations in the 
areas where development interventions shall be carried out are: 1) the need to have first-hand 
information on the main project objectives, 2) the need to know the ways in which the 
concerned communities shall be benefited, and 3) the need to have citizenship engagement 
throughout all stages of the project1. 
3. In Guatemala, and in particular in the proposed areas of intervention of the project, women 
have been consistently categorized as groups of vulnerable populations as due to the systemic 
discrimination they face, such as a lack of access to education, decent and remunerated work 
and income, and participation in decision-making platforms. Moreover, various studies 
conclude that women face longer working days, including upwards of 8 hours of non-
remunerated reproductive and household rearing work per day. In addition, in this context 
women have less access to land and natural resources (which in turn has prevented them in 
many cases to qualify for access to credit from financial institutions that tend to ask for land and 
capital ownership as collateral). Because of the all of the above, it proves essential to carry out 
a nuanced analysis on the gender-specific division of tasks before giving start to an initiative that 
seeks to tackle to impacts of climate change in rural areas. This is key in order to establish gender 
roles and to identify the needs specific to men and women in their tasks around different 
productive livelihoods. 
4. The present document was prepared with information gathered from secondary sources, 
including different national household surveys, statistical data compilations and territorial 
development plans. All of this information served to further gather and analyze data and 
statistics that allowed for the development of gender equality indicators, with the aim of giving 
more visibility and importance to the local circumstances that women face in the project’s 
proposed intervention areas. From these indicators it is possible to understand the gender gaps 
between men and women, which in turn will allow for the measurement of existing gender 
inequalities, especially those relevant to women, who are consistently the ones suffering the 
 
1 These demands were mentioned by the participants of the prior, free and informed consent workshops carried out in November 2018.

=== PAGE 108 ===
6 
 
most from these disparities. Likewise, this work allow the proposal of strategic actions that can 
tackle each of these gender inequalities. 
3. General information at country level 
3.1 
The state of affairs of rural women in Guatemala  
5. The role of women in rural development contributes to the economy and represents a high 
percentage of the rural manual labor involved. However, inequalities between men and women 
regarding the access to productive resources continue to exist.  
6. Rural women produce the vast majority of food, but they are the ones consuming the least 
amount of portions of what they themselves have produced. Rural women in Guatemala face a 
large inequality in relation to men regarding the access, use and control of resources, such as 
family income, means of production (land, equipment, tools, technical assistance, and credit 
options) and mechanisms to strengthen their capacity to become leaders and organized agents 
of development (FAO and EU FIRST, 2017). 
3.2 
Demographic data  
7. According to estimations for Guatemala (INE, 2019), in 2015 Guatemala had a total population 
of 16.18 million2. The percentage of the population living in rural areas for that period was 50% 
while 53.7% of the total population was living in poverty and 13.3% of the total was living in 
extreme poverty (Boa, Loboguerrero, Martínez Barón, & Rojas, 2014). In 2015, moreover, 
women accounted for 8,272,469 of the total population while men accounted for 7,903, 664 
(Guatemala, INE, 2016).  
3.3 
Rurality and rural women  
8. According to the ENCOVI, 50% of Guatemala’s total population is rural. When analyzing these 
data for the proposed intervention areas of the project, this percentage of rurality increases 
significantly, with 76.4% of rurality among the population in Alta Verapaz, 66.8% in Baja 
Verapaz, 68.3% in Petén, 56% in Zacapa and 73.1% in Chiquimula (INE, 2014) (see Figure 1). 
9. The same survey shows that rural women account for 51.5% of the total rural population of 
Guatemala. However, the last Agricultural and Livestock Census mentioned that only 5% of the 
lands used or viable to be used for agriculture were owned by women (INE, 2003). Rural women 
carry out activities related to agricultural production, however, they do not tend to receive 
monetary remuneration for this work. This is due, in the majority of situations, to the fact that 
these tasks continue to fall under the historically and societally-entrenched category of 
reproductive work, that is, work that is innately expected from a women solely because of her 
biological identity (FAO, 2015). 
10. Water use in rural area is as well an important element where women have a relevant role,  
however,  current water sharing arrangements in place are not sensitive enough to the needs 
of women and indigenous people, despite their key and major role in water collection, 
 
2 Even though a new National Population and Living Conditions Census was carried out in 2018, this updated information was not yet 
officially available at the time of writing the present document, hence why the document mentions population estimations by the 
National Statistics Institute (INE) that were in turn based on the last National Census from 2002, which constitutes the latest officially 
available data.

=== PAGE 109 ===
7 
 
transport, management and use (cooking, cleaning, and drinking) in their households (i.e in the 
project implementation area). Women also lack of equal access to decision-making platforms 
on the distribution and use of water. Participation of women in the water sharing arrangements 
is very low, and in some areas, close to nil3. 
 
Figure 1: Percentage of rural population by department in the implementation area of the Relive 
project 
3.4 
The context of the project’s intervention areas  
3.4.1 Alta Verapaz Department  
11. The Department of Alta Verapaz is located in northern Guatemala, adjacent to the Department 
of Baja Verapaz. These two constitute the National Northern II Region. More specifically, Alta 
Verapaz is located 220 kilometers from the capital city, and it is characterized by its coffee, 
cardamom, basic staple crop and livestock production. Coffee and cardamom, which account 
for two of the most important production sectors in the region, continue to be predominantly 
led by men. In many cases, moreover, the revenues from the sale of these two products 
represents the major (or even the only) source of income with which households survive. As 
such, the fall in international prices for both crops has provoked a critical decrease in the 
incomes of these families. This in turn has decreased the quantity and diversity of food items 
that local households can afford to consume. 
12. The most pressing adversities that women from Alta Verapaz face are the constant violations of 
their rights. More specifically, these women tend to have their rights to life, healthcare, food, 
education, dignified livelihoods and land violated (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad 
 
3 FAO reports that in some areas close to the project implementation area,   the participation was of 34% in 
Chiquimula and only 13.3% in Ixil area.   
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
At National Level
A. Verapaz
B. Verapaz
Petén
Zacapa
Chiquimula
(%) Percentage of rural population
Department

=== PAGE 110 ===
8 
 
San Carlos, 2006). Women tend to be assaulted while walking in the street, as well as in their 
own homes, workplace (if they have one) and institutions (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, 
Universidad San Carlos, 2006). Their access to work is even more limited than in other parts of 
the country, and they oftentimes face discrimination and/or are victims of humiliating 
treatment of all types by other people in their workplace environment (Instituto de Derechos 
Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006). Moreover, they barely even take part in social or 
political platforms (not even at the community level) (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, 
Universidad San Carlos, 2006) (see Table 1). 
3.4.2 Baja Verapaz Department 
13. The Baja Verapaz Department is located in central Guatemala, a region characterized by its 
production of green vegetables and basic staple grains. The main threats that the Department 
face are droughts, which impact food production and household incomes.  
14. The most pressing problems that women face in Baja Verapaz are the lack of access to judicial 
mechanisms and to health services (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 
2006). Moreover, women tend to lack knowledge of their own rights at all levels. It is because 
of this, on the one hand, that domestic abuse (which is very present and accentuated in the 
region, especially among elderly women) is not often reported and, on the other hand, that 
women are not aware that they are able to decide to space out their pregnancies over time or 
to decide to not get pregnant at all (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 
2006) (see Error! Reference source not found.)

=== PAGE 111 ===
9 
 
Table 1: General information about the Alta Verapaz Department 
I. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT THE ALTA VERAPAZ DEPARTMENT 
Department 
Alta Verapaz  
Territorial extension  
8,686 km2 
Location  
To the north, it is adjacent to the Department of Petén and to Mexico, to the South it is adjacent 
to the Department of Zacapa and Baja Verapaz, to the East it is adjacent to the Department of 
Izabal and to the West it is adjacent to the Department of Quiché. It is divided into 16 
municipalities (Cobán, Cahabón, Chahal, Chisec, Fray Bartolomé de la Casas, Lanquín, Panzós, San 
Cristóbal Verapaz, San Juan Chamelco, San Pedro Carchá, Santa Catalina La Tinta, Santa Cruz 
Verapaz, Senahú, Tactic, Tamahú and San Miguel Tucurú). 
Ethnic and sociocultural groups  
In the Department of Alta Verapaz one finds the Q’eqchi’ and Poqomchi’ linguistic communities.  
Sacred locations  
There have been 89 sacred locations identified in the Department.   
Dietary culture  
Turkey stew, beverages such as cacao and Boj. The Poqomchi’ community cooks the Sack Ik and 
cacao beverage.  
Demography 
• 
Total population:  1,183,241 with an increasing tendency of 3.11% between 2012 and 2013, 
which is higher than the national mean rate of 2.32%. 
• 
Male population: 49.8% 
• 
Female population: 50.2% 
• 
Rural population: 77% 
• 
Urban population: 23%  
• 
Percentage of population self-identified as Indigenous: 89.7% 
• 
Percentage of population self-identified as non-indigenous: 10.3% 
Illiteracy rates   
In 2013, illiteracy rates rose to 28.4%. As such, 45.3% of women and 27% of men are illiterate.   
School 
dropout 
rates 
among 
primary school children   
INE reported that for 2013, 2.8% of primary-level schoolchildren abandoned school. Moreover, 
the average number of schooling years for those 15 years or older was only of 4.6 among men 
and 3.5 among women. 
Food and nutrition security 
The ENCOVI 2011 reported that 17.5% of households face severe food insecurity.  
Maternal mortality 
In 2013, there were 44 maternal deaths per 100,000 births.   
Infant mortality  
Between 2005 and 2015, child mortality was 23% and infant mortality was 29%. 
Violence against women  
The MP received 751 reports of sexual violence in 2018.   
II. ECONOMIC DIMENSION OF THE ALTA VERAPAZ DEPARTMENT 
Poverty rate 
In 2011, the poverty rate rose to 78.2% (very much above the national average of 53.7%), and 
the extreme poverty rate rose to 37.7%.   
Economically 
active 
population 
(EAP) 
The EAP for 2010 was 37.2% (30.09% male and 7.23% female). 
Migratory flows 
There are out-migration flows as well as in-migration flows as a result of the seasonal demand 
for manual labor required during the coffee and sugarcane harvests. Even though there are some 
industries in the department, these do not account for more than 5% of all employees in the 
department. The service sector does not account for more than 10% of all employees, and 13.5% 
of the Department’s population works on a variety of other activities. There is little organized 
production and few cooperatives, and there was only one entity identified that support 
production among women.  
 Economic activities 
Of those working in agriculture, 92.92% are and only 7.08% are women. In commerce, 40.76% 
are men and 59.24%. In industrial activities, 69.91% are men and 30.09% are women. In the 
service sector, 39.79% are women.   
% of agricultural lands owned by 
women   
According to the Agricultural and Livestock Census of 2003, there were 88,243 agricultural and 
livestock enterprises, of which 84,518 were owned by men and only 3,725 were owned by 
women.  
Elaborated with data from (INE , 2002) (INE, 2011) (INE, 2014) (SEGEPLAN , 2011) (INE, 2003) (PNUD, 2019) 
(MSPAS, INE, SEGEPLAN, 2017)

=== PAGE 112 ===
10 
 
Table 2: General information about  the Baja Verapaz Department 
I. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT  THE BAJA VERAPAZ DEPARTMENT 
Department 
Baja Verapaz  
Territorial extension 
3,124 kilometers squared 
Location 
To the North, it is adjacent to the Department of Alta Verapaz. To the South, it is adjacent to 
the Departments of Guatemala and Chimaltenango. To the East, it is adjacent to the 
Department of El Progreso. To the West it is adjacent to the Department of Quiché. It has a 
territorial extension of 3,124 Km² and it is comprised by eight municipalities (Salamá, Cubulco, 
Santa Cruz El Chol, Granados, Purulhá, Rabinal, San Jerónimo and San Miguel Chicaj) comprise 
it. 
Ethnic and sociocultural groups  
The population of the Department of Baja Verapaz is predominantly indigenous. The dominant 
linguistic group is Achi’, which accounts for 41.52% of all linguistics groups in the Department, 
following by Q’eqchi, which accounts for 8.49% of the departmental total.   
Dietary culture 
The “boshboles” (corn-based wraps covered in squash leaves; the chilate (corn-based drink 
seasoned with peppers), and the atol shuco and pinol. 
Demography 
• 
Total population: 284,530, with an increasing population rate trend 
(2.58% between 2012 and 2013), which is slightly above the national 
average of 2.32%. 
• 
Male population: 47.9% 
• 
Female population: 52.1%  
• 
Rural population: 68.1% 
• 
Urban population: 31.9%  
• 
Percentage of population self-identified as indigenous: 55.8%   
• 
Percentage of population self-identified as non-indigenous: 44.2% 
Illiteracy 
24.2% of the total departmental population is illiterate. Disaggregated by gender, 33% of 
women are illiterate while only 20% of men are illiterate.   
School dropout rates among primary 
school children   
INE reports a dropout rate of primary-level schoolchildren of 2.5% in 2013. Moreover, the 
average number of completed years of schooling for those over 15 years of age was 5.44 for 
men and 4.63 for women. 
 Food and nutrition security 
Food and nutrition insecurity is mainly linked to a lack of access to food. Data from ENCOVI 
2011 show that for Baja Verapaz, 20.9% of households were facing a severe level of food 
insecurity. 
Maternal mortality 
For 2013, there were 8 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births. 
Infant mortality 
Between 2005 and 2015, the neonatal mortality rate was 13%, while the infant mortality rate 
was 22%. 
Sexual violence against women 
During 2017 there were 181 reports of crimes involving sexual violence against women.  
II. ECONOMIC DIMENSION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BAJA VERAPAZ  
Poverty rate 
Ein 2011, the departmental poverty rate was 64%, which was above the national average of 
53.7%. For the same period, extreme poverty reached 23.6%.  
Economically active population (EAP) 
The EAP for 2002 was of 78.86% made up by men and 21.14% made up by women.  
Migratory flows 
* 
Economic activities 
The main activity is centered around corn production, with 69.49% of the EAP dedicated to 
agricultural activities.  
Percentage 
of 
agricultural 
lands 
owned by women 
According to the Agricultural and Livestock Census from 2003, there were 25,331 agricultural 
enterprises in Alta Verapaz, of which only 1,901 where owned by women while 23,430 were 
owned by men.  
*No information was obtained. Elaborated with data from (INE , 2002) (INE, 2011) (INE, 2014) 
(SEGEPLAN , 2011) (INE, 2003) (PNUD, 2019) (MSPAS, INE, SEGEPLAN, 2017)

=== PAGE 113 ===
11 
 
3.4.3 Petén Department 
15. Petén is one of the most geographically extensive departments of the country. It is divided 
administratively into 13 municipalities, and it is known for its warm temperatures. In this 
department their main livelihood is the cultivation of basic grains (corn and beans), in addition 
to pepper crops, tomato, pepitoria and melon. A large part of the male population sells their 
unskilled labor force for agricultural activities (agricultural day laborer). On the other hand, few 
women are engaged in this type of activity (day laborers), since it is more common to take care 
of household chores, in addition to caring for children and the elderly from their extended 
families. Moreover, women to stay at home more often because of the trend of male migration 
(at least during a few months per year as part of their seasonal work). This forces women to 
become de-facto heads of households, which in turn forces them to adopt all chores and duties 
associated with taking care of the household and its occupants. 
Table 3:: General information about the Petén Department 
I. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT THE PETÉN DEPARTMENT 
Department 
Petén  
Territorial extension  
35,854 km2, making it the largest department in Guatemala.  
Location and political boundaries  
To the North and West, it is adjacent to Mexico. To the East, it is adjacent to Belize. To the South, it is adjacent to 
the Departments of Izabal and Alta Verapaz. Petén is divided into 14 municipalities: San Andrés, San Benito, Las 
Cruces, La Libertad, Flores, San José, Melchor de Mencos, Dolores, Poptún, San Luis, Santa Ana, Sayaché, El Chal 
y San Francisco. 
Ethnic and sociocultural groups  
Petén’s population is 32% indigenous and 68% non-indigenous. There are various linguistic communities in the 
department, including the Itza’, Mopan, Kaqchikel and Q’eqchi’, the latter being the most prevalent. 
 Demography 
• 
Total population:  687,192, with an increasing population growth rate at 3.68% between 2012 and 2013, 
which is above the national average of 2.32%. 
• 
Male population: 51.6% 
• 
Female population: 48.4% 
• 
Rural population: 68.7% 
• 
Urban population: 31.3% 
• 
Population self-identified as indigenous: 32.4% 
• 
Population self-identified as non-indigenous: 67.6% 
 Illiteracy 
10.7% of the population is illiterate, of which 20% are women and 17 percent are men. 
School 
dropout 
rates 
among 
primary school children   
INE report for 2013 a school dropout rate of primary schoolchildren of 7.2%. Moreover, the average number of 
years of schooling among those 15 years or older was of 5.32 years for men and 5.27 years for women. 
Food and nutrition security 
11.2% of households faced severe food and nutrition insecurity. 
Maternal mortality  
In 2013, 24 maternal deaths were reported per 100,000 live births. 
Infant mortality 
Between 2005 and 2015, the neonatal mortality rate was 11%, and the infant mortality rate was 19%. 
Violence against women 
The MP received  447 reports of sexual violence against women in 2018. 
II. ECONOMIC DIMENSIONS OF THE PETÉN DEPARTMENT  
 Poverty rate 
In 2011, the departmental poverty rate was 65.7%, which was above the national average of 53,7%. Moreover, 
the extreme poverty rate was 16.3%. 
Economically 
active 
population 
(EAP) 
The EAP for 2002 was 122,187, which accounted for 19.61 of the departmental EAP. 
Migratory flows 
During the 1970s, Petén received a significant number of migrants, who mainly arrived in search of land.   
Economic activities 
Petén has significant land extensions for agricultural production purposes, and its main crops are corn and beans, 
in addition to other types of agriculture, livestock rearing and exploitation of the forestry economy. 
Percentage of agricultural lands 
owned by women  
 
In 2003 there were 33,178 agricultural enterprises, of which 32,477 were owned by men and only 701 by women. 
Elaborated with data from (INE , 2002) (INE, 2011) (INE, 2014) (SEGEPLAN , 2011) (INE, 2003) (PNUD, 2019) (MSPAS, INE, 
SEGEPLAN, 2017)  
3.4.4 Zacapa Department 
16. The Department of Zacapa is located in eastern Guatemala, some 147 kilometers from the 
capital city. This region is characterized by large land extensions dedicated to the production of

=== PAGE 114 ===
12 
 
melon, watermelon, lemon and coffee. There are also other areas dedicated to mining and to 
the elaboration of wood-based products (see Error! Reference source not found.). 
Table 4: General Information about the Zacapa Department 
I. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT THE ZACAPA DEPARTMENT 
Department 
Zacapa   
Territorial extension 
2,690 km2 
Location and political boundaries  
To the North, it is adjacent to Alta Verapaz and Izabal. To the South, it is adjacent to Chiquimula 
and Jalapa. To the East it is adjacent to Honduras, and to the West it is adjacent to El Progreso. 
Ethnic and sociocultural groups  
The majority of the population is non-indigenous. In the Municipality of Union, only 0.5% of the 
population belong to the Ch’orti’ ethnicity. 
 Demography 
 
 
 
• 
Total population:  228,810, with a growing population rate of 1.64% between 2012 and 
2013, which is below the national average of 2.32% 
• 
Male population: 47.8% 
• 
Female population: 52.2% 
• 
Rural population: 56.9% 
• 
Urban population: 43.1% 
• 
Percentage of population self-identified as indigenous: 0.9% 
• 
Percentage of population self-identified as non-indigenous: 99.1% 
 Illiteracy 
3.7% of the population is illiterate and 21.45% of women and 18.72% of men are illiterate.  
School dropout rates among primary 
schoolchildren  
INE reports for 2013 a dropout rate of 6%. Moreover, the average number of schooling years 
completed for those over 15 years of age was 5.34 for me and 5.59 for women (one of the few 
cases where women fare slightly better than men). 
 Food and nutrition security 
The strongest threats are droughts, floods, and landslides resulting from hurricanes and tropical 
storms. This mainly affects the basic staple grain crops, which in turn affects the food and 
nutrition security of the population, especially of those living in extreme poverty already. In 
2011, there were 20.4% of households facing severe food and nutrition security.  
Sacred locations  
The prehispanic location of La Vega del Cobán in Teculután 
Chronic malnutrition  
50.6% for children under 5 years 
Maternal mortality  
In 2013, there were 2 maternal deaths for every 100,00 live births. 
Infant mortality  
Between 2005 and 2015, the neonatal mortality rate was 5% and the infant mortality rate was 
20%.  
Sexual violence against women  
The MP received 120 reports of sexual violence against women during 2018.  
II. ECONOMIC DIMENSION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ZACAPA  
 Poverty rate 
In 2011, the poverty rate was 55%, which was slightly above the national average at the time 
of 53.7%. Moreover, the extreme poverty rate was 25%.  
Economically active population (EAP) 
The EAP consists of 177,348 people, and women account for 22.1% of that and men represent 
77.9%. The low participation rate of women is evident.  
Migratory flows 
* 
Economic activities 
Agriculture: women represented 7.08% and men 92.92%  
Industry: women represented 69.91% and men 30.09%  
Commerce: women represented 59.24% and men 40.76%  
Services: women represented 39.79% and men 60.21% 
Percentage of agricultural lands 
owned by women   
In the 2003 Agricultural and Livestock Census, there were 11,563 agricultural enterprises 
identified, of which only 566 were owned by women and 10,997 were owned by men. 
*No information was obtained.  
Elaborated with data from (INE , 2002) (INE, 2011) (INE, 2014) (SEGEPLAN , 2011) (INE, 2003) (PNUD, 2019) (MSPAS, INE, SEGEPLAN, 
2017) 
 
3.4.5 Chiquimula Department 
17. The Department of Chiquimula is located in the northeastern region Guatemala. The population 
is mainly dedicated to the production of basic grains for self-consumption. One of the main 
threats it has is the growing irregularities of rainfall  (see Table 5).

=== PAGE 115 ===
13 
 
18. Some of the most serious problems that women in Chiquimula face are the high rates of gender 
violence, sexual harassment (in the street and at work), and in some cases, even forced 
prostitution (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006). Women who do 
manage to enter the labor market tend to perform jobs that have been historically and 
traditionally always been carried out by women (such as household chores and care of children 
and the elderly). Moreover, the majority of women who do work can only access jobs that are 
not formally recognized as gainful employment, or that are poorly remunerated and/or part of 
the informal economy (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006), such as 
housekeeping or caretaker tasks. Furthermore, many women migrate to the United States to 
work and, in other cases, the men in their families migrate before they do, therefore leaving 
them more exposed to all kinds of external threats and gender-based violence and 
discrimination (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006). 
19. Most likely as a consequence of the aforementioned difficulties, there also are high rates of 
femicide, sexual aggression and female suicide in the department of Chiquimula (Instituto de 
Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006). 
3.5 
Analysis of indicators in the project’s intervention area 
3.5.1  Beneficiary population of the project  
20. In the project’s intervention area, the activities slated to take place shall have an indirect impact 
on people who do not fall into the specific areas of the project’s activities. This will especially be 
the case if local radio and communication advocacy campaigns are carried out, as well as 
meetings with groups of women who live in other municipalities who may benefit from 
obtaining a replication of the information shared with women in the project’s intervention 
areas. With this vision in mind, the project aims to impact directly and influence indirectly at 
least 2 million people altogether (see Table 6).

=== PAGE 116 ===
14 
 
Table 5: General information about Chiquimula Department 
I. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT CHIQUIMULA DEPARTMENT 
Department 
Chiquimula   
Territorial extension 
2,376 km² 
Location and division 
of political boundaries  
To the North, it is adjacent to Zacapa. To the South, it is adjacent to Jutiapa and El Salvador. To the East, is 
adjacent to Honduras, and to the West it is adjacent to Jalapa and Zacapa. It is divided into 11 municipalities: 
Chiquimula, Camotán, Concepción las Minas, Esquipulas, Ipala, Jocotán, Olopa, Quezaltepeque, San Jacinto, 
San José la Arada and San Juan Ermita. 
Ethnic and 
sociocultural groups  
The population is 16.67% indigenous, which mainly situate themselves in the municipalities of Jocotán, 
Camotán, San Juan Ermita and Olopa. 
Demography 
• 
Total population: 388,155, with an increasing population growth rate of 2.32% between 2012 and 2013, 
which is equivalent to the national average. 
• 
Male population: 47.8% 
• 
Female population: 52.2% 
• 
Rural population: 73.4%  
• 
Urban population: 26.6% 
• 
Percentage of population self-identified as indigenous: 7.1% 
• 
Percentage of population self-identified as non-indigenous: 92.9% 
Illiteracy 
25.5% of the total population in illiterate, of which 31.16% are men and 33.32% are women. The 
municipalities showcasing the highest rates of illiteracy are those located in the Ch’orti region: Jocotán, 
Camotán, San Juan Ermita and Olopa.  
School dropout rates 
among primary school 
children  
INE reports that in 2014 the dropout rate was 2.9%. Moreover, the average number of schooling years 
obtained by men was 3.89 and 4.28 by women (another one of the few cases where women had, on average, 
more years of schooling than men).   
Food 
and 
nutrition 
security 
Food and nutrition security has been widespread due to droughts, which have affected the production of 
corn and beans. The municipalities that continue reporting the highest levels of food and nutrition insecurity 
are those making up the Ch’orti region. In 2011, 19.3% of households faced severe food and nutrition 
insecurity.  
Maternal mortality  
In 2013, there were 15 maternal deaths per 100,00 live births.  
Infant mortality  
Between 2005 and 2015, the neonatal mortality rate was 28% and the infant mortality rate was 51%.  
Sexual violence against 
women  
The MP reported 182 cases of sexual violence against women in 2018.  
ECONOMIC DIMENSION OF THE CHIQUIMULA DEPARTMENT 
 Poverty rate 
In 2011, the poverty rate was 62.7%, which was almost 10 percentage points above the national average of 
53.7%. Moreover, the extreme poverty rate was 28.3%.  
Economically 
active 
population (EAP) 
The EAP is 33.38% overall, with women only accounting for 32.39% of it and men accounting for 67.61% of it. 
Migratory flow 
Temporary migration rates are of 2.91%, which represent those people who migrate seasonally to the 
Department of Zacapa to work in the melon and banana plantations. However, 9.56% of the population has 
migrated permanently to the United States.  
Economic activities 
The main economic activity is agriculture, mainly on the production of corn and beans, as well as bananas, 
peaches, mangos, oranges, plums, and nuts. 
Percentage of 
agricultural lands 
owned by women  
There were 28,768 agricultural enterprises in 2003, of which 26,702 were owned y men and only 2,066 by 
women.  
Elaborated with data from (INE , 2002) (INE, 2011) (INE, 2014) (SEGEPLAN , 2011) (INE, 2003) (PNUD, 2019) (MSPAS, INE, 
SEGEPLAN, 2017)

=== PAGE 117 ===
15 
 
Table 6: Territorial extension and population to benefit from the project’s activities. 
No. 
Department 
Municipalities Territorial extension Km2 
Population  
 
Project area 
29 
17,470.82 
1,206,009 
1 
Alta Verapaz 
17 
10,636.67 
814,300 
2 
Baja Verapaz 
3 
1,155.46 
80,207 
3 
El Petén 
3 
5,467.69 
101,558 
4 
Zacapa 
1 
211 
25,464 
5 
Chiquimula 
5 
1,29.02 
184,480 
 
 
 
3.5.2  Cultural and linguistic context   
21. The municipalities where the proposed project aims to carry out its interventions have a total 
population that self-identifies as indigenous of 761,591, which represents 34% of the total 
population of the departments where the project aims to focus on. Moreover, among this 
population, five indigenous languages are spokenof which four are of Mayan origin  (see Table 
7),. Unfortunately, there are neither disaggregated data by gender nor by indigenous origin, in 
addition to data disaggregated by gender in relation to each of the five languages spoken.  
22. This is an important factor to consider given that at the time of implementation, the linguistic 
and cultural aspects of these regions must be taken into account, such as ensuring to carry out 
the respective activities in the local language while ensuring the respect for the Mayan 
cosmovision, among other key considerations. 
23.  
 
Table 7: Languages spoken in the municipalities selected for the project implementation 
Department 
Municipalities 
Language 
Alta Verapaz 
Cobán, Fray Bartolomé de las Casas, Lanquín, Panzós, Chamelco, 
Carchá, Cahabón, Senahú, y Tucurú 
Q'eqchi' 
San Cristóbal Verapaz, Santa Cruz Verapaz, Tactic, Tamahú y  Tactic  
Poqomchi' 
Baja Verapaz  
Purulhá,  Rabinal, San Miguel Chicaj, 
Achí, Poqomchi' 
Zacapa  
La Unión 
Español, Ch'orti' 
Chiquimula   
Jocotán, Camotán, Olopa , San Juan Ermita y Chiquimula  
Ch'orti' 
El Petén  
Dolores, San Luis, Poptún   
Q'eqchi 
 
3.5.3 Economically active population (EAP)  
24. Women represent more than half of the population that will be benefited from the project’s 
activities. However, only 13.13% is made up of women, in contrast to the percentage occupied 
by men, which is 44.90%. The gender gap between men and women in terms of access to paid 
employment is represented in these data. In addition, these data can also represent the fact 
that women tend to dedicate upwards of 10 hours per day on household-related tasks, which 
are not officially considered as gainful employment and thus prevents them from formally taking 
part in the remunerated labor market.

=== PAGE 118 ===
16 
 
4. 
Gender gap analysis  
4.1 
Basic questions to contextualize the gender gaps in the present study 
 
What is the legal status of women?  
25. Even though after the Peace Accords signed in 1996 several mechanisms were created for the 
defense of women in general (Secretaría Presidencial de la Mujer –SEPREM) and indigenous 
women in particular (Defensoría de la Mujer Indígena -DEMI-), different laws were enacted for 
their protection and development (i.e. comprehensive development of women and the 
prevention of intra-family violence, sexual violence, and trafficking and exploitation, femicide 
and other forms of violence). In addition, a series of policies were designed with the main 
purposes of attending to the specific needs of women (Política Nacional para la Promoción y 
Desarrollo Integral de las mujeres – PNPDIM) (ONU Mujeres, n. d.), and specific research bodies 
were created for gender violence issues (ONU Mujeres, n. d.). However, women continue to be 
discriminated against in many ways. For example, according to figures from UN Women, "only 
2% of mayoral offices are headed by women" (ONU Mujeres, n. d.), and women in general are 
underrepresented in all political spectra (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San 
Carlos, 2006).  
26. Moreover, the use of birth control medication is not yet far-reaching (ONU Mujeres, n. d.) in 
these communities, despite the fact that the reproductive years of youths are starting at an 
early stage (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006). The lack of 
information regarding sex education and reproductive health translate into the fact that “more 
than 4,000 girls between 10 and 14 years of age give birth every year” (ONU Mujeres, n. d.), 
which in turn exposes them to a higher likelihood of being exposed to sexually transmitted 
diseases. In the broader Guatemalan context, “the liberty [for Guatemalan women] to exercise 
and enjoy their sexual and reproductive rights [...] is still very limited” (Instituto de Derechos 
Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006), and the information and protections afforded by the 
State to young women in this matter is also limited to their roles as mothers (Instituto de 
Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006). As for women who belong to the LGBTQI+ 
community are, for the aforementioned reasons, in an especially precarious situation (Instituto 
de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006). It is equally alarming that the possibility 
of rural women to be able to make decisions over their own body is “almost non-existent” 
(Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006). 
27. The access of girls and women to education is much lower than that of men, and their 
employment and employment rates are much lower as well, especially as women tend to work 
much more in the informal labor market than men do (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, 
Universidad San Carlos, 2006). Moreover, although Guatemalan law recognizes the right to co-
ownership of land for women, this has not translated into real access to land or other resources 
to work it on it (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006). As a result, 
banks and credit institutions deny access to women in rural areas, which in turn prevents them 
further from accessing land (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006).  
28. According to data presented by UN Women, violence against women, which is strongly rooted 
in Guatemala, has not disappeared in recent years, which has Guatemala ranking among the

=== PAGE 119 ===
17 
 
countries with the highest prevalence of gender-based violence in the world (ONU Mujeres, n. 
d.).  Indeed, according to a study on women's rights in Guatemala in 2006, the aforementioned 
measures have been ineffective and women continue to suffer on a daily basis from the constant 
violence against them (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006), and 
women who suffer violent deaths every year in Guatemala are amounting to the hundreds (ONU 
Mujeres, n. d.). On the other hand, women are often also victims of other types of physical 
violence, such as obstetric violence (ONU Mujeres, n. d.). 
29. Some added difficulties faced by women in rural areas are the tight control that the men 
exercise over women and their families (especially those male heads of families, such as 
husbands, fathers or siblings). These controls deprive women of their freedom and autonomy 
to leave the house, to study or work, and to use contraceptive methods or denounce gender 
violence that may occur in their homes (ONU Mujeres, n. d.). 
30. The study about women rights in Guatemala from the Institute of Human Rights of the 
Universidad San Carlos emphasizes the lack of statistics in many areas pertinent to the current 
state of gender and women affairs in general. As such, it calls for the disaggregation of more 
information by gender (Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos, 2006), since 
this is an essential measure to better understand the situations facing women and to be able to 
better put a halt to the gender inequality gaps.  
What are the gender-based common beliefs, perceptions and stereotypes? 
31. Women – in particular rural women – face a multiple stereotypes in parallel.  
32. One of the main stereotypes present is that which expects women to remain in the house while 
the man must exclusively work outside the household. This means that women have to do all 
household-related chores, which can amount between 14 and 16 hours per day. This work is 
not remunerated, whereas the man is able to have a paid job (which constitutes an average of 
10 daily working hours). The difference between having and not having a salary implies that 
women have less decision-making power in terms of decisions that affect their own family and 
household; likewise, they have less or no say as to how the household income is spent or 
invested. Moreover, the fact that women tend to have fewer hours of free time to themselves, 
coupled with the fact that it is seen as dishonorable for them to leave the house for purposes 
beyond obtaining food or household items for cleaning or to care for family members, means 
that they cannot attend community meetings, which in turn prevents them from participating 
in community decision-making bodies. 
33. Furthermore, since it is assumed that women are not agricultural producers and that they do 
not work the land, they are excluded in most cases from access to land through inheritance. Due 
to both the nature of their unpaid work, and to the fact that they also suffer from inequality in 
access to education, it is difficult for them to find a qualified job, which allows them to be subject 
to credit to access land through other means, such as purchasing. This translates into women 
only owning 5% of all land. 
34. Yet another stereotype is that women must always become mothers at all costs. As can be seen 
in the data to prepare the present document, women tend to have large numbers of children, 
usually from an early age and all throughout the rest of their reproductive lives. This causes

=== PAGE 120 ===
18 
 
women’s health to suffer and deteriorate more quickly than if they had fewer children. In 
addition, the more children they have, the higher the probability of losing some of them to 
infant mortality at birth or during his or her early years, given the poor socioeconomic conditions 
in which these families live. In turn, the amount of work in at the household level piles up 
unfairly on the woman, as she is expected to continue being a mother and housewife in parallel. 
 
What is the distribution of work between men and women? 
35. The division of gender roles in the project’s area of intervention can be established in relation 
to the percentage that women occupy in the EAP, as well as how many women are in charge of 
agricultural holdings and the level of access to education they have. Although women represent 
approximately 50% of the population that will be assisted in the framework of the project’s 
interventions, they still only control less than 5% of agricultural enterprises. 
36. It is important to note that women carry out productive, reproductive and community-wide 
activities. However, they do not dedicate the same number of hours to each type of work. The 
division of gender roles when it comes to labor in rural Guatemala indicates that household 
chores (such as cleaning, food processing, carrying water, community activities and some school 
activities such as the preparation of school menus) fall almost in their entirety on women, while 
only a small extent of these tasks are borne by men. Reproductive activities (the care of children 
and elderly and/or the sick) tend to exclusively fall as part of responsibilities of women.   
37. Although women in these communities also tend to work on numerous backyard activities 
directly related to agricultural production and food and nutrition security (such as growing and 
producing green vegetables, raising birds and pigs, and sometimes even medicinal plants), these 
do not generate income, or in the cases where they do, they are very scarce and anyhow are 
significantly lower than the income that men generate in their work. Thus, there is, on the one 
hand, a significant gender equality gap in relation to the distribution of domestic tasks between 
women and men, and on the other hand, there is another gender equality gap in relation to the 
amount of income generated by women in their own right in relation to men.  
 
How does the participation of women and men in the formal and/or informal economy look 
like? 
38. Many more women than men do not attend school, and women in general end up dropping out 
of school before men do. This is because most families consider that girls must help with 
housework from a very early age, while the burden of domestic chores is lower (or non-existent) 
in the case of their male siblings. 
39. As such, reproductive work, which is considered an extension of women's biological identity, 
entails a long list of household and caregiving tasks that limit their time to seek and maintain a 
decent and remunerative job. This is reflected in the percentage of men who work outside the 
home for a salary, which is much higher than that of women. 
40. This condition makes women – and rural and indigenous women in particular – a markedly 
vulnerable group that tends to live more often in poverty or extreme poverty.

=== PAGE 121 ===
19 
 
41. In order to achieve the economic empowerment of women, initiatives such as promoting the 
access to productive inputs and markets and marketing products, increasing and diversifying 
production, facilitating vocational training and the acquiring of new skills, and ensuring eased 
access to specialized technical assistance are all essential. If women manage to generate income 
in their own right, they will increase their decision-making capacity (within the household and 
at the community level) and, in turn, they will also augment their control over family income 
and how it can be fairly spent among its female and male members alike. 
What is the current state of affairs of women and men? 
42. In most cases, there is a greater number of illiterate women than men. In addition, fewer 
women access basic education services and, many of those who do, drop out at an earlier age 
than men do. The linguistic groups with which the project will work are, besides Spanish, the 
Q'eqchi 'and the Poqomchi' groups. It must be taken into account that even though most men 
speak Spanish, they prefer to hold meetings and other activities in their native language. 
Moreover, a significant number of them do not speak Spanish, which is mainly the case among 
elderly women.) 
43. The birth rate shows an upward trend in all departments, hence it can be inferred that women 
are indeed having a high number of children whose care, consequently, falls almost entirely on 
these women as well. 
44. The distribution of paid work between men and women is very unequal, with the percentage of 
men that receive a salary for their work being much greater in relation to women with 
remunerated work. In addition, as already indicated, only 5% of women in the areas in which 
the project will work are landowners. While men work an average of 10 hours as day laborers 
in farms near the community and/or in their own plots, the burden of domestic work falls much 
more on women, and the care work is almost exclusively feminine because these are socially 
and historically understood to be gender-specific roles, which in this case are innate to the 
biological identity of women. All in all, women perform between 14 and 16 hours of daily work 
with days that start at four in the morning, in addition to including some physically demanding 
activities such as going to collect water or carry out sowing activities in their backyard. 
45. The profile of the project’s beneficiary women is one of rurality and, in the majority of the 
targeted departments of intervention, indigenous as well.  
46. It is for this series of reasons that programs and projects must consider strategies to reduce the 
time that women dedicate to household chores and promote, therefore, the equitable 
distribution of domestic tasks and family care, while also taking into account the cultural 
relevance of each group of people. 
In terms of the project’s/program’s budget, are there anticipated differences on the 
vulnerabilities and capacities to adapt to climate change between men and women? If so, what 
are they? 
47. Both men and women are vulnerable to the effects of climate change, which are felt in 
Guatemala in the form of prolonged droughts, severe tropical storms, forest fires that affect the 
loss of crops.

=== PAGE 122 ===
20 
 
48. Although the lower availability of food directly impacts the food security of all family members, 
it can harm women more who, despite producing food themselves, traditionally receive (in 
some communities) lower amounts or eat what boys do not want or what children leave at the 
table. 
49. On the other hand, men and women make a different use of all natural resources, and especially 
water, since men use it almost exclusively for consumption, personal use and for irrigation. 
Conversely, women use it not only for personal hygiene as well as, but also for their backyard 
plantations and many domestic chores (cleaning clothes, kitchen utensils, and floors and to 
prepare food).  
50. Because water is essential for unpaid work within households, it is the women themselves who 
traditionally carry water from the sources of origin to their homes. In addition, many times the 
personal grooming of the female population takes place in the water source itself, thereby 
making them more vulnerable to violent and/or sexual attacks as they are exposed to those 
passing by. When water is scarce, women are obliged to walk longer distances to reach the 
source, once again exposing them to greater risks on the road and at the water source, as they 
are farther away from their homes. Without water, however, their traditional housework 
becomes even more challenging to carry out.  
51. It is due to this series of events that women have to be taken into account when proposing new 
ways to use and distribute water. 
52. The processes that have to do with resilience to climate change have to have women in the 
center, since they have a high potential to adapt to climate change, since they are aware of the 
effects it has for them and their families. Hence, they will be receptive to implement good 
practices of adaptation measures. In addition, women become multipliers of information to 
their children and the rest of the family, so the investment in them translates into scaling up the 
positive effects of these processes.  
Are there gender inequalities that can become exacerbated by the impacts of climate change? 
53. They do exist due to the impacts of climate change on the food production, making household 
food insecurity levels likely to worsen. This means that a large majority of men migrate to seek 
employment as farm labor on farms, or in the capital city as security guards. Women are left in 
charge of the family and the family farm, increasing their responsibilities and being more 
exposed to dangers of all kinds. 
54. Climate change also affects and degrades the upper and middle parts of the basins, which 
directly affect water births and streams, both of which are places where women directly obtain 
water for household consumption. Therefore, climate change can incur a disproportionate 
effect on women as they face water scarcity and must cope to obtain it by walking longer 
distances or straining themselves to stock up on more water at any one points in time.  
55. The effects of water scarcity and subsequent effects has contributed to the increase of gender 
gaps and gender inequalities in general. This is due to the discrimination that women (and to a 
greater extent rural and indigenous women) suffer in all parts of their daily lives, thereby making 
them more vulnerable to external risks. In addition, higher temperatures can put water 
availability, food production and food security for the whole family at risk, which would result

=== PAGE 123 ===
21 
 
in an increase in workloads within the home (i.e. once again augmenting the burden faced by 
women). Beyond the decreased or lack of access to land, water, productive inputs, women also 
face a decreased access to education and participation in decision-making platforms.  
What are some types of inequalities that exist between the different social groups? How do 
these affect the capacities of people to adapt to climate change?  
56. The inequalities that people in the area of the project’s intervention suffer are plural in nature. 
Women are the most vulnerable group due to their decreased levels of and access to training, 
as well as their due to their scarce access to land and other resources and their inferior 
integration into the formal labor market. Girls are even more vulnerable for reasons of access 
to health and from helplessness in the face of violence, while older women can also be 
considered at risk of social exclusion in some cases, since they are not subject to receiving as 
much information and/or training campaigns as the younger age groups. Among these risks is 
the high percentage of that population that lives in poverty or even in extreme poverty, coupled 
with the fact that a significant number of them have not had a formal education. In addition, 
there is little State investment in the area and some families have used chemicals that have 
degraded their soils. 
57. In order for families to be able to adapt to climate change, they must first off be conscious of 
their own activities that bear harmful impacts to the environment. After this environmental 
conscientiousness, a capacity development initiative must be carried out in order to inform 
families about the adaptation and mitigation measures that the project will be implementing. 
 
What roles does the project expect women and men to play in the context of its interventions? 
What would these roles imply in terms of time commitments and mobility needs? 
58. From its baseline, the project should establish that activities to mitigate and adapt to climate 
change do not represent more workload for women. Many times the projects reduce the 
working hours of the men because they are given technical assistance to improve and increase 
their production and they are provided with technologies and technical assistance and this 
means that they can reduce their work by one or two hours. However, women continue to work 
an average of 12 hours. The project will take into account the need for co-responsibility of the 
care of the domestic unit through reflection processes on the importance of sharing care 
activities among all family members. 
59. That is why the training processes and monthly meetings take place in community places, so 
that women do not have to spend much time to get there. Likewise, it will be noted for meetings 
to not last beyond noon, as women may have to return home to attend to their children after 
school and prepare their lunch. As such, the implementation of “Mobile Childcare”, a strategy 
encouraging women to take their children to training sessions and take turns in taking care of 
them so that the rest can pay full attention will be promoted.  
60. With the Mobile Childcare,   Kids are not distressed, because their mothers are close to them, 
and at the same time, women can participate in the training without being constantly 
interrupted.  FAO has established on the basis other successful projects the Childcare as a good 
practice to be promoted in the region.

=== PAGE 124 ===
22 
 
 
Figure 2: Mobile Childcare implementation during a training session in a FAO Project.  Part 
of the toys, materials, implements can be seen. 
 
 
Figure 3: One of the training participants is taking care of the kids,  during the training 
session.  Later on, other woman will take her place. 
 
61. On the other hand, it is important that gender training be done (explained more in depth in 
subsequent points of this document) so that the burden of domestic and care work is distributed 
more equitably and this allows for women to participate in meetings, training and paid work. 
62. Women will work in family gardens, being previously trained to get the most out of their small 
plots. However, although women can trade small surpluses (for example, herbs such as

=== PAGE 125 ===
23 
 
coriander), this does not allow them to emancipate themselves, and that is why they will be 
encouraged to participate in training for wider production and to work family lands in equal 
conditions and with equal resources as men. Other project activities to which they will be 
introduced will be the post-harvest activities and, specifically, the storage of bean and corn. In 
order to economically empower them, they would be included in the coffee and cocoa 
production chain (specifically in the harvest), as well as in the related value-added processes.  
What resources (financial, physical, natural or other assets) do women and men have? Who 
administers or controls the access to these resources? 
63. The decisions regarding what is to be grown on the family farm is made by men.  In some cases 
these decisions are consulted with the wife and children because they are all part of the agrarian 
economy. Women are responsible for the backyard activities, the production of vegetables and 
medicinal plants, and the raising of birds and pigs. The land may bear the names of both the 
husband and wife, however the control of the land per se still falls mostly on the men, as they 
are understood to be the heads of family or heads of household. Women are responsible for 
the household economy, and men assign a certain amount per day, week or month to these 
tasks. When there is an emergency, an illnesses of a child, the need to purchase supplies, or the 
need to accompany extracurricular activities, women take advantage of the resources they 
produce in their backyard activities in order to sell them and obtain cash to cover any one of 
these emergencies or additional expenses.  
Do women and men in the vulnerable communities have equal access to the necessary 
information and opportunities in order to fully participate in and benefit from the anticipated 
results of the project/programme?  
64. The project’s objectives must be actively disseminated so that the beneficiaries know the nature 
of the program, its objectives and the results that are to be achieved. As part of this process it 
must be taken into account that a large proportion of women are illiterate and/or monolingual 
with a Mayan language as their mother tongue (this is mostly in the Q'eqchi 'and Poqomchi' 
groups). Therefore, a strategy should be developed to this end to facilitate the dissemination of 
information. That is why one of the best means of disseminating the program’s goals would be 
via radio spots in the predominantly used local languages. Another useful method to spread key 
message would be the placement of posters with photographs and basic information in public 
places such as health centers, municipality offices, offices of secretariats for women, and 
schools. It is important that at least one person working in each of these places knows the 
content of the program, the activities that will be carried out and the specific objectives and 
requirements to participate in it. Although women may not frequent the municipality as much 
as men, as work related to the home care falls almost exclusively on them, they usually do go 
to schools more than men do, just as they tend to attend medical centers more than men (for 
example when they are pregnant, breastfeeding, sick or accompanying their own sick family 
members or their husbands' family). Hence these centers are useful to disseminate the relevant 
information seeking to engage more women in the project’s activities. 
65. A commitment must be made both with the women who participate in the trainings, and with 
the families that benefit from them. The project must ensure that women who start training go 
to all meetings and workshops. In those cases in which families or single men are participating,

=== PAGE 126 ===
24 
 
the importance on obtaining the best results and actively integrating women into these tasks 
must also be communicated, in order to convey the message that women have a key role to 
play in contributing to the community. This will promote active women participation, as part of 
the understanding that the best possible results can only be obtained if women actively and 
inclusive take part in them as well.  
66. One can set a minimum percentage of realistic participation of 35% of women and 65% of men, 
but this percentage should not be communicated to the beneficiaries because if that minimum 
is reached, some women who were thinking of joining the project may believe that they are no 
longer necessary. On the other hand, the project personnel should be focused on exceeding that 
minimum at all times, and not cease to influence the importance of women participation in the 
project as it progresses. 
67. Social communication campaigns will use an inclusive and non-sexist language in order to 
ensure that no gender stereotypes are replicated. Moreover, the necessary graphic information 
(such as illustrations or photographs) shall contain images of both men and women working the 
land. 
68. The information strategy will inform and disseminate that this is a program/project that 
promotes equality between women and men, and will make known the strategies that will be 
used to address gender issues and document the commitments to reduce the gaps. As such, this 
strategy should be carried out to the furthest extent possible, involving internal project 
personnel and external stakeholders alike. 
69. Once the project is launched, monthly meetings and supervisions of the progress of the project 
should be held, and it is important that women also attend in order to guarantee that they are 
also working on their specific interests and expectations. 
 
Do women have equal access to education, technical knowhow and /or ways to improve their 
skills? 
70. Girls and boys in Guatemalan rural families contribute to the family’s economy through support 
in productive activities and in household tasks. A lot of this depends on the level of poverty that 
the family lives in, as many children may not be able to continue with their studies. Girls are 
oftentimes given the demanding responsibility of caring for their younger siblings, helping with 
the preparation of food, carrying water, and washing clothes, among other tasks. 
71. There may also be the idea that women do not need education since they are destined to marry, 
reproduce and perform household activities. This is reflected in the fact that in Guatemala the 
percentage of married or united women between 15 and 19 years old is much higher than the 
group of men with the same age range. Although the gap between the number of married and 
unmarried women between 20 and 24 years old and the number of married and unmarried men 
in the same age range is not as high, the absolute number of married women is still greater. It 
is also important to note that most mothers have their children between 15 and 19 years of age, 
followed by those having children between the ages of 20 and 24.

=== PAGE 127 ===
25 
 
72. The project can well positioned to support the generation of information that allows school 
dropout rates to be disaggregated by gender, taking into account that another factor that 
influences this trend is the parents’ decision to migrate to the United States with their children, 
in the hopes of having a better probability of entering the country if traveling with minors.  
 
To what degree do women and men in the vulnerable communities take part in decision-
making? What types of decisions to women make? What are the limitations (social, cultural, 
economic, and political) that restrict their active participation in decision-making processes at 
the family and community levels? 
73. In Guatemala’s rural communities, when there are meetings with mixed groups, it is the men 
who ask and take the floor. Women expect men to make their proposals and should some kind 
of empowerment or leadership opportunity be available after, only then would women come 
into the picture. 
74. Women have a low participation rate in the Community Development Councils (COCODEs) and 
the Municipal Development Councils (COMUDEs) for many reasons, including the fact that they 
feel ashamed to speak in public, are monolingual, or their contributions are sometimes 
minimized in value by the attendees. 
75. The development of women capacities will be promoted through training so that they can 
increase their power of decision and leadership. The life and trajectory of some women who 
participate in the project will be followed up on, which will make it possible to evaluate and 
assess whether there have been changes in daily life – and decreases in gender discrimination 
in turn - when project activities are implemented. 
76. Training on gender issues for mixed groups (men and women), for women alone 
(empowerment), and men alone (new masculinities) will be promoted.   These trainings will be 
not included as a separate training and will be integrated as cross-cutting issues during the 
different training sessions.   It is planned that during the training sessions the groups can be 
divided and focus for a part of the training on those specific topics. 
77. Male-relevant training on gender issues (the so-called “new masculinities”) is strongly 
encouraged to be discussed along with female-relevant sessions (to address empowerment, 
female rights, etc.). If men do not take part in process having to do with gender issues, females 
cannot reach full empowerment 
78.

=== PAGE 128 ===
26 
 
 
Figure 4: Participants of a mixed training session on community mapping activities in 
Guatemala

=== PAGE 129 ===
27 
 
Figure 5: Participants of a women empowerment workshop in Guatemala drawing the body of a 
woman. 
 
 Are there any opportunities to promote the leadership of women in terms of governance and 
local policy, as well as in formal and informal platforms and institutions? If not, what are some 
of the limitations that prevent women from pursuing these roles of leadership? 
79. If the opportunity exists, the program should develop strategic alliances with institutions that 
ensure the rights of women, such as the municipal offices for women, the Ombudsman for 
Indigenous Women and the Presidential Secretariat for Women. As far as possible, it shall map 
actors and identify local associations – both those that are led by women and those led by both 
men and women – that can provide an added sustainability to the practices that will be 
developed within the framework of the project. 
 
What are the gender-specific needs and priorities of men and women in the context of the 
project’s/program’s activities? Could the project tackle their respective needs and priorities? If 
so, how does it plan to do so? 
80. Women and men suffer climate change differently. On the one hand, their needs regarding 
water have different approaches. Women give water uses that have more to do with household 
tasks and care and men use it for productive purposes for the most part. 
81. On the other hand, while men can move more freely, women in rural areas have a more limited 
freedom of movement and, if water is scarce in their area, all their work at home (cleaning, food 
preparation) is affected. Also, if a woman does not have access to water in her area, she cannot 
use it for her own consumption or her hygiene. On the other hand, women also need water for 
their backyard crops, which are often the main source of food for the whole family. 
82. Although women can sometimes move to get water from more distant sources when it is scarce 
in their area, having to travel greater distances means that they spend more time in the same 
tasks and are also exposed to greater physical hazards due to having to walk more time 
(accidents and assaults) as well as exposing themselves to unfamiliar environments (for 
example, they may suffer sexual violence if they expose themselves to showering in rivers or 
lakes outside their community). Women use water for the development of family gardens, 
which are key for their food and nutrition security, so climate variations are set to affect the 
development of this subsistence activity. On the one hand, this can cause a reduction in crop 
yields, and on the other, it can force women to find water from a source that is farther away. 
83. With regards to men, climate change may cause them to lose their crops (which would be their 
source of income, and usually the main source of the whole family), or they may not have jobs 
because local employers have lost the harvest or they have had a small harvest and do not need 
their services. This affects women directly as well, as the income generated by men is almost 
always the only source of income for the entire household. Moreover, if men are forced to 
migrate to find work, women will be left alone with added responsibility as a head of household,

=== PAGE 130 ===
28 
 
while also becoming more exposed to gender-based violence in the absence of a male figure in 
the home. 
84. If both women and men are able to cope with climate change in their areas of origin through 
the achievement and development of resilient livelihoods, neither men nor women will be 
forced to migrate in search of new job opportunities. By the same token, if men are not forced 
to migrate, then women will not have to assume added household burdens in the absence of 
their spouse. Likewise, women will then be able to empower themselves economically when 
participating in tasks from which they can obtain an economic benefit that allows them to have 
a certain degree of economic autonomy. It is important that both men and women have access 
to crops that are not affected by climate change and that women are integrated into productive 
work by giving them access to both land and training in order for them to learn how to produce 
food by putting the right tools and knowhow into practice. Furthermore, men must collaborate 
with household chores so that women can have time and freedom to work outside the house 
and participate in community-level decisions. Finally, both men and women must learn about 
implementing post-harvest practices and grain conservation, as well as harvesting rainwater for 
consumption and production. 
Has the project/program identified opportunities to challenge the present gender stereotypes 
and promote positive gender relations by way of equitable actions? If so, what are these 
opportunities and actions?  
85. It is essential that the personnel participating in this project receive specific gender training and 
be prepared to carry out the activities and face possible problems and setbacks regarding 
perceived and tangible inequalities. 
86. Among the project’s trainings for beneficiaries will be workshops on gender roles and work 
traditionally assigned to each gender. Among the tools to use is "the 24-hour clock", which will 
not only serve to promote dialogue and understanding between men and women regarding the 
work of the home and paid work, but it will also prove useful at a later analysis of results both 
of the participants and of the project staff. 
87. In addition, in order to help reduce gender gaps in access to land, work, natural resources, and 
income, the project should promote the participation of women in all possible activities, with 
special emphasis on facilitating for them to take part in those that have to do with production 
(so as to promote their economic empowerment). 
88. In order for women, their opinions, specific needs and experiences to be taken into account 
before making decisions, women and men should be asked about them separately. In addition, 
once the project is launched, women should participate in an exchange of experiences exercise. 
This will also help make it easier to train other women in turn. 
4.2 
Use of time and non-remunerated work 
89. A large part of the population is illiterate (and women are disproportionately represented 
among the illiterate population. This has a direct impact on the possibility of generating income 
because the jobs people perform are unskilled jobs and inherently poorly paid.

=== PAGE 131 ===
29 
 
90. As it was possible to establish with the data obtained, women work mainly on backyard 
plantation, food preparation, water collection and transport, and washing of kitchen utensils, 
clothes and floors), in addition to their reproductive roles (care of children and elderly and/or 
the ill), none of which are which are remunerated. 
91. The percentage of women who have paid work and/or who work outside their own homes is 
significantly lower than that of men, and this trend stands across all of Guatemala’s 
departments.  
4.3 
Heads of households 
92. Within the project area of intervention, 14% of households have a single-parent female head; 
that is, there is no spouse. The department with the most female-headed households is Zacapa, 
with 23.8% of households led by a woman, followed by Chiquimula with 18% and Alta Verapaz 
with 9.3%. 
4.4 
Access to basic services 
4.4.1 Education 
93. Ensuring access to education continues to be a pending imperative to be tackled as it is a 
problem for a large proportion of the Guatemalan population. In accessing education, there are 
gender inequalities in relation to men and women completing or not their primary education. 
The female dropout rates limit the likelihood that women can improve their living conditions 
and behaviors that may even save their lives. For instance, it is important to highlight that 78% 
of women who died during childbirth in 2014 did not have any educational level or only had 
completed some grades of primary school (MSPAS, 2018). That being said, the high illiteracy 
rates in the project’s areas of intervention may suggest that the population does not have access 
to qualified and well-remunerated employment, and this is a grievance disproportionately 
affecting women.  
4.4.2 Food and nutrition security and health 
94. In the departments of the proposed intervention areas of the project, there was an average of 
20% of households facing severe food insecurity in 2014. The department with the highest index 
of households that face severe food insecurity is Baja Verapaz with 20.90% of households 
affected, followed by Zacapa with 20.40%. (INE, 2011). The department with the lowest index is 
Petén with 11.20%. 
4.4.3 Access to land 
95. The Agricultural and Livestock Census established that in the area of the project’s intervention, 
the relationship that women have with farms is very limited, since only 4.79% identified 
themselves as producers of these farms. In said census, backyard activities, which are activities 
exclusively developed by women, were not subject to registration. As part of the backyard 
activities, one can include the raising of poultry, care of crops, textile work, raising of pigs and 
production of medicinal plants. The focus of the project’s area is mainly dedicated to agriculture 
and forestry, and agricultural activities will include the production of corn and beans.

=== PAGE 132 ===
30 
 
5. 
Gender equality strategy  
96. The project’s strategy for gender equality focuses on making the proposed interventions 
inclusive, sustainable and resilient, while promoting gender equality to provide an efficient and 
timely response to the problems faced by different population groups against the prevalence 
and incidence of extreme weather events, such as drought and prolonged heat. 
97. This strategy defines the RELIVE framework for action on gender issues, and focuses mainly on 
supporting the most vulnerable populations to climate change, understood as those groups 
whose most important livelihood is subsistence agriculture. This activity is characterized by 
being highly dependent on the weather, mainly rain; In addition, those who practice it are 
mostly women, young people and indigenous peoples, who have rates of acute poverty and 
limited access to the main productive resources such as land and inputs for agricultural 
production, technical assistance and financing. 
98. On the other hand, the strategy contributes to reducing social inequalities, including gender 
inequality, through the empowerment of women, young people and indigenous groups. The 
strengthening of the producer association processes and the development of new leadership in 
the communities, contributes to improve governance in the territories. The objective is to create 
the conditions that allow vulnerable populations to have access to the services and benefits of 
the project, ensuring their full participation in the processes of improving their technical and 
associative capacities and their livelihoods, and making a special effort to include women in all 
phases of the project. 
99. The following are the integral strategic actions: 
a. Hire the project staff following inclusive selection processes, setting a hiring quota of at 
least 35% women and 25% indigenous. These percentages include the recruitment of 
young people. 
b. Reduce the existing gender gaps between men and women by including a minimum 35% 
participation of women in technical institutional strengthening, capacity building in the 
territory, promotion of leadership and association processes, and restoration and 
conservation actions of natural resources, among others, that contribute to the 
improvement of territorial governance. 
c. Ensure the incorporation of gender issues and social inclusion in the capacity 
development processes carried out by some MAGA units that participate in the project, 
incorporating the gender units of these institutions in support of the awareness and 
development processes of capabilities. 
d. Ensure that social control and citizenship engagement processes guarantee the 
representation of vulnerable groups in decision-making: at least 35% of women, 25% of 
indigenous people and 10% of young people. 
e. Establish links between the service for victims of violence against women, Article 4 of 
the Political Constitution of Guatemala, Article 2 of the Equal Remuneration Convention 
of 1951, the United Nations Declaration on Indigenous Rights and Article 66 of the 
Political Constitution of Guatemala, CEDAW (and specifically Article 14, on rural 
women), the FAO Policy on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, and Article 151 of the Labor

=== PAGE 133 ===
31 
 
Code, with project actions in the territories in order to create greater capacities in the 
municipalities and communities intervened, that can contribute to the reduction of 
gender inequalities, violence against women and social exclusion. 
f. Monitor compliance with qualitative and quantitative indicators through measurement 
instruments that allow evaluating gender equity and social inclusion through project 
actions. These instruments must have information disaggregated by gender, age groups 
and ethnicities, and may contain other variables depending on the area. 
g. Establish mechanisms to guarantee access, control and equal ownership among men 
and women, young and indigenous, of tangible goods (inputs, technology) and 
intangibles (technical assistance, training, participation in decision-making and 
leadership) provided by the project in order to guarantee the improvement of the 
livelihoods of the populations in the intervention territories. 
h. Support local governments, as well as municipal offices for women affairs and 
representatives of SEPREM in the area, in the promotion of gender equality policies as 
a key action to correct existing inequalities in the territories. 
i. 
Create inter-institutional synergies with entities that promote the social and economic 
empowerment of women and other vulnerable groups such as the aforementioned 
women's municipal offices, but also civic groups that operate in each area. 
j. 
Ensure the recruitment of women (at a minimum of 35% of the total) and young people 
so as to involve them in the structure of the coordination and implementation units in 
the regions. 
k. Document the progress in the activities and results of gender equality and social 
inclusion in the intervention territories of the project through press, television or local 
radio, events in the municipality, etc. 
l. 
12. Disseminate and communicate on good practices and lessons learned through 
experience exchanges between beneficiaries (preferably women or, at least, of both 
genders) using the methodology of direct learning "from farmer to farmer", as well as 
online resources and other tools.

=== PAGE 134 ===
32 
 
Part II: Gender equality action plan 
 
Activities 
Indicators and objectives 
Timeline 
Institution in charge 
Impact declaration: The objective of RELIVE is to increase the resilience of the most vulnerable smallholder farmers in Guatemala and of their livelihoods to the impact 
of climate change. The project will focus on the most vulnerable region in Guatemala, in the Departments of Petén, Alta Verapaz, Baja Verapaz, Zacapa and Chiquimula. 
 
Declaration of results: RELIVE has a national strategy to promote adaptation to climate change in the long term, in the Mayan landscapes and the Dry Corridor of 
Guatemala. Through this strategy, the project will benefit 116,353 people who will benefit directly from the project's resilience activities (0.7% of the population and 
20% of the population in the target area), and it is expected that 583,146 people will benefit indirectly (3.9% of the population). The project will increase the resilience 
of 37,170  vulnerable smallholder farmers (6,195 families) in the Dry Corridor of Guatemala against their prolonged exposure to drought. Of this total, approximately 
10,200 people are adult women, who tend to be more vulnerable than men, and 17,500 are indigenous. Likewise, RELIVE will contribute to increasing access to safe 
water supply, will ensure that 19,239  families have safe water in the face of prolonged drought and heat, and will contribute to improving ecosystems and ecosystem 
services through the promotion of soil and water conservation, agroforestry activities and appropriate watershed management measures. The project will help 
community members manage ecosystem services at the watershed level as well. As part of the co-financing of the project, the national forestry incentive programs 
PINPEP/PROBOSQUE will provide funds to work on 13,044 hectares on climate-resistant agroforestry measures. 
Component 1. Implementing climate resilient agricultural practices and enhancing farmers’ livelihoods  . This component is designed to promote resilience of 
agricultural producers at farm level. It will improve the capacity of farmers to reduce drought-related production losses by using climate information and adopting climate 
resilient agricultural practices. 
“Mobile Childcare”. This is a strategy encouraging women to take their children to training sessions and take turns in taking care of them so that the rest can pay full 
attention. Kids are not distressed, because their mothers are close to them, and at the same time, women can participate in the training without being constantly 
interrupted. 
It is a cost-effective practice, which only requires a set of toys, which can be used during the different training sessions in the same area. The modalities of this practice 
is agreed together with the women. The selection of the venue for the trainings considers the need for a separate area to accommodate the “Mobile Childcare”.  
Training on gender issues should be added as part of the technical subjects: mixed (for men and women), for women alone (empowerment), and men alone (new 
masculinities. Those topics will be integrated as cross-cutting issues during the different training sessions.   It is planned that during the training sessions the groups can 
be divided and focus for a part of the training on those specific topics. 
 
Activity 1.1.3 Disseminate climate information and response 
adaptation measures using locally-relevant delivery mechanisms as 
virtual platforms, electronic means, telecommunication and visits of 
the extension workers 
• 
19,239 farmers (of whom 7,696 are 
women) 
receive 
climate-adapted 
information 
____________ 
7 years 
FAO and MAGA

=== PAGE 135 ===
33 
 
Activities 
Indicators and objectives 
Timeline 
Institution in charge 
Tailor the climate information and translate in 
local language. The agro-weather advisories 
will be especially for the production of staple 
grains (maize and beans) and cash crops 
(coffee and cocoa). Disseminate the climate 
information 
products 
via 
appropriate 
communication channels with consideration 
of the gender dimension. 
 
Activity 1.2.1 Fund the implementation of the adaptation practices 
and gender-sensitive technology packages for staple crops, coffee 
and cocoa in 6,195 family farms 
• 
8 adaptation measures adopted per 
system (6,195  farming families, of 
whom at least 40% are farms led by 
women) 
____________ 
Provide technical assistance for the adoption 
of the integrated packages of agricultural 
adaptation measures 
7 years 
FAO and MAGA 
Activity 1.2.2 Implement at least 10 trainings to enhance the 
technical and organizational capacity of 6,195 farmers for climate-
risk informed planning and implementation of agricultural 
adaptation measures at farm level   
• 
6,195 farmers (of whom 2,478 are 
women) are able to implement 
adaptation measures 
____________ 
Support government extension services to 
develop and promote tailored and tested 
agriculture adaptation through the Learning 
Centers for Rural Development (CADERs). 
7 years 
MAGA and FAO 
Activity 1.2.3 Establish 28 women-led, farm-level seed nurseries for 
resilient crops and community forest nurseries 
• 
28 seed banks established and 
managed by women 
____________ 
7 years 
FAO and MAGA

=== PAGE 136 ===
34 
 
Activities 
Indicators and objectives 
Timeline 
Institution in charge 
Create community-led seed banks and 
promote the leadership and entrepreneurial 
skills of women groups to manage them. 
Activity 1.3.1 Promote diversification of productive units in home 
gardens for 2,500 farm families and install 370 greenhouses micro-
tunnel facilities for vegetables and poultry 
• 
370 
greenhouses 
micro-tunnel 
facilities 
for 
vegetables 
are 
established 
in 
the 
targeted 
communities. 
2,220 
direct 
beneficiaries (880 women) with 52 
households with a single-parent 
female head .. 
____________ 
Collaborate 
with 
the 
Government 
of 
Guatemala to link its nationally funded school 
meals program with the farmers and help 
catalyze the creation of a market for 
communities and stimulate local production 
and purchase. 
7 years 
FAO and MAGA 
Activity 1.3.2 Organize training for 2,500 farmers to improve 
technical skills for enhancing coffee and cocoa value chains and to 
strengthen organizational capacities of producers’ associations to 
access markets infrastructure 
• 
20,136 people (of whom 8,054are 
women)  benefiting from 3,356 ha of 
agroforestry and established and 
other selected alternative activities. 
____________ 
Improve the value chain of cocoa and cacao via 
resilient infrastructure for processing to 
protect from unfavorable weather conditions 
as 
prolonged 
drought 
and 
extreme 
temperatures. The project will encourage the 
organization of producers in local associations 
and facilitate the access to the market. 
7 years 
FAO and MAGA

=== PAGE 137 ===
35 
 
Activities 
Indicators and objectives 
Timeline 
Institution in charge 
 
Component 2. Supporting efficient water management for agriculture to reduce the impact of increased water scarcity. It is designed to strengthen capacities of local 
actors to better manage water resources under conditions of projected increase in water scarcity. Community-led planning of water resource management at micro-
basin level will secure water availability needed by smallholder farmers to achieve resilience to drought and heatwaves. 
“Mobile Childcare”. will be available during workshops, information sessions, and training sessions for mothers attending with their daughters and sons..4 
Activity 2.2.1 Technical support to 19,239 smallholder farmers 
(women in particular) to access forest incentives 
• 
19,239  farmers (of which 7,696 are 
women) have received technical 
support to access forest incentives 
____________ 
Facilitate the access of smallholder farmers to 
forest 
incentives 
from 
the 
program 
PINPEP/INAB. The activity will invest in 
technical support to facilitate smallholder 
farmers, especially women, to qualify for 
forest incentives and promote agroforestry 
systems 
 7 years  
FAO and INAB 
Activity 2.2.2 Training of 90 technicians from extension services, 
forest regents and INAB. 
• 
90 rural extension service and INAB 
personnel are trained (of whom 32 
are women) 
____________ 
Conduct trainings to extension technicians and 
INAB staff to better integrate agroforestry 
systems in their standards and requirements 
7 years 
FAO, INAB and MAGA 
 
4 This practice allows women who attend training to take their children with them.  Women who take this option, take turns caring for the children (one woman 
each session). Kids are not distressed, because their mothers are close to them, and at the same time, women can participate in the training without being 
constantly interrupted.    
The modalities of this practice is agreed together with the women. The selection of the venue for the trainings considers the need for a separate area to 
accommodate the “Mobile Childcare”. It is a cheap practice, which only requires a box with some toys such as puzzles, balls, etc. which can be reused in many 
sessions.

=== PAGE 138 ===
36 
 
Activities 
Indicators and objectives 
Timeline 
Institution in charge 
and strengthen the technical capacities and 
effective support to smallholder farmers. 
Activity 2.3.1 Provide trainings to improve technical capacity of 
2,500 local officials and members of community organizations on 
the implementation and maintenance of micro-basin infrastructure.   
• 
12,500 water resource users are 
trained on efficient water use and 
management practices (of whom 
5,000 are women) 
____________ 
Strengthen the technical knowledge and skills 
of local communities and organizations for the 
installation 
and 
maintenance 
of 
water 
collection and irrigation infrastructure. This 
will ensure the long-term maintenance of the 
infrastructure through local 
7 years 
FAO and MAGA 
Activity 2.3.2 Install farm-level drip irrigation system for using 
harvested water on 250 ha of farm land. 
• 
2,500 families (at least 1,000 female-
headed households) have rainwater 
collection systems in their homes 
____________ 
Design and install/upgrade community-based 
water irrigation systems and roof-top water 
collection tanks by combining traditional and 
new technology design elements. This activity 
will upgrade/Install village irrigation systems 
and rooftop tanks and improve water access in 
prolonged drought conditions. 
7 years 
FAO and MAGA 
Component 3. Improved enabling conditions for climate resilient livelihoods. This component will focus on strengthening the institutional capacities at all levels for 
comprehensive and climate risk-informed governance of water resources at a landscape level, by enabling inter-institutional platforms for coordination and enhancing 
knowledge management. These enabling factors will ensure the effective implementation of the activities under Components 1 and 2. This component is crucial to 
achieve replicability and upscaling of resilient agricultural practices at a landscape level and to accomplish the expected paradigm shift.

=== PAGE 139 ===
37 
 
Activities 
Indicators and objectives 
Timeline 
Institution in charge 
Two activities should be added: training on gender issues to civil servants from MAGA, INAB and MARN, and training on gender issues to private sector taking part in the 
project.  In addition,  relationship with the private sector,  will be strengthened at the level of market strategies to improve the value chain of the different products and 
activities produced by the project, especially women and indigenous people 
3.2.1 Train and assist 90 staff members from INAB, MAGA and 
MARN on the management and dissemination of climate 
information. 
90 civil servants from MAGA, INAB and MARN 
are trained on natural resource governance at 
the micro-watershed level (of whom 30 are 
women). 
____________ 
 
Raise awareness and strengthen the capacities 
of national institutions to generate and 
transfer knowledge regarding climate change 
adaptation. The activity will invest in   
Strengthening the National System for 
Information on Climate Change (SINCC). 
7 years 
MARN, MAGA, INAB 
and FAO 
3.2.2 Train 100 experts at departmental and municipal level and 
agricultural extension workers and other staff from SNER on climate 
risk-informed agricultural adaptation strategies   
 
100 coordinators trained at department level 
and municipal level and extension technicians 
trained at municipal level  (at least 40 are 
women) 
____________ 
 
Conduct training for extension service agents 
to provide extension support during the life of 
the project, the project will invest in the 
training of in-house SNER technicians in order 
to develop their capacities to design and 
promote adaptation strategies beyond the life 
of the project, thereby contributing to 
innovation, sustainability and scaling up of 
impacts 
7 years 
MAGA, MARN, INAB 
and FAO

=== PAGE 140 ===
38 
 
Reporting and monitoring of activities of the three components 
All activities are an integral part of the long 
frame and the M&E plan of the project.  
For almost all the activities, there is an 
indicator (sex disaggregated) to be 
monitored.  It is expected that most of the 
indicators will be monitored at a yearly basis 
via the Project Progress Reports and at 
midterm and at the end of the project.   
Project process 
reports= annually  
 
Project Monitoring 
Reports midterm 
and at the end of 
the project 
 
 
FAO

=== PAGE 141 ===
39 
 
6. 
Bibliography 
Boa, M., Loboguerrero, A., Martínez Barón, D., & Rojas, E. (2014). Estado del Arte en Cambio 
Climático, Agricultura y Seguridad Alimentaria. Guatemala: CGIAR, MAGA, y CIAT. 
Córdova, L. (2018). Inclusión de consideraciones de género en las actividades del FVC, 
basado en las directrices del fondo y establecidas por Guatemala. Documento de 
trabajo. Guatemala. 
FAO. (2015). Las mujeres y la división sexual del trabajo. Documento para análisis y 
reflexión. Guatemala: FAO. 
FAO Y EU FIRST. (2017). Mujeres Rurales en Guatemala. Documento de consultoría. 
Guatemala. 
Guatemala, INE. (7 de Enero de 2019). Instituto Nacional de Estadística. Obtenido de 
Estadísticas: https://www.ine.gob.gt/index.php/estadisticas/tema-indicadores 
Guatemala, Instituto Nacional de Estadística (INE). (2016). Encuesta Nacional de 
Condiciones de Vida. 2014. Tomo I. Guatemala: INE. 
INE . (2002). XI Censo de Población y VI de Habitación. Guatemala. 
INE. (2003). Censo Agropecuario. Guatemala: INE. 
INE. (2011). Encuesta Nacional de Condiciones de Vida. Guatemala. 
INE. (2014). Encuesta Nacional de Condiciones de Vida. Guatemala. 
Instituto de Derechos Humanos, Universidad San Carlos. (Mayo de 2006). Derechos 
Humanos de las Mujeres en Guatemala: diagnóstico. Guatemala. 
MSPAS. (28 de Enero de 2018). Ministerio de Saluds Pública y Asistencia Social. Obtenido de 
Sistema de Información Gerecial de Salud (SIGSA): www.mspas.gob.gt 
MSPAS, INE, SEGEPLAN. (2017). VI Encuesta Nacional de Salud Materno Infantil 2014-2015. 
Guatemala: Ministerio de Salud Pública y Asistencia Social (MSPAS), Instituto 
Nacional de Estadística (INE), Secretaría de Planificación y Programación de la 
Presidencia (Segeplán). 
ONU 
Mujeres. 
(n. 
d.). 
Guatemala, 
Contexto. 
Obtenido 
de 
http://lac.unwomen.org/es/donde-estamos/guatemala 
PNUD. (4 de Febrero de 2019). Informe Nacional de Desarrollo Humano Guatemala. 
Obtenido 
de 
Estadísticas 
de 
Género: 
http://desarrollohumano.org.gt/estadisticas/estadisticas-genero/tasa-de-
alfabetismo-por-sexo-segun-departamento/ 
SEGEPLAN . (2010). Plan de Desarrollo Departamental 2011-2025.  
SEGEPLAN . (2011). Plan de Desarrollo Departamental 2011-2025. Zacapa . 
SEGEPLAN . (2011). Plan de Desarrollo Departamental 2011-2025. Alta Verapaz: SEGEPLAN. 
SEGEPLAN . (2013). Diagnóstico Territorial de Petén . Flores, Petén .

=== PAGE 142 ===
40 
SEGEPLAN. (2010). Objetivos de Desarrollo del Milenio. Guatemala. 
SVET . (diciembre de 2018). www.svet.gob.gt/estadistica. Obtenido de www.svet.gob.gt. 
___________________
