=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20074
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20074
creationDate: D:20200724121406+09'00'
modDate: D:20200724121557+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
18 – 21 August 2020 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 11 
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
28 July 2020 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum IV 
Funding proposal package for FP132 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Enabling Implementation of Forest Sector Reform in 
Georgia to Reduce GHG Emissions from Forest Degradation"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page b 
3 
96 
98 
102 
117 
141 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Secretariat’s assessment 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment 
Gender documentation 
143

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project Title: 
Enabling Implementation of Forest Sector Reform in Georgia 
to Reduce GHG Emissions from Forest Degradation  
Country: 
Georgia 
Accredited Entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
(GIZ) GmbH  
Date of first submission: 
2019/08/13 
Date of current submission 
2020/06/4 
Version number 
V.008

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 1 OF 92 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[Dates]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 2 OF 92 
 
 
 PROJECT SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or private 
sector 
Public 
 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
Not applicable  
 
 
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation:   
 
☐ 
Low-emission transport:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:  
 
☒ 
Forestry and land use:   
 
 
 
 
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☐ 
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
 
  
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security: 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution:  
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
100% 
 
 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  
16.14 million tCO2eq 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation impact  
Direct beneficiaries: 98,337 
Indirect beneficiaries: 1,000,000  
Direct beneficiaries: 3% of 
national population 
Indirect beneficiaries: 27% of 
national population 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  
177.69 million Euros  
A.9. Project size 
Medium (Upto USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
32.79 million Euros 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
 
☒ Grant 
32.79 million Euros 
 
☐ Loan  
Enter number 
☐ Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐ Equity  
 
Enter number 
☐ Results-based  
 
     payment 
 
Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
7 years (84 months) 
A.12. Total lifespan 
20 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
 
7/4/2019 
A.14. ESS category  
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has Readiness 
or PPF support been 
used to prepare this 
FP? 
Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the country 
programme? 
Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Yes ☐    No ☒

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 92 
 
 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH besides being 
the Accredited Entity (AE) of the project, acts as well as an Executing Entity (EE). Besides 
GIZ, there will be the following other Executing Entities:  
• 
National Forestry Agency (NFA), a Legal Entity of Public Law (LEPL) of the 
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture (MoEPA) (Georgia). 
• 
Department of Environmental Supervision (DES) representing the Government of 
Georgia, State Sub-Agency of MoEPA (Georgia). 
• 
Environmental Information and Education Centre (EIEC), a LEPL of MoEPA 
(Georgia). 
• 
Agricultural and Rural Development Agency (ARDA)1, a Non-Entrepreneurial 
(Non-Commercial) Legal Entity (N(N)LE) of MoEPA (Georgia). 
MoEPA acts as the National Designated Authority (NDA) for GCF in Georgia. 
A.21. Executive summary 
1. Georgia’s forests play a pivotal role in securing net removal of GHG emissions, which are expected to rise by approx. 
70 % to 28,690 Gg CO2eq in 2030 in the BAU scenarios. However, LULUCF sector absorption capacity is rapidly 
decreasing. Climate change impacts and the demand for fuelwood from rural population puts significant pressure on 
Georgia’s forests: up to 90% of rural households (1.43 million people) rely on fuel wood for their energy needs. This 
leads to forest degradation and loss of carbon absorption capacity, which is projected to decrease by five times 
between 1990 and 2030. The Government of Georgia therefore prioritized the forest sector in its Nationally 
Determined Contribution (NDC) aiming at reducing GHG emissions by 6 million tCO2eq by introducing the sustainable 
forest management (SFM) on 250,000 ha of state-managed forest lands over a period of 2020-20302. 
 
2. The project will enable the Government of Georgia to implement its transformational forest sector reform agenda 
to put the entire nation’s forests under the SFM framework. It will do so by supporting establishment of a nation-wide 
SFM system under Component 1 and in parallel, under Component 2, promoting market development for energy 
efficient (EE) and alternative fuels (AF)3 to address main driver of Georgia’s forest degradation, the unsustainable 
fuelwood consumption by rural population. Component 3, addressing potential adverse effects of the forest sector 
reform, safeguards the reform implementation by diversifying livelihood opportunities and strengthening local self-
governance in forest adjoining rural communities.   
 
3. The first component will help the Government put in place main building blocks of SFM at national level in the form of 
appropriate policy and regulatory environment, knowledge and data, as well as human and institutional capacities. At 
the regional level, the project will implement SFM in the three target regions of Kakheti, Mtskheta-Mtianeti and 
Guria. By doing so, the project will help develop an appropriate institutional structure and a business model for SFM, 
which will then be replicated to cover all forest areas in the country. Under second component, the project will 
accelerate growth of the nascent EE-AF sector in Georgia by pushing the development of supply chain and in 
parallel pulling the demand via consumer awareness raising, provision of financial incentives and consumer financing 
products in partnership with financial institutions, as well as creating conducive policy and regulatory framework for 
the sector in line with EU aquis, which the Government of Georgia has committed to implement. The third component 
will build up capacities of local authorities and citizens to participate in the sustainable management of forests and 
will enable communities of the target regions to benefit from diversified income opportunities by improved forest-
related value chains and better access to forest-related knowledge and skills.  
 
4. The project will cover 270,807 ha of state-managed forests in the target regions with SFM (over-achieving the NDC 
target of 250,000 ha).4 This will lead to the improvement of quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the forests 
and gradual build-up of carbon stock: Broader SFM implementation will lead to a reduction of forest degradation in 
the range of 0.8 t biomass per ha and year (1.3 tCO2/ha/year); in addition forest biomass will increase by 1.7 t biomass 
per ha and year (2.9 tCO2/ha/year) as a result of direct SFM measures. Further, availability of sustainably 
harvested fuelwood in the target districts will increase 5-fold from 50,000 m3 up to 285,575 m3 by the project end. 
 
1 From July 1, 2019 the official title of Agricultural Projects Management Agency (APMA) was changed into Agricultural and Rural 
Development Agency (ARDA). 
2 Conditional commitment. 
3 Alternative fuels (AF) in the context of this Funding Proposal refer to different forms of upgraded solid biofuels (USB), which can be 
produced from woody or vegetable material by modern processes and technologies, such as briquettes, pellets, or chips sourced from 
forestry and agricultural residues (hazelnut shells, wine pruning, etc.). Please refer to Section 5.3.3.1 of the Feasibility Study for the full 
account of available AFs in Georgia 
4 Note on the project area: The total forest area within the selected forest districts is 293,824 ha. The area analyzed in terms of forest 
degradation and mitigation impacts amounts to 270,807 ha. The area difference is due to the fact that some areas could not be attributed to 
a specific forest formation for which information on carbon stocks is available. See Feasibility Study Chapter 4 for more detail.

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 92 
 
 
In addition, the Project will promote accelerated deployment of EE stoves and AF in the target regions to ensure up 
to 30% penetration by project end and up to 75% in the long-run. This will significantly diminish pressure on forest 
resources and demand for fuelwood from 100,000 rural households, i.e. by up to 360,000 m3 or 50% compared to 
baseline. Taken together, SFM and EE-AF adoption will make sure that supply of sustainably harvested biomass in 
the target regions can meet the demand thus effectively reducing the fuelwood gap, which currently stands at 
580,000 m3.  
 
5. Tackling both, the underlying driver of the degradation by making fuelwood use more efficient and by improving the 
management of the undervalued forest resource, will translate in a direct climate impact: unsustainable biomass 
extraction will be reduced on one hand and on the other incremental growth in the more resilient forest will increase. 
The amount of CO2eq remaining sequestered in standing forest will increase thereby reducing GHG emissions from 
forest degradation and enhancing carbon stock by at least 5.30 million tCO2eq by the project end at a cost to 
the GCF of EUR 6.81/tCO2eq and 16.14 million tCO2eq over a 20-year project lifetime at a cost to the GCF of EUR 
2.0/tCO2eq. 
 
6. The project will also bring about important social, environmental and health benefits. It will directly benefit close to 
100,000 rural residents, fuelwood users, by enabling investment in energy efficiency and alternative fuels and, as a 
result, will lower energy poverty, improve thermal comfort and the quality of indoor and outdoor environment by 
reducing NOx and particles emissions from fuelwood combustion by inefficient heat stoves. The population of the 
three target regions will a) participate in decision-making processes at the local level, b) have access to mechanisms 
to protect their interests, and c) gain additional economic benefits through the improved livelihood opportunities, 
education and job creation activities of Component 3.     
 
7. To scale-up public and private investment in low-carbon transformation of Georgia’s forestry and rural energy sector, 
the project will set-up, as an overarching financing framework, the Georgia Forest and Rural Energy Investment 
Facility (GFREIF). Via GFREIF, the project will mobilize significant co-finance from the government, the financial 
sector and donors at the ratio of 1:2 (GCF – confirmed co-finance). The GCF grant, by filling selected funding gaps 
while minimizing concessionality, will be crucial to the successful execution of the project. In addition, it will leverage 
a considerable public and private sector contribution – EUR 123.57 million – from the households, EE-AF suppliers, 
forest private sector contractors, National Forestry Agency and financial sector. The project’s cumulative total finance 
leveraged ratio is therefore 1:6 (GCF – total leverage).

=== PAGE 8 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 5 OF 92 
 
 
 
5 MoENRP 2016. First Biennial Update Report on Climate Change. Tbilisi, Georgia. 
6 USAID 2017. Low Emission Development Strategy. Tbilisi, Georgia 
7 Ibid. 
 
 PROJECT INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate rationale and context 
8. After the collapse of the economic system of the Soviet period, Georgia’s GHG emissions decreased rapidly 
and reached their lowest point in 1995 (8,799 Gg CO2eq). Since 1995, at a time of economic recovery, emissions 
started to increase and have doubled by 2013 (16,679 Gg in CO2eq), but still remained at 35% of 1990 
emissions5. Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) is one of the most significant sectors in 
Georgia’s GHG emission profile. Georgia’s forests, covering approximately 40% of the total territory, play a 
pivotal role in regulating net GHG emissions of Georgia removing an average of ~5,400 Gg CO2eq annually from 
2010-2013, i.e. one-third of the national emissions. The importance of forest resources and their sustainable 
management is highlighted in the country’s highest climate level policies: Georgia’s Nationally Determined 
Contribution (NDC) singled out forests as the key sector for national climate actions and the only one with 
quantified commitments to scale-up sustainable forest management (SFM) on the territory of 250,000 hectares 
by 2030 (conditional commitment). 
 
9. Based on the current trend, GHG emissions are expected to continue rising until 2030: By approx. 70% to 
28,690 Gg CO2eq in 2030 in the BAU scenarios and by 33% even under the low-emission development 
scenario6. The sink potential is therefore critical in securing net removal of forecasted GHG emissions. However, 
LULUCF sector absorption capacity is decreasing: The projected annual absorption of CO2 by the managed 
forests will decrease by five times between 1990 and 2030, and by 1.5 times between the years 2015 and 2030 
(see Figure 1 below).7 
 
 
Figure 1: Trend in CO2 absorption by Georgian forests from 1990-2030 
 
10. Climate change also has negative but varying impacts on Georgia’s forests: due to the diversity of agro-climatic 
zones in Georgia and distribution of tree varieties, it is challenging to draw uniform conclusions on forests’ 
vulnerability. The main climate signal is continued trend of increased temperature, which has resulted in various 
impacts to the forest ecosystems, such as greater occurrence of pests and diseases in some areas, altitudinal

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 6 OF 92 
 
 
 
8 Georgia currently does not have an official definition of forest degradation. In Resolution 241 (Regulation of Forest Protection, Reforestation 
and Maintenance), a degraded stand is defined as a “stand, where the main features have started to degrade, deteriorate” (page 4). The new 
forest code does not include a definition of forest degradation.  
For the purpose of the first NFI in Georgia forest degradation is assessed and has been defined as follows:  Forest degradation status defines 
the level of deviation from an undisturbed natural or well managed development of the forest. It is determined on the basis of: Tree coverage 
(canopy), the tree species composition in relation to a natural potential to be expected on the site, the relationship between the main and 
accompanying tree species, damages of trees and surface, humus and soil. It should be noted that there are ongoing discussions in Georgia 
whether or not the official forest definition should consider canopy cover or density as both approaches have their own unique advantages 
and disadvantages. There is a preference to move towards density, as it is a more precise measuring unit that eliminates possible errors from 
assessing crown cover with spatial tools. This language and approach will be integrated into the forest code. In the latest version of the draft 
Forest Code, the term ´Forest´ is defined as “Areas covered with forest forming species and other territories within the forest contour that are 
an integral part of the forest ecosystem”. The draft Forest Code further defines ´Area covered with forest forming species´ as “land plot with 
the width of minimum 10m and area of not less than 0.5 ha covered with one or several forest forming timber species, where the tree density 
per area is not less than 0.1”. Thus, the updated definition will likely use the term ´density´.  For the assessment of carbon associated with 
forest degradation, the FAO Ex-ante Carbon-balance Tool was utilized, where different forest degradation levels are assessed using the % 
of biomass lost and compared in the baseline and the project scenario. The different available states of degradation within EX-ACT correspond 
to an average level of degradation, also expressed in terms of percentage of degraded area. For more detailed information refer to Chapter 
5.2 and 9.1.1 in the Feasibility Study. 
9 See Section 3.1.2 of the Feasibility Study for detailed presentation of forest vulnerabilities in Georgia. 
10 See Feasibility Study Chapter 5.1.3.1 for detailed presentation of the fuelwood consumption by households and assessments of the various 
studies. 
11 Please refer to Chapter 5.2 of the Feasibility Study for details. 
12 In 2014, the forest resources assessment of the Borjomi-Bakuriani Forest District showed the reduction in forest biomass by almost 20% 
over the past 15 years. 
13 All forests in Georgia are state owned (except the church forests) and managed by the National Forestry Agency and other public forest 
management bodies, please also refer to Chapter 1.4 of the Feasibility Study. 
 
shift in forest lines, increased fire hazard and occurrence of droughts. These observed impacts are already 
expected to intensify further exacerbating forest degradation8 and the loss in carbon absorption capacity.9   
 
11. Forests mostly natural forests, covering around 40% of the land cover of Georgia are a critical resource for 
socio-economic development, especially for Georgia’s rural population, in particular in terms of supplying them 
with timber and fuelwood necessary for everyday life. However, the unsustainable use of forest resources, 
primarily for fuelwood – the main source of energy in rural areas - has resulted in over-harvesting and 
degradation of Georgia´s forest resources. Up to 90% of rural households (i.e. 37% of total population or up to 
1.43 million people) rely partially or completely on fuel wood for space and domestic hot water heating, as well 
as for cooking.10 The problem is exacerbated by the fact that households use obsolete technologies, such as 
traditional stoves with a lifetime of two years and an efficiency of 35% or less. Fuelwood demand exceeds 
sustainable harvesting levels, considering reduced productivity of many forests in the country because of 
extensive forest degradation11. As the result of ongoing degradation, the capacity of Georgian forests to 
provide goods and services has declined, most notably the carbon capturing potential.12  
 
12. Without action, the degradation of Georgian forests will continue to prevail under business as usual practices. 
There is a need to promote the transition to sustainable forest management nationally13, while simultaneously 
promoting the adoption of energy efficient technologies and alternative fuels to reduce the rural population´s 
reliance on fuelwood. Such practices will reduce forest degradation and enhance forest carbon stocks, 
strengthening the sink potential of Georgia´s forests to regulate net GHG emissions. It further generates 
numerous sustainable development benefits. 
Info Box. 1: Sustainable Forest Management definition in the Georgian context 
The preamble to Georgia´s New (draft) Forest Code states “Georgia’s forests shall be managed based 
on the system established in accordance with the principles of sustainable development, which will 
provide improvement of quantitative and qualitative parameters of Georgia’s forests, protection of 
biodiversity, rational use of forest’s economic potential taking into consideration its ecological value, 
public involvement in forest management and access to forest resources.”[1] SFM is further defined in 
the New (draft) Forest Code as the “management and use of forests and forest lands in such a way and 
rate that maintains its biodiversity, productivity, regeneration capacity, vitality and their potential so that 
at present and in the future relevant ecological, economic and social functions will be fulfilled on local, 
national and global levels and that does not cause damage to other ecosystems.”[2] Sustainable Forest 
Management in the case of Georgia is specified in the National Criteria and Indicators (C&I). The 
National C&I detail the social, societal, economic and ecological (ecosystem-based) dimension of forest 
management in Georgia. In Georgian context, the term ecosystem-based forest management is used 
to describe the ecological dimension. This dimension is further specified in draft Management Criteria 
and Indicators.

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 7 OF 92 
 
 
 
14 See Feasibility Study, Chapter 4.1.1. 
15 See Feasibility Study, Chapter 5.1.1.2. 
 
13. The project will focus on three target regions that serve as a model for the implementation of SFM: Guria, 
Kakheti, and Mtskheta-Mtianeti (see Figure 2). All three target regions are included in the upcoming Fourth 
National Communication of the UNFCCC, with a noted focus on forest vulnerability assessments for these 
regions. In the target regions, eight out of 14 forest districts were selected, totaling 270,807 ha of forest, which 
will be subject to SFM planning and implementation within the frame of this project. The area represents a 
balance of forest types in Western and Eastern Georgia and account for 14% of Georgia´s forests. The selection 
of target districts is a result of thorough process, including ranking of the districts against a set of established 
criteria, quantitative and qualitative considerations as well as stakeholder consultations. 14 The map below 
depicts the project´s target districts: 
Figure 2: Map of target regions and districts 
 
14. As a result of large-scale forest degradation, carbon stocks in the target regions has estimated to decline by 
20.2% from 1998-2014 (historical reference period) and is expected to further decline by 15.4% in 2040 if 
business as usual practices would continue (baseline scenario)15. As illustrated in Figure 3, this negative trend 
is largely caused by massive fuelwood consumption by the local population. The demand for fuelwood 
greatly exceeded the amount of legally harvested fuelwood (212,042 m3) resulting in the illegal harvesting of an 
additional 547,699 m3 or around 75% of total wood removals in the three project regions.

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 8 OF 92 
 
 
 
16 Georgia´s social wood programme was introduced in the 2000s to address energy poverty and economic crisis, ultimately providing the 
rural population with an affordable supply of fuelwood. Households register as timber users at the municipality level, and purchase fuelwood 
harvesting permits (hereby referred to as ´social tickets´), from NFA that allow the recipients of social tickets to harvest fuelwood in an area 
allocated by the NFA regional office. Allocation of forest areas for social felling is done without a thorough analysis of the optimal volume of 
yearly extractable timber at sustainable level, due to the inexistence of up-to-date forest information and lack of FMPs. The State Audit 
Report (2016b) agreed stating that it is difficult to estimate with confidence both the impact of social felling on the forests and its negative 
impacts on the environment as the MoEPA and forest management bodies allocate forest resources for the social felling activities without 
having accurate and exhaustive information necessary for the sustainable management of forests (State Audit Office 2016a). However, as 
described in Chapter 5.1.2 of the Feasibility Study, consumption of fuelwood is 4-8 times higher than legal allocation – resulting in 
substantial illegality within fuelwood supply chains (State Audit Office 2016a). 
17 The New (Draft) Forest Code sets out the organizational arrangements, rights and responsibilities of forest management bodies in 
Georgia, including the state forest management body, as well as the management bodies of autonomous republics and self-governments.  
 
Figure 3: Legal and illegal wood removals in Kakheti, Mtskheta-Mtianeti and Guria in 2017 
 
15. In order to address unsustainable forest management practices, the Government of Georgia has initiated an 
extensive forest sector reform back in 2013. The aims of the forest sector reform are (a) to change current 
approaches to forest use and management, (b) to develop a unified legal system of forest management and (c) 
to improve the institutional and technical capacities of forest management and supervision bodies. Key 
milestones of this ambitious reform process include: 
 
Adoption by the Georgian Parliament of the National Forest Concept in December 2013, which is aimed 
to establish “a system of sustainable forest management that will ensure the improvement of quantitative 
and qualitative characteristics of the Georgian forests, protection of biological diversity, effective use of 
the economic potential of forests taking into account their ecological values, public participation in forest 
management and fair distribution of derived benefits“. 
 
Launch of the National Forest Program (NFP) process in September 2013 as an instrument to involve 
of stakeholders in the decision-making processes in order to support the Forestry Sector Reform. 
 
The development of a New Forest Code based on the SFM principles, as stipulated in the National Forest 
Concept. The Code envisages a number of innovations that are expected to radically change existing 
practices in the forestry sector, such as: Introduction of forest information and monitoring system; reform 
and transformation of the National Forestry Agency (NFA): the new management model envisions a 
gradual transformation of the NFA to a multipurpose forest management body. In this role, the NFA will 
be authorized to manage forest and reinvest revenues from multiple uses into forest restoration, fire 
prevention, infrastructure, and other forest management activities; phasing out of all longer-term forest 
management concessions and the social wood programme16. Wood-related commercial activities in state 
forest will exclusively be implemented by forest management bodies.17 
 
16. GIZ has been active in the Georgia’s forest sector since 2013 via the regional (South Caucasus) project 
Integrated Biodiversity Management South Caucasus (IBIS, ends in 11/2019; funded by BMZ and the

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 9 OF 92 
 
 
 
18 Please refer to Chapter 5.4 of the Feasibility Study for further details about past and on-going projects. 
19 Estimated volume of sustainably harvested fuelwood which NFA would be able to supply at current level of its operational capacities. 
Austrian Development Agency, ADA), and its successor programme ECOserve (started in 01/2019). It 
supported the development of the Forest Sector Reform Strategy based on the principles of Sustainable Forest 
Management, new forest code and other policy and regulatory provisions enabling transition to SFM. IBIS has 
initiated the elaboration of national C&I for SFM including a detailed set of management level C&I for ecosystem-
based forest management (ecological dimension of SFM), the National Forest Programme (NFP) process, 
training of forest work specialists at vocational training centers, the improvement of university forestry education, 
the on-going process of National Forest Inventory, the improvement of forest management inventories and 
forest management planning and pilots the implementation of SFM in Akhmeta municipality (Kakheti region). 
These GIZ-supported activities lay an important foundation for the proposed GCF project and provide an 
opportunity to scale-up SFM in line with the national climate commitments of the NDC. Several other 
international initiatives and institutions (such as EU Twinning and ADA) are supporting the Government of 
Georgia in the forestry sector and on promoting sustainability and climate change agenda more broadly. The 
design of the GCF project builds upon the lessons learned from other donor projects and experiences in the 
country and seeks to address and complement them.18  
B.2. Theory of change 
17. The Project will enable the Government of Georgia, in a socially compatible manner, to implement its 
transformational forest sector reform agenda to put the entire nation’s forests under the SFM framework. As 
a starting point for establishing a nation-wide system and in line with NDC 2030 target (250,000 ha), it will cover 
270,807 hectares of NFA-managed forests with SFM. The transformation process will entail the following 
qualitative and quantitative changes in the sector: 
18. First of all, a new approach to forest management based on SFM principles and integration of climate change 
adaptation in forest sector governing framework will lead to improvement of quantitative and qualitative 
characteristics of the forests and gradual build-up of carbon stock, such as a reduction of forest 
degradation in the range of 0.8t biomass per ha and year (1.3 tCO2/ha/year) and increase in forest biomass by 
1.7 t biomass per ha and year (2.9 tCO2/ha/year) as illustrated in Figure 4 below. 
 
Figure 4: Carbon stocks in the forests 
19. Second, enhanced forest supervision and introduction of new fuelwood provision mechanism by NFA will 
eliminate illegal logging currently estimated at 618,283 m3 (85% of the residential fuelwood demand), while at 
the same time lead to five-fold increase in the availability of the sustainably harvested biomass in the 8 target 
districts from around 50,489 m319 up to 285,575 m3 by the project end.

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 10 OF 92 
 
 
 
20. In parallel, in order to address main driver of Georgia’s forest degradation, the unsustainable fuelwood 
consumption by rural population, the Project will promote market development for energy efficient (EE) and 
alternative fuels (AF), which is currently at a very nascent stage. There is only a limited number of local 
manufacturers or technology suppliers (e.g. 15 producers of EE stoves and 3 briquette manufacturers), the 
quality of their products and services are largely limited and so does the capacity to improve and expand their 
offer to the market, and the total annual sales volume for EE-AF products does not exceed 1 million EUR. 
 
21. The project will adopt a “push and pull” approach to stimulate development of EE-AF market. It will push the 
supply chain to prepare the sector for expedited growth by providing EE-AF producers with access to finance 
and advisory support for business development and product certification. It will also pull the demand to jump-
start the market via consumer awareness raising, provision of financial incentive and dedicated financing 
products in partnership with financial institutions. The volume of EE-AF production and sales will increase 
manifold to reach 30,730 EE stoves and 28,600 tonnes of AF or 15 million EUR/year (Figure 5), market 
penetration of EE stoves in target region will be at least 30% by the project end.   
 
Figure 5: Market development for EE stoves 
 
22. As a result of EE-AF market growth, fuelwood consumption in the three target regions will reduce by 50%: 
from 725,000 m3 down to 366,000 m3. Taken together, SFM and EE-AF adoption will ensure that supply of 
sustainably harvested biomass in the target regions can meet the demand in year 7 of implementation Figure 
6).

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 11 OF 92 
 
 
 
20 Refer to Feasibility Study Chapter 5.2.3.4.3 for more detailed information on the SFM scenario/ model developed to inform project design. 
  
Figure 6: Overview of fuelwood demand and supply from sustainably harvested forests in the three project regions  
(Guria, Mtskheta-Mtianeti, and Kakheti)  
Source: Fuelwood supply based on SFM scenario developed20 for project development; Fuelwood demand baseline in year 1 
from CENN Household Study (2016) 
 
23. To sustain results in target regions, as well as to enable nation-wide SFM roll out, the project will introduce a 
number of critical policy changes by supporting implementation of the new Forest Code and EE-AF policy 
framework. This will entail full internalization of SFM principles in the regulatory framework of forest sector and 
operationalization of cross-sector coordination mechanism. It will also gradually phase-out inefficient stoves 
from the market and create strong demand for EE and AF products by introducing minimum energy efficiency 
and environmental performance standards for domestic heating appliances, as well as energy efficient public 
procurement policies. 
 
24. To support a socially just implementation of the forest sector reform in the target regions, the project a) 
strengthens municipal authorities’ and citizens’ technical and human capacities to participate in sustainable 
forest management and b) it establishes forest related value chains as well as access to knowledge and 
education opportunities for local communities to facilitate employment and income generation. These alternative 
livelihood opportunities and participation measures mitigate potential adverse social effects through the new 
management of forest products and reduce potential conflicts between state institutions (NFA, DES and 
MoEPA) and the local population in the implementation of the provisions of the new forest code. 
 
25. The project will follow a two-pronged approach to address underlying root cause of forest degradation, i.e. 
inadequate forest management and high demand for fuelwood (see Theory of Change - Figure 7): with 
Component 1 aiming at operationalizing and scaling-up implementation of SFM, while Component 2 aiming at 
promoting development of EE-AF market, specifically for rural areas. A socially just transition to the new forest 
management approach in Component 1 and 2 is facilitated by Component 3: Strengthened municipal institutions

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 12 OF 92 
 
 
 
21 Please see table 3 in Section B.3 for more information on funding windows and respective project activities. 
and intensified citizens’ participation in forest management, combined with diversified livelihood opportunities 
through the generation of employment and income. 
 
26. The following five key results will be achieved, with Results 1-3 and 5 focusing on target regions and Result 4 - 
on scaling-up results from the target region nation-wide:   
• 
Result 1: Reduced forest degradation and enhanced timber/carbon stocks 
• 
Result 2: Illegal logging eliminated and legal and sustainable fuelwood supply established  
• 
Result 3: EE-AF market reached critical share and self-sustaining level of growth  
• 
Result 4: Policy and regulatory framework for SFM and EE-AF market created enabling environment to 
continued SFM roll-out and EE-AF market development post-project 
• 
Result 5: Diversified livelihood opportunities and strengthened local self-governance in forest 
management to reduce pressure on forests. 
 
27. Tackling both, the underlying driver of the degradation by making fuelwood use more efficient and by improving 
the management of the undervalued forest resource, has the potential for a paradigm shift if social, ecological 
and economic criteria are integrated in the new management regime. This will translate in a direct climate 
impact: the amount of CO2eq remaining sequestered in standing forest will increase, thereby reducing GHG 
emissions from forest degradation and enhancing carbon stock by at least 5.30 million tCO2eq by the project 
end and 16.14 million tCO2eq over a 20-year project lifetime. 
 
 
Figure 7: Theory of Change 
 
Project Financing Framework:  Georgia Forest and Rural Energy Investment Facility (GFREIF) 
 
28. As an overarching financing framework for GCF project implementation, the Georgia Forest and Rural Energy 
Investment Facility (GFREIF) will be formed to coordinate and scale-up public and private investment in low-
carbon transformation of Georgia’s forestry and rural energy sectors (Figure 8). In line with proposed two-
pronged approach, the Facility will consist of two funding windows21.  
 
29. Under the GFREIF Public Investment Window, the Facility will establish a sustainable financial mechanism 
to channel public investment in Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) by creating a viable business model for 
sustainable biomass supply to consumers and a revolving financing scheme to enable accumulation of NFA

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 13 OF 92 
 
 
revenues and their re-investment to scale-up SFM across Georgia. A performance-based GCF investment 
grant will be used to kick-start and initiate SFM implementation in three target regions of Georgia, and, via 
technical assistance, to build the capacity of NFA to roll-out SFM to other forest districts across the country. In 
addition, financial support is granted to NFA for the construction of Business Service Yards for the processing 
and sales of timber and fuelwood. The mechanism will become self-sustainable from year 15 of reformed NFA 
operations. Sustainability of the mechanism will be ensured by the NFA financial independence from the state 
budget and earmarking its revenues for re-investment in SFM implementation across the country (see financial 
analysis and projections for NFA operations in Annex 3b of the FP and FP section B.6). Under the Public 
Investment Window, additional grant support for the procurement of equipment to improve the forest 
supervision capacities of the Department of Environmental Supervision (DES) is provided. 
 
30. The GFREIF Private Investment Window will facilitate private investment in the forestry and rural energy 
sector. It will do so by providing a range of de-risking instruments in the form of technical assistance (TA), 
grants, interest rate subsidies and guarantees to be deployed alongside market loans by the Georgian 
commercial banks. The following private investments will be supported and de-risked: a) investment in domestic 
EE-AF production and supply chain; b) Providing private forestry service companies with investment capital to 
carry out SFM works; and c) Investment by households and other fuelwood users in EE-AF solutions. GCF 
grant resources, along with BMZ co-financing in the form of TA, will be used to design and operate de-risking 
instruments in a more targeted, efficient and result-oriented manner (e.g. only producers of appliances which 
meet EU Eco-design standards will be eligible to be supported). De-risking instruments such as interest rate 
subsidies and guarantees will be co-financed by the Government and financial partners. To ensure sustainability 
of the GFREIF Private Investment Window SIDA will provide co-financing to mainstream de-risking 
instruments in the ARDA core activities, along with capacity building for ARDA and its partner banks to 
implement and expand the scope of support to cover other EE-AF solutions for rural areas. A limited amount of 
GCF funds (less than 10%) will be used to provide financial incentives via a result-based grant voucher scheme 
to households to jump-start demand for EE stoves and enable rapid growth and capitalization of this new market 
segment (See section B.5.2 for justification).  
 
 
Figure 8: Georgia Forest and Rural Energy Investment Facility (larger version available in Annex 22c) 
Component 1: Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) 
31. Component 1 “Sustainable Forest Management” carries a dual objective and works at two level. First it 
supports NFA to implement SFM in line with NDC target in three target regions, while in parallel it works with 
NFA, other forest management bodies, forest supervision and MoEPA to create enabling environment, 
capacities and sustainable financing mechanism for SFM nation-wide. Implementation of the Component 1 will

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 14 OF 92 
 
 
 
22 See Feasibility Study Chapters 5.1, 5.2 and 6.2 for more detailed information on the barriers for SFM. 
23 It is estimated that the implementation of SFM requires additional 250 private sector workers.  
24 See Feasibility Study Chapter 5.2.3.4.3 for additional benchmarking information, including information from the European Forest Information 
Scenario Model, among other sources. 
25 NFA, unpublished figures. 
26 NFA, unpublished figures. 
27 See Feasibility Study Chapter 5.2.4 on the analysis of the past, current and projected budget situation in the forest sector. 
28 MoENRP 2014. National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan of Georgia 2014-2020. Tbilisi, Georgia; MoENRP and NFA, Ministry of 
Environment and Natural Resources Protection and the National Forestry Agency. 2014. National Forest Concept for Georgia. Tbilisi, Georgia. 
29 See Feasibility Study, Chapter 5.1.3.3.2. 
 
be primarily enabled through the GFREIF Public Investment Window and partially through the GFREIF Private 
Investment Window to stimulate involvement of private forestry service companies in SFM works. 
 
32. Component 1 is aimed at addressing the following barriers to implementation of SFM:22 
 
33. Limited capacities, practical skills and experience of forest sector institutions:  
 
Capacities for SFM: NFA as the main forest management body is heavily understaffed. Substantial efforts 
are needed to train NFA workforce (existing and new hires) on SFM, where 90 full-time forest work 
specialists and 428 seasonal employees are required to implement SFM in the target districts. (compared 
to the existing 3 chief forest officers, 3 forest operation managers, and 33 forest work specialists in the three 
project regions – i.e. covering 14 districts) In addition, NFA has either no or outdated/inadequate equipment 
for implementation of SFM measures. Private sector service companies in the forest sector, supposed to 
implement 70% of the SFM measures under the New Forest Concept, face the same challenge, where 270 
jobs are expected to be generated for private sector forest work specialists.23 
 
Capacities for forest supervision: The supervision of natural resources is under the auspices of the 
Department of Environmental Supervision (DES), which is responsible for controlling the transportation and 
trade of forest products outside of the forests. The protection inside the forests has recently been mandated 
to DES as well but is not implemented yet. The new mandate requires the hiring of 270 staff for the new 
forest patrolling and inspection directorates. These directorates presently are lacking staff, adequate and 
modern equipment as well as know-how on standard operating procedures and forest patrolling. 
 
Capacities for sustainable fuelwood provision: The forest sector reform envisages a new mechanism 
for the sustainable provision of fuelwood and timber through NFA-operated business service yards (BSYs). 
While a draft concept and business model exists, standard operating procedures, detailed business plans 
and staff with adequate know-how are missing. Construction of the first BSY has only begun in 2019 with 
the support of GIZ but covers only the simple physical infrastructure. Nationwide, 54 BSYs need to be 
constructed, in the project regions alone, at least 15 yards are needed, which require substantial investment 
in construction and equipment. 
 
34. Inadequate financing for the forest sector: Since gaining independence from the Soviet Union, Georgia’s 
forestry sector has suffered from declining budgets and salaries for forest management, severely undermining 
its capacity to properly implement SFM. Existing Government budgets, and NFA revenues are insufficient. Years 
of under-investment in the sector have greatly limited the adoption of SFM: While official statistics in Georgia 
are not available, experts have estimated that current forest road infrastructure is equivalent to 3m/ha of forest 
(compared to 10-30m/ha in Central and Eastern European countries),24 and skidding road infrastructure 9m/ha 
(where a target of ca. 40-50 m/ha is more suitable for SFM in an area with primarily mountainous terrain, where 
skidding roads secure the application of low impact logging strategies). In the three project regions, only 12.1 
km of new forest roads were constructed, and 105.2km of roads were rehabilitated during 2015-201725. From 
2013 to 2017 for example, only 3.4 ha were reforested and 18.2ha were supported in natural regeneration in 
the three target regions 26. Existing Government budgets, and NFA revenues are insufficient to cover the 
investment needs for forest infrastructure and implementation of concrete SFM measures27. See also Section 
B.5 of the FP for further details.   
 
35. Policy and regulatory gaps: The state of the regulatory framework for Georgian forestry is inadequate 
for the application of sustainable forest management practices. The new (draft) forest code will establish the 
legal framework for SFM, however, secondary forest legislation will have to be developed to align with SFM 
principles.28 Examples of policy and regulatory gaps are related to the lack of regulations/requirements for low-
impact forest infrastructure (e.g. forest access roads and skidding trails), the lack of a comprehensive 
prescription for best practice low-impact cutting operations, insufficient guidance to support the identification 
and transformation of forests that do not represent natural forest types to close to nature forests, among 
others29.

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 15 OF 92 
 
 
 
30 Ibid. 
31Garforth, M., Nilsson, S., Torchinava, P. 2016. Wood market study. Integrated Biodiversity Management, South Caucus (IBiS) Program. 
GIZ, Tbilisi, Georgia. The current practice of timber harvesting under the social ticket system does not differentiate between high- and low-
quality timber, where high quality/ value timber is used fuelwood – resulting in economic losses and the inefficient use of natural resources. 
32 NFA. 2019. Comparative analysis of activities carried out by National Forestry Agency 2015-2018. [Unpublished presentation]. Tbilisi, 
Georgia. 
33 Garforth et al. 2016. 
34 Information provided by NFA, Forest Fund Single Inventory Data Indicators [unpublished]. 
 
36. In addition, the regulatory system of fuelwood provision currently in use is flawed and contributes to extensive 
forest degradation. Allocation of forest areas for social felling is done without a thorough analysis of the optimal 
volume of yearly extractable timber at sustainable level. Thus, annual allowable cuts are not based on the actual 
forest condition and status. Under the “social wood programme”, logging is often carried out by 
´intermediaries´, who are unregistered yet purchase social tickets from local people. Thus, their identification, 
recording of revenues and payment of taxes is not possible under this system. Given the high degree of 
informality it is extremely difficult to determine exact harvested fuelwood volumes, and ultimately to differentiate 
between legally and illegally-sourced fuelwood.30 The cost of social tickets is highly subsidized and does not 
reflect the true economic and environmental value of the natural resources resulting in major losses to the 
sector. One study noted that the programme “constitutes a substantial financial loss for forestry and the state”, 
with state loses of at least GEL 30 million (over EUR 10 million) per year due to the program. Furthermore, 
some of the trees marked for fuelwood could be sold for higher prices as industrial timber.31 Harvesting practices 
are often carried out by unqualified persons and often lead to environmental degradation, and even to accidents 
and injuries due to the lack of suitable equipment (incl. both harvesting equipment and safety equipment).32 
 
37. Incomplete, unreliable and outdated data on forest inventories: One challenge for forest management in 
Georgia in general is the lack of up-to-date forest inventories. Forest inventories in Georgia are outdated, with 
many conducted 20-30 years ago, resulting in patchy information on the status and quality of forests in 
Georgia.33 Specifically, in majority of the target districts, the date of the last inventory is within the range of 1987 
to 1995.34 In the absence of up-to-date inventories and forest management plans, majority of forest districts 
have been managed by short-term (often ad hoc) forest utilization plans and in the framework of the social wood 
programme, often independent of forest stand conditions. Such practices put forests at risk of unsustainable 
management, particularly unsustainable harvesting levels that are not aligned with forest conditions and growth 
rates. 
 
38. The lack of a comprehensive forest information and monitoring system limits sustainable planning, 
management and monitoring. A system is needed that includes a forest resource database, information on 
land registration, forest inventories, forest site and forest function mapping, utilization rights, forest operations 
(including an activity registry, and an electronic system of timber resources management), and forest incidence 
mapping. The lack of such a system prevents transparent oversight and traceability in the sector, enabling 
illegality. It further limits national and international monitoring and reporting on the LULUCF sector, including 
the robustness and accuracy of emissions reporting, and NDC monitoring.  
 
Component 2: Market development for energy efficiency and alternative fuels 
 
39. Component 2 “Market development for energy efficiency and alternative fuels” will tackle the main driver 
of forest degradation, unsustainable fuelwood consumption, by promoting the development of a market for 
energy efficient (EE) technologies and alternative low-carbon fuels (AFs). The primary focus will be on the 
population of the target regions to be first affected by the Forest Sector reform and therefore the first to demand 
EE-AF products. At the same time, to ensure sustainability and scaling-up EE-AF market, the project will at the 
national level support policy, regulatory, and investment framework for EE-AF sector in partnership with EE-AF 
suppliers, financial sector and the Government (see Figure 10 in the next section for illustration of the national 
and regional scope of activities). GCF funds and co-financing for Component 2 will be provided via the GFREIF 
Private Investment Window as described earlier and illustrated in the Figure 8. 
 
40. Component 2 is designed to address demand-side, supply-side and policy barriers to EE-AF market, 
specifically:  
 
41. Under-developed supply chain for EE technologies and alternative fuels: So far, there are only 15 
producers of efficient stoves and 3 producers of AF on the market, with limited annual production volumes (500 
stoves, 3,500 tons of briquettes). Producers are restricted in their ability to raise capital in order to invest in 
building up new or expansion of existing production and distribution capacities, as well as in supply of raw

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 16 OF 92 
 
 
 
35 1 EUR = ca. 3 Georgian Lari (GEL) 
36 https://commersant.ge/en/post/loans-and-real-estate-will-fall-in-price-after-the-central-banks-regulations-come-into-effect  
37 Deloitte Consulting LLP 2014. Household Energy End-Use Survey. Final Report under USAID Hydro Power and Energy Planning Project. 
materials (in case of AF). Quality issues and absence of testing, standardization and certification services further 
hinder the market upscaling. Entrepreneurs involved in AF supply chain are lacking detailed information on 
availability and territorial distribution of raw materials, as well as expertise to conduct such resource assessment 
and develop feasible business models. 
 
42. Affordability of EE-AFs and access to finance, especially for poor households: High up-front costs of 
energy efficient technologies is a major barrier to their wide-spread adoption by households, which is being 
further exacerbated by low level of incomes in rural Georgia and households’ restricted access to bank 
financing. 
 
43. Prices for EE technologies vary significantly, but even the cheapest alternative is hardly affordable for an 
average rural household. Depending on the source and quality, the price of an EE stove ranges between GEL 
300-50035 for a locally produced non-certified stove and GEL 800-1500 for an imported EU-certified appliance. 
Only 10% of rural households earn more than GEL 800 per month and another 68% of households have monthly 
earnings below GEL 400. In other words, for the vast majority of Georgian rural households, their monthly 
disposal income is not sufficient to cover even the cost of a basic EE stove, let alone invest in a more expensive 
and efficient technologies, such as thermal insulation or central heating system.  
 
44. The situation is being exacerbated by households’ restricted access to bank financing. In the last several years, 
household debt in Georgia has been growing rapidly and the value of overdue loans is high. The National Bank 
of Georgia therefore has enacted as of January 1, 2019 tight regulations, which significantly restrict banks’ 
abilities to provide individual unsecured consumer loans without detailed analysis of customer’s solvency. In 
particular, banks and micro-finance institutions (MFIs) have to calculate the loan amount based on the income 
of the potential borrower, so that the borrower should not take the amount more than its financial capabilities 
allow. For example, anyone earning up to GEL 1,000 per month will be able to receive a loan in the amount at 
which monthly loan payments would not exceed 20% of income.36 
 
45. Low consumer awareness about technologies and fuel alternatives and reduction of fuel wood consumption: 
Awareness about energy efficiency and sustainable/low-carbon alternative fuels is very low among rural 
Georgian households: Only 20% of the local population are aware about energy efficiency while the rest of rural 
residents are either not sure or not aware at all.37 The population is also concerned about availability and 
potential disruption and instability of AF supply to rural areas. 
 
46. Absence of enabling policy and regulatory framework: Slow progress and insufficient capacities within the 
Government to effectively transpose and implement relevant provisions of the EU energy acquis in the areas of 
energy efficiency and alternative fuels, such as: regulations, which establish minimum allowed level of energy 
efficiency and environmental performance for domestic appliances, in particular heat stoves; roadmap and 
capacities for introduction of EE labelling for heat stoves; support and promotion scheme for renewable heat 
supply, or energy efficient public procurement policies. 
 
Component 3: Livelihood opportunities and local self-governance in forest management 
 
47. The focus of Component 3 will be on municipal institutions, policies and the population in the three target 
regions. These communities will be among the first to be affected by the implementation of the new forest 
management regime in the country. To ensure a just transition to the new forest management approach via 
transparent and active participation of local communities in forest management and the diversification of 
livelihood options the project will address notably the following barriers: 
 
48. Absence of strategies, tools, instruments and capacities for municipal authorities to participate in 
sustainable forest management and conservation: The new Forest Code (article 20 “Competence of a 
Municipality” and article 21 “Forest Management Body”) foresees in the medium- to long-term the optional 
management of forests by municipalities. However, this concept is at a very nascent stage in Georgia. For the 
time being, most municipalities lack a strategic approach, practical instruments and tools, economic and 
technical planning, awareness and human skills and capacities to actively engage in sustainable forest 
management as stipulated in the new Forest Code.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 17 OF 92 
 
 
 
38 See Feasibility Study, Chapter 8 “Potential for Scaling-up and Replication”. 
49. Insufficient participation and representation of local stakeholders in forest management related 
decision-making: To date, participation in e.g. FMP-development is implemented on a very basic level without 
providing sufficient opportunities for local stakeholders to participate in decision-making or to benefit from forest 
management plan implementation. The Forest Sector Reform foresees intensive stakeholder engagement, 
when planning and implementing SFM. However, existing mechanisms or instruments are insufficient to 
materialize this approach nor is an awareness or capacities in local communities available to participate in 
potential mechanisms. 
 
50. Lack of qualified personnel and insufficient education opportunities in the forest sector: The 
implementation of the Forest Sector Reform will require in future a large number of new forest workers to be 
employed either in NFA or in private sector companies.  Moreover, the introduction of forest-related value-chains 
will further require organizational and business skills related to production, processing and marketing of forest 
products. Vocational training colleges lack capacities, equipment, curricula and educated teaching staff to 
expand their already existing program. Moreover, forest related education programmes at universities need 
improvement in terms of curricula strengthening, expansion of research activities and building up networks with 
international research and university institutes. International partnerships with qualified centers of knowledge 
would allow to acquire efficiently necessary expertise and solutions.  
 
51. Under-utilisation of economic opportunities in forest-related value chains: Forest-related value chains 
such as timber value chain, Non-Timber-Forest Products (NTFP) value chains and eco-tourism opportunities 
offer potential income sources for local communities. The economic, but ecological sustainable utilization of 
these value chains is below the potential. Reasons include lack of data, sector analyses for the identification of 
economic opportunities, lack of business plans and strategies, missing human, technical and economic 
capacities and capital.   
 
52. The project Components 1,2 and 3 are inter-dependent and complementary and reinforce the outcomes of 
each other, as illustrated in Figure 9. On one side, addressing the root cause of forest degradation, i.e. 
unsustainable fuelwood consumption, is made possible by providing affordable and more efficient alternatives 
to current stoves thus reducing by at least 50% the demand for fuelwood from households and consequently 
the pressure on forest. On the other side, introduction and strict enforcement of SFM practices along with new 
business model for supply of sustainably harvested and quality fuelwood provides strong impetus for the growth 
of EE-AF market because the abundant supply of illegally sourced fuel will gradually phase out. Component 3 
ensures that the gradual transition to the new forest management system is socially just and provides 
employment and income opportunities for forest adjoining communities. 
 
Figure 9: Complementarity of project objectives 
 
53. The on-going process of forest sector reform in Georgia represents a unique opportunity to put into practice 
SFM principles embedded in the new (draft) Forest Code and kick start its implementation by creating enabling 
environment for SFM nation-wide and scaling-up SFM on the ground in the target regions. Apart from better 
forest protection, improved governance structure will also help to establish a sound revenue base for the forestry 
administration, which makes the sector more financially independent in the future. 38 At the same time, the 
increased energy efficiency, the more formalized value chain for rural energy supply and diversified income

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 18 OF 92 
 
 
opportunities for local population de-incentivize illegal wood harvest in the forests. The project shall function as 
a catalyst for upscaling SFM model to the whole country. 
 
54. Sustainably reducing the need for fuelwood on the one hand and improving the management of the forests 
based on SFM principles on the other will have an impact on how the resource is valued – both from an 
environmental and from an economical perspective. A higher value of the forest resource will sustain the long-
term improvement in management and result in better protection of the resource. In its new Forest Code, 
Georgia puts strong emphasis on the ecosystem services the forests shall provide and sees their protection as 
a prime objective. This requires strengthening management structures, reducing informal and often 
unsustainable use of the forests, better participation of local communities in forest management and to provide 
alternative livelihood options for community members previously engaged in informal or illegal activities. At the 
same time, income generation for the forest administration shall come from multi-purpose forest use including 
more formalized markets and higher prices for forest products, particularly timber and fuel wood.   
 
55. Having personnel and capacity to do this both increases the potential of ecosystem services in revitalized forests 
and for higher value forest products. A significant potential for revenue generation for the forest administration 
lies in sustainable harvest rates for higher quality timber from well managed forests. Reliable supply of quality 
timber allows more value adding down the supply chain and a more formalized forest sector general. On the 
energy side, more conscious and efficient use of the resource combined with a more conducive environment 
for small business should transform the energy consumption patterns away from short-term, opportunistic use 
of the forests. 
B.3. Project description 
56. The overall project structure, including interlinkages between individual components and activities and their 
geographical focus is presented in Figure 10. An overview table with the selection of appropriate instruments 
(technical assistance and financing instruments) applied in the project per activity and the justification for their 
application is provided at the end of this chapter (Table 3). 
Figure 10: Project structure

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 19 OF 92 
 
 
 
39 Draft Forest Code – Version submitted to the Georgian Parliament in February 2019. 
40 Forest code is expected to be approved in mid-to-late 2019. See Activity 1.4 for a description of the project´s support for the revision of 
select acts, and Annex 2 for a detailed description of the main secondary legal acts that need to be revised under the forest code.  
41 Once the new forest code is approved, related secondary legal acts will be revised and/or elaborated to ensure their compliance with the 
forest code. GIZ will support the elaboration of the three legal sub-acts that are the most relevant for forest management plan development, 
forest inventory, restoration, management and utilization (currently Resolutions 179, 241 and 242 of Government of Georgia), and it is 
expected this work will be initiated prior to project start – as soon as the new code is approved.  
42 See Feasibility Study, Chapter 5.2.3.4 and 6. 
43 For more detailed information on how the project addresses key barriers, please refer to Chapter 6.2 of the Feasibility Study. 
44 For more detailed information on the specific steps in FMP development see Chapter 6.3 of the Feasibility Study and the Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (Annex 6b) for ensuring participatory approaches. 
Component 1: Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) 
 
57. This component supports MoEPA, NFA and other public forest management bodies, EIEC and DES in putting 
in place the main building blocks of SFM at national level in the form of appropriate policy and regulatory 
environment, knowledge and data, as well as institutional capacities. At the regional level, the project will enable 
SFM implementation in the three targeted regions of Kakheti, Mtskheta-Mtianeti and Guria covering 270,807 ha 
of NFA-managed forest land, in line with Georgia’s NDC conditional target hectares. By doing so, the project 
will help develop an appropriate institutional structure and a business model for SFM, which will then be 
replicated by the NFA, other public forest management bodies and DES to cover all forest areas under their 
mandate in the long-run.  
 
Activity 1.1 Development and implementation of SFM plans: 
 
58. This Activity supports the implementation of sustainable forest management practices in eight forest districts 
(Kvareli, Dedoplistskaro, Telavi, Tianeti,  Chokhatauri, Ozurgeti, Lanchkhuti, and Akhmeta) within the three 
target regions (Kakheti, Guria and Mtskheta-Mtianeti) by a) the elaboration and development of 10 year 
sustainable forest management plans (FMPs), based on forest management inventories, data analysis, and 
multi-stakeholder consultations (Sub-activity 1.1.1) and b) by the implementation of active interventions on 
170,539 ha (refer to Figure 11), including restoration and maintenance (incl. fire, pest and disease management, 
restoration and reforestation measures), cutting operations (maintenance and final cuts), and the construction 
of resilient forest infrastructure, among other activities (Sub-activity 1.1.2). SFM will result in reduced forest 
degradation, the sustainable production and harvesting of fuelwood for the rural population, and further 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks. 
 
59. For forests and forest lands under the authority of NFA, NFA is obliged to develop and implement forest 
management plans following secondary legal acts/ regulations. The new (draft) Forest Code has a stronger 
emphasis on sustainable forest management, where SFM is defined as the “management and use of forests 
and forest lands in such a way and rate that maintains its biodiversity, productivity, regeneration capacity, vitality 
and their potential so that at present and in the future relevant ecological, economic and social functions will be 
fulfilled on local, national and global levels and that does not cause damage to other ecosystems.”39 To support 
ongoing forest sector reforms and the new (draft) Forest Code, Georgia has developed national political-level 
criteria and indicators for ecosystem-based forest management, and is in the process of developing 
Management-level C&I for forest management that will be considered in the elaboration of secondary legal 
acts40. The implementation of the FMPs will be in line with provisions of new forest code, related secondary 
legal acts, as well as national and management-level criteria and indicators (C&I) for forest management.41  
 
60. With this activity the project addresses the barrier of capacities for SFM by supporting training of NFA, public 
forest management bodies and private sector contractors on FMP development and the operationalization of 
best practices for SFM (e.g. low-impact cutting operations, low-impact and resilient forest infrastructure planning 
and construction, among others42). If further addresses the barrier associated with inadequate financing for 
SFM implementation by supporting NFA and private sector contractors to invest in SFM.43 
 
61. Sub-activity 1.1.1 Development of SFM plans: The project will support the (a) development of FMPs by 
technical assistance in four districts: Kvareli, Dedoplistskaro, Telavi and Tianeti. The development of the plans 
will follow a participatory multi-stakeholder engagement process to ensure that needs of local communities are 
addressed properly, whilst promoting improved cooperation between NFA and local communities44 and (b) 
elaboration of FMPs in the other 4 target districts (Chokhatauri, Ozurgeti, Lanchkhuti, and Akhmeta) that are 
currently being developed as well as completion and approval of those FMPs by project inception. This enables 
a phased approach and prevents over-burdening the NFA and private sector to develop the plans, whilst building 
up capacities. For all 8 target districts, this Sub-activity will support the development of business plans to support

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 20 OF 92 
 
 
 
45 Detailed SFM planning, and the analysis of forest degradation and mitigation impacts was only possible for 270,807 ha, as there were 
information gaps for 23,017 ha. This area will nonetheless be included within FMIs and FMPs, which will fill information gaps and promote 
sustainable management in the entire NFA managed forest area in the 8 target districts 
46 Examples of suggested training modules to develop, could include: Data collection for Forest Management Inventories (FMIs), and planning 
for SFM; Ecosystem-based SFM: Implications for the revision and endorsement of FMPs; Business plan development to support FMP 
elaboration and implementation, combined with long-term financial planning for SFM; Climate change risks and best practices for 
strengthening climate resilience; new roles and responsibilities for operationalizing SFM; forest cutting for ecosystem-based SFM; 
construction of sustainable and resilient forest infrastructure for SFM; forest regeneration, restoration and management under SFM; gender, 
and occupational health and safety.  
 
NFA with improved financial and business planning in line with SFM principles and the newly developed FMPs. 
In addition, annual action plans will be elaborated, which support the operationalization of the FMP (budgeting, 
detailed technical planning, etc.).   
 
62. Sub-activity 1.1.2 Implementation of SFM plans: As a result of this Sub-activity, FMPs will be approved and 
implemented for 270,870 ha of forests, as described in the following Figure. The specific activities and areas 
within the 8 districts mentioned above will be confirmed based on the approved FMPs, see Feasibility Study 
Chapter 5.2.3.4 for more detailed discussion on the forest model used for designing the project. 
 
Figure 11: SFM implementation in target regions45 
 
63. The Sub-activity supports NFA and the private sector in the implementation of the FMPs by technical assistance, 
a targeted performance-based grant mechanism (for NFA) and an investment support scheme for private sector 
contractors: 
 
64. Technical assistance (financed by GCF and BMZ) will be provided to NFA staff and forest-sector contractors 
to develop capacities on best practices for implementing SFM. This includes dedicated project management 
staff and national and international experts to provide targeted support where needed for the implementation of 
SFM. This includes on-the job training, the development of guidelines and protocols for the implementation of 
best practices for SFM, and the development of training modules, training trainers and conducting trainings 
supporting the operationalization of SFM.46  
 
65. Performance-based grant mechanism (financed by GCF): NFA faces severe constraints in financing the 
necessary investments in equipment and forest road construction to actually enable the institution to implement

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 21 OF 92 
 
 
 
47 For more details on the performance-based grant mechanism, please refer to Chapter 6.4.1.1 in the Feasibility Study (p. 244).  
48 GIZ AE will sign a subsidiary agreement with DES and DES will procure the equipment. 
the above described SFM measures (see barriers above and Section B.5 for more details). Based on the 
performance of NFA in the implementation of the measures in the 8 target districts (approved FMPs, 
forest/skidding road construction, thinning and harvesting, restoration), the project provides a 50% contribution 
in year 1, 3 and 5 of project implementation to the procurement of advanced, low-impact SFM machinery and 
to forest road construction.47  
 
66. Investment support scheme for private sector contractors (financed by Government of Georgia through 
ARDA and ARDA partner (M)FIs and banks): The implementation of 70% of the necessary forest measures will 
be tendered by NFA to the private sector. Private sector forest service contractors have to investment in new, 
SFM specific equipment to comply with the SFM approach. To incentivize necessary investments ARDA will 
provide an interest rate subsidy and a guarantee scheme via its existing investment support instruments for the 
agricultural sector (see Activity 2.1 and Section B.5 for more details). These incentives will be coupled with 
loans from ARDA partner banks. The application mechanism for the support and loans is the same as for the 
existing support mechanisms of ARDA. Together with long-term contracts provided by NFA this support scheme 
will stimulate investment of the private sector into modern equipment. Eligible for the incentives and loans are 
all forest service contractors, which comply with the eligibility criteria set out in the existing ARDA instruments 
and which pass the due diligence of ARDA partner (M)FIs and banks. Eligible investments items are any 
technical equipment for forest management activities, except trucks. GIZ will require ARDA to implement this 
Sub-activity in accordance with these criteria and investment items. 
 
Activity 1.2 Strengthening of forest supervision  
 
67. The Activity supports the Department of Environmental Supervision (DES) to reduce the illegal use of forested 
areas, including illegal logging for fuelwood and industrial timber and to assess the forest management practice 
of forest management bodies, such as NFA. The project supports DES on the national level to manage their 
new mandate by developing standard operating procedures (SOPs) and training their staff. In the target regions, 
DES will be equipped with advanced equipment and technology (e.g. drones, GPS devices for registered 
logging trucks, satellite cameras, etc.). This improves the efficiency and effectiveness of forest supervision and 
law enforcement. 
 
68. Sub-activity 1.2.1 Strengthening of procedures, standards and protocols for enhanced forest 
supervision: TA will be provided on the national level develop new procedures, standards and protocols for 
the newly established forest patrolling and inspectorate divisions and to harmonies them with the standards and 
procedures of the existing environmental patrolling divisions. In addition, the TA will support the development 
of training modules for DES staff on SOPs, newly revised regulations, practices for patrolling and forest 
inspection and assessment of environmental damages, including such cross-cutting themes as gender, 
occupational health and safety (incl. safety of forest patrols) and conflict management.  
 
69. Sub-activity 1.2.2 Implementation of improved forest supervision measures and technologies: This sub-
activity includes a combination of TA and investment support to DES. Technical assistance (project 
management staff, international and national experts) will be provided to implement improved forest supervision 
practices, including the collection and analysis of improved information and provision of trainings. GCF-financed 
investment support will provide DES with advanced, modern technology for reaching remote forest areas and 
to collect evidence of illegal activities in the forest areas for effective prosecution. A detailed list of technology 
to be procured by DES with the GCF grants in the 3 target regions is provided in Chapter 6.4.1.2 in the Feasibility 
Study48.  
 
Activity 1.3. Provision of sustainably produced fuelwood by NFA 
 
70. This Activity supports NFA to establish a model sustainable fuelwood supply chain in the above mentioned 8 
target districts within 3 regions. It supports NFA, who is responsible for the procurement and construction, in 
the development and operation of Business Service Yards (BSY) by construction of the yards, purchase of 
equipment, training BSY staff, supporting operational planning, and ensure active monitoring of the yards. As a 
result, it facilitates the transition from the social wood programme to a new system of NFA-run ´BSYs´ for 
fuelwood supply, which increase transparency and traceability in the forestry sector, and ensures harvesting 
levels are based on eco-system-based forest management. BSYs will be owned and operated by NFA.

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 22 OF 92 
 
 
 
49 Training modules (incl. an e-course, training trainers, and regional BSY trainings conducted by NFA trainers) will be integrated in the 
knowledge management and training platform (Activity 1.4), where training materials, videos, protocols and other information will be stored 
and easily accessible. 
50 Appendix 5 of the Feasibility Study provides more detailed construction specifics for the technical design of the yards. 
51 Government funds will cover 50% of the investment costs, while grant finance will cover the remaining 50%.  
52 The status of NFP, including the evaluation and plan to upgrade the process, are included in the Feasibility Study within Chapter 5.2. 
71. It is anticipated that as a result of this Activity, NFA will reach the sustainable level of fuelwood outtake of 
285,575 m3 per year by the project end, applying sustainable forest management practices in the project´s 
target districts. 
 
72. Sub-activity 1.3.1 Support establishment of the new mechanism for fuelwood provision to local 
population: Technical assistance (financed by GCF) will be provided to establish the new mechanism for 
fuelwood provision to local population by NFA-operated business service yards (BSY), including elaboration of 
SOPs, training modules49 and operational regulations, and technical guidelines for the newly established BSYs 
to ensure their transparent and efficient operation. This will also include trainings on sorting tree trunks into 
different qualities of timber to optimize the sale of higher-quality timber for higher prices and ensuring that 
fuelwood is comprised of low-quality timber (to the greatest extent possible), as well as training on timber and 
fuelwood marketing and cross-cutting themes such as gender, occupational health and safety. This Sub-activity 
also envisages the provision of ongoing technical support by project management staff and experts to ensure 
effective controlling, and continuous improvement services to strengthen the operation and monitoring of BSYs, 
ensure alignment of FMPs, business development plans and timber marketing at BSYs. 
 
73. Sub-activity 1.3.2 Construction of 14 new and refurbishment of 1 existing business service yards (BSY) 
in the target districts (GCF and Government of Georgia investment). BSYs will include a check-point, office, 
drying and storage facilities (open air structure with a roof), and equipment for primary timber site manipulation.50 
Co-investments by GCF and government51 will be made available to construct 14 new BSY facilities, and 
purchase equipment for 15 BSYs (including the 14 new facilities, plus a BSY that is undergoing construction in 
2019 in Akhmeta district, supported by GIZ as a model case).  
 
Activity 1.4 Enhancement of enabling environment for the nation-wide implementation of sustainable forest 
management (SFM) 
 
74. This activity strengthens the enabling environment to facilitate the nation-wide adoption of SFM. The project 
provides targeted support for adjusting the regulatory framework, improving forest sector training and vocational 
education, strengthening cross-sectoral planning through the establishment of a multi-stakeholder platform and 
high-level inter-ministerial working group. Finally, climate risks and suitable adaptation strategies in forest 
ecosystems in the 3 project regions will be assessed to inform sector planning and forest management, where 
the results will be mainstreamed into national sector policies, trainings and guidelines, as well as FMPs.  
 
75. Sub-activity 1.4.1 Strengthening of the legal framework for SFM: The majority of revisions of the key 
regulations for SFM, in particular current resolutions 179 (The Rule of Forest Registration, Planning and 
Monitoring), 241 (Regulation of Forest Protection, Reforestation and Maintenance) and 242 (Resolution of the 
Government of Georgia on Approval of the Forest Use Regulation) will be completed prior to project start by the 
ongoing BMZ funded IBIS project. However, it is likely that some additional revisions may be required. BMZ co-
finance will be dedicated to providing targeted support for regulatory revisions, building on GIZ and government 
efforts prior to project start. In addition to revising three of the main secondary legal acts for forest management 
and utilization, and elaborating secondary legal acts for the liability law, the project will also support the 
elaboration of a regulation on the commercial use of non-timber-forest products, including: types of non-timber 
forest resources that can be commercially harvested, amounts for each NTFP that can be commercially 
harvested to ensure sustainable management based on the principles of SFM, fees for commercial harvesting, 
processes for commercial harvesting (applications, forms, monitoring, timing / zones, among others).   
 
76. Sub-activity 1.4.2 Improvement of sector steering and coordination between involved sectors: This 
activity makes use of the NFP process, which facilitates improved cross-sectoral cooperation and coordination, 
as well as information sharing via the working groups of the NFP.52 The Biodiversity and Forestry Department 
of MoEPA will coordinate the NFP process with technical assistance from GIZ. BMZ co-finance will cover the 
costs of external technical experts and facilitators. Under this sub-activity, the project will support a high-level 
sector coordination committee, consisting of representatives of the forestry, rural development and energy 
sectors which will play a critical role in overseeing and guiding the implementation of the project financing 
platform, the GFREIF (see Activity 1.4.2 in Feasibility Study, page 244).

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 23 OF 92 
 
 
 
53 EIEC is performing a similar role in the GCF project “Scaling-up Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems and the Use of Climate Information 
in Georgia”, where UNDP and GCF support EIEC to strengthen their institutional capacities and develop a training curriculum related to 
various climate-related topics (disaster risk reduction, early warning systems, etc.). Within the framework of UNDPs project EIEC has a core 
role in raising public awareness and supporting capacity building at all levels, including training government institutions at all levels as well as 
community-members. A core element of their work further focuses on training trainers and strengthening knowledge retention within the 
institution. Thus, this project will build on the capacities developed and synergies with this project.  
54 Currently VET programs can be completed in 9 months, however NFA will need to develop a simplified approach for existing staff, as well 
as an approach to support the integration of local people who were formerly involved in the informal harvesting of fuelwood and timber.   
 
77. Sub-activity 1.4.3 Development of online knowledge management and training platform for the forest 
sector: This sub-activity supports the development of an online knowledge management and training platform 
for the forest sector (Target group: MoEPA, NFA and other public forest management bodies, DES and forest 
private sector companies). Training modules and informational materials developed in the other activities will 
be integrated into a knowledge management and training platform (KMTP). The system will include e-learning 
elements, videos, knowledge storage, and ultimately strengthen the management and dissemination of 
information. The KMTP will ensure that people engaged in forestry sector have adequate knowledge and skills 
to effectively implement the actions considered under SFM under the new forest code through improved 
knowledge management and dissemination, and the institutionalization of key sector trainings. While each 
module will have a lead institution who provides insight on training content and oversees module development, 
EIEC is expected to oversee the broader functioning of the platform providing key coordination and logistical 
support (e.g. informing different stakeholders about training opportunities/ awareness raising, organizing 
venues, ensuring standard quality of trainings is maintained, conducting evaluation of trainings, among other 
tasks).53 A combination of GCF grants and BMZ co-finance will be used to set up the platform and to capacitate 
EIEC by supporting the development of the KMTP concept, programming g the system and implementing 
trainings. 
 
78. Sub-activity 1.4.4 Improvement of vocational education and training for the forest sector: The new (draft) 
forest code requires all foresters and forest workers, including existing staff and future staff to obtain a formal 
qualification by 2025. Thus, there is a strategic need to improve the forest education and vocational training 
situation in Georgia for both the medium- and long-term. GIZ, through its IBiS and ECOserve projects, supports 
the Georgian Government to strengthen vocational education programs in the forestry sector, including the 
development of accredited courses and trainings, and training of trainers, among other activities. BMZ co-
finance will be dedicated to expand this support to strengthen vocational education and training for the forestry 
sector. It will support the integration of short-term trainings into accredited modules and trainings and will support 
NFA to design educational and training programs to support existing and new staff with different options to 
obtain official qualifications complying with the new forest code.54 
 
79. Sub-activity 1.4.5 Enabling improved integration of climate change adaptation in forest sector planning, 
management and monitoring: This sub-activity aims to improve knowledge on climate risk and adaptation 
strategies in forest ecosystems and enable integration of climate change adaptation in forest sector planning, 
management, and monitoring. It supports via GCF finance the: a) assessment of climate risk and vulnerability 
and suitable adaptation strategies for forest ecosystems in each of the three target regions (addressing key 
knowledge and information gaps that limit climate-resilient land use planning in the sector), b) mainstreaming 
of climate-resilient strategies into guidelines, training modules and annual action plans,) c) establishment of a 
national dialogue on adaptation strategies for forest ecosystems within the NFP process, and d) development 
and implementation of training modules on climate risks and adaptation strategies for forest ecosystems for 
NFA, other public management bodies and MoEPA (to be integrated into KMTP). 
 
Activity 1.5 Improvement of monitoring and measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) systems for the 
forest sector 
 
80. The Activity supports the development of a Forest Information and Monitoring System (FIMS), aligned with 
national MRV requirements by elaborating and operationalizing 10 FIMS modules and developing national 
emission factors. These will be utilized by 7 government institutions to sustainably manage and monitor 
Georgia´s forest resources. The system improves the monitoring of forest resources, facilitating a more accurate 
monitoring of forest carbon stocks and other forest dynamics, which ultimately improves sector planning and 
forest management.   
 
81. Sub-activity 1.5.1 Strengthening of the national forest monitoring and MRV architecture: The sub-activity 
will provide TA to cover the following needs:

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 24 OF 92 
 
 
 
55 Several of these activities are being currently supported under the GIZ IBiS programme, however continued support from 2020 onwards is 
necessary. A combination of BMZ and government co-finance has been targeted to support these activities.  
 
 
Regulatory Framework and Institutional set-up: Clarification of roles and responsibilities, establishment of 
standard operating procedures & methodologies for data collection/ analysis, integration of FIMS into 
secondary legal acts to be revised after the adoption of the forest code (BMZ-financed).  
 
Development of Georgia-specific accounting systems (default values, forest emission factors, equations): 
This includes providing international and national experts to develop allometric equations, which will involve 
a combination of field work, laboratory work and in-office analytical work (GCF-financed).  
 
Supporting the development of a carbon processing module as base for reporting on carbon (concept 
development) (GCF-financed). 
 
Support the concept development of a data warehouse module in FIMS allowing to report on NDC tracking 
and the Transparency Framework for Action and Support under the Paris Agreement, among other topics 
(GCF-financed). 
 
82. Sub-activity 1.5.2 Development of FIMS modules will support the development and/or improvement of ten 
FIMS modules building on GIZ extensive previous and on-going activities.55 The BMZ-financed support includes 
procurement of required equipment (database and server), experts to develop modules, provision of training for 
FIMS on MRV modules, as well as establishment of helpdesk and software support.  
 
83. Table 1 details the many existing challenges for forest sector monitoring and explains how the proposed Sub-
activity will address them.  
 
Table 1: Forest sector MRV: BAU and Project Scenarios 
Challenges for forest sector 
monitoring  
How these challenges will be addressed within the project 
Lack of national emission factors: 
The shift from Tier 1 to Tier 2/3 
emission factors is one of the key 
principles under the Transparency 
Framework for Action and Support, 
supporting national accounting and 
reporting. 
 Since this project is primarily focusing on mitigation actions as a result of 
improved forest management (through SFM), the need for at least 
national level emission factors is more relevant than for afforestation/ 
reforestation activities since the IPCC provides less guidance (including 
Tier 1 default factors) for this specific IFM activities. This way it can even 
be seen as a showcase for many other countries in the region (and even 
globally) where this activity is relevant. 
 Additional research on allometric equations, and soil carbon will be 
conducted within the project.  
Insufficient harmonization of NFI 
data 
and 
the 
country´s 
GHG 
inventory (e.g. variables collected, 
timing of collection) 
 The project supports the NFI analytical software and reporting tool. With 
the help of these tools a fully harmonized data provision to the GHG 
inventory will be provided.  
Inconsistencies between official data 
and field data 
 Improved data collection is promoted within the FMP/FMI process through 
the utilization of FIMS modules and targeted trainings on best practices 
(Activity 1.1), as well as additional trainings on monitoring and MRV 
systems for end users will be supported by the project.  
 The Activity will support improved data collection and processing 
measures, based on positive experiences with NFI and FMI in recent 
years improving data quality and quantity, and will further strengthen 
databases for both internal and public use.  
 Trainings for staff in key forest sector institutions on FIMS, including data 
collection, analysis and implications for policy making (in both Activities 
1.1- 1.5). Trainings will also discuss how to disclose and manage data 
inconsistencies (promoting transparency). 
Insufficient capacities on monitoring 
and MRV across key institutions. 
Ongoing 
capacity 
development 
support has been provided in the 
FIMS development process, and 
 All involved institutions need to develop capacities to manage the 
respective software modules. The institutions responsible for a certain 
software module - like the NFA Inventory department for the FMP 
software - must be able to have full “ownership” on it. This means that the 
software concept must be fully understood as well as all related 
processes. This knowledge is obligatory for all users who are responsible

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 25 OF 92 
 
 
 
56 Please refer to Chapter 5.2.3 of the Feasibility Study for detailed description. 
 
 
continued support will be needed as 
it is increasingly operational.  
for the creation and update of forest related information (NFI, FMI, 
FMP56).  
 In order to achieve this knowledge and understanding of the software and 
work processes, systematic and advanced trainings will to be provided 
within the Activity.  
MRV roles and responsibilities are 
not comprehensively elaborated and 
assigned. 
While 
concepts 
for 
improved institutional set-ups (i.e. 
FIMS concept) exist, support is 
needed for putting such concepts 
into practice (clearly defining revised 
institutional mandates in official 
decrees, establishing SOPs, and 
awareness raising and training on 
the revised institutional set up). 
 Support will be provided to assign clear roles and responsibilities for MRV 
to avoid duplication of effort, build on existing synergies and improve the 
efficiency of the country´s national monitoring and MRV architecture. 
 
 
Component 2: Market development for energy efficiency (EE) and alternative fuels (AF) 
 
84. Deployment of energy efficient (EE) technologies and alternative fuel (AF) solutions can substantially reduce 
demand for fuelwood in the household sector. However, the market for EE and AF products is at a very nascent 
stage. There is only a limited number of local manufacturers or technology suppliers (e.g. 15 producers of EE 
stoves and 3 briquette manufacturers), the quality of their products and services vary significantly and so does 
the capacity to improve and expand their offer to the market. The project will adopt a “push and pull” approach 
to stimulate development of EE-AF market: Activity 2.1 will push the supply chain to prepare the sector for 
expedited growth, while Activities 2.2 – 2.4 will pull the demand to jump-start the market via consumer 
awareness raising, financial incentive and consumer financing products in partnership with financial institutions, 
as well as by creating conducive policy and regulatory framework (See Figure 12). 
Figure 12: Push and Pull strategy for EE-AF market creation 
 
85. A range of more energy efficient heating solutions is available in Georgia: opportunities vary between relatively 
simple and affordable locally-produced energy efficient wood stoves or imported analogous product with a 
higher price and quality to more sophisticated and much pricier boiler-powered central heating systems.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 26 OF 92 
 
 
 
57 See Chapter 5.3.2 of the Feasibility Study for detailed description of available EE technologies in Georgia. 
58 The Greens Movement of Georgia 2015. Sustainable Management of Biodiversity, South Caucasus, Identification of Options to Improve 
Energy Situation in Dedoplistskaro Municipality. 
59 www.domino.com.ge   
60 See for example: https://www.hava.ge/en/heating/central-heating-boilers-c-1_24.html.  
86. Energy efficiency technologies:57 The most affordable options are locally manufactured, but non-certified EE 
stoves, which are produced in small workshops in small towns and villages throughout Georgia. Improved 
woodstoves have three common features: they have combustion chambers, air inlet control, and smoke 
chambers. These stoves are made one-by-one by hand without patterns or modern manufacturing techniques. 
They are usually priced at GEL 300 – 500, depending on the season and producer. These stoves consume 25 
to 50% less wood and their thermal efficiency, according to the producer, is up to 75%. A range of even 
more energy efficient and durable imported wood stoves can also be found on the markets in urban centers. 
These products are characterized by much higher combustion efficiency and low level of emissions, most of 
them are EU-certified and compliant with requirements of EU Ecodesign Directive. However, due to the high 
price (between GEL 800 to 1,500), demand for such products is mainly concentrated in more affluent urban 
areas. See also Figure 13 below for illustration of a difference between locally manufactured and imported EE 
stoves.   
 
 
 
Made in Akhmeta, Georgia, Efficiency: 75%, 
Price: 58 GEL 320. 
Made in Bulgaria, EU, Efficiency: 75%. Price: 
59 GEL 1,400. 
Figure 13: EE stoves available in Georgia 
 
87. Among all alternative household heating options, the most efficient one is the boiler-based central heating 
systems. There are several companies specializing in design and installation of such heating systems for 
individual households in Georgia offering a turn-key services (design, technology and installation) and range of 
technologies (electrical, gas-based and fuelwood-based boilers)60. The major detriment to widespread adoption 
of the central heating systems is their very high cost: it would require GEL 2,500 – 3,000 per household to have 
such technology installed. Thermal insulation of rural houses has high theoretical technical potential to reduce 
heat demand: insulating the whole living space, including the ceiling, floor and equipping the external walls of 
the dwelling with additional insulation by professional workforce can bring up to 60% energy saving. This 
package, however, for an average rural house (140 m2) would come at a price of GEL 15,000, i.e. 3-times 
annual income of an average rural household. The very basic insulation package for 40 m2 of living space could 
result in at least 30% in energy saving and would come at a price of about GEL 5,000. Figure 14 below illustrates 
the price difference and saving potential of the various EE alternatives. Among available alternatives, an EE 
stove can be considered as the most optimal solution because it has relatively large fuelwood saving potential 
at the lowest price.

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 27 OF 92 
 
 
 
61 To be on conservative side, estimates assume 50% availability of residues from perennial crops and in the forestry sector biomass residues 
from timber harvesting and logging activities in the forests have been excluded. Please refer to Chapter 5.3.3 of the Feasibility Study for 
detailed description of AFs and their availability in Georgia. 
 
Figure 14: Price and fuelwood saving potential of EE alternatives 
 
88. Alternative fuels: Georgia possesses significant volumes of solid woody biomass residue, currently not utilized, 
that can be used for heating through production of upgraded solid biofuels (briquettes, pellets and wood chips) 
and considerably satisfy heating needs in the regions thus reducing demand for fuelwood. Alternative fuels (AF), 
such as Upgraded Solid Biofuels (USB) can be produced from woody or agricultural residues by modern 
processes and technologies. The total potentially available supply of raw materials for USB in the three target 
regions has been estimated61 to be 129,548 tons, an equivalent of 590 GWh (Table 2). This would be sufficient 
to cover heating requirements of 33,000 households (using existing heating device) or up to 78,000 if more 
efficient devices are used. A local market for the simplest forms of USB, wood chips and hazelnut shells, does 
exist in Georgia. The scale of this market is however hard to assess due to its localized and largely informal 
nature, as well as high regional differences in availability/supply of raw materials and demand. Briquette industry 
is rather small, existing production capacities (ca. 3,500 t/year) are not fully utilized. There are no local pellet 
manufacturing plants in Georgia. 
 
Table 2: Availability of raw materials for USB products in target regions 
Type 
t 
GJ 
MWh 
Available forest residues 
60,343 
838,764 
232,990 
Available vineyards pruning residues 
38,234 
714,968 
198,602 
Available fruit orchard pruning residues 
10,340 
186,126 
51,702 
Available hazelnut orchard residues 
20,632 
385,815 
107,171 
Total 
129,548 
2,125,673 
590,465 
 
Activity 2.1 EE-AF supply chain development 
 
89. Objective of this activity is to facilitate creation and expedited growth of the supply chain for EE and low-carbon 
AF solutions. It consists of two complementary sub-activities. Sub-activity 2.1.1 Establishing Technical 
Assistance and Investment Support Facility (TAISF) will focus on the two existing EE-AF supply chains: energy 
efficient stoves (solid fuel-based space heaters) and upgraded solid biofuel (USB) products from forest and 
agricultural residues. In parallel, Sub-activity 2.1.2 will support identification and feasibility assessment for other 
EE-AF alternatives for which the supply chain does not exist yet in Georgia.  
 
90. Sub-activity 2.1.1 Establishing Technical Assistance and Investment Support Facility (TAISF): A TAISF 
will be established to facilitate the development of supply chain for efficient space heaters (EE stoves) and USB 
manufacturers. The key objectives of the TAISF are to:

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 28 OF 92 
 
 
 
62 ARDA’s (former APMA) mandate has recently been expanded by the government to cover a broader agenda, including promoting 
investment in sustainable rural development, as reflected in the Agency’s new title, Agricultural and Rural Development Agency, effective 
from July 1, 2019. 
 
Improve technical, managerial and financial capacities of SMEs, cooperatives and individuals involved in 
EE-AF supply chain 
 
Ensure availability of certified EE-AF products on the market in line with applicable international EE and 
environmental standards  
 
Facilitate access to financing for supply chain businesses to invest in new and/or expansion and 
improvement of existing EE-AF production and delivery capacities  
 
Facilitate EE-AF products marketing 
 
Support investment in EE-AF supply chain 
 
91. TAISF will build on existing Technical Assistance and Investment Support Facilities established at the 
Agricultural and Rural Development Agency (ARDA) in line with ARDA’s mandate to promote and stimulate 
development of agricultural production-oriented industries in the regions of Georgia.62 The TAISF is not a legal 
entity in its own. TAISF will operate as a one-stop-shop for Georgian enterprises involved in EE-AF supply chain 
and provide a range of services to existing and new EE-AF suppliers through the five dedicated service lines 
aligned with the Facility’s key objectives. ARDA will host the Facility and ensure close coordination between its 
Technical Assistance (TA) and Investment Support components, as illustrated in the Figure below.  
 
92. Technical assistance (consultants to run advisory services in service lines, portfolio development, capacity 
building) will be financed by GCF and BMZ. In addition, TA will be provided by Swedish International 
Development Agency (SIDA) to facilitate mainstreaming of environmental considerations in the scope of ARDA’s 
investment support, as well as the design of new investment support instruments aimed specifically at green 
rural development and green energy solutions in rural areas. 
 
93. Investment support (Service line 4) in the form of investment grants, interest rate subsidies and guarantees 
on commercial loans is going to be financed by the government of Georgia.  
 
Figure 15: Technical Assistance and Investment Support Facility (TAISF) 
 
94. Service line 1: TAISF will offer a package of training and capacity development activities to manufacturers of 
EE stoves and USB, including training on skills development, advisory services on technology 
application/improvement of production and delivery systems, provision of information on applicable standards 
and requirements (in coordination with Activity 2.4 which will support development and adoption of such 
standards nation-wide). Capacity building will be provided through the direct advisory services to enterprises, 
regular training events and workshops (as well as via production and dissemination of educational and learning 
materials.

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 29 OF 92 
 
 
 
63 In the absence of national regulations on EE product certification, organizations which are accredited against international standards and 
EU Directive can carry out such certification.  
64 An investment manual will be developed in year 1 of the project setting out the investment criteria and list of eligible products, plus the 
regular ARDA criteria. The procedures and processes of providing the support will follow the already established and proven standard 
operating procedures of ARDA for the 3 existing ARDA instruments 
95. Service line 2: Stoves and USB currently available on the Georgian market are not subject to any mandatory 
standards, are often of low/inferior quality, and their energy/environmental/health performance characteristics 
cannot be verified by consumers (in particular for domestically produced heat stoves). Lack of quality standards 
leads to sub-standard, inefficient products being over-represented in the market. There are also quality control 
issues, which include the high cost and logistical challenges of accessing product certification services, which 
are not available in Georgia. To address this barrier TAISF will support certification of locally produced solid 
fuel-based space heaters and USB for compliance with EE and environmental standards set-forth by the EU 
Ecodesign Directive (See description of Activity 2.4 for further details about EU Eco-design Directive and the 
process of its transposition in Georgia). The following type of assistance is envisaged: 
 
Raising suppliers’ awareness about applicable standards and requirements  
 
On-site inspection of the manufacturing sites and of products and advising on how compliance with 
applicable standards can be improved  
 
Preparing application for product certification by accredited certifiers/verifiers63, including confirmation of 
the conformity of products and/or production processes with the requirements of the applicable standard. 
Only certified products will be eligible for participation in the GCF-supported financial incentive scheme to be 
implemented under Activity 2.2.  
 
96. Service line 3: TAISF will support development of business plans for EE-AF suppliers to support their loan 
applications via ARDA partner banks, as well as to access investment support instruments offered by ARDA.  
 
97. Service line 4: Implementation of investment support instruments: Under Service Line 4, TAISF will implement 
publicly-funded financial instruments to enable EE-AF suppliers’ access to commercial loans via ARDA partner 
banks. Investment support instruments will be provided within ARDA’s investment support portfolio, which 
includes the following instruments64: 
 
Preferential Agricultural Agro Credit Project co-finances interest rate on commercial loans from ARDA 
Partner Banks for the investment in rural SMEs’ production assets (up to 11% and 66 months) and working 
capital (up to 8% and 15-36 months). The former is mainly applicable to new manufacturers to finance their 
start-up investment needs, while the latter is an important instrument for existing producers, e.g. to ensure 
availability of the working capital to finance supply of raw materials. Up to now, the Agricultural Agro Credit 
Project has supported establishment of 145 new SMEs and re-equipped over 900 SMEs and facilitated loan 
financing in the amount of over 250 million USD in the agricultural sector. 
 
“Processing Enterprises and Storage Facilities Project” co-finances up to 40% of the production costs 
(max. GEL 600,000). A minimum of 10% beneficiary’s contribution is required and in addition at least 50% 
of the costs should be financed through a commercial loan with ARDA co-financing via an interest rate 
subsidy under the Preferential AgroCredit Project. 
 
Credit Guarantee Fund to safeguard the loans under the interest rate subsidy scheme.   
 
98. In addition to proposed service lines, technical assistance (co-financed by SIDA) will be provided to ARDA to 
support the development of new investment support scheme for green energy producers/equipment suppliers, 
as well as to facilitate mainstreaming environmental considerations in the scope of ARDA’s investment support 
to agricultural sector, as follows: 
 
Scoping of current and pipeline portfolio of ARDA to identify opportunities for strengthening environmental 
dimension of investments and technical support programmes 
 
Scoping of possible new investment directions considering environmental aspects as outlined above, e.g. 
private sector investment in forest management, promotion of EE technologies for rural development, 
dealing with hazardous waste in agriculture 
 
Delineation of future ARDA portfolio with mandate of other state and non-state actors in rural development 
 
Capacity Development for ARDA-“Department for Technical Assistance“ to systematically embed 
environmental aspects in the portfolio.  
 
99. Service line 5: EE-AF products marketing. Under this service line, TAISF will provide marketing support for EE-
AF suppliers to help promote their products to potential customers. Specific support activities will include: 
 
Training and individual advice on marketing strategy and product branding  
 
Support with identification of potential corporate and public sector customers through market research and 
in conjunction with Activity 2.5 (Implementing energy efficient public procurement program)

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 30 OF 92 
 
 
 
65 JSC Partnership Fund (PF) is a state-owned investment fund, established in 2011. PF’s main objective is to promote investment in 
Georgia by providing co-financing (equity, mezzanine, etc.) in projects at their initial stage of development. 
 
Publication of catalogue of Georgian EE-AF products and its dissemination to potential clients at the 
national and local level (in conjunction with the Activity 2.3)   
 
100. 
Sub-activity 2.1.2 Feasibility assessment and pipeline development for new EE-AF solutions: The 
aim of this sub-activity is to spearhead development of EE-AF sector and specific products/technology packages 
tailored to the need of rural households (in terms of specific energy needs, price, easiness of implementation 
and operation) beyond solutions and technologies which already exists on the market, such as EE stoves or 
briquettes. This may include, for instance, design and installation of energy efficient central heating systems in 
houses, implementation of comprehensive energy efficient retrofit measures (insulation), solar water heating 
(SWH) systems, biogas, production of pellets and utilization of wider range of agricultural residues (e.g. straw 
or energy plantations) for rural heat supply. None of these solutions is yet sufficiently localized and 
commercialized in Georgia. The BMZ-financed sub-activity will therefore support identification and promotion of 
new solutions for rural energy supply by conducting feasibility studies, market assessment and business plan 
development. The project will also collaborate closely with the Georgian Partnership Fund (GPF)65 to identify 
and prepare investment projects which GPF could support with its equity. At the moment the market for EE-AF 
products is very nascent on supply and demand side and does not represent a viable large-scale investment 
case for GPF. As the market for EE-AF will grow and new opportunities for revenue generation in EE-AF sector 
will be identified, the scope and modality of GPF’s investment in the sector will be more precisely defined.  
 
Activity 2.2 Implementing consumer financing instruments for EE-AF solutions 
 
101. 
The objective of this activity is to jump-start the market and to significantly scale-up demand for EE-
AF products in target regions - in the short-term and beyond – in the long-run. It is also meant to provide 
meaningful and practical alternative to the population of the regions, which will be affected by the forestry sector 
reform by reduced availability and potentially higher price of fuelwood for some segments of the population 
(Component 1). This activity will consist of three sub-activities: Sub-activities 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 focusing on the 
most cost-effective and relatively available solutions, EE stoves and AFs, while Sub-activity 2.2.3 at other 
emerging solutions and products (to be identified and supported in parallel under Sub-activity 2.1.2.). 
  
102. 
Among available alternatives, an EE stove can be considered as the most optimal solution because it has 
relatively large fuelwood saving potential at the lowest price, i.e. this technology is the most cost-efficient and 
offers attractive IRR of 45% (see Figure 14, Info Box 2 and Annex 3 – Financial and Economic Analysis). 
However, even the cheapest alternative, such as an EE stove is 5-10 times more expensive than a conventional, 
inefficient stove which are now priced at GEL 50-70 and have a lifetime of maximum 2 years.  
 
103. 
It is expected that the activity will stimulate demand for up to 30,000 stoves cumulatively until project end 
and additionally about 28,000 households will switch to AF. To do so the project will, in partnership with national 
financial organizations, local banks and MFIs, provide a package of consumer financing options focusing initially 
on EE stoves and USB, but gradually expanding to other more sophisticated EE-AF technologies (Sub-activity 
2.2.3). The consumer financing support for EE stoves and AF features two interlinked financial instruments: 
 
Result-based financial incentive instrument (financed by GCF: EUR 3.6 million) in the form of price 
discount (via a voucher scheme) on the purchase of EE stove from certified suppliers for up to 30% of the 
market price (Sub-activity 2.2.1).  
 
Consumer loans instrument (financed by local banks and micro-finance institutions: EUR 10.5 million) 
to households from local financial organizations will cover up to 70% of the costs of EE stove only or EE 
stove + annual USB supply package depending on the consumer choices.   
Info box 2: EE stove price  
Locally produced efficient stoves are priced between GEL 300 – 500, but they only last for an estimated 5 years 
and are not certified so their true efficiency is not known. In EU countries with high fuelwood consumption by 
households all wood stoves on the market must be certified, ecodesign-compliant; the prices vary from EUR 
175 to around EUR 800 (GEL 525 to 2,400). It must be noted that the price depends on size (i.e. m2 which can 
be heated) and the design. Levels of efficiency vary somewhat but all have efficiency over 70% (versus 30–
40% typical in Georgia for non-efficiency stoves). Lifetime of modern EE stoves is usually 10–15 years. 
These are already on the market in Georgia – reported average of GEL 1,479 for retailers / imported stoves 
according to surveys of companies selling them and installing them. Based on this analysis, an average price of 
GEL 1,000 for an energy efficiency EU-certified stove has been assumed in the project scenario.

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 31 OF 92 
 
 
 
66 For details on the implementation structure of the voucher programme and responsibilities of the service provider please see Feasibility 
Study chapter 6, Activity sheet 2.2. 
67 For more details please see Feasibility Study Chapter 6.3.2.1 (Sub-Activity 2.2.1). 
68 Beneficiaries of the “consumer loans” will be chosen by partner banks based on their creditworthiness criteria established individually by 
each financial partner and in line with regulations of the Georgia’s Central Bank 
69 The scheme is open for all banks and microfinance institutions and it does not give any kind of exclusivity to Crystal. 
 
104. 
Sub-activity 2.2.1 Design, implementation and marketing of the voucher programme for EE stoves 
for households: GCF finance is used to design and implement a result-based financial incentive instrument to 
stimulate the demand for EE stoves among households. Initially, the size of the incentive has been set-up at 
30% of the market price (see Info Box 2). However, the design of the scheme and the amount of incentive shall 
be progressively revised and adjusted over the project implementation in response to the overall market 
development, availability and price of certified products and consumers’ demand. Initially, the scheme will target 
(via marketing and consumer awareness) the population of three target regions. As the SFM will scale-up and 
EE market grow, along with scale of EE stoves production, it is anticipated that the economy of scale will drive 
the cost of production and retail price down leading to reduced retail price of EE stove and progressively 
diminishing the need for financial incentive.  
 
105. 
ARDA will be directly responsible for administration of the voucher programme and sub-contracts a service 
provider for implementation of the voucher scheme66. Provision of the financial incentive will be result-based 
because ARDA will release the payment of the subsidy directly to suppliers of certified EE stoves upon them 
presenting the proof of EE stove sales to households (paid invoice and the voucher67). 
 
106. 
Sub-activity 2.2.2 Providing consumer financing for EE stoves and AF for households (Co-financed 
by financial partners): This Sub-activity will be implemented along the following three lines: 
 
a) Consumer loans will be provided by banks and micro-finance institutions68 in conjunction with financial 
incentive for EE stoves to enable cash-constrained households to buy an EE stove and procure annual 
supply of AF (see Info Box 3 for details on confirmed co-finance for this by Crystal).  
b) Technical assistance will be provided to MFIs and commercial banks to structure and promote such loan 
products for households in partnership with suppliers of certified EE-AF products.  
c) In parallel, the project will also provide technical assistance to financial institutions to structure loan 
products for investment in EE-AF by local businesses, such as hotels and restaurants. 
A number of Georgia’s financial institutions which have been consulted (Crystal, TBC Bank and ProCredit 
Bank) had expressed interest to partner with GIZ-GCF project on developing a consumer financing loan to 
complement GCF-supported financial incentive – see Info Box 3. 
 
Info box 3: Consumer Loan for EE stoves and AF   
Among potential financial partners consulted through the Funding Proposal development stage, Crystal69, Georgia’s 
largest MFI, is the most advanced in developing a new loan product specifically for EE-AF, but participation in the 
project is open for all financial institutions. Crystal has conducted in-depth market study for this product and is 
currently piloting a prototype scheme to collect additional data and information on consumers’ readiness and 
willingness to finance and the impacts of EE stove adoption and switch to USB. Under this project, Crystal will set 
up an EE stove instalment financing programme: Crystal will finance the purchase of an EE stove through a 9-month 
loan, to be repaid in equal instalments. Crystal will realize an effective interest rate of 30% by negotiating with EE 
stove suppliers a discount (ca. 10%) on the purchase price (the instalment programme will therefore be presented 
as 0% interest to consumers). The financing programme can be extended to include the purchase of a 1-year supply 
of fuel (sustainably sourced fuelwood from the new NFA fuelwood supply system or AF products). 
 
107. 
Sub-activity 2.2.3 Supporting MFIs and partner banks to structure and promote consumer financing 
products for advanced EE-AF solutions: The project, via GIZ and financed by BMZ, will provide technical 
assistance to MFIs and commercial banks to support the development of new consumer financing products for 
emerging technical solutions and new EE-AF products (to be identified and supported under Activity 2.1.2. 
These new solutions are not stoves and briquettes). For example, there is large potential and financing needs 
for building insulation works in residential sector. However, little sector information is available or exist regarding 
the costs of such projects, availability of skills and technical solutions and the resulting financial benefits for 
households. The project will be based on market analysis into residential sector potential for retrofits, training 
and knowledge transfer for banks on appraising investments (including risk assessment) and developing a 
pipeline of projects in residential sector. Loan products for renewable energy system installation by households, 
such as solar water heaters (SWH) or heat pumps, will also be explored.

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 32 OF 92 
 
 
 
70 For details of the implementation structure of this activity please see Feasibility Study, Chapter 6, Activity sheet 2.3. 
 
Activity 2.3 Creating consumer awareness and provision of technical advisory services for fuelwood users 
 
108. The objective of this activity is to raise awareness about EE-AF solutions, national forest sector reforms and 
its implication for fuelwood supply, and participation options in forest management planning and 
implementation. The focus is on rural households (GCF funding will cover target regions, while SIDA will co-
finance the same package of activities in the rest of the country). As a result of this activity in the target regions 
82,000 households, including 27,000 women-headed households will be provided with information and 
assistance to identify and adopt EE-AF solutions in the target regions alone and additionally with SIDA support 
– 160,000 HHs (52,800 women-headed HHs) across the other regions of Georgia will be supported. In addition, 
1 million people will be reached out nation-wide via awareness raising campaign. The Activity works on two 
levels: Localized awareness creation and advisory services in the municipalities and villages (Sub-activity 
2.3.1, implemented by GIZ and SIDA) as well as on the national level via a national campaign (Sub-activity 
2.3.2, implemented by EIEC).  
 
109. Sub-activity 2.3.1 Community-mobilization, advocacy and advisory services on EE-AF to fuelwood 
users: On the local level, the project will provide extensive informational and technical advisory support to 
fuelwood users in the target regions and other locations across rural Georgia. This support will specifically 
cover a) provision of information about locally available EE-AF solutions; b) outreach and awareness raising 
about the implications of the forestry sector reform, the options for participating in forest management planning 
and implementation, the impact on fuelwood availability, price and available EE-AF alternatives, new supply 
chain of fuelwood via NFA (see Activity 1.3), as well as c) the provision of technical advisory services to 
fuelwood users to help them identify and apply optimal EE-AF solutions in their households. This activity will 
involve close collaboration with regional and municipal authorities, trustees of the local communities, 
community-based organizations (CBOs), women groups and local NGOs. A national organization, NGO or 
professional service provider, will be selected by GIZ through an open tender or grant awarding procedure to 
implement this activity. GCF-BMZ funding will be used to finance awareness and advisory work in three target 
regions, while SIDA co-financing will enable replicating and scaling-up the same approach to other Georgia’s 
regions70.   
 
110. In the first stage, the project will reach out to and identify potential local partners and organize a series of 
meetings to provide information about awareness and communication strategy on EE-AF and the opportunities 
for local organizations to participate in its implementation. The project will run a micro-grant programme to 
select local partners and through them the establishment of the local information points (LIPs), i.e. public places 
where households and other fuelwood users can receive information about locally available EE-AF products, 
test/see them in operation, obtain contact information about EE-AF suppliers and financing options.  
 
111. In the next stage, once local partners are identified and LIPs are established, the project will work through them 
to provide information materials, facilitate networking with EE-AF suppliers and will use local partners as a 
platform to communicate with and receive feedback from local communities throughout project duration. 
Further, through established LIPs technical advisory services will be provided to fuelwood users, in the form of 
simple (walk-through) energy audits and other type of energy advice to help households and local SMEs 
identify optimal technical and financial solutions for EE-AF.   
 
112. Sub-activity 2.3.2 National advocacy and awareness raising: At the national level, the project will run a 
GCF-financed country-wide awareness raising and PR campaign to be implemented by the Environmental 
Information and Education Centre (EIEC) on sustainable forest management, forestry reform agenda and its 
linkages with climate change and sustainable energy, including: 
 
Informing important stakeholders at municipal level about their roles, responsibilities and opportunities 
related to the forest reform, including local authorities, citizens, community-based organizations, and 
commercial operators of the private sector 
 
Engaging youth and children in SFM campaign through forestry knowledge publicity, tree species 
identification, voluntary actions, knowledge competition, art performance, and essay contest 
 
Organization of forest visit programs for journalists, youth, and students (specifically in the three target 
regions)  
 
Writing and publishing forestry related stories targeting radio, newspapers and TV, as well as using social 
media such as Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, and Instagram for scaling outreach

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 33 OF 92 
 
 
 
Production and dissemination of promotional items Communicating GCF project results and impacts to a 
wider range of stakeholders in Georgia and the region, including undertaking project impact and lessons 
learnt studies on the national campaigns. 
 
Activity 2.4 Enabling policies and regulations 
 
113. The objective of the Activity is to create a conducive policy and regulatory environment for EE-AF market 
development. First, it aims at gradual phase-out of in efficient stoves from the market by introducing and 
facilitating adoption of mandatory energy efficiency and environmental performance standards for domestic 
heating appliances. Second, to create initial strong demand for EE and AF products, it will support development 
and application of energy efficient public procurement policies. By doing so, this Activity will support 
implementation of the ambitious reform agenda of the Government of Georgia in the area of energy efficiency 
and renewable energy in line with its commitment as a member of the EU Energy Community, which the country 
joined in 2017. Technical assistance will be provided to the relevant public authorities to accelerate 
transposition and practical implementation of those policy and regulatory instruments envisaged in the EE and 
RE acquis, which have direct relevance and implications for the EE-AF sector and reduction of the fuelwood 
consumption in rural areas. There are two key policy instruments which the project via GIZ as responsible 
Executing Entity will support with BMZ funding:  
 
Introduction and enforcement of the energy efficiency and environmental standards and labelling scheme 
for EE heating appliances (stoves) in line with draft Energy Efficiency Law and National Energy Efficiency 
Action Plan (NEEAP) (Sub-activity 2.4.1) 
 
Introduction of the energy efficiency procurement in the public sector, as per relevant provision of the 
Energy Efficiency Directive and Energy Efficiency Law (Sub-activity 2.4.2). The Ministry of Economy and 
Sustainable Development (MoESD) is the key governmental body in charge of developing and promoting 
Energy acquis and will be the primary partner and beneficiary of this Activity. 
 
114. Sub-activity 2.4.1 Capacity building for introduction and enforcement of energy efficiency and 
environmental standards and labelling for EE-AF solutions: Due to the missing framework and low level 
of technical capacities, the appliance eco-design implementation will require extensive groundwork, in 
particular for domestically produced appliances, such as solid fuel local space heaters. That is why NEEAP 
envisages a phased approach to introduction of standards and labels, with only a limited number of appliances 
subject to regulation in the first phase. 
 
115. Recognizing limited capacity of the Government and the market to simultaneously adopt and implement all 
Eco-design directive regulations, the project will spearhead adoption of EE and environmental standards and 
labels specifically for heat stoves by: 
 
Supporting MoESD in drafting and adopting of legislation and its delegated acts for EE standards and 
labels of solid fuel-based local space heaters 
 
Identifying appropriate arrangements for stove testing and certification, in particular in view of the absence 
of such experience and capacities in Georgia (in parallel with Activity 2.1 which will support stove 
certification) 
 
Capacity building of the designated EE Agency for stove market surveillance, including product data-base, 
rapid screening methods to identify non-compliant products. The project will do so by providing technical 
advice, training and facilitating learning from experience and best practices from EU and other countries 
 
Recommendations on establishment of the social support programme for solid fuel local space heaters 
based on the results of Activity 2.2. 
 
116. Sub-activity 2.4.2 Facilitating introduction of EE procurement practices in public sector: The Public 
Procurement Agency of Georgia has been entitled by the EE Law to integrate principles of energy efficiency 
public procurement in the public procurement practices in Georgia. MoESD and the Public Procurement 
Agency will be the main partners and beneficiaries under this sub-activity and will receive technical assistance 
for: 
 
Development of secondary legislation on Energy Efficient Public Procurement (EEPP) 
 
Development of the National Guideline on EEPP, including appropriate methodologies, templates, case 
studies, etc. to aid with practical application of the EEPP 
 
Provision of training and capacity building for public procurement authorities on EEPP application, including 
through familiarization with international best practices and approaches to EEPP 
 
Pilot application of the EEPP in target regions, the support includes: the preparation and finalization of 
procurement documentation (tender dossiers, evaluation reports, draft contracts); attendance to pre-tender 
meetings, bid opening ceremonies (as observer) and clarification/negotiation meetings

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 34 OF 92 
 
 
 
71 The exact wording of the results and activities might slightly change before formal decision by SDC. 
72 Please also see description of Sub-activity 1.1.1. 
 
Advocacy and awareness raising on energy efficient procurement among Public Procurement Agency 
(PPA) staff, public procurement authorities, vendors and population at large. 
 
Component 3: Livelihood opportunities and local-self-governance in forest management71 
Note that SDC has expressed strong interest to co-finance this project for a duration of 4 years (see co-financing 
letter Annex 13e), however its formal decision about the contribution as described in the Funding Proposal has not 
been taken yet - but is expected for the end of June 2020. 
 
117. This Component ensures a just and participatory transition to the new approach of managing forests 
sustainably in its social, economic and ecological functions with the ultimate goal to reduce pressure on forest 
areas. 
 
118. Under the forest sector reform, the fuelwood supply mechanism and timber harvesting will be the sole 
responsibility of the NFA. Up to now, members of local communities depend partly on informal or illegal wood 
harvesting activities as source of income – a livelihood opportunity, which will disappear in the near future. At 
the same time, the new forest code and the new National Principles, Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable 
Forest Management put a much stronger focus on economic benefit sharing and participation of local 
authorities and population in forest management. Component 3 taps into these opportunities by: 
 
Strengthening technical capacities of municipalities and citizens to engage in forest management and 
conservation (Activity 3.1) 
 
Introducing participation and interest protection mechanisms in order to ensure a transparent and inclusive 
forest management planning and implementation (Activity 3.2) 
 
Developing professional skills and knowledge for forest management and conservation through vocational 
education and international university partnerships with centers of knowledge (Activity 3.3) 
 
Supporting the transition from informal fuelwood related income sources to formal livelihood options of 
various forest-related value chains (Activity 3.4) 
 
119. These activities lead on the one hand to a more active participation of local authorities and local population in 
decision-making, SFM implementation and dispute settlement and thus to a more just transition. On the other 
hand, through increased education and value chain development the local population benefits from diversified, 
legal employment and business opportunities and thus increased incomes.  
 
120. This Component will utilize technical assistance to implement the activities. The Component is solely financed 
by an SDC grant.  
 
121. Activity 3.1: Development and introduction of municipal-level tools, practices, plans and capacities for 
participatory SFM and conservation 
Municipality-based SFM increases the forest ownership of local communities and thus supports the national 
forest protection and conservation efforts. In addition, the value-added of SFM remains in the communities for 
their benefits. This Activity prepares the framework conditions and introduction of municipal sustainable forest 
management in the country. The new Forest Code (article 20 “Competence of a Municipality” and article 21 
“Forest Management Body”) foresees in the medium- to long-term the optional management of forests by 
municipalities. However, this concept is at a very nascent stage in Georgia, and only two forest areas are so 
far managed by a municipal administration (Akhmeta Municipality for the forest area of the Tusheti Protected 
Landscape and Tbilisi City Hall for the forest area of the city of Tbilisi). 
The project will develop and introduce tools, practices, plans and economic planning instruments specifically 
designed for utilisation in municipal forest management and conservation efforts. In addition, capacity 
development for municipal authorities will enable staff and community members to utilize the developed 
instruments and to participate in management and conservation activities.  
 
122. Activity 3.2: Development, testing and promotion of local mechanisms to better protect interests of 
adversely affected stakeholders 
The new forest code and the Criteria and Indicators foresee a much stronger participation of local level 
stakeholders in decision-making and forest utilization than before. More active participation is foreseen in 
developing forest management plans, in decision-making on grazing areas and utilization of NTFP collection, 
as well as implementation of SFM in general72. In the course of implementation, forest management activities,

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 35 OF 92 
 
 
 
73 See Annex 7a Stakeholder Engagement Plan and Grievance Mechanism 
74 See section D.3 Sustainable Benefits 
including forest policing, will intensify, leading to potential more conflicts between authorities and local 
population. This Activity will put the new participation approach into “life”, acknowledging the need for conflict 
resolution mechanisms. To do so, the project will develop, promote and test interest protection mechanisms. 
The grievance mechanism developed for this project73 will serve as a starting point for one of the mechanisms. 
 
123. Activity 3.3: Development of professional skills on SFM and conservation through vocational education 
and international partnerships with centres of knowledge 
To engage in formal forest-related employment as a forest worker, either as staff member of NFA or as part of 
service contractors, education in vocational training colleges and a respective degree is a formal requirement 
under the new forest code. Similar, foresters require now an official university degree. Employment 
opportunities via the forest sector reform are vast74. The Criteria and Indicators clearly state that that preference 
for employment has to be given to members of local communities.  Moreover, the introduction of forest-related 
value-chains will require organizational and business skills related to the production, processing and marketing 
of forest products. Vocational training colleges lack capacities, equipment, curricula and educated teaching 
staff to expand their already existing program in the forest and value chain sectors. To diversify income 
opportunities, the project will work with vocational training colleges to strengthen the educational capacities of 
the institutions, to foster intake of local community members and to promote the forest worker job profile in the 
three target regions. At university level, practically relevant research activities and forester education will be 
supported by establishing partnerships with international qualified centers of knowledge to efficiently build up 
necessary expertise and solutions in the respective forester education programmes. 
 
124. Activity 3.4: Introduction of selected value chains (timber, NTFP, eco-tourism) 
This Activity creates alternative livelihood opportunities for individuals and households in the target regions to 
 
support the transition from informal fuelwood related income sources of certain members of the community 
to other (more formal) sources of income, and thus compensate for loss of (informal) income sources caused 
by the Forest Sector Reform  
 
increase household incomes, which eventually supports potential fuel switch and purchase of legal, high 
quality fuelwood 
 
125. The project facilitates the establishment of the new value chains as alternative livelihood options via technical 
assistance. Among several options, the following ones will be considered, in view of a final selection: 
 
Timber value chain: The market development for energy efficient technologies and alternative fuels (see 
Component 2) and the harvesting and processing of timber provide various income and labour opportunities 
through respective value chain development.  
 
Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFP):  Up to now, the commercial build-up of NTFP (such as chestnuts, wild 
fruits, berries and mushrooms) value chains by private and community-based entrepreneurs, is legally 
restricted. The law allows the collection of these products free of charge for personal consumption. However, 
while local people often collect them for sale, no harvesting limits are specified beyond which the collection 
of a given product would be regarded as commercial. Community-run NTFP value chains are rare and 
under-developed, despite the economic potential. Community-run commercial value chains for NTFP will 
be promoted in the eight project forest districts in line with the new Forest Management Plans. 
 
Eco-tourism in forests and mountain areas: Tourism potential in Georgia, especially nature-based tourism, 
is a growing economic factor. The project could assist communities to develop and participate in eco-tourism 
value chain, based on the recreational use of forests. 
 
Overview and justification of instruments being used by the project 
126. The table below provides an overview of the financial instruments used in the project and the justification for 
the specific choice.

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 36 OF 92 
 
 
 
75 See Chapter 5.4 of the Feasibility Study for overview of TA in the targeted sector. 
Table 3: Justification for TA and Investment Support per Sub-activity 
Sub-activities 
Source of 
funds 
Justification 
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE (TA) 
Grant support in the form of technical assistance (TA) is required to address a range of non-financial barriers to scale-up SFM 
and EE-AF market development, as detailed below at sub-activity level (please also refer to Section B.2 of the FP for 
description of barriers). In the absence of GCF project these barriers will continue to exist because on-going TA projects are 
not sufficient to comprehensively address them at the scale required to meet NDC target75. GCF grant will be deployed 
alongside additional grant funding from BMZ and SIDA and partner contributions.      
Sub-activity 1.1.1 
Development of 
SFM Plans 
GCF, BMZ 
TA support is required for this sub-activity to cover the costs of external expertise 
(international and national experts) required to support NFA with development forest 
management plans based on SFM principles and provisions of the new (draft) Forest 
Code. 
Sub-activity 1.1.2 
Implementation of 
SFM plans 
GCF, BMZ 
This sub-activity forms the core of the project. Implementation of the country´s forest 
sector reform and SFM at the scale needed to meet Georgia’s NDC target necessitates 
substantial capacity building at the individual, institutional and sectoral level. Dedicated 
project management staff and national and international experts are required to provide 
targeted support for the implementation of SFM, including on-the job training, the 
development of guidelines and protocols for the implementation of best practices eco-
system-based forest management, and the development of training modules, training 
trainers and conducting trainings to NFA staff and forest-sector contractors. While GIZ 
has been and will continue provision of technical assistance via the IBIS/ECOserve 
project to implement the sector reform, substantial capacity gap remains to enable 
sector transformation and therefore additional GCF and BMZ grant funding is being 
requested to address this gap.  
 
Sub-activity 1.2.1 
Strengthening of 
procedures, 
standards and 
protocols for 
enhanced forest 
supervision 
BMZ 
TA support is needed to reflect and mainstream forthcoming regulatory changes in the 
forest supervision practices, as well as to support staff awareness raising and training. 
DES has a growing work force and its staff is expected to double by the end of 2019, 
which is a substantial capacity building challenge for the organization.  
Sub-activity 1.3.1 
Support 
establishment of 
the new 
mechanism for 
fuelwood 
provision to local 
population 
GCF 
Fuelwood provision at scale is a new function of NFA, there is very limited human or 
institutional capacity within NFA to carry out such mandate. External professional 
expertise, as well as international knowledge and best practices, are required to 
establish and successfully implement new business model for NFA. Ongoing technical 
support on sustainable fuelwood supply management is also critical as there will be the 
need for adaptive management in the first years of operation.      
 
Sub-activity 1.4.1 
Strengthening of 
the legal 
framework for 
SFM 
BMZ 
TA is needed to operationalize SFM requirements and integrate them in national policy 
and regulatory framework. Secondary regulations, cross-sector coordination and 
technical knowledge are all essential elements of the enabling environment for nation-
wide roll-out of SFM. First, forest sector reform will not be complete without secondary 
regulations which reflect and operationalize the principles. While currently TA is 
available through GIZ to prepare first set of regulations, the need will remain beyond 
GIZ project’s time-frame and will have to be addressed with additional TA from the GCF 
project. Without policy and regulatory changes, SFM implementation will remain at the 
“pilot” level.    
 
Sub-activity 1.4.2 
Improvement of 
sector steering 
and coordination 
between involved 
sectors 
BMZ, 
Government 
The new forest code has major implications not only for the forestry sector, but also on 
topics related to energy efficiency, alternative fuels, rural development, and public 
health, among others. Therefore, effective mechanism for cross-sectoral coordination 
and information sharing is needed. Technical assistance is required for this sub-
activity to support an “upgraded NFP” process, specifically to provide expertise and 
operational support to the Forest Sector Reform Steering Committee, the key body in 
charge of the NFP and the work of the seven thematic working groups. 
Sub-activity 1.4.3 
Development of 
online knowledge 
management and 
training platform 
GCF, BMZ, 
Government 
Under this sub-activity one of the main barriers to SFM introduction will be addressed, 
i.e. insufficient capacities and knowledge of sector stakeholders. This involves moving 
from the current system of ´one off trainings´ to an institutionalized knowledge 
management and training platform that enables improved knowledge management, as 
well as improved institutional and individual capacity development. It further utilizes 
diverse training formats and educational tools ranging from e-courses, in-class

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 37 OF 92 
 
 
 
76 See Chapter 3.1.2 of the Feasibility Study for a detailed information of climate risks and data gaps pertaining to climate change 
adaptation in the target region. 
77 See Feasibility Study, Chapter 5.2.3.3. 
for the forest 
sector 
trainings, and in-forest videos, and information can be uploaded to support knowledge 
management and learning. In view of the number of people involved in the sector and 
broad range of technical topics and areas of expertise to cover, substantial amount of 
technical assistance is required to address capacity barrier comprehensively and to 
provide a sustainable solution. 
Sub-activity 1.4.4 
Improvement of 
vocational 
education and 
training for the 
forest sector 
BMZ, 
Government 
The new (draft) forest code requires all foresters and forest workers, including existing 
NFA staff and future staff to obtain a formal qualification by 2025. This implies the need 
to develop certified courses and programs based on best practices for SFM, for existing 
staff and future staff. There is limited expertise either within NFA or Georgia’s education 
sector to prepare such training programs in line with international standards and best 
practices, whilst ensuring accreditation by the Ministry of Education. TA support 
therefore is essential to address this capacity gap.  
Sub-activity 1.4.5 
Enabling 
improved 
integration of 
climate change 
adaptation in 
forest sector 
planning, 
management and 
monitoring 
GCF, BMZ 
Georgia is lacking comprehensive and evidence-based research on the vulnerability of 
forest ecosystems to climate change, which is necessary to plan detailed actions to 
increase the resilience of forest ecosystems, as well as to integrate climate change 
adaptation in forest sector governing framework. TA support is being requested to 
strengthen the knowledge base on climate risk and vulnerability76, promote climate-
responsive planning, processes and management, increase awareness on climate-
risks, and building the necessary capacities on climate—resilient planning and 
adaptive ecosystem-based management. 
Sub-activity 1.5.1 
Strengthening of 
the national forest 
monitoring and 
MRV architecture 
GCF, BMZ, 
Government 
A comprehensive FIMS is required to provide, analyze and utilize data for the various 
stakeholders in the forest sector, enabling transparent supervision, monitoring, 
evaluation and reporting. In addition, an MRV module in the forestry sector is required 
for the sector and the GCF project to monitor and report on the results and impacts of 
forestry sector reform, as well as on the progress with achieving GHG emission 
reduction targets specified in NDC. No such MRV system exists in Georgia, and BAU 
practices on forest information and monitoring are very limited77. GCF grant is being 
requested to build up the climate specific modules and systems of FIMS, whilst BMZ 
and Government funds are being requested to develop the overall system and the 
other FIMS modules. 
Sub-activity 1.5.2 
Development of 
FIMS modules 
Sub-activity 2.1.1 
Establishing 
Technical 
Assistance and 
Investment 
Support Facility 
(TAISF) 
GCF, BMZ, 
SIDA 
TA will address capacity barriers on the side of EE-AF suppliers related to product 
quality, marketing and business development skills, as well as the capacity constraints 
at ARDA to integrate environmental and climate considerations in the scope of its 
investment support activities. Most of companies currently present on the EE-AF 
market are self-financing their business operations. In terms of access to finance, 
most producers cannot access finance through the commercial banking sector or 
micro-finance institutions (MFIs). This is not due to a lack of potential financing 
options, but rather due to the low level of financial literacy of the local SMEs and lack 
of experience and skills with development of bankable projects. TA is needed to assist 
nascent EE-AF sector in Georgia to make it from the early business planning stages 
through to operational and commercial sustainability in order to reach a break-even 
point.  
Sub-activity 2.1.2 
Feasibility 
assessment and 
pipeline 
development for 
new EE-AF 
solutions 
BMZ 
TA support under this Sub-activity will address market failure and the barriers typically 
faced by first movers on a un-established market when substantial up-front resources 
are need to develop a new product, but the risks of initial investment in market research 
and product development are too for individual entrepreneurs to bear due to a lack of 
strong demand for a product by consumers.  
 
Sub-activity 2.2.1 
Design, 
implementation 
and marketing of 
the voucher 
programme for EE 
stoves for 
households 
GCF, BMZ 
TA to ARDA is required to design voucher programme for EE stoves and enable its 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation.  
Sub-activity 2.2.3 
Supporting MFIs 
and partner banks 
BMZ 
Georgia’s financial institutions have limited awareness about EE and AF solutions, in 
particular in rural context. A number of banks have experience with financing domestic 
EE appliances, but none has yet dealt with financing EE retrofit measures or installation

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 38 OF 92 
 
 
 
78 See Chapters 5.2 and 5.4 of the Feasibility Study for details on forest sector funding baseline, as well as Section B.5 of the FP for the 
concessionality arguments 
 
to structure and 
promote 
consumer 
financing products 
for advanced EE-
AF solutions 
of central heating systems, for example. TA is required to help financial institutions 
better understand potential market niche, technologies and develop new product for EE-
AF market.      
Sub-activity 2.3.1 
Community-
mobilization, 
advocacy and 
advisory services 
on EE-AF to 
fuelwood users 
GCF, BMZ, 
SIDA 
Low level of awareness, as well as concerns among households about the implications 
of forest sector reform on fuelwood supply and availability of alternatives has been 
identified through stakeholder consultations (see Section G.1) as the key barrier to both 
adoption and scaling-up SFM, as well as EE-AF market development. TA to raise 
awareness is essential to address this barrier, in particular through on the ground work 
and direct engagement with communities to be first affected by the forest sector reform.   
Sub-activity 2.3.2 
National advocacy 
and awareness 
raising 
GCF, 
Government 
This is relatively small, but an important activity within the project as it is meant to 
create understanding about SFM and its benefits among population at large, which is 
essential to secure broad support and buy-in of the forest sector reform in the country. 
TA support will address this need.  
Sub-activity 2.4.1 
Capacity building 
for introduction 
and enforcement 
of energy 
efficiency and 
environmental 
standards and 
labelling for EE-
AF solutions 
BMZ 
Policy changes are required to create lasting effect on the EE-AF sector development 
as they would include clear signal to both suppliers and consumers about the sector 
development trajectory towards strict EE and environmental performance standards in 
line with international best practices. Existing and planned TA projects in energy 
sector, however, does not cover approximation of the Ecodesign Directive, as well as 
introduction of EEPP practices. These two regulations are important as the former will 
over time force the inefficient stoves off the market, while the latter will create strong 
demand to use alternative fuels in the public sector.  
Sub-activity 2.4.2 
Facilitating 
introduction of EE 
procurement 
practices in public 
sector 
BMZ 
INVESTMENT SUPPORT through GFREIF 
Investment support is required to address financial barriers and budgetary shortfall in the forestry and household sector. It 
will take various forms and come from a range of sources. Specifically, GCF funding is being requested to co-finance 
alongside BMZ and the Government the following investments: 
Under GFREIF Public Investment Window I: 
 
Performance-based grant to NFA for implementation of FMPs (Sub-activity 1.1.2): EUR 9.6 million  
 
Procurement of equipment and modern technologies for DES (Sub-activity 1.2.2): EUR 0.6 million  
 
Construction of BSY facilities (Sub-activity 1.3.2): EUR 2.6 million  
 
Under GFREIF Private Investment Window II: 
 
Result-based financial incentive instrument (voucher program) for EE stoves for households (Sub-activity 2.2.1):   
EUR 3.6 million  
 
In addition, the following investment needs will be 100% co-financed by project partners: 
 
Under GFREIF Private Investment Window II: 
 
Development of EE-AF supply chain via Investment grants, interest-rate subsidies and guarantees to EE-AF suppliers 
by the Government via ARDA (Sub-activity 2.1.1): EUR 4.3 million  
 
Interest-rate subsidies and guarantees to forestry companies by the Government via ARDA (Sub-activity 1.1.2):   
EUR 13.5 million  
 
Procurement of EE-stoves and AF supplies by households with loan financing from Chrystal Bank and other FIs (Sub-
activity 2.2.2): EUR 10.5 million  
 
GCF grant for Component 1 (Investment support to NFA and DES) will contribute to alleviating budgetary shortfall faced by 
the Government78. The government has committed to step in, out of budget sources, to fill in the funding gap with significant 
commitment exceeding its current funding for the forest management system.

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 39 OF 92 
 
 
 
79 For detailed specification of equipment and works, please refer to the Feasibility Study, Chapter 6.3.1.1 its Appendix 4) 
80 Yield on Georgia’s 10-year (longest-dated) sovereign bonds as of mid-June 2019. 
81 Furthermore, in 2018 second hand cars were purchased that led to high maintenance costs, and resulted in many cars breaking down – 
ultimately limiting the effectiveness of such vehicles for forest supervision activities. 
82 DES 2018. 
83 For justification of investment in specific equipment categories, please refer to Chapter 5.2.3.2, Table 38 of the Feasibility Study. 
84 Draft Forest Code, Version submitted to Georgian Parliament in February 2019. 
Sub-activity 1.1.2 
Implementation of 
SFM plans 
GCF, 
Government 
Based on the progress in FMP implementation, the project will provide a 50% 
contribution in year 1, 3 and 5 to the procurement of advanced, low-impact SFM 
machinery and to forest road construction. To minimize concessionality requirements, 
this investment support will be in the form of performance-based grants and linked to 
the achievement by the NFA of the agreed-upon milestones related to forest road 
construction, harvesting, planting, etc.79 NFA has no other means to finance investment 
required to scale-up SFM implementation: without GCF support, the expected financial 
IRR (FIRR) of Component 1 is 2.4%, which is well below Georgia’s financial cost of 
capital of ~8.4%.80 The financial NPV, using such cost of capital as the discount rate, is 
negative EUR 9 million. 
Sub-activity 1.2.2 
Implementation of 
improved forest 
supervision 
measures and 
technologies 
GCF, 
Government 
DES is fully dependent on government budget for the implementation of their 
activities, since it is a non-revenue generating state function. State budget, however, 
covers only basic investments including uniforms, laboratory costs, office expenses, 
fuel and maintenance costs, standard vehicles and personnel (partial) insurance 
costs, basic equipment (flashlights, binoculars, truncheons, rescue vests, fire 
extinguishers and other low-cost equipment), and office building construction. It further 
covers the purchase of some patrolling vehicles, but often basic trucks are procured 
which are not suitable for many of the poorly maintained and rugged roads, especially 
in mountainous areas.81 For 2019, DES requested a budget of GEL 28.9 million, 
however they were only appointed a budget of GEL 20.67 million, resulting in a 
deficiency of GEL 8.23 million.82 The gap in financing particularly affected investments 
in off-road vehicles for mountainous areas, motorbikes, drones, video-audio devices, 
cameras, camera traps, and computers, among others. Such equipment is considered 
highly relevant and important for improving forest supervision in the country.83 Without 
GCF grant, deficiency DES’s material base will continue to exist limiting its ability to 
effectively implement its mandate. 
Sub-activity 1.3.2 
Construction of 14 
new and 
refurbishment of 1 
existing business 
service yards 
(BSY) 
GCF, 
Government  
Phasing out the “social wood programme” by January 1, 2022,84 along with foreseen 
strengthened law enforcement to combat illegal logging (Activity 1.2), will support the 
transition to a new fuelwood provision mechanism overseen by the NFA that aims to 
provide sustainably produced fuelwood to local households.  
A concept for the new fuelwood provision model by the NFA envisages establishment 
of at least 54 BSYs across the country. Each BSY includes (at least) 1 office for BSY 
staff and guard(s), drying and storage facilities (a shelter with a roof) and an area for 
simple timber site manipulation. These facilities will improve transparency and legality 
in timber value chains and improve timber sorting (enabling added value by ensuring 
low-quality timber is prioritized for fuelwood – see FS Chapter 5.2.3.5). Without 
investment in BSYs facilities the new fuelwood supply model cannot be practically 
implemented, as a result population will be entirely cut-off from even limited source of 
fuelwood supply in their areas. This poses substantial social risks to the projects, 
because even with EE-AF market development residual demand for fuelwood will 
remain and will have to be addressed in a sustainable manner to improve legality of 
fuelwood supply households again to illegal suppliers/markets. Existing NFA budget 
and revenues fall short of being able to carry the investment at the required scale (see 
section B.5 for details) 
Sub-activity 2.1.1 
Establishing 
Technical 
Assistance and 
Investment 
Support Facility 
(TAISF) 
Government 
Investment support is required to help nascent EE-AF sector access much needed 
capital to grow and develop in the situation when prevailing market conditions are not 
conducive and the cost of capital (interest rate of 14-15%) makes such investment 
financially non-viable. Financial support to entrepreneurs will be supplied by ARDA 
under its existing support schemes, which include a combination of interest rate 
subsidies (applied to commercial loans offered to the entrepreneurs by ARDA partner 
banks), partial credit guarantees and contributions for the purchase of equipment. 
Entrepreneurs will also contribute equity (minimum 10% of the investment, actual level 
determined on a project-by-project basis by ARDA). Commercial lenders will bear the 
risk of loan default for the portion of the loan that is not guaranteed by ARDA. 
Sub-activity 2.2.1 
Design, 
implementation 
and marketing of 
the voucher 
GCF 
Several barriers hinder the adoption of EE stoves, the most important being the high 
price point of an EE stove (GEL 1,000 EE stove price vs. GEL 50-70 for a conventional 
one). Even though (theoretically) the IRR for such purchase at 45% is very attractive, 
the amount of up-front investment required is well beyond household’s ability to self-
finance. In addition to the product being very expensive (also in view of available much

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 40 OF 92 
 
 
programme for EE 
stoves for 
households 
cheaper alternative), it is very novel to consumers, with only few units sold currently in 
Georgia and lack of industry certifications of product quality. Provision of publicly 
sponsored subsidies is an established practice in OECD countries to stimulate 
consumer demand for new products, such as more EE stoves (See Section D.6.4 of the 
FP – description of best practices). Without financial incentive, households could only 
finance the purchase of an EE stove with a micro-finance loan at 30% effective interest 
rate, repaid in 9 monthly instalments (assuming they have access to and qualify for MFI 
loans). These terms are in line with those applied by MFIs and Banks in Georgia. The 
resulting monthly instalment of GEL 128 is, according to MFIs, not affordable to most of 
the target households. The amount of subsidy, i.e. 30% of the market price, has been 
established taking into account requirement to minimize concessionality in the GCF-
funded project and enable the household to be eligible and afford complementary loan 
financing. 
The incentive scheme will be put in place in partnership with local financial institutions 
(banks and MFIs) that will offer loans at full commercial terms covering the remaining 
70% of the purchase price. While loan rates and conditions will vary by lender, the 
example of an MFI loan at 30% effective rate points to a monthly instalment for the 
borrowing household in the range of GEL 80, which MFIs deem is within affordability 
limits.  
Sub-activity 2.2.2 
Providing 
consumer 
financing for EE 
stoves and AF for 
households  
Banks and 
Microfinance 
Institutions 
(Crystal, 
TBC, Bank 
of Georgia, 
Procredit 
Bank etc. 
 
There is currently a lack of an easy-to-tap financing product specifically targeted at the 
purchase of EE stoves, to help consumers bridge the price gap between an EE and a 
conventional stove and this sub-activity aims at bridging this funding gap via consumer 
loans to be provided by project’s financial partners. Importantly, such loans will bear 
full commercial interest rates, which are currently in the 30% range for MFIs. In other 
words, no concessionality will be offered by the financial institutions. Households will 
have the option to apply for a consumer loan covering the EE stove purchase only, or 
the stove and the annual supply of AF. In addition, financial institutions will bear the 
risk of loan default (no government or other guarantees are attached to the EE stove 
loan program). 
B.4. Implementation arrangements 
B.4.1 Institutional arrangements 
127. Accredited Entity – Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH. GIZ with its head 
office in Germany is the AE in this project. GIZ with its management structure in Georgia will operate as an 
Executing Entity. For the avoidance of doubt, these two GIZ functions will be strictly separated and are 
accountable to different management structures within GIZ. As the Accredited Entity (AE), GIZ has the 
oversight responsibility for the overall project as defined in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) between 
GCF and GIZ. As AE, GIZ administers the funds on behalf of GCF and provides oversight guidance and quality 
assurance for the Executing Entities.  
 
128. Executing Entities: The following Executing Entities will implement the project  
1. National Forestry Agency (NFA) 
2. Department of Environmental Supervision (DES), representing the Government of 
Georgia 
3. Environmental Information and Education Centre (EIEC) 
4. Agricultural and Rural Development Agency (ARDA) 
5. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH  
 
129. The National Forestry Agency (NFA) is a Legal Entity of Public Law (LEPL) of the Ministry of Environmental 
Protection and Agriculture (MoEPA) of Georgia. NFA is responsible for managing 1.8 million hectares of forest 
in the country and is the sole entity responsible for forest management in these areas. Under the new forest 
code, NFA together with other forest management bodies will additionally be responsible for the provision of 
legally and sustainably sourced fuelwood in the country. NFA is experienced in working with international 
donors and development institutions, such as GIZ, EU, WB, ADA, US Forest Service, and other international 
institutions. For details of NFA involvement in international projects see chapter on donor projects in the forest 
sector. Within the logframe of the project, NFA is in charge of the following sub-activities:  
Activity 1.1. Development and 
implementation of SFM plans 
1.1.1 Development of SFM plans based on the principles of ecosystem-
based SFM in selected forest districts 
1.1.2 Implementation of SFM plans in selected forest districts 
1.3.1. Support to new mechanism for fuelwood provision to local 
population

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 41 OF 92 
 
 
Activity 1.3. Provision of 
sustainably produced fuelwood 
by NFA 
1.3.2. Establishment of business service yards (BSY) 
Activity 1.4. Enhancement of 
enabling environment for the 
nation-wide implementation of 
sustainable forest management 
(SFM) 
1.4.5 Enabling improved integration of climate change adaptation in forest 
sector planning, management and monitoring 
 
130. NFA will receive EUR 14.87 million GCF grant funding for activities 1.1 and 1.3. GIZ AE will enter into a 
subsidiary agreement (grant agreement) with NFA. The contract will be legally binding and outline the detailed 
financial, procurement and implementation plan of the relevant elements of the project, incl. reporting and 
liability requirements, as well as ensuring compliance against GCF environmental, social and governance 
safeguards. The funds will be used for: 
 
Procurement of equipment  
 
Construction of forest roads and business service yards for wood sales 
 
Procurement of services, such as forest inventories, harvesting, timber transport, forest management 
plan development and other services 
 
International and national experts for developing training modules, and training of trainers 
 
Trainings 
 
131. Department of Environmental Supervision (DES) – representing the Government of Georgia – is a State 
Sub-Agency of the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture (MoEPA) of Georgia. DES is 
responsible for the prevention and detection of illegal use of natural resources, the prevention and detection of 
environmental pollution, the control of natural resource license requirements and control of forest management 
based on management C&I for eco-system-based forest management. All forest supervision activities and the 
management of procurement of equipment (e.g. vehicles) and other services are executed by DES. Within the 
logframe of the project, DES is in charge of the following activities: 
Activity 1.2. Strengthening of 
forest supervision 
1.2.1. Strengthening of procedures, standards, systems for enhanced law 
enforcement 
1.2.2. Implementation of improved forest supervision measures and 
technologies    
 
132. DES will receive GCF funds of up to EUR 0.69 million. GIZ AE will enter into a subsidiary agreement (grant 
agreement) with DES, representing the Government of Georgia. The contract will be legally binding and 
outline the detailed financial, procurement and implementation plan of the relevant elements of the project, incl. 
reporting and liability requirements and ensuring compliance against GCF environmental, social and 
governance safeguards.   
 
133. The funds will be used for:  
 
Procurement of services to harmonize new standards and systems for the forest patrolling division with the 
standards and procedures for the already existing environmental patrolling division 
 
Development of training modules and implementation of trainings 
 
Investments in improved technologies, equipment and vehicles for forest supervision 
 
134. Environmental Information and Education Centre (EIEC) is an independently administered legal entity of 
public law (LEPL) of MoEPA. EIEC provides access to environmental education and ensures access to 
comprehensive information on the environment in Georgia. The center acts as a mediator between the 
environmental protection policy developing and implementing parties and ensure that strategies, legislation 
and policies are explained to the target groups in a simple language and format. Within the logframe of the 
project, EIEC is in charge of the following activities: 
Activity 1.4. Enhancement of 
enabling environment for the 
nation-wide implementation of 
sustainable forest management 
(SFM) 
1.4.3. Development of online knowledge management and training 
platform for the forest sector

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 42 OF 92 
 
 
Activity 1.5. Improvement of 
monitoring and measurement, 
reporting and verification 
systems (MRV) for the forest 
sector 
1.5.1. Strengthening of the national forest monitoring and MRV 
architecture 
Activity 2.3. Creating consumer 
awareness and provision of 
advisory services for fuelwood 
users 
2.3.2 National advocacy and awareness raising 
 
135. EIEC will receive EUR 0.48 million GCF grant funding. GIZ AE GIZ will enter into a subsidiary agreement (grant 
agreement) with EIEC. The contract will be legally binding and outline the detailed financial, procurement and 
implementation plan of the relevant elements of the project, incl. reporting and liability requirements. 
 
136. The GCF funds will be used for:  
 
Procurement of services for the development of online knowledge management and training platform 
(KMTP) for the forest sector 
 
Design and implementation of a national awareness campaign 
 
137. Agricultural and Rural Development Agency (ARDA) was established in 2012 as a non-entrepreneurial 
(non-commercial) Legal Entity “Agricultural Projects Management Agency” (APMA) by the Ministry of 
Agriculture of Georgia in order to promote rural development. From July 1, 2019 the official title was changed 
into Agricultural and Rural Development Agency (ARDA). The Agency is functioning under the supervision of 
First Deputy Minister of Environmental Protection and Agriculture of Georgia. The agency implements a variety 
of projects initiated by MoEPA. Furthermore, it is responsible for managing subordinate agricultural companies. 
ARDA has a track record of delivering state and donor-funded TA and Investment Support Facilities in the 
agricultural and rural sector (e.g. DANIDA, IFAD and GEF). Within the logframe of the project, ARDA is in 
charge of the following activities: 
Activity 2.1. EE-AF supply chain 
development 
2.1.1 Establishing Technical Assistance and Investment Support Facility 
(TAISF) 
Activity 2.2. Implementing 
consumer financing instruments 
for EE-AF solutions 
2.2.1. Design, implementation and marketing of the voucher programme 
for EE stoves for households  
 
138. ARDA will receive EUR 5.00 million GCF grant funding. GIZ AE GIZ will enter into a subsidiary agreement 
(grant agreement) with ARDA. The contract will be legally binding and outline the detailed financial, 
procurement and implementation plan of the relevant elements of the project, incl. reporting and liability 
requirements. The GCF funds will be used for:  
 
Procurement for services for the Technical Assistance and Investment Support Facility, TAISF 
(consultants, printing, workshops, trainings) 
 
Design and implementation of the household subsidy scheme (voucher programme) 
 
139. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH: GIZ is one of the largest 
international providers of capacity development and technical assistance on climate change worldwide. GIZ is 
currently carrying out over 300 climate-related projects, with combined funding of over USD 1.9 billion. 
Mitigation and adaptation account for equal shares in the GIZ portfolio, supplemented by activities on climate 
financing. A significant part of GIZ’s work is implemented in least developed countries. GIZ has been working 
in Georgia since 1992. GIZ's country office in Tbilisi primarily manages regional programmes that are being 
implemented in Georgia and the two neighbouring countries Armenia and Azerbaijan. Currently around 
90 national and 25 international employees are working in the country. GIZ leads and provides overall 
management of the capacity development and technical assistance (TA) to the project at national and 
subnational levels in various activities. GIZ is in charge of the following specific activities: 
Activity 1.4. Enhancement of 
enabling environment for the 
nation-wide implementation of 
sustainable forest management 
(SFM) 
1.4.1. Strengthening of the legal framework for SFM 
1.4.2. Improvement of sector steering and coordination between involved 
sectors 
1.4.4 Improvement of vocational education and training for the forest sector

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 43 OF 92 
 
 
Activity 2.1. EE-AF supply chain 
development 
2.1.2 Feasibility assessment and pipeline development for new EE-AF 
solutions 
Activity 2.2. Implementing 
consumer financing instruments 
for EE-AF solutions 
2.2.3. Supporting MFIs and partner banks to structure and promote 
consumer financing products for advanced EE-AF solutions  
Activity 2.3. Creating consumer 
awareness and provision of 
technical advisory services for 
fuelwood users 
2.3.1. Community-mobilization, advocacy and advisory services on EE-AF to 
fuelwood users 
Activity 2.4. Enabling policies 
and regulations 
2.4.1. Capacity building for introduction and enforcement of energy efficiency 
and environmental standards and labelling for EE-AF solutions  
2.4.2 Facilitating introduction of EE procurement practices in public sector 
Component 3: Livelihood 
opportunities and local self-
governance in forest 
management 
Activity 3.1 Development and introduction of municipal-level tools, practices, 
plans and capacities for participatory SFM and conservation 
Activity 3.2: Development, testing and promotion of local mechanisms to 
better protect interests of adversely affected stakeholders 
Activity 3.3: Development of professional skills on SFM and conservation 
through vocational education and international partnerships with centres of 
knowledge 
Activity 3.4: Introduction of selected value chains (timber, NTFP, eco-
tourism) 
  
140. GIZ’s additional responsibilities include: 
 
Managing the project budget of GIZ as Executing Entity that is spend in the country. 
 
Liaising with the GIZ Country Office regarding budget and finances, monitoring and reporting, staff and 
appraiser contracts. 
 
Reporting to the German Embassy and BMZ regarding their financial contributions to the project as well 
the overall progress of project implementation. 
 
Coordinating project implementation with the co-financing development partners and their projects and 
counterparts as well as other bi- and multilateral institutions operating in the same technical and/or 
geographical area. 
 
Liaising with, and reporting to, the Project Steering Committee. 
 
Coordinating with and reporting to the other four Executing Entities involved in the project (NFA, DES, 
ARDA, and EIEC). 
 
Representing the project in national working groups and stakeholder forums. 
 
141. GIZ as an Executing Entity will be responsible for a GCF budget of EUR 11.75 million, which will be devoted 
to staff and travel costs, equipment, international and local consultants, execution of trainings, workshops and 
conferences as well as professional/contractual services.  
 
142. Project Partners (providing co-financing to the project): Apart from the Executing Entities, GIZ will work closely 
with a number of governmental, development and private sector partners for the implementation of the Funded 
Activity, including: 
 
The Government of Georgia (GoG) represented by the Ministry of Environmental Protection and 
Agriculture (MoEPA) and the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development (MESD) will provide in-
kind co-financing to the project in form of expert staff, project implementation unit staff, and office space. 
 
The Public Procurement Agency (PPA) is a governmental procurement institution that establishes 
policies for the regulation of state procurement processes and provides oversight to all government 
procurement procedures. PPA will provide in-kind parallel financing to the project in form of expert staff 
as well as training facilities. 
 
The Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) is a Swedish government 
agency and contributes co-financing to the project. SIDA provides technical assistance for the strategic 
and operational development of ARDA’s portfolio in green rural development. Furthermore, SIDA will be 
involved in community mobilisation, advocacy and advisory services on energy efficiency and alternative 
fuels in form of a grant contribution to selected institutions. SIDA will provide co-finance of Swedish 
Krona 23.70 million (EUR 2.25 million) to the project in the form of a grant contribution to ARDA and a 
grant contribution to a national institution for the community mobilisation. 
 
The Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) is a Swiss government agency, which 
will provide co-financing of CHF 4.7 million (EUR 4.09 million) to the project in the form of a grant

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 44 OF 92 
 
 
 
85 Contribution of SDC is subject to the formal decision of the Swiss government, which is expected by the end of June 2020. 
86 The amounts mentioned in the previous pages only cover GCF proceeds. However, the grant agreements may also include additional 
BMZ funding and funding provided by other co-financiers. 
contribution to GIZ.85 SDC will finance a livelihood community component (Component 3). Its goal will 
be to provide alternative livelihood opportunities and self-governance in forest management for rural 
communities. 
 
Crystal (and potentially other MFIs or banks, such as TBC, Bank of Georgia, Procredit Bank, 
etc.): Crystal will provide co-financing of EUR 10.50 million to the project in the form of consumer loans 
for households on energy efficiency and alternative fuels. Based on the technical assistance of Sub-
Activity 2.2.2 and 2.2.3, other MFIs and banks might develop further additional loan products in case the 
market development provide sufficient business opportunities. This may lead to further private sector 
leveraged finance (parallel financing). 
 
143. Contractual arrangements: The graph below illustrates the contractual arrangements foreseen between the 
main partners of the project. The German Federal Ministry for Cooperation and Development (BMZ) will be 
commissioning GIZ with the implementation of the project (commissioning agreement). The GCF will transfer 
funds based on a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) to the Accredited Entity GIZ. The Swiss Agency for 
Development and Cooperation (SDC) will sign a co-financing agreement with GIZ for the implementation of 
Component 3. This co-financing agreement will be established prior to the 2nd disbursement of GCF proceeds 
according to the FAA. 
The Executing Entities – the National Forestry Agency (NFA), the Agricultural and Rural Development Agency 
(ARDA), the Department of Environmental Supervision (DES, representing the Government of Georgia) and 
the Environmental Education and Information Center (EIEC) - will sign subsidiary agreements with GIZ, based 
on GIZ standard operating procedures for grant agreements. These subsidiary agreements establish the legal 
basis on which GIZ makes the GCF Proceeds available to the Executing Entities for the measures to be 
implemented by the Executing Entities, in accordance with the AMA and FAA.  
Furthermore, GIZ will sign co-operation agreements with SIDA, Crystal, in which their co-financing contributions 
as well as reporting responsibilities will be specified. GIZ will also sign a cooperation agreement with the Public 
Procurement Agency (PPA), covering its in-kind contribution to the project (parallel financing). 
Finally, GIZ will conclude an implementation agreement with the Government of Georgia (represented by 
MoEPA 
and 
MESD), 
which 
will 
specify 
their 
in-kind 
contributions 
to 
the 
project.  
For the avoidance of doubt, PPA and the Government of Georgia, represented by MoEPA and MESD will not 
receive GCF proceeds but provide co-financing to the project. 
 
Figure 16: Contractual arrangements 
 
144. Flow of Funds Structure: The graph below shows the overall fund flow of ODA funding and private sector 
funding in the project (government contributions are excluded). Direct co-finance will flow from BMZ, SDC and 
GCF to GIZ head office (AE). SIDA and (Micro)-finance institution provide indirect co-finance. GIZ (AE) will 
transfer GCF funds to the five Executing Entities86. The Executing Entities NFA, EIEC and DES (representing

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 45 OF 92 
 
 
 
87 Negotiations with the Georgian government are currently ongoing regarding government contributions to Component 3. 
the Government of Georgia) will all use the funds within the context of Component 1 Sustainable Forest 
Management. The funds to ARDA will flow into Component 2 Energy Efficiency and Alternative Fuels. ARDA 
transfers the GCF financed funding of the household subsidy scheme for EE stoves via a voucher programme 
to the consumers. Banks and Microfinance Institutions (Crystal, TBC, Bank of Georgia, Procredit Bank, etc.) 
provide EE-AF financing to consumers via a consumer loan. SIDA provides funding to ARDA for technical 
assistance and transfers funding to a national institution (to be identified) to implement community-mobilisation 
with consumers as final beneficiaries. The Georgian government allocates significant additional budget for the 
two project components87. These funds, however, are not part of the diagram. 
Figure 17: Flow of funds 
 
145. Governance Structure: The project will establish a Steering Committee as the main governing body for the 
project, as shown in the Figure 18 below. The Committee will meet two times a year and members will consist 
of department heads/directors from MoEPA, NFA, DES, ARDA, MESD, MoF, EIEC, MRDI, NGOs, SIDA, SDC, 
BMZ and GIZ. The mandate of the Steering Committee includes: 
 
Providing overall guidance for the project 
 
Providing feedback and validation of annual work plans, annual reports and audits 
 
Ensuring project energy and coherence with the evolution of the international and national context 
 
Being informed of project adherence with E&S Safeguards and Gender Action plan objectives 
 
Supporting the coordination of project activities across different line ministries and between private and 
public sector and civil society. 
 
146. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) with representatives of project partners will be set up for the duration 
of the project. The mandate of the unit includes: 
 
Enhance common understanding among Executing Entities on the theory of change and how 
transformation in both sectors shall evolve 
 
Discuss, monitor, and promote best possible synchronisation of implementation between the Executing 
Entities 
 
Define, monitor and coordinate work plans 
 
Ensure that budgets and work plans are on track and monitor project progress 
 
Identify and resolve bottlenecks and implementation challenges relevant on project level 
 
Monitor adherence to environmental, social and fiduciary safeguards; monitor implementation of the 
Project’s Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Gender Action Plan (GAP), and 
steer review of these plans if needed

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 46 OF 92 
 
 
 
Identify issues required to be brought to the attention of the steering committee and/or political decision 
makers 
 
Provide for information exchange and synergies between project Components 
 
Agree on terms of reference, recruitment of experts 
 
Discuss outcome and impact monitoring processes and results 
 
Prepare monitoring reports. 
 
Figure 18: Governance and Implementation structure 
 
B.4.2 Regulation, taxation and insurance 
 
Privileges, immunities and taxation 
 
147. The Federal Republic of Germany has concluded Framework Agreements on Technical Cooperation under 
international public law with the Government of Georgia, which provide for certain privileges and immunities to 
be applied in projects and programmes of technical cooperation, including exemptions for taxes, customs, 
duties and fees. GIZ will endeavour to reach arrangements to have these privileges and immunities also applied 
to this project, including GCF proceeds. However, formal agreements will only be entered into after the project 
has been approved. 
 
Approvals, permits, licenses and land 
 
148. Depending on the location of the Business Service Yards (BSY) of NFA, construction permits might have to be 
obtained. These permits will be obtained by NFA before disbursement of GCF proceeds for this specific activity.  
Other than that, GIZ is not aware of project requiring specific approvals, permits, licenses or land to allow for 
the implementation of planned activities. 
 
Currency 
 
149. The local currency in Georgia is the Georgian Lari (code: GEL). The project’s local transactions will use GEL. 
The AE will manage GCF proceeds in Euro. GIZ will apply its standard rates for the conversion of currency. 
 
 
 
 
Insurance

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 47 OF 92 
 
 
 
88 Costs for SFM in a permanent (i.e. non-rotational) forest in China, based on an International Climate Initiative Project. It should be noted 
that costs for SFM can differ greatly based on the country and regional context (accessibility, labour regulations, currency, and inflation, 
among other factors), however forestry experts noted that SFM in many countries with a developed forestry sector would require 
investments within the range reported.  
89 Comprising 15% of the NFA-managed forest area actually covered by forest. 
90 For more detail, please refer to the Feasibility Study Chapter 5.2.3.4. 
91 From year 16 onwards, the NFA will make profit from forest management measures and wood supply system, see next section for 
details. 
 
 
150. GIZ, as the AE, will ensure that project activities are adequately insured as per GIZ standard operating 
procedures and common practices. GIZ standard operating procedures require contractors to ensure required 
insurance cover. GIZ policies provide insurance cover for GIZ staff. At the time of submitting the Funding 
Proposal, GIZ does not anticipate additional insurance in order to cover special risks in this project. 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request 
B.5.1. Funding gap: Forestry sector 
 
151. After years of forest degradation. Georgia is actively seeking to implement an ambitious forest sector reform 
to preserve the ecological value (including carbon stocks), enhance the economic value and increase the social 
value of its forests. In the past, Georgia has put a lot of efforts and has closely worked with bilateral and 
multilateral donors to design the new SFM concept, which is now ready for implementation. The degree and 
complexity of the necessary change in both sectors, forestry and rural energy, is high, as is the need for 
technical support and investments for the implementation of the reform.   
 
152. Since independence, Georgia’s forestry sector has suffered from declining budgets for forest management and 
protection, severely undermining its capacity to properly enforce forest laws and regulations. NFA is dependent 
on state budget as well as its own revenues to cover its costs. In 2018, NFA budget expenditures reached EUR 
9.66 million (GEL 28.88 million). Around 60% of NFA´s budget was from their own generated income (EUR 
6.15 million or GEL 18.45 million), and 40% was from state budget (EUR or 3.45 million GEL 10.35 million). 
This demonstrates a notable change since 2015, where 67% of NFA´s budget was from state funding. While 
NFA´s total budget has increased in recent years, the financing needs are also expanding due to the increased 
necessity for investing in the forestry sector. In 2018, the level of expenditures was EUR 4.86/ha (GEL 
14.48/ha), which is very low. In comparison, SFM implementation in many middle-income countries often 
requires investments in the range of EUR 250-270 per hectare.88   
 
153. The budget is insufficient to cover the minimum basic forest management needs, as majority of it is dedicated 
to staff and administrative costs (60% of NFA´s budget, of which 53% is from the state budget and 47% from 
NFA revenues). Forest use activities (cutting operations and harvesting) comprise an additional 30% of NFA´s 
budget (20% is from state budget), which is deemed important as it is the potential principal revenue generating 
activity for NFA. Much needed forest maintenance and restoration activities comprise only 9% of NFA´s budget 
(of which only 6% is from state budget). Forest inventory activities comprise less than 1% of the budget (entirely 
financed from NFA revenues). Such trends are similarly observed in the project regions (Guria, Kakheti and 
Mtskheta-Mtianeti) 89 where NFA had a budget of EUR 2.1 million (GEL 6.3 million) for above mentioned 
activities in 2018 (an average of EUR 3.36/ha, below national average). 
 
154. Following the phased approach on implementation of the reform, 90  the government aims to start 
implementation of SFM in the eight target districts. According to calculations, for the first 15 years91, revenues 
from SFM activities in the districts will not be sufficient to cover investment and operation and maintenance 
costs, because of the timing required for forest management measures and wood supply system to reach 
maturity and timber/fuelwood sales volumes to increase accordingly. In the 8 districts the government would 
have to inject a total of EUR 32.80 million (of which EUR 18 million (ca. 60%) are required in the first seven 
years) to make up for the revenue shortfall in years 1-15, more than EUR 2 million on average p.a. To put this 
in context, this would be equivalent to half the government’s expected budget support to the whole NFA in 
2019, but for a forest area that is just 15% of the total. It fully exceeds the annual budget of NFA in the three 
regions (that include 14 districts). Additional substantial investments are needed to build up the capacities of 
DES for forest supervision, in addition to other technical assistance needs in the sector (e.g. building up 
capacities on forest management in NFA and for private sector contractors, improving vocational education 
and trainings, strengthening the regulatory framework and ensuring its alignment with the New Forest Code

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 48 OF 92 
 
 
 
92 For a more detailed assessment of the financial baseline, see Feasibility Study, Chapter 5.2.4. 
93 See Chapter 5.4 of the Feasibility Study on cooperation potentials. 
94 85% of GEL 11.9 million (EUR 4 million), the state funding required for the NFA as a whole under the 2019 budget.  
and the Management-level Criteria and Indicators for ecosystem-based forest management, among other 
investments.92  
 
155. As shown above, the need for additional financial and technical assistance to cover the costs of initiating and 
conducting SFM in Georgia is substantial. As regards technical assistance, several small-scale technical 
assistance projects are supporting the forestry and rural energy sector. The cooperation potentials are already 
identified. 93 However, the scope of required TA support is well beyond existing donors’ commitment and 
partnership agreement with Georgia. To address this TA shortfall, the project in addition to GCF funding, has 
mobilized substantial additional commitments from BMZ, SIDA and potentially other development partners. 
 
156. In order to address funding shortfall at NFA to cover SFM-related investment needs, the following options can 
be considered:  
 
Option 1 – increase in public financing: The Government already committed to contribute some 
substantial additional resources to reduce the funding gap for SFM measures and wood supply in the 8 
target districts, i.e. EUR 19.60 million (GEL 58.80 million) for year 1-15 (in average EUR 1.31 million/year 
or GEL 3.92 million/year). This is the maximum the Ministry of Finance is able to provide to the sector. In 
addition, budget support will continue on the remaining 85% of the forest area not targeted by the project, 
which in 2019 would equate to approx. EUR 3.4 million.94 In addition, the government makes available 
additional state budget contributions for DES to hire forest patrollers and to provide the basic equipment 
for forest supervision functions, as well as re-invest NFA’s future revenues in SFM. Georgian Government 
is also increasing its commitment to provide investment support to EE-AF sector, beyond its current level 
of support to rural and agricultural SMEs.  
 
Option 2 – concessional loans: Several activities for which GCF grant is requested will not directly result 
in revenue generation, but rather support the enabling environment for SFM planning and implementation. 
This includes investment in infrastructure to strengthen and enforce forest surveillance practices and 
prevent illegal logging via DES, none of this investment though is revenue-generating and therefore loan 
financing is not applicable. For revenue generating activities in SFM implementation and building up the 
NFA wood supply system, due to the prolonged period of negative cashflows, borrowing to cover the 
funding gap is not advisable, even at the concessional terms offered by GCF and development banks 
(grace periods typically do not exceed 5 years). In addition, the SFM represents a complete overhaul of 
Georgia’s forest management system in the target districts. Information asymmetries deter commercial 
lenders from supporting the project, especially with the very long-dated loans that would be required due 
to cashflow profile (see details in B.5.3).  
 
157. In addition, the two financing options described above are not advisable in light of Georgia’s fiscal and debt 
situation. The government has committed to fiscal consolidation under an ongoing IMF program. Significant 
budget reforms were introduced in 2017 and no increase in current spending is envisaged in real terms in the 
coming 5-7 years. The budget deficit has been declining gradually since 2017/18 as envisaged by the IMF. 
The deficit is forecasted at 2.6% of GDP in 2019, has to be maintained under 3% in coming years and reduced 
gradually to 2.5% in the medium term starting from 2023. Maintaining the fiscal deficit within the above-
mentioned limits is extremely important since this is the debt stabilizing level of fiscal deficit. Government debt 
is forecasted at 43.7% of GDP for 2019, which needs to be reduced gradually and maintained within 35%-40% 
of GDP in the medium term. Within this fiscal consolidation framework, the set limits of government debt and 
budget deficit allow only for increased spending in education and investments in infrastructure that maximizes 
the usage of Georgia’s transit and tourism potential. At the same time, there are constraints on including new 
commitments in many other directions and no room for additional liabilities. 
 
158. GCF funding is required to address, in the form of TA, extensive capacity building needs of the forest sector 
stakeholders, as well as financial gaps for investment in SFM by the Government. Currently, the Government 
with GIZ support is introducing forest management planning for 64,892 ha in Akhmeta, Kakheti, but available 
public resources are not sufficient to implement the FMP and reach the scale of NDC commitment. Under 
current framework, the value of forest is being depleted through unsustainable extraction of timber and 
fuelwood. The project seeks to address this market failure by supporting forest sector reform leading to scaling-
up SFM approach and eventual increase in forest’s economic, social and ecological values.  
B.5.2. Funding gap: EE-AF Sector

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 49 OF 92 
 
 
 
95 According to WB (2018) "Georgia Forests, Livelihoods, and Poverty Linkages in the Forest Communities of Georgia", the median income 
is GEL 83 per capita per month and average number of people in Georgia’s household is 3,2 members (Geostat 2018) 
 
 
159. Affordability of EE-AF products is the major financial barrier for consumers. Even for the least cost solutions, 
such as an EE stove, there is a substantial funding gap and lack of incentive. Estimated price of a certified EE 
stove is GEL 1,000 whereas a conventional stove can be bought for GEL 50-70, i.e. 20 times cheaper. In 
addition to the product being very expensive compared to much cheaper alternatives, it is very novel to 
consumers, with only few units sold currently in Georgia and lack of industry certifications of product quality. 
 
160. The amount of up-front investment required to purchase a new EE stove is well beyond household’s ability 
to self-finance: average rural household monthly income is 270 GEL. Low revenues, which determine 
maximum borrowing capacity as per Central Bank regulation and banks’ credit requirements, also restrict 
households’ ability to obtain credit for the full cost of an EE stove. Under current conditions, households could 
only finance the purchase of an EE stove with a micro-finance loan at 30% effective interest rate, repaid in 9 
monthly instalments (assuming they have access to and qualify for MFI loans). The resulting monthly instalment 
of GEL 128 is about 50% of the average household monthly income95, it exceeds the borrowing threshold 
established by the Central Bank of Georgia for households.  
 
161. Grant funding is therefore required to address this gap and create a strong incentive for “early adopters’, 
those households willing to take the risk and invest in a much more expensive, unknown but promising 
alternative.  
 
162. The amount of subsidy, i.e. up to 30% of the market price, has been established taking into account requirement 
to minimize concessionality in the GCF-funded project while enabling households to be eligible and afford 
complementary loan financing. The incentive scheme will be put in place in partnership with local financial 
institutions (banks and MFIs) that will offer loans at full commercial terms covering the remaining 70% of the 
purchase price. While loan rates and conditions will vary by lender, the example of an MFI loan at 30% effective 
rate points to a monthly instalment for the borrowing household in the range of GEL 80, which MFIs deem is 
within affordability limits and the Central Bank’s threshold. Households will have the option to apply for a 
consumer loan covering the EE stove purchase only, or the stove and the annual supply of AF. Financial 
institutions will bear the risk of loan default (no government or other guarantees are attached to the EE stove 
loan programme).  
 
163. Provision of publicly sponsored subsidies is an established practice in OECD countries to stimulate consumer 
demand for new products, such as more EE stoves (See Section D.6.4 of the FP – description of best 
practices). Similar consumer financing schemes in Georgia and elsewhere in the region, such as the EBRD’s 
Sustainable Energy Financing Facility (SEFF), proved instrumental in stimulating demand of other household 
products, such as EE appliances.  
 
164. On the supply side, in view of the barriers explained earlier in Section B.2, EE-AF sector does not represent a 
viable investment opportunity neither for suppliers, nor for consumers. As regards EE-AF suppliers, lack of 
effective market demand limits their ability to invest in EE-AF product development and manufacturing capacity 
expansion. At the same time, EE-AF suppliers are not covered by the existing state-sponsored investment 
support mechanisms for private sector, such as guarantees, interest rate subsidy, and investment grants. The 
Government of Georgia recognizing the need to support nascent EE-AF sector will co-finance investment 
support activities under the Project’s Component 2. In addition, the Government of Georgia through the state-
funded Georgian Partnership Fund (GPF) considers providing equity investment in the EE-AF sector 
development once there is a sufficient pipeline of bankable project to invest in. However, due to capacity 
constraints among EE-AF suppliers, such pipeline does not yet exist and there is a need for additional TA 
support. There is no on-going donor-supported project which would address, even partially, the TA needs in 
this sector. 
 
B.5.3 Choice of instruments and concessionality 
 
165. Both Components will catalyze significant co-finance from the government, the private sector and project 
beneficiaries. GCF grants, by filling selected funding gaps while minimizing concessionality, will be crucial to 
the successful execution of the project.

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 50 OF 92 
 
 
 
96 For details on the financial and economic model please see Annex 3. 
97 Yield on Georgia’s 10-year (longest-dated) sovereign bonds as of mid-June 2019. 
 
Component 196 
166. The model for SFM implementation and wood supply under the NFA is meant to be financially sustainable in 
the long run, by generating revenues from timber and fuelwood sales that more than offset capex and 
operations and maintenance (O&M) costs. For the first 15 years, however, revenues will not be sufficient to 
cover capex and O&M, because of the timing required for SFM measures to reach maturity and timber/fuelwood 
sales volumes to increase accordingly. Without GCF support, the government would have to inject a total of 
EUR 32.8 million to make up for the revenue shortfall in years 1-15.  
 
167. A EUR 13.2 million GCF grant for Activity 1.1 and 1.3 of the project will contribute to alleviating this shortfall. 
The government has committed to step in, out of budget sources, to fill the SFM’s remaining funding gap of 
EUR 19.6 million in years 1-15 (EUR 1.3 million p.a. on average). This is a significant commitment that exceeds 
the current funding injected by the government to support the current forest management system, pro-rata in 
the target districts. In 2019, for instance, a budget support of GEL 11.9 million (~EUR 4 million) is expected for 
the NFA across the entire Georgia – the target districts represent 15% of the total NFA forest area. 
 
168. Due to the prolonged period of negative cash flows, borrowing to cover the funding gap is not advisable, even 
at the concessional terms offered by GCF and development banks (grace periods typically do not exceed five 
years). In addition, the SFM approach represents a complete overhaul of Georgia’s forest management system 
in the target districts. Information asymmetries deter commercial lenders from supporting the project, especially 
with the very long-dated loans that would be required due to cash flow profile described above. 
 
169. Importantly, from year 16 onwards, the SFM will be consistently cashflow-positive, ensuring the long-term 
sustainability of the project without any additional concessional funding or budget support from the government. 
This long-term financial sustainability is indeed one of the reasons for the government to transition from the 
current system to the SFM. 
 
170. Without concessionality, the expected financial IRR (FIRR) of Component 1 (SFM) is 2.4% over 20 years, the 
time period conventionally used to evaluate the effectiveness of SFM projects. This is well below Georgia’s 
financial cost of capital of ~8.4%.97 The financial NPV, using such cost of capital as the discount rate, is 
negative EUR 9 million. A EUR 13.2 million GCF grant, covering approx. 25% of the SFM’s capex over the first 
7 years, would increase the FIRR to 9.7%. In order to minimize concessionality, the grant is sized so that the 
FIRR reaches just above the sovereign cost of capital and does not create a financial windfall for the 
government. 
 
Component 2 
171. The objective of GCF grants in Component 2 is to kick start two markets that are currently in their infancy in 
Georgia and bring them to a meaningful scale: EE stoves and AF. On paper, the replacement of a conventional 
stove with an EE one is an attractive financial proposition for a household, generating a financial IRR of 45% 
without GCF support (see section D.6 for details). In practice, several barriers hinder the widespread adoption 
of EE stoves, including: (i) the high price point of an EE stove, considering local income levels (GEL 1,000 EE 
stove price vs. GEL 50-70 for a conventional one); (ii) product novelty, with only few units sold currently in 
Georgia and lack of industry certifications of product quality; (iii) lack of sizable domestic production of EE 
stoves or imports (and for the latter, particularly high prices); and (iv) lack of an easy-to-tap financing product 
specifically targeted at the purchase of EE stoves, to help consumers bridge the price gap between an EE and 
a conventional stove.  
 
172. Through the financial incentive scheme, the project will stimulate demand for up to 30,000 EE stoves and 
related AF supply, creating a market opportunity for entrepreneurs that wish to start EE-AF production 
businesses and bring the scale of production to the level where economy of scale could drive the production 
cost and retail price down making the product eventually more affordable to consumers. GCF grants will not 
be used to provide financial support to such entrepreneurs, to minimize concessionality and market distortions. 
GCF support will be limited to funding technical assistance (via the Technical Assistance and Investment 
Support Facility, TAISF, based at the Agricultural and Rural Development Agency, ARDA), together with BMZ’s 
co-finance.

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 51 OF 92 
 
 
 
173. Financial support to entrepreneurs will be supplied by ARDA under its existing support schemes, which include 
a combination of interest rate subsidies (applied to commercial loans offered to the entrepreneurs by ARDA 
partner banks), partial credit guarantees and contributions for the purchase of equipment. Such support 
schemes are provided by ARDA to a variety of sectors.  
 
174. The concessionality of ARDA’s support is minimized by the requirement that the entrepreneur also contributes 
equity (minimum 10% of the investment, actual level determined on a project-by-project basis by ARDA). 
Commercial lenders bear the risk of loan default for the portion of the loan that is not guaranteed by ARDA. 
The entrepreneurs bear the risk of losing their equity should the ventures fail. The project, in other words, does 
not create a risk-free profit opportunity for the private sector. 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability 
175. The exit and sustainability strategy of the project focuses on a) anchoring approaches and methodologies in 
the legislative and regulative framework, b) creating financially self-sustaining structures (where necessary and 
possible) to avoid financial dependency on external sources and c) strengthening of institutions and individuals 
to perform their functions beyond the project’s duration. 
 
176. For component 1, the sustainability of the project is ensured in the following dimensions: 
 
177. In general: The project is embedded in the ongoing national forestry sector reform in Georgia, which has high-
level support and strong commitment from the Georgian government. The implementation of the reform 
country-wide is a long-term target and the project enables the kick-start of this implementation and provides 
the ground for replication (see Section D.2). Beyond this, it is well aligned with Georgia´s national climate 
policies and commitments, including the country´s Nationally Determined Contribution. The project enables 
Georgia to meet the conditional target of implementing SFM on at least 250,000 ha. In its draft Climate Action 
Plan (CAP), the Georgian government aims for an even higher number of ha to be covered (436,000ha). This 
GCF project was an important trigger for the increase in ambition and the expected projects results are 
incorporated in the updated NDC.   
 
178. Furthermore: 
 
The creation of an enabling policy and regulatory environment for SFM and for market development of 
EE-AF at the national level ensures the long-term safeguard of the project approaches and benefits 
country-wide. 
 
Demonstrating the benefits and feasibility of the proposed SFM approach in 8 districts leads to secured 
continuous political buy-in and commitments to implement the sector reform in other districts and other 
forest management bodies 
 
Climate change risks (current and future) will be considered in forest management through in the target 
regions by improving the knowledge base on climate risks and suitable adaptation strategies for forest 
ecosystems. This especially addresses a major gap in information for Eastern Georgia, and will inform 
future planning, reporting and commitments (e.g. National Communication to UNFCCC, updated NDC, 
and National Adaptation Plans).  
  
Financial exit strategy and sustainability 
 
179. The implementation of SFM (Activity 1.1) and the fuelwood supply (Activity 1.3) is in the medium-term cost-
covering and generates revenues for NFA (see Section B.5 and Annex 3 Financial and Economic Model) and 
is therefore financially sustainable. During project implementation, NFA will generate revenues from timber and 
fuelwood sale of ca. EUR 84.5 million alone (over 7 years). Financial model demonstrates that after 15 years 
of implementing SFM, NFA has sufficient resources to re-invest in establishing SFM system in other regions. 
These revenues are used for re-investment into equipment (in need of replacement and/or repair), as well as 
operations and maintenance costs for the sustained implementation of forestry operations. 
 
180. The Law of Georgia on Legal Entities of Public Laws provides for financial independence of NFA and enables 
NFA to generate and retain own funds through the activities relevant to their mandates. Based on this, the 
Charter of NFA has been approved by the Minister of MEPA which enlist eligible activities for NFA to generate 
income (special cut, rent for mobile antennas, etc.). Further, those eligible revenue-generating forest 
management activities are defined in the Resolution of the Government of Georgia (GoG) N242. NFA’s 
revenues shall be accumulated at the special account opened in the State Treasury and reinvestment to scale-

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 52 OF 92 
 
 
 
98 Specialized teams on restoration (natural regeneration and enrichment planting), cutting operations, timber transport, forest road and 
skidding road infrastructure development, and forest road maintenance. 
up SFM made based on annual Procurement Plan to be approved by the MEPA and the Government of 
Georgia.  
 
181. Forest supervision by DES is a pure state-budget funded function. The government of Georgia committed itself 
to provide the necessary long-term funding for forest patrollers and inspector staff, equipment replacement and 
operations and maintenance costs of equipment procured by government funding as well as GCF funding. 
 
182. The FIMS and MRV to be established will increase efficiency of data collection, monitoring and analysis and 
thus will reduce costs. Once established, operations and maintenance costs will be covered by state budget 
commitments. 
 
183. Institutional sustainability is ensured by establishing the institutional and technical setup that sustains 
and expands the adoption of SFM by  
 
Developing clear standard operating procedures, manuals, guidelines, and other supporting documents, 
which will be available to all existing and futures staff. These documents and approaches ensure that SFM 
is streamlined in the operations of forest management bodies and DES. 
 
Developing capacities (including specialized teams) 98 in the public and private sector to practically 
implement SFM and for forest supervision (DES). This capacity development is not only implemented for 
staff in the target regions but also for head quarter staff and other regional branches of NFA and DES to 
pave the ground for replication (see also below on knowledge and training platform).   
 
Setting up a centralized knowledge management and training platform in EIEC that ensures long-term 
availability and continuation of training and knowledge materials and events after project finalisation to 
cater for ongoing learning needs of new/existing staff of MoEPA, NFA, DES and forest service 
companies in the future. By creating qualified staff and strengthening ownership over sustainability in the 
forestry sector via the platform future growth in the sector is enabled. 
 
184. For Component 2, the EE-AF market development, the sustainability is ensured via the following approaches: 
 
185. The key element of Project’s sustainability as far as EE-AF market promotion is concerned is to create lasting 
demand for EE-AF products. This will be ensured by implementing and enforcing SFM: for as a long as 
fuelwood supply will be managed by NFA and DES will prevent illegal logging, the need and demand for EE-
AF among rural households will exist.  
 
186. The project’s design involves several innovative elements, such as provision of energy advisory services to 
rural population, support to producers, involvement of financial sector, and the grant/incentive scheme with 
high leveraging potential. While none of these models alone can address all barriers associated with EE-AF 
market in rural areas, taken together and in combination with policy and regulatory support at national level, 
they offer an integrated package of scalable solutions aimed at removing barriers to market development and 
ensuring sustainable demand for and supply of EE-AF solutions on the rural market. 
 
187. Sustainability of market demand: A more formalized supply chain and a higher valuation of fuelwood as a 
result of new sector management model, along with strengthened consumer awareness will create lasting 
demand for EE-AF products among households, while EE public procurement policies will create demand for 
EE-AF in public sector. In addition, strict EE and environmental performance standards for EE stoves will 
gradually phase-out inefficient products from the market. Financial sector, banks and MFIs, will respond to this 
increase in demand with new, attractive consumer loan products for EE-AF. The GCF funded voucher 
programme will terminate in year 6 of project implementation, as does the awareness creation activities. At this 
point, the goal of the incentive scheme and awareness activities is achieved: EE stoves are adopted by 30,000 
households and annual sales volume reaches at least 7,500 stoves. Due to economy of scale, the price of an 
EE stove will reduce significantly, while consumer awareness and confidence in the product enhances. A 
continuation of incentives is not necessary. 
 
188. Sustainability of EE-AF supply: The need for and form of support required for EE-AF suppliers will largely 
be dictated by the prevailing market conditions and the strength of the demand. As regards TA support for the 
sector, it is expected that once high production/sales volumes (i.e. in the order of 7,500 – 10,000 stoves/year) 
are reached, there is no need any longer to build supplier’s capacity for marketing, product quality, etc. As

=== PAGE 56 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 53 OF 92 
 
 
0 
regards investment support, it will, most likely, continue after the project end through ARDA in line with 
Agency’s mandate to promote sustainable rural development.  
 
189. The project will ensure that in the long-run environmental considerations and promotion of investment in green 
rural growth are part of ARDA’s programme and capacities are in place to implement it. SIDA co-financing will 
contribute to this by building ARDA’s capacities to design and implement investment support instruments for 
green and sustainable rural development. The (government funded) targeted financial support of EE-AF 
producers shall terminates in year 6 of the project (as per Project Implementation timetable). By that time ARDA 
will have mainstreamed green financing mechanism across all its operations and there won’t be a need for a 
stand-alone E-AF support mechanism, such as TAISF.   
 
190. In addition, Georgia’s Partnership Fund is interested in supporting larger investment in the sector (over EUR 
10 million) with its equity funding. By the project end, the scale of the sector and the demand will make such 
investment opportunity possible.    
 
191. In regard to the sustainability of gender equality and environmental mainstreaming in the project: ESS 
and gender management plans will be implemented by the project. Several elements of the plans will be 
mainstreamed in the operations of NFA, DES and MoEPA to ensure continuation of ESS and gender equality 
practices after project end. In addition, ESS and gender training modules are part of the training platform at 
EIEC. Please refer to the ESMP in Annex 6b for details. For ARDA specifically, SIDA will provide dedicated 
support to the institution to institutionalise ESS management systems for their entire portfolio.

=== PAGE 57 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 54 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
32.79  
million euro (€)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) 
Subordinated loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) 
Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity 
return 
 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) 
Grants 
32.79 million euro (€)   
 
 
 
(vii) 
Result-based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing information 
Total amount 
Currency 
144.90 
million euro (€) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Government of Georgia (GoG) 
Grant 
In-Kind 
Guarantees 
118.0699 
million 
euro (€)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
BMZ 
Grant 
10.00 
million 
euro (€)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
SIDA 
Grant 
2.25  
million 
euro (€)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Crystal100 
Subordinate
d Loans 
10.50 
million 
euro (€)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
SDC101 
Grant 
Ca. 4.09 
million 
euro (€) 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
177.69 
million euro (€)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max 0.5 page) 
n/a  
 
 
 
99 Including EUR 84.7 million revenues of NFA to be reinvested in project activities.  
100 The scheme is open for all banks and microfinance institutions and it does not give any kind of exclusivity to Crystal. 
101 Please note that this amount is indicative and is subject to final approval by SDC

=== PAGE 58 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 55 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
C.2. Financing by component  
Component 
Activity 
Indicative 
cost 
million euro 
(€) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million 
euro (€) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million 
euro (€) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Component 1: 
Sustainable 
Forest 
Management 
(SFM) 
Activity 1.1. 
Development and 
implementation of SFM 
plans 
107.14 
14.21 
Grants 
92.93 
Grants 
GoG, BMZ 
Activity 1.2. 
Strengthening of forest 
supervision 
5.57 
1.34 
Grants 
4.23 
Grants 
GoG, BMZ 
Activity 1.3. Provision of 
sustainably produced 
fuelwood by NFA 
16.92 
3.55 
Grants 
13.37 
Grants 
GoG, BMZ 
Activity 1.4. 
Enhancement of 
enabling environment 
for the nation-wide 
implementation of 
sustainable forest 
management (SFM) 
3.86 
1.38 
Grants 
2.48 
Grants 
GoG, BMZ 
Activity 1.5. 
Improvement of 
monitoring and 
measurement, reporting 
and verification (MRV) 
systems for the forest 
sector 
5.43 
1.57 
Grants 
3.86 
Grants 
GoG, BMZ 
Component 2: 
Market 
Development 
for Energy 
Efficiency (EE) 
and 
Alternative 
Fuels (AF) 
Activity 2.1. EE-AF 
supply chain 
development 
6.80 
1.75 
Grants 
5.05 
Grants 
GoG, BMZ, 
SIDA 
Activity 2.2. 
Implementing consumer 
financing instruments 
for EE-AF solutions 
15.70 
4.33 
Grants 
11.37 
Grants 
& 
Subordinat
ed Loans 
BMZ, 
Crystal102 
Activity 2.3. Creating 
consumer awareness 
and provision of 
technical advisory 
services for fuelwood 
users 
4.21 
2.04 
Grants 
2.17 
Grants 
GoG, BMZ, 
SIDA 
Activity 2.4. Enabling 
policies and regulations 
1.63 
0.35 
Grants 
1.28 
Grants 
GoG, BMZ 
Component 3: 
Livelihood 
opportunities 
and local self-
governance in 
forest 
management 
Activity 3.1 
Development and 
introduction of 
municipal-level tools, 
practices, plans and 
capacities for 
participatory SFM and 
conservation 
Activity 3.2: 
Development, testing 
and promotion of local 
mechanisms to better 
protect interests of 
4.09 
0 
 
4.09 
Grants 
SDC 
 
102 The scheme is open for all banks and microfinance institutions and it does not give any kind of exclusivity to Crystal.

=== PAGE 59 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 56 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
adversely affected 
stakeholders 
Activity 3.3: 
Development of 
professional skills on 
SFM and conservation 
through vocational 
education and 
international expertise 
Activity 3.4: Introduction 
of selected value chains 
(timber, NTFP, eco-
tourism) 
Project 
Monitoring 
(M+E) 
 
0.48 
0.48 
Grants 
 
 
 
Project 
Management 
Cost (PMC) 
 
5.26 
1.19 
Grants 
4.07 
Grants 
GoG, BMZ 
Contingencies 
 
0.6 
0.6 
Grants 
 
 
 
Indicative total cost (EUR)103 
177.69 
32.79  
144.90 
 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer 
C.3.1 Does GCF financing fund capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF financing fund technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☐      No ☒ 
192. Capacity building activities are strongly embedded in the project design and make for an integral part of all project 
activities, as explained in the Table . 
Capacity Building measures include the following GCF Categories:  
Staff costs; international consultants; local consultants, travel; training, workshops and conferences. 
 
Table 4: Capacity building activities in project design 
Sub-activity 
Targeted beneficiary 
GCF Funding 
(EUR) 
Sub-activity 1.1.1: Development of SFM plans based on the 
principles of ecosystem-based SFM in selected forest districts 
• 
Support to develop forest management plans (FMPs) and training 
module on regulatory changes 
• 
Training on FMI, SOPs, guidelines and regulatory changes 
• 
Support for development of infrastructure rehabilitation plans 
• 
Support the elaboration of guidelines, manuals, and training modules 
on new roles and responsibilities of NFA, guidelines and manuals for 
multi-purpose SFM 
NFA staff and forest-
sector contractors 
879,255 
Sub-activity 1.1.2 Implementation of SFM plans in selected forest 
districts 
• 
Support of operational planning 
• 
Advisory services on implementation of FMPs by GIZ international and 
regional advisors 
• 
Knowledge exchange workshops on FMP development and 
implementation 
• 
Stakeholder engagement events during FMP implementation at 
regional level 
• 
Training trainers and trainings on ecosystem-based SFM 
NFA and forest-sector 
contractors 
1,647,936 
Sub-activity 1.2.2: Implementation of improved forest supervision 
measures and technologies 
DES 
103,819 
 
103 Please note: differences as a result of automatic rounding may occur!

=== PAGE 60 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 57 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
• 
Trainings for DES staff on best-practices for patrolling, inspection 
assessing damages and revising mitigation/ restoration plans 
• 
Knowledge exchange workshops on forest supervision 
Sub-activity 1.3.1: Support establishment of the new mechanism for 
fuelwood provision to local population  
• 
Capacity building to strengthen the operation and monitoring of BSYs 
• 
Advisory services by GIZ national advisor on fuelwood provision 
mechanism 
• 
Knowledge exchange workshops on provision of new fuelwood 
mechanism 
BSYs staff (NFA) 
237,880 
Sub-activity 1.4.3: Development of online knowledge management 
and training platform for the forest sector 
• 
Development of online knowledge management and training platform 
for the forest sector 
DES, EIEC, NFA, 
MoEPA, forest sector 
contractors 
140,000 
Sub-activity 1.4.5: Enabling improved integration of climate change 
adaptation in forest sector planning, management and monitoring 
• 
Support the assessment of climate risks in three target regions 
(adaptation co-benefit) 
• 
Support to mainstream assessment results in policies, management 
plans, guidelines and protocols and trainings 
• 
Stakeholder consultations on climate risks and adaptation strategies 
• 
Trainings on climate change adaptation in forest eco-systems 
NFA, MoEPA 
584,550 
Sub-activity 1.5.1: Strengthening of the national forest monitoring 
and MRV architecture  
• 
Support for establishment of M&E system and training for operation to 
PIU team 
• 
Support for research on allometric equations and national forest 
emission factors 
MoEPA, its relevant 
departments and other 
institutions responsible 
for FIMS modules (e.g. 
EIEC, NFA, etc.) 
204,910 
Sub-activity 2.1.1: Establishing Technical Assistance and Investment 
Support Facility (TAISF) 
• 
EE-AF supply chain capacity development and product certification 
• 
Advisory services on alternative fuels by GIZ national and regional 
advisors 
• 
Support for EE-AF product certification and marketing of EE-AF 
products 
EE-AF producers 
1,161,140 
Sub-activity 2.3.1. Community-mobilization, advocacy and advisory 
services on EE-AF to fuelwood users 
• 
Support of community mobilisation, advocacy and technical advisory 
services on EE-AF 
EE-AF producers 
1,145,000 
Sub-activity 2.3.2 National advocacy and awareness raising 
• 
National PR campaign on EE-AF products 
• 
Impact and baseline studies for awareness raising 
EIEC 
365,000 
Total 
6,496,490 
Additionally, other GIZ advisors are also providing capacity building services, which are mainstreamed throughout 
each activity in both components. These amount to additional EUR 1,466,438.

=== PAGE 61 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 58 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential 
193. The project contributes to the GCF’s objective and result area: 
 
M4.0 Reduced emissions from land use, reforestation, reduced deforestation, and through sustainable forest 
management and conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stock; and 
 
194. GHG emission reduction impacts have been calculated in addition for the energy sector (increased uptake of 
stoves and alternative fuels). However, to since this project is a forest project and to avoid double-counting 
only GHG emission reduction for result M.4.0 have been included as the core impact indicator of the project.  
 
195. GHG emission reductions from SFM: Mitigation potential in the project as a result of the introduction of SFM 
can be split into two impact components (see also Figure below): 
 
reducing degradation effects of illegal forest use and avoiding further degradation 
 
Increasing/enhancing carbon stock through SFM  
 
196. In the past decades, Georgia and the project region has experienced significant loss of carbon within the forests, 
therefore for the baseline scenario of the project period of 7 years as well as the project lifetime of 20 years a 
continuous yet conservative forest degradation is assumed. The transition towards practical application of SFM in 
Georgia first requires an overall planning and implementation phase for the entire forest areas, which includes 
elements such as multifunctional zoning, aiming to define ecological, environmental, social and other functions for 
all forest areas within a forest district with a view to balancing the sometimes divergent objectives of timber 
production, societal needs and nature conservation. This provides planners and managers alike with specific 
management prescriptions for particular forest sites depending on the identified forest functions. Direct 
implementation of these management prescriptions in Georgia range from better supervision, protection, to active 
silvicultural measures within the forests.104 The first impact of the overall planning and better implementation of 
SFM will be the reduction of the degradation compared to the baseline. This impact component will affect all the 
forest areas where they will be just protected or also actively managed.  
 
Figure 19: Mitigation concepts in the project as a result of the SFM introduction (Source: UNIQUE) 
 
197. Secondly, those forests where direct silvicultural measures will be implemented such as promotion of natural 
regeneration and enrichment planting will actively increase carbon stocks over time. Such measure will be 
implemented only within those areas clearly identified as part of the multifunctional zoning, and therefore will 
include all protective function areas or areas not being eligible due to any other reason (e.g. not accessible, high 
altitudes, etc.). 
 
198. These two impact components together sum up the total SFM mitigation potential in this project as illustrated in 
the summary figure below, which also highlights the main methodological approach followed for each of the two 
components – (1) reduced degradation and (2) enhancement of carbon stocks.105 
 
104 See Chapter 5.2.3 of the Feasibility Study. 
105 See Chapters 10.1.1.1 and 10.1.1.2 of the Feasibility Study for description of methodological approach to calculations.

=== PAGE 62 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 59 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 20: Mitigation potential in the project after 7 and 20 years for reducing forest degradation and enhancement of carbon 
stocks as a result of SFM implementation (Source: UNIQUE) 
 
199. For information purpose only: GHG emission reductions from EE-AF market development: Adoption of EE 
and AF solutions by rural household will lead to substantial reduction in fuelwood consumption and consequently 
in GHG emissions too. This impact has been estimated based on a combination of UNFCCC Small-scale 
Methodologies AMS-I.E.: Switch from non-renewable biomass for thermal applications by the user. Version 9.0106 
and AMS-II.G.: Energy efficiency measures in thermal applications of non-renewable biomass. Version 10.0.107 
AMS-II.G comprises efficiency improvements in thermal applications of non-renewable biomass, including the 
introduction of high efficiency biomass fired project devices. AMS-I.E comprises of activities to displace the use 
of non-renewable biomass by introducing various renewable energy technologies.108  
 
200. Table 5 and Table 6 present results of EE-AF sector scenario development and corresponding GHG emissions 
reduction during project duration (direct) and during project’s influence period (indirect). It is estimated that the 
direct GHG emission reduction from EE-AF sector will account for 1.83 million tCO2eq by the project end and 
additionally 6.59 million tCO2eq will be reduced over the project’s influence period. As stated above, these 
emissions are displayed for information purposes only and were not considered in the fund level impacts and 
result areas.  
 
Table 5: Direct GHG emission reduction from EE-AF sector 
Project Period 
 
BAU 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Year 7 
Total 
(project) 
EE stoves 
500 
500 
2,000 
2,500 
5,000 
5,000 
7,500 
7,500 
 
Incremental EE 
stoves 
 
- 
1,500 
2,000 
4,500 
4,500 
7,000 
7,000 
AF, t 
3,500 
4,725 
6,379 
8,611 
11,625 
15,694 
21,187 
28,603 
Incremental AF, t 
 
1,225 
2,879 
5,111 
8,125 
12,194 
17,687 
25,103 
AMS II-G (EE), 
tCO2eq 
 
- 
88,000 
117,333 
264,000 
264,000 
410,667 
410,667 
1,554,667 
AMS I-E (AF), 
tCO2eq 
 
4,690 
11,021 
19,567 
31,106 
46,682 
67,710 
96,099 
276,874 
Total 
 
4,690 
99,021 
136,901 
295,106 
310,682 
478,377 
506,765 
1,831,541 
 
 
 
106 https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/DB/IO5FJLJFWT91R6B8SO5BC7TXSK27I2.  
107 https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/DB/HLXIKEIBAXBE4EHO24H5IAB824MBD8.  
108 See Chapter 9.1.2.1 of the Feasibility Study for description of calculations.

=== PAGE 63 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 60 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6: Indirect (post-project) GHG emission reduction from EE-AF sector 
Project Period 
 
Year 8 
Year 9 
Year 10 
Year 11 
Year 12 
Year 13 
Year 14 
Year 15 
Year 16 
Year 17 
Year 18 
Year 19 
Year 20 
Total  
(post-project) 
EE stoves 
7,500 
7,500 
7,500 
7,500 
7,500 
7,500 
7,500 
7,500 
7,500 
7,500 
7,500 
7,500 
7,500 
 
Increment
al EE 
stoves 
7,000 
7,000 
7,000 
7,000 
7,000 
7,000 
7,000 
7,000 
7,000 
7,000 
7,000 
7,000 
7,000 
AF, t 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
Increment
al AF, t 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
28,603 
AMS II-G 
(EE), 
tCO2eq 
410,667 
410,667 
410,667 
410,667 
410,667 
410,667 
410,667 
410,667 
410,667 
410,667 
410,667 
410,667 
410,667 
5,338,667 
AMS II-G 
(AF), 
tCO2eq 
96,099 
96,099 
96,099 
96,099 
96,099 
96,099 
96,099 
96,099 
96,099 
96,099 
96,099 
96,099 
96,099 
1,249,283 
Total 
506,765 
506,765 
506,765 
506,765 
506,765 
506,765 
506,765 
506,765 
506,765 
506,765 
506,765 
506,765 
506,765 
6,587,949 
 
 
201. Apart from the mitigation benefits described above the project reaches 98,337 direct and 1,000,000 indirect 
beneficiaries as co-benefit (of which 52% or 51,135 and 520,000 are female respectively). Direct beneficiaries are 
considered to be the recipients of the project-funded financial incentive for EE stove, which will target 30% of the 
fuelwood consuming households in the target regions, i.e. 30,370 HHs. The number of direct beneficiaries has 
been calculated assuming average size of a Georgian household to be 3.2 . Indirect beneficiaries are considered 
to be the people to receive information and advisory support through the project. The number has been calculated 
in line with target for corresponding activities in the project logframe.   
D.2. Paradigm shift potential 
D.2.1 Potential for scaling up and replication  
202. There is substantial potential for scaling up and replication of SFM in Georgia: The 8 target districts, cover 14% 
of the forested area under NFA management109. On NFA forest land alone, there is the potential to implement 
SFM on an additional ~1.5 million ha and the firm commitment by the Government to do so. This includes ~338,000 
ha within the three project regions in the other 6 forest districts, and over 1.1 million ha outside of the three project 
regions. In addition, 805,000 ha of forest area are managed by other forest management bodies (e.g. Adjara 
Forestry Agency, Agency of Protected Areas, among others), which also are obliged to implement SFM under the 
new forest code. In the project approach, it will take 7 years for a fully operational SFM system and the enabling 
environment on the national level to be established. The latter one being a pre-condition for further up-scaling and 
replication110. A gradual approach is needed to not over-burden NFA, DES and the private sector during the kick-
start of the forest sector reform in the eight districts, as they need to develop capacities and make the necessary 
investments.  
 
203. The learning experience from implementation in the target districts will lead to efficiency gains and therefore 
shorter implementation periods in other districts and regions. Enabling policy and regulatory environment for SFM 
will create sound basis for its scaling-up nation-wide. Further, re-investment mechanism of the revenues to be 
generated in the medium-term will support replication and scaling up in other districts and regions.  
 
204. Investments in vocational education and training, and the knowledge management and training platform will further 
strengthen the capacities of existing employees (public and private sector), as well as future foresters and forest 
workers on SFM – enabling replication and scaling up in other regions of the country.  
 
205. There is substantial potential to further scale-up the EE-AF Market: There are about 100,000 households relying 
on fuelwood and conventional stoves in the target regions alone.111 This translates into effective annual demand 
for heating appliances of around 50,000 stoves112. The project will be able to realistically tap only 30% of this 
demand by the project end. However, assuming producers will retain annual EE stove production at the same 
level (ca. 7,500 stove per year) by 2030 - 75% of the fuelwood users in target regions will switch to EE appliances 
– see Figure 5 before. Nation-wide, there are 419,330 households relying on fuelwood for energy needs, a 
considerable market for both EE stove and adoption of AF. Potential for EE-AF market development is even 
greater if regional needs are considered: neighboring Armenia and Azerbaijan have similar rural energy 
consumption patterns and high reliance on fuelwood for heat supply. 
 
 
109 Considering NFA forested areas of which are actually covered by forest (i.e. 1.88 million ha). 
110 See Section B.6 for details how the enabling environment at the national level creates pre-conditions for replication. 
111 CENN, Caucasus Environmental NGO Network. 2016. Cost-Benefit Analysis Fuelwood vs. Alternative Heating Resources. Tbilisi, 
Georgia. 
112 Maximum longevity of a conventional stove is 2 years, therefore annually at least half of stoves are being replaced.

=== PAGE 64 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 61 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
206. On the financing side, GFREIF will play a critical role in ensuring realization of the project’s significant potential 
for scaling-up and replication. First, the Facility will enable gradual accumulation of NFA revenues and their re-
investment through the revolving financing mechanism to scale-up SFM across Georgia thus creating a lasting 
sustainable source of funding for SFM, completely independent from the state budget. Second, GFREIF will 
enable transformation of rural energy sector by deploying a range of public de-risking instruments to stimulate 
private investments in EE-AF supply chain and ensure the market is capable to respond to growing demand with 
quality and affordable EE-AF products. GFREIF will be anchored on two existing institutions, NFA (public sector 
window) and ARDA (private sector window) which will also help ensure sustainability of the Facility beyond the 
timeframe of the GCF project.     
 
D.2.2 Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
 
207. The project builds on substantial work conducted by GIZ and other donors in the forest sector,113 which has 
generated a strong knowledge base. Knowledge management in the context of the project aims to strengthen the 
dissemination of information and knowledge to project stakeholders, including public institutions (e.g. MoFE, NFA, 
DES, EIEC, ARDA), private sector (private sector contractors, among others), local communities (in target districts 
on SFM, forests and climate change, and other citizens on the broader forest sector reform), Civil Society 
Organizations, academia, and international organizations (e.g. multi-lateral organizations, development 
cooperation).This involves improving communication and awareness raising, while also supporting targeted 
measures for capacity development (trainings, workshops, vocational education and training programs).  
 
208. Systems for knowledge management and training will be strengthened through the development of the KMTP, 
which will institutionalize trainings and knowledge management. This will not only improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of project measures, but will also support the long-term sustainability of the project. In addition, the 
project will support national efforts to raise awareness of the forest sector reform, ensuring that diverse 
stakeholders at all levels are aware of regulatory changes, as well as the importance of forests to support not only 
climate change action, but also sustainable development in the country.   
 
209. The knowledge to be generated through this project, in particular the practical application of SFM in the project 
regions, is essential to help Georgia ensuring successful implementation of its forestry sector reform. A large share 
of the project’s activities are dedicated to knowledge, learning, exchange and interaction, including:114 
 
Knowledge distribution via government and partner´s websites 
 
Development of a forest sector knowledge management and training platform to strengthen knowledge 
management, dissemination and training  
 
SFM guidelines, manuals (incl. hard copies, soft copies, and other supporting material including e-courses, 
and videos), and other informative materials on SFM (brochures, posters, etc.) 
 
Training modules and materials, integrated into the proposed training platform, and materials for training 
trainers 
 
SOPs, manuals and procedures for SFM and regulatory changes for NFA and DES staff that improve 
institutional knowledge management and learning within government institutions  
 
Assessment reports on climate risks and potential adaptation strategies for forested ecosystems in the three 
project regions 
 
FIMS software modules, to support ongoing forest information data collection and monitoring 
 
Documentation of successful experiences and lessons learned from implementation of SFM, and promotion 
of energy efficient technologies and alternative fuels in the target districts 
 
Vocational education courses to support the education of forest workers and foresters, under the new forest 
code requirements  
 
Package of PR and promotional materials for households on EE-AF products and financing option 
 
Training and advisory packages for EE-AF suppliers and financial organizations. 
 
210. The project´s knowledge management approach aims to link to existing complementary information channels (e.g. 
the NFP process, local Civil Society Organisations (CSOs), community liaisons and municipalities).115  
 
D.2.3 Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
 
 
113 See Feasibility Study, Chapter 5.4. 
114The project has been designed taking into account the different needs of project beneficiaries, including considering what knowledge 
products are needed for what beneficiaries/ audiences.  
115 More detailed information on the project´s approach to knowledge management is provided in Feasibility Study, Chapter 7.8.

=== PAGE 65 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 62 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
211. The project supports implementation of the forest sector reform thus creating enabling environment for SFM. 
The main building blocks of such enabling environment include legal and regulative framework which set the 
normative frame for SFM (Activity 1.4), enhanced capacities of the NFA and the DES to fulfill their envisaged 
functions under the new Forest Code at national and local level, including supervision and law enforcement 
functions (Activity 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3), as well as enhanced sector steering and coordination between adjoining 
sectors such as energy and rural development (Activity 1.4). Furthermore, the Project also creates enabling 
environment for EE-AF sector, including EE, environmental and quality standards (Activity 2.4) in conjunction with 
assistance to suppliers to comply with standards (Activity 2.1), enhanced consumer awareness (Activity 2.4), as 
well as familiarity and readiness and of the financial sector to provide sector with the capital needed for growth 
(Activity 2.3). 
 
D.2.4 Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
 
212. With the approval of the new Forest Code, there are various secondary legal acts that will need to be revised 
and/or elaborated to enable SFM.116 In addition to revising main secondary legal acts for forest management and 
utilization and elaborating secondary legal acts for the liability law, the Project also supports the elaboration of a 
regulation on the commercial use of non-timber-forest products (NTFP), including definition of non-timber forest 
resources that can be commercially harvested, amounts for each NTFP that can be commercially harvested, fees 
for commercial harvesting, processes for commercial harvesting (applications, forms, monitoring, timing / zones, 
among others).  
 
213. In addition, technical assistance will be provided to DES to support the harmonization of standards and systems 
including the development / revision of standard operating procedures and guidelines for forest supervision and 
enforcement under the new forest code and liability law, ensuring coherence with related revised secondary legal 
acts. Finally, the elaboration of standard operating procedures (SOPs), operational regulations, and technical 
guidelines for the newly established BSYs to ensure their transparent, sustainable, and efficient operation. 
 
214. As regards EE and AF market development, the project will support MoESD and the Public Procurement Agency 
of Georgia to accelerate transposition and practical implementation of regulatory instruments envisaged in the EE 
and RE acquis, which have direct relevance and implications for the EE-AF sector and reduction of the fuelwood 
consumption in rural areas, specifically i) Introduction and enforcement of the energy efficiency and environmental 
standards and labelling scheme for domestic heating appliances (stoves) in line with draft EE Law and NEEAP; 
and ii) Introduction of the energy efficiency procurement in the public sector, as per relevant provision of the EED 
and draft EE Law. 
 
D.2.5 Contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate 
change adaptation strategies and plans  
 
215. The NDC document for Georgia makes a particular reference to the forest sector due to its ability to contribute to 
climate change mitigation activities: It is the only sector with quantified and clearly spelled out unconditional and 
conditional targets for climate change mitigation measures. This reflects the importance the country attaches to 
this sector and the ongoing forestry sector reform process and its role in fulfilling national climate change 
commitment. The project has been designed to help the Government of Georgia to fully attain its stated NDC 
objective for the forest sector, i.e. to ensure at least 250,000 ha of forests under SFM by 2030. In the ongoing 
update of the NDC, the government plans to rise the ambitions in the forest sector: It is envisaged to increase 
the carbon sink capacity of the forest sector by 10%. In the draft Climate Action Plan (CAP) of Georgia a 
new conditional commitment to increase the forest area under SFM to 436,000ha by 2030 is included. This 
rise in ambition is a direct consequence of this GCF proposal, since expected project results were taken 
into account. In addition, Georgia’s forest ecosystem are considered as particularly vulnerable to climate impacts 
and therefore prioritized for climate adaptation measures by the Government in the National Adaptation Plan 
(NAP), which is currently under preparation. 
D.3. Sustainable development 
 
216. The project will deliver a wide range of sustainable development benefits and directly contribute to 9 Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), as summarized in the Table 7 below. Environmental co-benefits: The Project will 
reduce annual demand for fuelwood thus substantially reducing the pressure on forest resources. Further, by 
introducing SFM, it will reverse ongoing degradation trends, which currently lead to the reduced provision of 
 
116 Detailed description available in Appendix 2 to Feasibility Study

=== PAGE 66 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 63 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
ecosystem services, and loss of biodiversity. The project´s activities represent an important stepping stone in 
Georgia to set a good example of best practice forest management planning processes, promoting ecosystem 
based “close-to-nature” SFM, and strengthening to role of biodiversity conservation and monitoring on the entire 
NFA-managed forest land. SFM promotes forest conservation, based on up-to-date forest inventories, resulting in 
suitable zoning and planning in FMPs. Thus, project activities will not only improve the management and monitoring 
capacities and capabilities of the government, but also will strengthen knowledge and information management 
and dissemination on biodiversity and forests in Georgia as a whole.  
217. Adapted forest management practices implemented in the project will consider natural dynamics, key ecosystem 
services, and aim at restoring ecosystem health and diversity (improving species variety, supporting diverse age 
classes in degraded areas). Through the project´s interventions, key areas for biodiversity protection can be 
identified and managed with a clear focus on protection and/or conservation through detailed FMP zoning and 
mapping. Key biodiversity sites identified in FMPs may even be flagged as a future site under the Emerald Network. 
Where suitable, FMPs will also identify key protection forest areas with stricter management to enhance protective 
forest functions (e.g. buffer areas along bodies of water, forests on steep slopes, reducing erosion in vulnerable 
areas, among others).   
 
218. Social and health co-benefits: Social and health benefits of the project will arise from improvement in living and 
occupancy conditions for rural households. Due to low efficiency, combustion of fuelwood in conventional stoves 
result in emissions of PM2.5 and carbon monoxide (CO) – two major air pollutants. WHO117 links emissions from 
wood heating to serious health effects such as respiratory and cardiovascular mortality and morbidity, in particular 
for children. With installation of efficient stoves, the air quality in houses will be improved leading to better health 
outcomes for at least 30,370 rural households to be supported by the Project. This has positive effects on life 
expectance, learning abilities of children and increases the chance of having work for adults118.  
 
219. The new participatory approach to forest management planning, as outlined in the Forest Code and promoted 
under Activity 3.1 and 3.2, would ensure that locally important protective and recreational forest functions are 
further considered in forest management planning and the implementation of FMPs.   
 
220. Economic co-benefits: The project will lead to long-term economic benefits for rural households, most of them 
considered poor or low-income. Installation of EE stove, for example, will result in reduction by 50% of yearly 
energy cost. Further, 867 jobs119 will be created in the forestry sector during the project life cycle for restoration, 
tending, harvesting, transportation and road building and maintaining activities in the project target regions. The 
development of the AF sector will also create new employment opportunities in rural areas: currently three existing 
briquette factories employ about 50 people. With anticipated 8-fold market growth for these products a comparable 
increase in sector work force will take place. In addition, the promotion of forest-related value chains will foster 
formal employment and income opportunities for communities in the three target regions.  
 
221. Gender sensitive development impacts: Women in rural settings are highly dependent on natural resources, in 
particular fuelwood, for their livelihoods120 and therefore, particularly women will benefit from the project, which 
will help secure the resources they are dependent on. Women-headed households constitute 33% of rural 
households in Georgia: Over 10,000 women-headed households will directly benefit from the project’s Component 
2. Additionally, the labor burden for women will be decreased such as less fuel wood needs to be brought in the 
room121. Please refer to Annex 8 for Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan. 
 
Table 7: Contribution to SDGs 
SDG 
Sustainable Development Benefits 
SDG 1 ”No 
poverty”  
 
• Lower energy expenses (up to 50% or GEL 300 on average per household per year) due to 
installation of energy efficient technologies by 30,370 households 
• Increased household incomes through value chain development and formal education 
opportunities  
 
117 http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/271836/ResidentialHeatingWoodCoalHealthImpacts.pdf  
118 WHO 2013. Health effects of particulate matter, World Health Organization. 
119 650 at NFA + ca. 217 at service contractors. 
120 UNEP, UN Women, PBSO and UNDP 2013. Women and Natural Resources - Unlocking the Peacebuilding Potential. 
121 The Greens Movement of Georgia 2015. Sustainable Management of Biodiversity, South Caucasus, Identification of Options to Improve 
Energy Situation in Dedoplistskaro Municipality.

=== PAGE 67 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 64 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
SDG 3 “Good 
Health and 
Well-being”  
• Reduced human health impact from fuelwood burning air pollution (30,370 households,) 
• Women and children will particularly benefit from such measures because they usually spend 
more of their time at home.122 
• SFM will further provide additional physical and mental health benefits, where people can 
access ´restorative environments´ to relax.123  
• Forests can also provide diverse recreational activities, supporting improvements in physical 
fitness of the population.124   
SDG 5 
“Gender 
Equality” 
• Women-headed households constitute 33% of all households in Georgia: over 10,000 women-
headed households will directly benefit from the project 
• Labor burden for women will be decreased such as less fuel wood needs to be brought in the 
room125. 
SDG-6 “Clean 
Water and 
Sanitation” 
• Reduced sedimentation and erosion in waterways and improving water quality due to the 
adoption of SFM. Over two-thirds of Georgia´s forests are located on medium and high 
inclination slopes, thus carry out key soil-protecting, water-preserving, water-regulating, 
sanitary and other protective functions.126 
SDG 7 
“Affordable 
and Clean 
Energy” 
• Facilitating access to more efficient appliances and alternative fuels for 30,370 rural 
households.  
SDG 8 
“Decent Work 
and Economic 
Growth”  
• Creation of 867 jobs127 in the forestry sector during the project life cycle for restoration, tending, 
harvesting, transportation and road building and maintaining activities in the project target 
regions.  
• Increased emphasis on occupational health and safety, through required trainings, standard 
operating procedures, and manuals.128  
• Vocational education and training provided will further strengthen this emphasis, along with 
the new forest code´s provision that all foresters and forest workers must hold formal 
qualifications by 2025. 
• Development of AF sector will also create new employment opportunities in rural areas: 
currently three existing briquette factories employ about 50 people. With anticipated 8-fold 
market growth for these products a comparable increase in sector work force will take place. 
• Value chain development will contribute to economic growth in local communities. 
SDG 12 
“Responsible 
Consumption 
and 
Production” 
• More efficient use of natural resources through the provision of sustainably harvested and 
dried fuelwood129, and through investments in energy efficient technologies and alternative 
fuels to close the fuelwood gap. 
SDG-13 
"Climate 
Action” 
• Implementing NDC actions at scale, building climate-related knowledge and capacities, and 
raising awareness on climate change mitigation.  
 
122 Schmall, S. 2015. Gender Analysis for the GIZ Programme “Integrated Biodiversity Management in the South Caucasus (IBiS)”. Tbilisi, 
Georgia. 
123 Hansmann, R., Hug, S.M., Seeland, K. 2007. Restoration and stress relief through physical activities in forests and parks. Urban Forestry 
and Urban Greening, 6(4): 213-225; Mitchell, R. 2013. Is physical activity in natural environments better for mental health than physical activity 
in other environments? Social Science & Medicine, 91: 130-134; FAO. 2019. Sustainable Forest Management Toolbox.  
124 FAO. 2019. Sustainable Forest Management Toolbox Available online: http://www.fao.org/sustainable-forest-management/toolbox/en/.  
125 The Greens Movement of Georgia 2015. Sustainable Management of Biodiversity, South Caucasus, Identification of Options to Improve 
Energy Situation in Dedoplistskaro Municipality. 
126 USAID. 2017. Climate Risk Profile Georgia. Tbilisi, Georgia. 
127 650 at NFA + ca. 217 at service contractors. 
128 Fuelwood production is currently carried out by unqualified people lacking appropriate technical equipment and safety measures. This 
regularly causes fatal accidents (CENN, 2016). International best practices, such as those highlighted in the FAO SFM Toolbox on 
Occupational Health and Safety in Forestry: http://www.fao.org/sustainable-forest-management/toolbox/modules/occupational-health-and-
safety-in-forestry/basic-knowledge/en/.  
129 Huhtinen, M. 2006. Wood biomass as a fuel. 5EURES Training Sessions, Supported by the EU Commission under the Intelligent Energy-
Europe Program.

=== PAGE 68 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 65 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
• Reducing GHG emissions due to the adoption of SFM (reduced degradation and enhancement 
of carbon stocks), and the adoption of more efficient technologies.  
• Strengthening forest ecosystems´ resilience to climate change, including through 
strengthening the protective function of forests, and restoring ecosystem health and diversity. 
SDG 15 “Life 
on Land” 
• Improved provision of ecosystem services.130 SFM will reverse ongoing degradation trends, 
which currently lead to the reduced provision of ecosystem services, and loss of biodiversity. 
Mountain ecosystems are a core focus of the project, given that 98% of Georgia´s forests are 
in hilly and mountainous areas. Climate-responsive measures to be implemented that consider 
the higher vulnerability of mountainous ecosystems, and suitable adaptation strategies 
contributing to the sustainable management of and ultimately conservation of mountain 
ecosystems.131  
• Enhancement of biodiversity through SFM, considering improved planning processes (forest 
inventories, forest use zoning, and participatory multi-stakeholder processes), and 
implementation of SFM at scale. Improved monitoring of biodiversity through investments in 
FIMS, SFM planning processes and management activities.  
• Protection of endemic species and restoration and rehabilitation of degraded forests through 
SFM. Targeted silvicultural practices will aim to restore ecosystem health, and diversity 
(improving species variety, supporting diverse age classes in degraded areas).132 SFM can 
reduce the incidence of and impacts from landslides, 133 support river bank stabilization, 
enhance soil carbon, improve soil moisture, among other benefits.134  
SDG 16 
“Promote 
peaceful and 
inclusive 
societies for 
sustainable 
development, 
provide access 
to justice for all 
and build 
effective, 
accountable 
and inclusive 
institutions at 
all levels“ 
• The improvement of the participatory approach to forest management planning and 
introduction of conflict resolution mechanisms contributes to transparency and accountability 
of institutions involved in forest management and forest supervision. 
D.4. Needs of recipient 
D.4.1 Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation 
only) 
 
222. Climate change and its adverse impacts on ecosystems and economy pose severe threats to Georgia’s 
sustainable development. Vulnerability of forest sector to climate change impact is underscored in Georgia’s NDC. 
Increasing temperature and changes in precipitation patterns have already had direct impacts on forests in 
Western and Eastern Georgia 135. As a result of these impacts, forest ecosystem services such as the soil 
protection and carbon storage functions, among others, will weaken if suitable adaptation strategies are not 
implemented. Currently Georgia is, however, lacking comprehensive and evidence-based research on the 
vulnerability of forest ecosystems to climate change (especially for eastern Georgia), which is necessary to plan 
detailed actions to increase the resilience of forest ecosystems. Different forest types, climate conditions and other 
localized conditions require regional level climate risk and vulnerability forest assessments.  
 
130 FAO. 2010. Managing forests for climate change. Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/i1960e/i1960e00.pdf.  
131 Ibid.; Stritih, J., Stritih, A. 2018. Adjara Forest Climate Adaptation Strategy. Tbilisi, Georgia. 
132 Stritih, J., Stritih, A. 2018. Adjara Forest Climate Adaptation Strategy. Tbilisi, Georgia. 
133 FAO. 2011. Forests and landslides. Bangkok, Thailand. 
134 FAO. 2010. Managing forests for climate change. Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/i1960e/i1960e00.pdf. 
135 Chapter 3.1.2 of the Feasibility Study provides detailed overview of the observed impacts, including increasing risk of fire, landslides, 
floods, pest and disease outbreaks, droughts, and changing species composition.

=== PAGE 69 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 66 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
223. The project will increase the resilience of 270,807 ha of forests through the implementation of sustainable forest 
management. Strengthened resilience will be enabled by the: 
 
Forest vulnerability assessments to inform sustainable forest management based on climate-
responsive planning processes and management. Three climate risk and vulnerability assessments for 
forest ecosystems in the three target regions will be carried out. This will fill a key information gap at the regional 
level, related to climate change risks and potential consequences, as well as suitable adaptation strategies that 
can be integrated into FMPs and annual plans. Recommendations will also be made to strengthen the 
monitoring of climate adaptation within FIMS. Ultimately, as a result of this action there will be strengthened 
awareness of climate risks, risk-reduction processes/ practices, and increased generation use of climate 
information in decision making.  
 
Consideration of climate change risks (current and future) in forest management planning, and 
integration of suitable adaptation strategies into management plans (amendments to FMPs, and 
mainstreamed into annual plans). This could include integrated fire management practices, the promotion of 
reforestation with resilient native species, forest regeneration on degraded slopes, maintenance of forest/ 
vegetative buffer zones along waterways, and improved forest health through regeneration, among others 
tailored to the local context Such activities will enable climate-responsive management, and ultimately reduce 
the exposure and improve the response to climate risks and threats. 
 
Implementation of FMPs, and adoption of adaptive ecosystem-based management strategies, involving 
the continuous improvement of practices and active monitoring, including forest and climate-relevant indicators 
within FIMS.  
 
Increasing awareness of local people of the multiple benefits, including climate benefits, of forest 
ecosystems and SFM for climate change mitigation and adaptation. Participatory planning approaches 
will further enable local people to inform FMP development, including considerations to strengthen the 
resilience of forests and local forest-dependent communities.  
 
Mainstreaming of best practices for climate change adaptation planning in forest ecosystems into 
training modules, guidelines, and protocols of forest management and supervision bodies. This will guide 
forest sector practitioners to take into consideration climate change, and operationalize suitable adaptation 
strategies. 
 
Strengthening of human capacities for adaptive management for forest sector actors (MoEPA, NFA, 
DES, and private sector contractors) through providing trainings on best practices for SFM, including 
information on relevant climate risks, adaptation strategies, monitoring and evaluation. Workers, managers and 
other key sector stakeholders will thus be better equipped to plan, implement and monitor and evaluate the 
effectiveness of adaptive strategies. 
 
Improved cooperation and coordination on adaptation in forest ecosystems through the NFP multi-
stakeholder working groups and plenary meetings, where a national dialogue on adaptation strategies for 
forest ecosystems will be established. Best practices, experiences, lessons learned and other knowledge will 
be shared and discussed within the working groups engaging CSOs, academia, private sector, among other 
stakeholders, strengthening their adaptive capacities.  
 
224. Forest vulnerability assessments, integrated adaptive ecosystem-based management practices, and improved 
information on climate change and its impacts on forest ecosystems will inform and support the country´s 
national climate dialogue. The Fourth National Communication to UNFCCC is in the planning phase where 
the project target regions (Kakheti, Mtskheta-Mtianeti and Guria) are included to assess climate risk impacts and 
the forestry sector is included as one of the priority areas in the upcoming National Adaptation Plan. Information 
from the project will inform these reports, plans and strategies. Finally, the project´s activities will inform the 
country´s updated NDC to the UNFCCC, which will cover the period from 2025 to 2030. 
 
D.4.2 Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
 
225. Georgia has a human development index (HDI)136 of 0.78, ranking 70th globally.137 Major strides have been made 
in reducing poverty, where the number of people living in poverty declined from 38.8% in 2007 to 21.9% in 2017.138 
 
136 HDI takes into account three dimensions to provide an estimation of to assess the development of a country: long and healthy life (life 
expectancy at birth, knowledge (expected ears of schooling, mean years of schooling), a decent standard of living (GNI per capita). Additional 
information on calculating HDI can be found online: http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human-development-index-hdi 
137 UNDP, United Nations Development Program. 2019. Georgia, Human Development Indicators. 
138 Absolute poverty line of USD 2.50/day; UNDP 2019; GEOSTAT. 2019a. Living conditions.

=== PAGE 70 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 67 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
However, the number of people living in poverty and extreme poverty in Georgia is higher than in other countries 
in Europe and Central Asia.139 Also nearly half of the poor population is considered as “vulnerable to falling into 
poverty”.140 Georgia has a Gini-coefficient of 36.5 in 2016, with inequality levels slightly lower than Turkey and 
Russia, and higher than Armenia and Azerbaijan.141 
 
226. People in rural areas are more likely to be affected by poverty than people living in urban areas in the country, 
with rural and urban poverty rates of 24.3% and 17.6%, respectively142 In terms of income, rural households in 
Georgia earn the equivalent of 80% of the average salary earned by urban households.143 The gap between urban 
and rural poverty has remained relatively stable over the last decade.144 Rural economic growth rates are much 
lower compared to urban areas, especially in Kakheti, Mtshketa-Mtianeti and Shida Kartli.145 Reasons for lower 
production is limited access to markets, education, fragmentation of land and underdeveloped infrastructure.146 In 
terms of education, the majority (78%) of the population with higher education is from urban areas, indicating a 
lower level of education in rural settlements.147  
 
227. Vulnerability in target regions148: Project target regions are among the most socially vulnerable in Georgia: The 
region of Kakheti is ranked number three (after Tbilisi and Imereti) in terms of total number of households that 
receive social allowance, the region of Mtskheta-Mtianeti - number four and Guria – number five149. 
 
228. Poverty and low-income level are indeed an important social issue and also a major barrier to wider uptake of 
energy efficient technologies among rural households. Through the GFRIF, the project will work and support 
directly Georgia’s poor rural household by instituting a voucher program enabling households to afford more 
efficient heating appliances. Moreover, the SDC-supported component 3 directly addresses vulnerable groups, in 
terms of its support to improve livelihood opportunities, to strengthen citizens’ participation, and to develop 
mechanisms at local level to better protect the interests of adversely affected stakeholders.   
 
D.4.3 Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payments gap that prevents 
government from addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
 
229. The government’s financing options are constrained by fiscal consolidation, to which the government has 
committed under an ongoing IMF program. Significant budget reforms were introduced in 2017 and no increase 
in current spending is envisaged in real terms in the coming 5-7 years. The budget deficit has been declining 
gradually since 2017/18 as envisaged by the IMF. The deficit is forecasted at 2.6% of GDP in 2019, has to be 
maintained under 3% in coming years and reduced gradually to 2.5% in the medium term starting from 2023. 
Maintaining the fiscal deficit within the above-mentioned limits is extremely important since this is the debt 
stabilizing level of fiscal deficit. Government debt is forecasted at 43.7% of GDP for 2019, which needs to be 
reduced gradually and maintained within 35%-40% of GDP in the medium term. Within this fiscal consolidation 
framework, the set limits of government debt and budget deficit allow only for increased spending in education 
and investments in infrastructure that maximizes the usage of Georgia’s transit and tourism potential. At the same 
time, there are constraints on including new commitments in many other directions and no room for additional 
liabilities. 
 
D.4.4 Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity 
 
230. Key government institutions in the forest sector for the implementation of this project are the Ministry of 
Environmental Protection and Agriculture (MoEPA), the National Forestry Agency (NFA), the Department of 
Supervision (DES) and the Environmental Information and Education Center (EIEC). The forest sector reform 
clarifies and strengthens the mandates of each institution to increase the overall management efficiency and 
effectiveness in the sector. In the course of the project design, capacity assessment has been undertaken to 
 
139 Garforth, M., Nilsson, S., Torchinava, P. 2016. Wood market study. Integrated Biodiversity Management, South Caucus (IBiS) Program. 
GIZ, Tbilisi, Georgia; World Bank. 2019. Data, Georgia. Available online: https://data.worldbank.org/country/georgia.  
140 World Bank. 2018a. FY19-FY22 Country Partnership Framework for Georgia. Washington D.C., USA. 
141 World Bank 2018a; Gini coefficients are a “Measure of the deviation of the distribution of income among individuals or households within 
a country from a perfectly equal distribution. A value of 0 represents absolute equality, a value of 100 absolute inequality“ -  World Bank. 
2013. World Development Indicators. 
142 IMF, International Monetary Fund. 2018a. Georgia. IMF Country Report No. 18/198. 
143 Ibid. 
144 World Bank. 2018a. FY19-FY22 Country Partnership Framework for Georgia. Washington D.C., USA. 
145 IMF, International Monetary Fund. 2018a. Georgia. IMF Country Report No. 18/198. 
146 Gassmann, F., Berulava, G., Tʻokʻmazišvili, M. 2013. Economic and Social Vulnerability in Georgia. UNDP. Tbilisi, Georgia. 
147 GEOSTAT. 2016. 2014 General Population Census Main Results. 
148 Please refer to Annex 6a for description of social vulnerabilities in the target regions. 
149 Government of Georgia. 2017. Rural Development Strategy of Georgia 2017-2020.

=== PAGE 71 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 68 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
review and analyze each agency’s mandate and adequacy of capacities, as well as to identify key areas where 
gaps exists and improvement needed. As described in Section B2 and in greater detail in Feasibility Study Chapter 
5.2.4.3, these institutions face a major challenge as the onboard substantial new staff (e.g. NFA alone will require 
onboarding of over 50 permanent staff in the target regions, and the hiring of 428 seasonal NFA staff, in addition 
to hiring over 270 private sector contractors). Capacities are limited on best practices for SFM (e.g. cutting 
operations, low-impact infrastructure development), forest supervision (inspection and patrolling), among others. 
Trainings are often limited to one-off trainings, and there is a need to institutionalize trainings based on best 
practices to facilitate capacity development of existing and future government staff, as well as private sector forest 
contractors. Consequently, the project has been designed to comprehensively address identified barriers and 
gaps, including the institutionalization of trainings and improved knowledge management, as has been earlier 
summarized in Table .  
D.5. Country ownership  
D.5.1 National climate strategy  
 
231. The government of Georgia commits to reduce its GHG emissions by 15% below the Business as usual scenario 
(BAU) for the year 2030 in its NDC submission to the UNFCCC. The committed mitigation target is a 34% reduction 
in emission intensity per unit of GDP from 2013 to 2030. The conditional reduction target is up to 25%, which is 
equivalent to 43% of emission intensity per unit of GDP from 2013-2030. Georgia’s NDC singled out forests as 
the key sector for national climate actions and the only one with quantified unconditional and conditional 
commitments. By strengthening law enforcement and introducing SFM practices, it is estimated to reduce an 
overall emission of at least 1 million tCO2eq over period of 10 years on 45,000 hectares and up to 6 million tCO2eq 
on 250,000 ha of forest lands over a period of 2020-2030 (conditionally). In the ongoing update of the NDC the 
government plans to rise the ambitions in the forest sector: It is envisaged to increase the carbon sink capacity of 
the forest sector by 10%. In the draft Climate Action Plan (CAP) of Georgia a new conditional commitment to 
increase the forest area under SFM to 436,000ha by 2030 is included. This rise in ambition is a direct consequence 
of this GCF proposal, since expected project results were taken into account. 
 
D.5.2 Existing GCF country programme  
 
232. Georgia’s Country Programme, which serves as the strategic framework for the country’s engagement with GCF, 
identifies four priorities for mitigation and four priorities on adaptation, including specifically: „Land use and 
Forests“ under Mitigation; and „Forests and Biodiversity“ under Adaptation. In addition, transition to 
sustainable financial system is a cross-cutting priority to facilitate private investment in green assets and 
measures. The project is fully aligned with identified country priorities. Under “Land Use and Forests”, the Country 
Programme proposes the following actions where GCF funding is needed: scaling-up conversation and SFM; 
increasing forest cover, and reducing fuelwood consumption. Further under „Forests and Biodiversity“, the project 
will ensure forests are sustainably managed for multiple purposes, where 123,091 ha of forest ecosystems will be 
managed with lower intensity as some forest area will be dedicated to nature conservation purposes, or not 
managed and kept as reference forest areas. Other areas will remain inaccessible due to steep slopes, and their 
location in remote high-altitude areas. Partly forests will be managed with low or no interventions for protection 
(e.g. recreation, buffer areas along bodies of water), in line with Georgian regulations. The Project will also address 
cross-cutting priority by facilitating private investment in EE-AF and forestry sector, as well as by strengthening 
capacities of ARDA to mainstream green investment support in the scope of its regular operations and mandate.  
 
D.5.3 Alignment with existing policies such as NDCs, NAMAs and NAPs  
 
233. Project design has been informed and fully aligned with NDC objective for the forestry sector, i.e. to ensure 
250,000 ha of forests under SFM by 2030. National Adaptation Plan (NAP), which is currently being drafted, also 
identifies forest among the key priorities for adaptation measures. In addition, it builds on and is aligned with the 
following NAMAs:  
 
Adaptive Sustainable Forest Management in Borjomi-Bakuriani Forest District (2014-2016) – completed. This 
NAMA set the foundation for the government’s implementation of SFM in Borjomi-Bakuriani, in particular the 
unconditional contribution of the Government of Georgia outlined in their NDC150. 
 
Efficient use of biomass for equitable, climate-proof and sustainable rural development – NAMA seeking 
financial support for implementation. The objective of this NAMA is to contribute to transformational change 
 
150 Georgia´s INDC.

=== PAGE 72 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 69 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
in the energy supply of rural areas, aiming for efficient use of biomass through the use and up-scaling of 
energy efficient technologies and alternative fuels. 
 
D.5.4 Capacity of Accredited Entities and Executing Entities to deliver  
 
234. GIZ is one of the largest international providers of capacity development and technical assistance on climate 
change worldwide. GIZ is currently carrying out over 300 climate-related projects worldwide, with combined 
funding of over USD 1.9 billion. Mitigation and adaptation account for equal shares in the GIZ portfolio, 
supplemented by activities on climate financing. A significant part of GIZ’s work is implemented in least developed 
countries. GIZ is currently implementing projects in a range of forestry topics, including: REDD+, sustainable forest 
management and community-based forest management (SFM/CBFM), natural resource management (NRM), 
forest landscape restoration (FLR), forest law enforcement, governance and trade (FLEGT) and biodiversity. The 
current GIZ forestry portfolio amounts to EUR 467 million, allocated across 63 forestry projects worldwide. 
 
235. In addition to GIZ, the following national Executing Entities will be involved in project implementation: National 
Forestry Agency (NFA); Department of Environmental Supervision (DES, representing the State of Georgia); 
Environmental Information and Education Centre (EIEC); Agricultural and Rural Development Agency (ARDA). 
All four national EEs are established as legal entities of public law under the Ministry of Environmental Protection 
and Agriculture (MoEPA) of Georgia. Their project management capacities have been assessed and confirmed 
through a due diligence process. See also section B.4.2 for details of the Executing Entities‘ experience and track 
record.  
 
D.5.5 Role of National Designated Authority (NDA) 
 
236. The project has been developed with active engagement from and under the strong leadership of the NDA 
(MoEPA). The initial project idea has been initiated by the NFA, MoEPA and the GIZ IBIS project in summer of 
2017 and the Concept Note was prepared under close consultation of key stakeholders in the sector. The draft 
version of the CN was presented to the NDA and the government stakeholders and received approval for 
submission to the GCF Secretariat in July 2018 in form of an endorsement letter. Since then, the project has 
formed part of Georgia’s GCF country programme. Representatives of the NDA have attended cross-sectoral 
multi-stakeholder workshops to provide feedback on the project. A letter of no-objection has been provided by the 
NDA (Annex 1), confirming the project conforms to the country’s national priorities, strategies and plans, and that 
it is in accordance with relevant laws and regulations. 
 
D.5.6 Stakeholder engagement 
 
237. The project preparation team of GIZ met with a variety of stakeholders from government, private sector and civil 
society during several missions, including 25 planning workshops, a separate consultation workshop with NGOs 
and field trip and stakeholder consultations in the target regions. For details on the stakeholder engagement during 
project preparation and the stakeholder engagement plan please see Annex 7. 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness 
238. Within the GFREIF, the project will empower and capacitate ARDA to become an effective delivery mechanism 
for public de-risking instruments to leverage private investment in forestry, rural energy and agricultural sector. 
ARDA’s capacities to design, implement and embed such instruments in its programming framework will be built 
through its leading role in project implementation. At the same time, public sector financing window of the GFREIF 
will enable reformed NFA to become self-sustainable and generate sufficient revenues to cover its capital needs 
for SFM implementation at national scale. 
D.6.1 Cost-efficiency 
 
239. The project will result in 16.1 million tCO2eq of emission reductions over the project lifetime of 20 years. This 
equates to a mitigation cost to the GCF of EUR 2/tCO2eq (see section E.2.2) and represents considerable value 
for money, particularly when the project’s additional benefits (adaptation, economic-co-benefits etc.) are 
considered as well (see section B.5). Relevant international benchmarks for abatement costs in forestry sector 
are in the range of USD 5-20 tCO2eq (Russia151) up to USD 30-40 /tCO2eq (Australia152). For additional reference, 
 
151 McKinsey 2009. Pathways to an energy and carbon efficient Russia.  
152 McKinsey 2008. An Australian Cost Curve for Greenhouse Gas Reduction.

=== PAGE 73 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 70 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
the abatement cost of another approved GCF forestry project (FP19, Ecuador) is EUR 2.5/tCO2eq. In terms of 
forestry projects on the voluntary carbon market, Voluntary Carbon Standard projects have an average market 
value of around USD 4-5/tCO2eq.Comparing to these benchmarks, expected project's GHG emission reduction 
potential can be considered cost-effective. 
 
D.6.2 Economic Rate of Return 
 
240. Economic Rate of Return: The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) reflects two categories of incremental 
project benefits vs. baseline: (i) value of carbon sequestration from SFM activities and (ii) economic value added. 
The latter comprises: Incremental employment at the NFA and its contractors; (ii) incremental household income 
from adoption of EE stoves and related fuelwood savings; (iii) incremental profits for EE stove and USB producers, 
partially offset by profit decrease from sale of conventional stoves and fuelwood; (iv) incremental employment at 
USB producers. Based on a CO2eq shadow price of EUR 24/t, the project produces an EIRR of 34% and NPV, 
using a 10% discount rate conventionally used in similar economic analyses, is a positive EUR 83 million. EUR 
24/t is the price of CO2 allowances on the EU Emission Trading Scheme (the most liquid carbon market worldwide) 
as of mid-June 2019. It is also consistent with the European Commission’s recommended CO2 price assumption 
of EUR 25/t in its Guide to Cost-Benefit Analysis of Investment Projects.153 Carbon prices vary considerably across 
markets and over time. A sensitivity analysis indicates that, even with a ~60% decrease in carbon prices (to EUR 
15/t) and a 20% decrease in economic value added, the EIRR would be 13%, above the 10% cost of capital used 
customarily in economic analyses. Additional, unquantified benefits come from the restoration of forest ecosystem, 
including avoided erosion, watershed protection, flood protection, biodiversity habitat, pollination and tourism 
revenues. 
 
D.6.3 Financial Rate of Return 
 
241. Financial rate of return: In Component 1 only Activity 1.1 (SFM implementation) and 1.3 (fuelwood supply) 
generate financial reflows for the sector (for NFA). Activities 1.2, 1.4 and 1.5 are entirely of public good nature and 
are suited to a grant. In Activity 1.1 and 1.3 the expected financial IRR (FIRR) without GCF support is 2.4% over 
20 years, the time period conventionally used to evaluate the effectiveness of SFM projects. This is well below 
Georgia’s financial cost of capital of ~8.5%.154 Concessionality is therefore required. Because the NFA would 
produce negative cash flows for the first 15 years (until the SFM interventions reach maturity) under the new SFM 
approach, loans – even concessional ones – are not advisable and a grant is the most appropriate level of 
concessionality. Specifically, a GCF grant of EUR 13.2 million, covering ~25% of capex in years 1-7 for these 
activities, would increase the FIRR to 9.7%, just above sovereign cost of capital.  
 
242. In Component 2, financial reflows will be generated by the producers of EE technologies and AF. These producers, 
however, are supported by government financed investment support instruments and not via GCF funding (except 
technical assistance via TAISF). GCF finance support is foreseen in Activity 2.2 on consumer finance to replace 
conventional fuelwood stoves. The FIRR for a household that replaces a conventional stove with an EE one is 
45% without GCF support. This is as a result of fuelwood savings over the EE stove’s 10-year useful life, partially 
offset by the incremental price of an EE stove over a conventional one and related financing costs.155 The analysis 
assumes households will have to pay under the new fuelwood supply scheme of NFA an official fuelwood price of 
GEL 81/m3 (cost-covering price for NFA). As discussed in section B.5, despite this positive FIRR, the widespread 
adoption of EE stoves is hindered by their high price point, product novelty and lack of sizable production or 
imports. A GCF grant covering 30% (up to GEL 300 or EUR 100) of the EE stove’s price is therefore recommended 
to significantly kick-start the market for this new product. 
 
D.6.4 Best available technologies and practices 
 
243. Best practices for SFM: Based on the revised regulations of key forest management regulations (once the forest 
code is approved) that ensures their alignment with the new forest code, national principles, criteria and indicators 
for SFM, and management-level criteria and indicators for ecosystem-based forest management, SFM will have 
 
153
 European 
Commission 
2014. 
Guide 
to 
Cost-Benefit 
Analysis 
of 
Investment 
Projects. 
Available 
online: 
https://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docgener/studies/pdf/cba_guide.pdf. 
154 Yield on Georgia’s 10-year (longest-dated) sovereign bonds as of mid-June 2019. 
155 Assuming households finance the purchase of an EE stove with a microfinance loan bearing an effective interest rate of 30%.

=== PAGE 74 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 71 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
a stronger legal basis enabling the adoption of international best practices for SFM, focusing on practices that are 
suitable and adapted to the Georgian context156.   
 
244. Best practices for EE-AF market development: The project is using best international experience and practices in 
designing EE-AF discount programme for households, in particular German experience with jump-starting the 
market for new products, such as biomass stoves and pellets. For example, under the German Market Rebate 
Programme for Renewable Energies (MAP)157, bonuses for households have been provided to stimulate wider 
uptake of new EE-AF solutions (up to 50% of the investment cost for EE). MAP programme has resulted in 
substantial growth of EE-AF market in household segment. It is still in operation and is being progressively 
adjusted to stimulate uptake of more innovative and efficient solutions. The key lessons learnt is that in nascent 
markets, in particular for new household goods and services, financial incentives play an important role in 
generating the initial strong demand for new products. More detailed information about a range of investment 
support scheme for EE-AF in EU is presented in the Report along with lessons learnt158.  
 
245. As far as policy and regulatory environment is concerned, the project builds on and seeks to transpose applicable 
provisions of the following EU Directives, which are considered international best practices in the field: 
 
Energy Efficiency Directive (EED) 2012/27/EU; 
 
Energy Performance in Buildings Directive (EPBD) 2010/31/EU;  
 
Energy Labelling Directive 2010/30/EU;  
 
Ecodesign Directive 2009/125/EC. 
 
156 Chapter 5.2.3 in the Feasibility Study provides a comparison of BAU practices with best practices for SFM promoted through the project. 
157 https://www.solarthermalworld.org/content/germany-map-national-subsidy-scheme-renewable-heating-technologies and 
https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/Meldung/20170815-bmwi-is-standardising-application-procedure-for-market-incentive-programme-for-
renewables.html  
158https://ec.europa.eu/energy/intelligent/projects/sites/iee-
projects/files/projects/documents/crossborderbioenergy_small_scale_heating_eu_market_handbook_en.pdf

=== PAGE 75 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 72 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement 
Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes as a whole, 
including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development 
 
 
 
 
159 Over 20 years of investment life-time. 
160 Includes all confirmed sources of co-financing to the project (including e.g. SIDA and Chrystal) which will contribute to the achievement 
of the project climate objectives 
161 Including confirmed co-financing from Crystal for EE stoves and AF loans. 
162 Including reinvestment of NFA revenues - see Annex 3 Financial and Economic Analysis. 
163 GEOSTAT 2018. Women and Men in Georgia: http://www.geostat.ge/cms/site_images/_files/english/health/W&M%20ENG-2018.pdf. 
E.2. Core indicator targets 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) to be 
reduced or avoided (mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
805,000 tCO2eq 
Lifetime159 
16.14 million tCO2eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per tCO2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation only) 
(a) Total project financing160 
177.69 million Euros    
(b) Requested GCF amount  
32.79 million Euros 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
16.14 million  t CO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
11.06 Euros / t CO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed 
(e = b / c) 
2.0 Euros / t CO2eq 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation only) 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
184.71 million  Euros 
(g) Public source co-financed161 
61.40 million Euros 
(h) Private source finance leveraged162  
123.57 million Euros 
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
1:6   
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
1:2  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
1:4  
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
98,337 
52% of female (51,135 women) 
Indirect 
1,000,000 
52% of female (520,000 women) 
Direct beneficiaries are considered to be the recipients of the project-funded 
financial incentive for EE stove, which will target 30% of the fuelwood consuming 
households in the target regions, i.e. 30,370 HHs. The number of direct 
beneficiaries has been calculated assuming average size of a Georgian household 
to be 3.2163.  
Indirect beneficiaries are considered to be the people to receive information and 
advisory support through the project. The number has been calculated in line with 
target for corresponding activities in the project logframe.  
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
3.7% (1.9% female) 
Indirect 
27.0%  (14% female)

=== PAGE 76 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 73 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. Fund-level impacts 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-
term 
(end-of 
year 4) 
Final 
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from land 
use, reforestation, 
reduced deforestation, 
and through 
sustainable forest 
management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks 
M4.1 Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) reduced 
or avoided 
(including 
increased 
removals) - 
forest and land 
use 
Government Sources:  
 Biennial update 
report to the 
UNFCCC 
 FIMS activity logs 
 
Project Sources: 
 Project M&E 
0 tCO2eq 
3.13 
million 
tCO2eq 
 
5.3 
million 
tCO2eq 
GHG estimates are based on 
the 7-year GCF project 
duration164. Additional GHGs 
will be reduced during the 
project´s lifetime (20 years), 
leading to 16.14 million 
tC202eq over lifetime (see 
Section D.1.165 
 
164 Methodology to estimate fund level impact for indicator M.4.0. is available in FS, section 9.1, pp. 335-349 
165 For more detail on the methodology and assumptions, also refer to the Feasibility Study Chapter 9.1. 
E.4. Fund-level outcomes 
Expected 
Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term) 
Final 
M6.0 
Increased 
number of 
small, 
medium and 
large low-
emission 
power 
suppliers 
M6.2 Number of 
households and 
individuals 
(males and 
females) with 
improved access 
to low-emission 
energy sources  
Annual reports 
from the 
Voucher 
Programme 
under Activity 
2.2 
 
< 1,000 
HHs 
10,200 HHs; 
 
(32,640 
beneficiaries 
(15,667 male 
and 16,973 
female)) 
30,730 HHs; 
 
(98,337 
beneficiaries 
(47,202 male and 
51,135 female)) 
 
Voucher Programme provides 
sufficient incentives to jump-
start demand for EE solutions 
M9.0 
Improved 
management 
of land or 
forest areas 
contributing 
to emissions 
reductions 
 
M9.1 Hectares of 
land or forests 
under improved 
and effective 
management 
that contributes 
to CO2 emission 
reductions  
Forest 
management 
plans 
approved by 
MoEPA 
 
Annual use 
plans 
approved by 
MoEPA 
 
0 ha 
130,000 ha 
270,807ha 
Forest code approved and 
secondary legal acts revised 
prior to project start 
No delays in developing and 
approving SFM plans

=== PAGE 77 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 74 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
166 Described assumptions included in Feasibility Study Chapter 5.2.3.4.2 & see Risk 1 in Section G below 
E.5. Project performance indicators 
Expected 
Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
Result 1: 
Reduced forest 
degradation and 
enhanced timber 
stocks. 
I1.1:  Rate of forest degradation: 
Baseline degradation rate in % 
of biomass lost, project 
reduction of degradation in 
tCO2/ha/year 
 
1) FMP and activity 
records of NFA 
2) Annual growth 
model-based update 
of the forest resource 
database (FIMS) 
(Volume, biomass, 
carbon) 
3) Verification in the 
field: Annually by 
DES supervision of 
implemented 
activities.  
In year 7: Systematic 
field control if SFM 
measures are 
successfully applied 
in all 8 districts, 
followed by model-
based recalculation of 
indicators I1.1 and 
I1.2 
Historical 
degradation: 26% 
biomass lost 
 
Conservative 
baseline scenario: 
15% biomass lost 
 
Detailed baseline 
to be provided 
with new/update 
of FMPs. 
  
Reduction of forest 
degradation compared to 
baseline: 1.3 
tCO2/ha/year; results in 
per ha reduction of 5.2 
tCO2/ha after 4 years 
Reduction of forest 
degradation compared to 
baseline: 1.3 
tCO2/ha/year; results in 
per ha reduction of 9.1 
tCO2/ha after 7 years  
The baseline and targets are 
calculated on basis of the 
forest model elaborated for 
project design166 
I1.2: Change in long-term 
average forest biomass in 
tCO2/ha and project carbon 
increase in tCO2 per ha and 
year 
Long-term 
average baseline 
forest carbon: 228 
tCO2/ha  
 
Detailed baseline 
to be provided 
with new/update 
of FMPs. 
Increase in forest 
biomass 2.9 
tCO2/ha/year; results in 
per ha increase of 11.6 
tCO2/ha after 4 years 
Increase in forest 
biomass 2.9 
tCO2/ha/year; results in 
per ha increase of 20.4 
tCO2/ha after 7 years 
 I1.3: NFA capacitated to 
implement sustainable forest 
management activities following 
the performance-based grant 
mechanism schedule 
NFA monitoring 
reports, FIMS activity 
recording and 
monitoring 
Low capacity: 
No FMP approved 
according to new 
approach 
 
Implementation of 
forest 
management 
measures (forest 
road construction, 
thinning and 
harvesting, 
Medium capacity: 
 
8 FMPs approved 
according to new 
approach 
 
Implementation of 
forest management 
measures (forest 
road construction, 
thinning and 
harvesting, 
restoration etc.) at 
 High capacity: 
 
FMPs implemented 
according to 
schedule 
 
Implementation of 
forest management 
measures (forest 
road construction, 
thinning and 
harvesting, 
restoration etc.) at 
100 %. 
Procurement of equipment and 
services by NFA to capacitate 
the forest implementation 
teams is not delayed 
significantly.

=== PAGE 78 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 75 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
167 There are 14 forest districts in the 3 target regions. Of those 14 districts, SFM measures will be implemented by NFA in 8 districts within the framework of GCF-supported project.  
The total fuelwood supply in the target region will come from 8 pilot districts and 8 additional forest districts in the target regions.  
168 Registration of harvested timber, sale receipts. 
169 Please note: The figures are for the total of the 3 regions, covering 14 forest districts, whilst the NFA harvest figures in I2.1 are for the 8 target districts the project is working in. 
restoration etc.) at 
0.3 to 19 % 
(depending on 
measure).  
25-35% (depending 
on measure). 
Result 2: 
Fuelwood supply 
switch from illegal 
outtakes to 
sustainable level 
of outtakes by 
NFA for the 
population of the 
3 target regions.  
 
I2.1: Cubic meters (m3) of 
fuelwood sustainably harvested 
by NFA in the 8 districts167 
applying eco-system-based 
forest management practices in 
year 7 of project implementation.  
Annual plans, 
harvested fuelwood 
intake records, BSY 
records,168 
Information recorded 
by FIMS modules for 
tracking and 
recording timber 
harvests  
50,489m3  
169.917m3  
285,575m3  
NFA reaches the sustainable 
level of fuelwood outtake of 
285,575 m3 in the 8 districts 
with 100% of implementation 
capacity in year 7. 
Population purchases 
fuelwood from NFA and does 
not use illegal sources.  
 I2.2:  Residential fuelwood 
consumption reduced for 3 target 
regions169 
Residential energy 
use survey in the 
target regions 
725,000m3 
633,000m3 
366,000m3 
EE-AF market development 
trends are consistent with 
projections.  
Forest supervision measures 
are effective and there is no 
spillover effect (i.e. illegal 
withdrawal and sales to other 
regions/consumers) 
 
Result 3: Self-
sustaining level of 
growth of EE-AF 
market reached 
(30% market 
share for EE 
stoves / 15% 
market share for 
AF) 
 
I3.1: Market volume of sold 
stoves and AF 
Annual reports from 
the Voucher 
Programme under 
Activity 2.2 and 
energy use survey at 
mid-term and project 
end (see Result 2). 
 
< 1,000 stoves 
and 3,500t AF 
 
10,200 stoves and 8,600t 
AF 
 
30,730 stoves and 
28,600t AF 
Manufacturers of EE stoves & 
AF have sufficient capacity to 
ensure supply of certified 
products on the market 
I3.2: Volume of investment 
(EUR) in EE-AF production 
sector, disaggregated by sources 
and instruments (loans, equity, 
grants) 
ARDA portfolio 
analysis 
 
0 - grants 
< EUR 0.1 million 
loans 
< EUR 0.1 million 
equity 
 
EUR 0.8 million -grants 
EUR 1.8 million– loans 
EUR 0.2 million – equity 
EUR 1.1 million -grants 
EUR 2.5 million– loans 
EUR 0.3 million – equity 
Accelerated increase in market 
demand for EE-AF solutions 
(i.e. up to 40-50% per annum) 
as a result of forestry sector 
reform and limited availability 
of cheap fuelwood

=== PAGE 79 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 76 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
I3.3: Investments leveraged 
(EUR) in EE stoves, 
disaggregated by source 
EE stoves: Voucher 
Programme 
Monitoring / 
Energy use survey at 
mid-term and by 
project end (see 
result 2) 
< EUR 0.1 million 
from HHs 
 
0 – from financial 
sector 
 
EUR 0.3 million– from 
HHs; 
EUR 2.6 million - from 
financial sector in the 
form of loans 
 
EUR 0.7 million– from 
HH 
EUR 6.5 million– from 
financial sector in the 
form of loans 
Financial sector responds 
proactively to new market 
segment and offer appropriate 
and affordable consumer 
financing products 
Result 4: 
Roll out of SFM 
and continuous 
EE-AF market 
development 
secured via 
enabling regulative 
framework  
 
 
I4.1: Provisions of Forest Code 
mainstreamed into secondary 
regulations and applied in 
practice 
Analysis of secondary 
regulations 
 
Analysis of FMP 
approval record of 
MoEPA 
 
Analysis of DES 
forest supervision 
cases on compliance 
with forest 
management 
principles by forest 
management bodies 
 
Analysis of education 
and training curricula 
 
Secondary 
regulatory 
framework does 
not entail SFM 
provisions of the 
new Forest Code  
Secondary regulatory 
framework entails SFM 
provisions of the new 
Forest Code  
Secondary regulatory 
framework implemented 
accordingly by forest 
management bodies in 
Georgia in the following 
elements: All new FMPs 
in Georgia developed 
according to new 
approach70% of 
reforestation, 
afforestation and forest 
maintenance is done 
according to regulations 
in the forest districts, 
which started 
implementation of new 
FMPs in Georgia  
 
All educational and 
training centres for forest 
workers have included 
SFM approach in their 
curricula 
 
Political commitments to 
implementation reform remain 
high on the agenda of the 
Government of Georgia 
I4.2: Functioning enabling 
regulative framework to ensure 
sustainability of EE-AF market 
developments via obligatory 
technology standards and 
favorable public procurement 
regulations 
 
 
Government annual 
report on the status of 
approximation and 
implementation of the 
EU Ecodesign 
Directive (as per 
Georgia’s obligation 
under Energy 
Community Treaty) 
 
 
Implementation of 
Ecodesign 
Directive, including 
EE standards for 
heat stoves, are 
included in the 
draft Climate and 
Energy Action plan 
for 2021-2030 
(under 
preparation) 
Standard approved by 
Government 
 
Public procurement 
regulations adopted 
 
30% of new stoves in the 
target regions are 
compliant with the new 
standard (stove 
types/brands officially 
certified) 
 
Public procurement 
regulation applied in 3 
target regions 
 
 Georgia fulfills its 
commitments under the Energy 
Community Treaty, including 
timely adoption of the EE Law 
and corresponding by-laws, 
e.g. primary regulation for 
transposition of the Eco-design 
directive as a precondition for 
adoption of standards and 
regulations

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 77 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
Annual report of the 
Public Procurement 
Agency 
 
 
scheduled to be 
adopted in 2020 
 
Introduction of the 
energy efficiency 
procurement 
regulations in the 
public sector is 
part of approved 
NEEAP. 
Result 5: 
Livelihood 
opportunities are 
diversified and 
local self-
governance in 
forest 
management is 
strengthened, 
leading to 
reduced pressure 
on forests 
To be defined 
To be defined 
To be defined 
To be defined 
To be defined 
To be defined 
E.6. Activities  
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
1.1 Development and 
implementation of sustainable 
forest management plans in 
Guria, Kakheti and Mtskheta-
Mtianeti 
This Activity supports the implementation of 
sustainable forest management practices in 8 
forest districts by a) the elaboration of 10 year 
sustainable forest management plans (FMPs) 
for eight target districts, based on forest 
management inventories, data analysis, and 
multi-stakeholder consultations and b) by the 
implementation of active interventions on 
170,539 
ha, 
including 
restoration 
and 
maintenance (incl. fire, pest and disease 
management, restoration and reforestation 
measures), cutting operations (maintenance 
and final cuts), and the construction of resilient 
forest infrastructure, among other activities.  
SFM will result in reduced forest degradation, 
the sustainable production and harvesting of 
1.1.1 Development of SFM plans based on the 
principles of SFM in selected forest districts 
1.1.2 Implementation of SFM plans in selected 
forest districts 
 4 
gender-sensitive 
business 
plans 
developed 
for 
Lanchkhuti, Ozurgeti, Chokhatauri and Akhmeta (Q4, year 
1) 
 Start of implementation of approved FMPs in Lanchkhuti, 
Ozurgeti and Chokhatauri districts in Guria, and Akhmeta 
district in Kakheti (Q4, Year 1) 
 4 gender-sensitive FMPs approved and 4 business plans 
developed for Kvareli, Telavi, Dedoplitskaro and Tianeti 
districts (Q4, Year 2) 
 Start of implementation of approved FMPs in Kvareli, 
Telavi, Dedoplitskaro and Tianeti districts (Q1, Year 3) 
 3 tranches of equipment purchased for NFA (Q2 year 1, 
Q1 year 3, Q1 year 5) 
 526 NFA staff trained in target districts

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 78 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
170 For specification of equipment technologies and vehicles, see FS Chapter 5.2.3.2 
 
fuelwood for the rural population, and further 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks. 
1.2 Strengthening of forest 
supervision 
The Activity supports the Department of 
Environmental Supervision (DES) to reduce 
the illegal use of forested areas, including 
illegal logging for fuelwood and industrial 
timber. The project supports DES to develop 
standard operating procedures, to train their 
staff and to equip DES with suitable equipment 
and technology (e.g. drones, GPS devices for 
registered logging trucks, satellite cameras, 
etc.). This improves the efficiency and 
effectiveness of forest supervision and law 
enforcement. 
As 
a 
final 
result 
forest 
degradation is reduced, and NFA revenues 
increase through eliminating illegal forest use. 
 
1.2.1 Strengthening of procedures, standards, 
protocols for enhanced forest supervision 
1.2.2 Implementation of improved forest 
supervision measures and technologies 
 Standard operating procedures for forest patrol staff 
developed (Q3, year 1) 
 Forest supervision teams 170 in the three target regions 
equipped with adequate equipment, technology, and 
vehicles (Q4, Year 1) 
 8 DES trainers trained to conduct training modules for 
DES staff (including gender equality component) 
 807 DES staff members trained on standard operating 
procedures, protocols and guidelines, including gender-
specific forest and fuel use (Q1, Year 2)  
 306 forest patrol staff trained on best practices, equipment 
and technology for forest supervision (Q1, Year 2) 
 20 forest inspectors trained on best practices, and 
technology for improved forest inspections and evaluation 
of damages in forest ecosystems (Q3, Year 2) 
1.3 Provision of sustainably 
produced fuelwood by NFA 
This Activity supports NFA to establish a 
model sustainable fuelwood supply chain in 8 
target districts within 3 regions. It supports 
NFA in the development and operation of 
Business Service Yards (BSY) by construction 
of the yards, purchase of equipment, training 
BSY staff, supporting operational planning, 
and ensure active monitoring of the yards. As 
a result, it facilitates the transition from the 
social wood programme to a new system of 
NFA-run ´BSYs´ for fuelwood supply, which 
increase transparency and traceability in the 
forestry sector, and ensures harvesting levels 
are based on SFM. 
1.3.1 Support to new mechanism for fuelwood 
provision to local population 
1.3.2 Establishment of business service yards 
(BSY) 
 Selection of 14 BSY sites (Q4, year 1) 
 SOPs, protocols and guidelines (gender-sensitive) for 
BSYs elaborated (Q4, Year 1) 
 15 BSYs operational through the project (Q2, Year 3) 
 90 BSY staff trained on SOPs, protocols, and wood 
marketing (Q3, Year 3) 
 50 NFA staff (in addition to BSY staff) trained on fuelwood 
and timber marketing  
1.4 Enhancement of enabling 
environment for the nation-
wide implementation of 
sustainable forest 
management (SFM) 
This 
activity 
strengthens 
the 
enabling 
environment to facilitate the nation-wide 
adoption of SFM. The project provides 
targeted support for adjusting the regulatory 
framework, improving forest sector training 
and 
vocational 
education, 
strengthening 
cross-sectoral 
planning 
through 
the 
1.4.1 Strengthening of the legal framework for 
SFM 
1.4.2 Improvement of sector steering and 
coordination between involved sectors 
1.4.3 Development of online knowledge 
management and training platform for the 
forest sector 
 Secondary legal act on the commercial use of NTFPs 
elaborated (Q4, Year 2) 
 At least 1 multi-stakeholder plenary meeting per year for 
the forest sector reform platform (7 in total)

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 79 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
171 Including the identification of suitable adaptation strategies to be mainstreamed into annual plans, FMPs, as well as regional and national strategies. 
establishment of a multi-stakeholder platform 
and high-level inter-ministerial working group. 
Finally, climate risks and suitable adaptation 
strategies in forest ecosystems in the 3 project 
regions will be assessed to inform sector 
planning and forest management, where the 
results will be mainstreamed into sector 
policies, trainings and guidelines, as well as 
FMPs. 
1.4.4 Improvement of vocational education and 
training for the forest sector  
1.4.5 Enabling improved integration of climate 
change adaptation in forest sector planning, 
management and monitoring 
 Knowledge 
management 
and 
training 
platform 
established for MoEPA, DES, NFA and private forest 
service companies (Q3, Year 2) 
 3 reports on climate risks for forest ecosystems in Guria, 
Kakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti171 (Q2, Year 3) 
1.5 Improvement of 
monitoring and measurement, 
reporting and verification 
(MRV) systems for the forest 
sector 
The Activity supports the development of a 
Forest Information and Monitoring System 
(FIMS), 
aligned 
with 
national 
MRV 
requirements 
by 
elaborating 
and 
operationalizing 
10 
FIMS 
modules 
and 
developing national emission factors. These 
will be utilized by (at least) 6 government 
institutions to sustainably manage and monitor 
Georgia´s forest resources. The system 
improves the monitoring of forest resources, 
facilitating a more accurate monitoring of 
forest carbon 
stocks 
and 
other 
forest 
dynamics, which ultimately improves sector 
planning and forest management.  
1.5.1 Strengthening of the national forest 
monitoring and MRV architecture 
1.5.2 Development of FIMS modules  
 1 set of national emission factors and Georgia-specific 
allometric equations developed (Q2, Year 3) 
 Institutional framework, SOPs, and protocols for FIMS 
(incl. clear institutional arrangements) established (Q2, 
Year 2) 
 FIMS technical units formed and trained 
 10 FIMS software modules are developed and operational 
(Q4, Year 3) 
 Help desk and support facility established and operational 
 36 FIMS end users are trained on FIMS (including staff 
from 9 regional offices, NFA, DES, MoEPA, APA, AFA, 
among others) 
 6 government institutions are trained and use FIMS (Q4, 
year 4) 
Activity 2.1 EE-AF supply 
chain development 
This activity facilitates the creation and 
expedited growth of the supply chain for 
EE and low-carbon AF solutions. It will do so 
by 
providing 
technical 
assistance 
and 
investment support in the form of grants, 
interest rate subsidy and guarantees (co-
financed) 
to 
existing 
and 
new 
EE-AF 
producers, as well as supporting development 
a pipeline of investment projects for new and 
emerging EE-AF solutions. Through this 
activity 
EUR 
3.8 
million 
of 
additional 
investment in EE-AF sector will be leveraged 
leading to 40-50% market growth rate in the 
volume of sales (currently 500 EE stoves/year 
and 3,500 t USB/year).  
2.1.1 Establishing Technical Assistance and 
Investment Support Facility (TAISF) 
 
2.1.2: Feasibility assessment and pipeline 
development for new EE-AF solutions  
 
 Data-base of EE-AF suppliers established 
 First certified product available on the market (Q4, Year 1) 
 Trainings/coaching sessions to min 100 employees of EE-
AF supply chain stakeholders delivered (min 30% female 
representation) 
 Business plans for investment in EE-AF production 
developed 
 Investment support to EE-AF suppliers provided: 
- 
70% of the estimated market needs (Q4, Year 4) 
- 
100% of the estimated market needs (Q4, Year 7) 
 Feasibility studies for new EE-AF solutions and products 
developed

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 80 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
Activity 2.2 Implementing 
consumer financing 
instruments for EE-AF 
solutions 
This Activity jump-starts the market and 
scaling-up demand for EE-AF products. It 
provides, in partnership with national financial 
organizations, local banks and MFIs, a 
package of consumer financing options (loans 
and financial incentives) focusing initially on 
EE stoves and briquettes, but gradually 
expanding to other EE-AF technologies. By 
project end, this activity will provide 30,370 
households with structured financing products 
enabling the purchase of an EE stove and over 
25,000 households – for the annual supply of 
AF. 
2.2.1: Design, implementation and marketing 
of the voucher programme for EE stoves for 
households  
 
2.2.2: Providing consumer financing for EE 
stoves for households 
 
2.2.3: Supporting MFIs and partner banks to 
structure and promote consumer financing 
products for advanced EE-AF solutions  
 
 Voucher Programme has started (Q4, year 1) 
 Gender impact assessment of viability of financing 
schemes for stoves to ensure that loans and micro credits 
are accessible for women, especially women-led 
households and single parents 
 Consumer financing products launched for EE stoves and 
briquettes (Q4, Year 1) 
 Voucher programme finalised (with at least 25% of 
beneficiaries being women-headed households) (Q4, 
Year 6) 
 Consumer financing products launched for other EE and 
AF solutions (Q4, Year 5) 
Activity 2.3 Creating 
consumer awareness and 
provision of technical advisory 
services for fuelwood users 
This activity creates awareness among 
fuelwood users and Georgia’s population at 
large about forestry sector reform process, its 
implications, as well as alternatives to 
fuelwood. It will involve the provision of 
informational and technical advisory support 
to fuelwood users in the target regions and 
other locations across rural Georgia, as well 
as undertaking a nation-wide awareness 
raising campaign. As a result, 82,000 
households will be supported in the target 
regions, 160,000 households in other rural 
regions and at least 1 million people will be 
reached nationally. It is expected that the 
share of people supporting the main direction 
of the forestry sector reform will increase by at 
least 50%.  
2.3.1: Community-mobilization, advocacy and 
advisory services on EE-AF to fuelwood users 
 
2.3.2: National advocacy and awareness 
raising 
 
Data-base of fuelwood consumers in the target regions 
established (Q4 Year 1) 
 
Advocacy and communication plan including gender-
sensitive approach developed 
 
Gender-sensitive knowledge and information materials 
developed 
 
Local information points (LIP) established (Q2 Year 2): 
- 
19 LIPs in target regions 
- 
30 LIPs in other regions across Georgia 
 
Annual reports on information provision and technical 
advisory support to fuelwood users published 
 Gender-sensitive 
nation-wide 
awareness 
raising 
campaign finalised (Q3, Year 6) 
 
 
Activity 2.4 Enabling policies 
and regulations  
This Activity provides technical assistance to 
public authorities to accelerate transposition 
and practical implementation of policy and 
regulatory instruments envisaged in the EE 
and RE acquis, which have direct relevance 
and implications for the EE-AF sector and 
reduction of the fuelwood consumption in 
rural areas, namely: 
 
energy efficiency and environmental 
standards and labelling for space 
heaters in line with EU Ecodesign 
directive 
2.4.1: Capacity building for introduction and 
enforcement of energy efficiency and 
environmental standards and labelling for EE-
AF solutions 
 
2.4.2: Facilitating introduction of EE 
procurement practices in public sector 
 Standards for EE stove /secondary regulation drafted (Q4, 
Year 1) and adopted (Q4, Year 4) 
 Certification and labelling scheme for EE stoves 
developed (Q4, Year 1) and officially adopted (Q4, Year 
4) 
 Market surveillance and MRV system established (Q4, 
Year 4) 
 Secondary regulation on EE public procurement adopted 
(Q4, year 2) 
 EE Public Procurement Guidelines developed (Q2, Year 
2)

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 81 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
energy efficiency public procurement 
rules and regulation. 
The objective is to create an enabling policy 
and regulatory framework for sustained EE-
AF sector growth beyond GCF project 
timeframe.   
 Training on EEPP with State Procurement Agency and 
Procurement Officers of national and local governments 
conducted  
 Study tour on EEPP with State Procurement Agency and 
Procurement Officers of national and local governments 
conducted 
 Awareness raising campaign on EEPP finalised 
 Report on EEPP application in target regions (Q4, Year 3) 
Activity 3.1: Development and 
introduction of municipal-level 
tools, practices, plans and 
capacities for participatory 
SFM and conservation 
This activity prepares the framework 
conditions and introduction of municipal 
sustainable forest management in the 
country. The project will develop and 
introduce tools, practices, plans and 
economic planning instruments specifically 
designed for utilisation in municipal forest 
management and conservation efforts. In 
addition, capacity development for municipal 
authorities will enable staff and community 
members to utilize the developed instruments 
and to participate in management and 
conservation activities. 
To be defined 
To be defined 
Activity 3.2:  
Development, testing and 
promotion of local 
mechanisms to better protect 
interests of adversely affected 
stakeholders 
This activity will activate the new participation 
approach, acknowledging the need for 
conflict resolution mechanisms. To do so, the 
project will develop, promote and test interest 
protection mechanisms.  
To be defined 
To be defined 
Activity 3.3:  
Development of professional 
skills on SFM and 
conservation through 
vocational education and 
international partnerships with 
centers of excellence 
This activity will support the professional skill 
development on sustainable forest 
management and conservation of local 
foresters and other forest workers. The 
project will work with vocational training 
colleges to strengthen the educational 
capacities of the institutions, to foster intake 
of local community members and to promote 
the forester job profile in the three target 
regions.  Eventually, Georgian forests face a 
number of forest pests and diseases which 
require efficient responses. International 
partnerships with qualified centers of 
knowledge would allow to acquire efficiently 
necessary expertise and solutions. The 
To be defined 
To be defined

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 82 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
project will seek international partnerships 
with centres of knowledge. 
Activity 3.4:  
Introduction of selected value 
chains (timber, NTFP, eco-
tourism) 
This Activity creates alternative livelihood 
opportunities for individuals and households 
in the target regions to support the transition 
from informal fuelwood-related income 
sources to other (more formal) sources of 
income and thereby increasing household 
incomes, which eventually supports potential 
fuel switch and purchase of legal, high quality 
fuelwood. The project facilitates the 
establishment of timber-, NTFP-, and eco-
tourism value chains via technical assistance. 
To be defined 
To be defined 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements 
246. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (in addition to ESMP and GAP monitoring) will comply with the relevant GCF policies, as stipulated in the AMA, FAA 
and project-related Financing Agreements and Implementation Agreements with Executing Entities and Implementation Partners, which EEs will extend to sub-grantees.  
 
247. The project will apply a customized results-based Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system. The system will be based on:  
 
GIZ Standard Operating Procedures (“GIZ’s evaluation policy - principles, guidelines and requirements”)  
 
The project logical framework  
 
The project implementation schedule  
 
Requirements of the GCF’s Annual Performance Report  
 
Development partners’ Standard Operating Procedures  
 
Procedures and requirements of project partners and stakeholders in Georgia  
248. The M&E system will track project inputs, actions, activities, outputs, and impacts as well as associated financial flows across all Components in all project districts and 
at national level in Georgia. The overall responsibility and oversight for M&E and reporting lies with the GCF AE unit of GIZ head office. The national Project Management 
Unit (PMU) in Georgia will implement the M&E system and work closely with EEs, Government project partners and development partners. 
 
249. Recruitment of M&E staff. Immediately when the project commences, GIZ’s GCF AE unit at head office in Germany will make available one expert to oversee, coordinate 
and manage the project M&E and reporting routines. He/she will cooperate closely with the PIU and GIZ Executing Entity staff to coordinate the implementation of the 
project’s M&E system. As soon as GCF proceeds become available in Georgia, the PIU will recruit one full-time M&E specialist. The PIU will additionally hire an 
international consultant/consulting company to design and to support the management of the M&E system and provide on-the- job training for PIU and other stakeholders 
of the system where requested. 
 
250. Interim evaluation: GIZ’s AE unit will initiate an Interim Evaluation in year four of the project (or at any time that GIZ, the NDA and/or the Project Steering Committee 
consider necessary). GIZ will competitively select and assign an independent consultant for this task. The Interim Evaluation will duly involve project stakeholders, 
including target groups and beneficiaries, project partners and contributing development partners. The Interim Evaluation will include:

=== PAGE 86 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 83 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A review of the institutional, administrative, organizational, environmental, social, economic, technical and financial aspects of the project based on the 
assumptions and risks included in the design (among others as specified in the Funding Proposal and Feasibility Study) and M&E system.  
 
A review of covenants to assess whether they are still relevant or need to be changed or waived due to altered conditions.  
 
A review of the viability of remaining planned impacts.  
 
An assessment of the need to restructure or reformulate the project and the effects of such restructuring on the project’s objective and long-term goals.  
251. GIZ’s AE unit will make available an MTR report to the GCF Secretariat and project stakeholders.  
 
252. Final evaluation: In due time before the completion of the project, GIZ’s AE unit will initiate a project completion mission, in which the implementation of the project 
based on the project-, financing- and implementation agreements, the delivery of outputs and the achievement of project targets will be evaluated. The mission will duly 
involve project stakeholders including target groups and beneficiaries, project partners and contributing development partners. At the time of the project’s physical 
completion and commissioning, and before the expiry of the guarantee period, GIZ’s AE unit will make available a final report to the GCF Secretariat and project 
stakeholders.  
 
253. Data collection and frequency: The PIU will coordinate data collection for implemented activities (indicators, implementation challenges and financial status) through 
responsible executing departments / divisions at the national and regional level on a regular base. The PIU will supervise and guide the monitoring and evaluation.

=== PAGE 87 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 84 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures  
A detailed analysis of project risks is provided in Chapter 12 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2). 
Environmental and social risks are considered in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
(Annex 6a) and the Environmental and Social Management Plan (Annex 6b). Gender-specific risks are 
considered in the Gender Assessment (Annex 8a) and the Gender Action Plan (Annex 8b). 
 
From a safeguards perspective, the ESIA rates the project risk as medium (Category B). 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
254. Forest management inventories and FMPs developed may differ from the forest model, resulting in a 
different prioritization of SFM measures and potentially different targets (e.g. the amount of timber 
that can be sustainably harvested). 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 The Feasibility Study emphasizes that while the forest model was developed using the best available 
information (existing studies, and extensive consultation with the Georgian government and other 
stakeholders) and using conservative estimates, all models are “simplifications of reality” and should be 
further informed by up-to-date forest inventories, particularly in the case of Georgia where data and 
information gaps in the forest sector are a major barrier facing the sector. Detailed forest management 
inventories conducted to inform FMPs will provide more accurate information and prioritize necessary 
SFM activities based on actual forest conditions. 
 While the proposed SFM practices are not expected to drastically change, since SFM involves a broad 
toolbox of approaches that are aligned with the forest conditions, nonetheless some adjustments in the 
practices and targets may be required (e.g. areas where certain practices are implemented, annual 
allowable cut, etc.). Harvesting yields and annual allowable cut will be closely assessed based on FMIs 
and FMPs. Changes in SFM activities may also impact the revenues from SFM, however business plans 
will be developed based on FMPs that provide detailed financial and economic planning – ensuring 
revenue modeling and financial planning are based on the forest conditions and confirmed SFM 
activities.  
 When necessary to change indicators/ targets, close communication will be ensured with GCF and other 
project partners. Information based on SFM best practices (and benchmarks) and a clear justification for 
any adjustments will be provided.172 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
255. Over-commercialization of forest resources (timber and non-timber forest resources) to increase 
economic gains at the regional level, where forest management transitions from SFM to 
unsustainable forest management practices focusing on the over-exploitation of timber and fuelwood. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 Forest Management Inventories to be conducted as part of the FMP development process, based on 
best practices. FMPs will be directly linked to FMIs and revised by MoEPA. Trainings will be provided to 
MoEPA on key considerations for the revision process in the context of SFM, and additional trainings 
will be provided to NFA for conducting forest management inventories, developing FMPs based on 
inventories and stakeholder consultations, and developing business plans for each district to improve 
 
172 The main assumptions for the forest model are provided in the Feasibility Study, Chapter 5.2.3.4.

=== PAGE 88 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 85 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
sector planning and monitoring. This will improve transparency and support active management. The 
approval of FMPs by the Ministry will also ensure checks and balances are in place.  
 The operation of BSYs will be closely linked with the FIMS and electronic system for timber resource 
management to ensure that timber entering and leaving BSYs are transparently monitored and tracked, 
ensuring a clear chain of custody. It will improve transparency in the sector as wood will be registered 
and sorted only at BSYs, reducing illegality within value chains.  
 Financial auditing of BSYs will be conducted by the NFA and the State Audit Office of Georgia on a 
regular basis, ensuring alignment with approved FMPs and annual plans 
 Trainings will be conducted for national, regional, and district NFA staff on BSYs, fuelwood provision and 
sustainable forest management to build capacities on SFM, and emphasize the need for forest 
management based on revised regulations (informed by national and management-level C&I for SFM) 
 The new (draft) Forest Code, and associated regulatory changes (e.g. Activity 1.4) will further ensure 
that there is a strong regulatory foundation for SFM 
 Support to DES in Activity 1.2 will further support risk mitigation, as they will be able to supervise forest 
use in a more efficient and effective manner. Transferring supervision responsibilities from NFA to DES 
will also support improved transparency, and accountability of NFA – ensuring forest management 
activities are sustainable and based on approved FMPs. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Low 
High 
Description 
256. While efforts to reduce corruption in the forest sector have been successful, there is still a risk that 
corruption could persist. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 The country´s anti-corruption strategy has been strengthened within the sector under the National 
Forest Concept and ongoing reforms in recent years. For example, currently there is a regular change 
of patrol districts, their patrolling areas are not known to them in advance of their shift. In addition 
systems that were prone to corruption, namely the timber concession system, are being phased out, 
and more transparent systems promoted.  
 The project will also strengthen Georgia´s anti-corruption strategy through improving transparent 
monitoring of forest use through the procurement of key technology to improve supervision (e.g. 
cameras on forest roads), the strengthening of standard operational procedures and protocols, 
strengthening the training system, and implementing diverse trainings for patrols and inspection staff 
(ensuring staff are aware of best practices and protocols). A major contribution to reducing corruption 
in the sector will be the development and operationalization of FIMS, including the Electronic System 
of Timber Resources Management, among other modules, that make the entire sector more 
transparent (Activity 1.5 – Monitoring and MRV). 
 FMPs developed by NFA will be revised an approved by MoEPA, ensuring a system of checks and 
balances within the government.  
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
High 
Low 
Description 
257. Staff turnover may result in loss of knowledge, information and capacities.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 Development of SOPs and secondary legal acts, and standardized training modules for onboarding of 
new staff members that ensure the consistent application of standard practices by new staff members, 
standardized basic training, and improved knowledge management. 
 Pool of trainers within institutions will train additional trainers, and capacities will be built within 
institutions to ensure trainings are not only “one-off” trainings, but instead institutionalized that can be 
repeated, and scaled up to other districts/ regions in the country. Training modules will be integrated in 
the online platform (incl. e-courses, videos from in-person trainings, course materials, etc.).

=== PAGE 89 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 86 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 The project will strengthen Vocational Education and Training in the sector, where new and existing 
laborers in the sector can receive formal education qualifications based on best-practices and 
knowledge for SFM. 
 Ongoing trainings, engaging diverse staff from national, regional, district and local level. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
258. Limited opportunities for local people to benefit from sustainable forest management under the new 
system (esp. those who previously were informally employed in the sector, or who harvested illegal 
fuelwood). Strengthened forest supervision and law enforcement combined with the pricing of 
fuelwood may negatively impact local livelihoods of vulnerable forest-dependent households.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
Past use of the forest was often conducted in illegal/informal ways and based on unsustainable 
utilization patterns where harvesting often exceeded sustainable utilization levels. The New Forest 
Code and national criteria and indicators for SFM, especially the latter under the social principle, 
recognize the importance of engaging diverse stakeholders within the FMP planning and 
implementation process. Community-outreach and continued engagement is a cross-cutting 
element throughout the project and is specifically addressed through Component 3.173 
 
Local communities will be provided support and incentives to switch to more efficient energy 
appliances and alternative fuel (Component 2), to reduce their reliance on fuelwood (incl. illegal 
cutting).  
 
Component 3 provides alternative livelihood opportunities for rural communities through forest and 
energy related value chain development. 
 
Given the new opportunity for improved stakeholder consultation and engagement in the forest 
management planning process, the project aims to set a positive example of how such 
engagement could look like. For each new FMP at least three stakeholder consultations will be 
conducted (one each at the beginning, middle and final validation), and additional technical 
support provided to both NFA and local communities to ensure productive and fruitful 
consultations. Georgia promotes SFM, and thus this participatory process also is an important 
platform for local stakeholders to discuss local sustainable forest use (e.g. grazing, eco-tourism, 
recreation etc.). Targeted support will be provided to NFA and local communities to improve their 
awareness of opportunities for collaboration, and to strengthen local engagement.  
 
Awareness raising will be conducted at various levels and engaging diverse actors within Activity 
2.3 – acknowledging the importance of a combined communications and awareness raising for 
forest sector reforms and alternative energy and energy efficiency. NGOs, local municipalities and 
community liaisons will play an important role in awareness raising and local capacity building. 
 
The new structure of the forest management will result in additional jobs for local people to support 
with management activities, including within NFA and in private businesses (permanent and 
seasonal staff). To the greatest extent possible the project will support the hiring of local people 
(through awareness raising campaigns, targeted local recruitment), facilitating formal job creation 
in the region.174 This will help transform jobs from the informal to formal sector, providing more 
social security and stability. 
 
Currently the NFA plans to maintain prices currently paid by households, through formal networks, 
to facilitate the smooth transition to the new mechanism. However, some households receive 
additional subsidies (incl. poor households receiving municipal subsidies, others who go to the 
forest themselves), and it will be challenging for these households to pay GEL 81/m3.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
 
173 This is further highlighted in Chapter 11 of the Feasibility Study (stakeholder engagement). 
174 Draft Forest Code, Version submitted to Georgian Parliament in February 2019.

=== PAGE 90 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 87 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
Description 
259. The approval of policies and regulations is linked to political processes within the country, over which 
the project has no control. Thus, there is a risk that policies, secondary legal acts, forest management 
plans and annual plans supported by the project are not formally approved/ adopted. Delays in 
approval of the forest code, FMPs, and key regulations may also impact the project. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 Specific measures to address this risk are limited given that this process (for Laws and regulations) is 
embedded within Parliament and is thus out of the project´s control. 
 Close collaboration and dialogue with key actors has been ensured in project development/design and 
will be maintained during project implementation. In terms of the forest code, in February 2019 it was 
accepted to the next session of Parliament and a speaker assigned, demonstrating a positive stride 
towards its timely approval. Strong ownership of the Government has been ensured throughout project 
development and will be maintained throughout project implementation through close coordination and 
cooperation. Thus, they are informed based on up-to-date information and partners are aware of its 
relevance for the project. For policies related to EE-AF this includes close collaboration and dialogue 
with EU and Energy community, as well as other stakeholder promoting EU integration agenda. For 
other forestry-related measures, this includes close coordination and cooperation with MoEPA and NFA, 
as well as other forest sector stakeholders, including local communities who will be consulted through 
the project on the proposed regulatory changes (e.g. regulations for the commercial use of non-timber 
forest resources).  
 Delays could also impact the project, and while they are not ideal, a phased-approach is applied where 
the project already anticipates high-priority actions as soon as the project starts (e.g. enabling 
environment, elaboration of key secondary legal acts). The project will also support FMPs in various 
stages, including some which will be approved or will be nearly approved by project start. If there are 
delays in the elaboration, adjustment and/or approval of some FMPs, work on others can be continued. 
NFA has its´ own inventory team, which has been building its´ capacities through the implementation of 
NFI and FMIs, with the support from donors such as GIZ. Thus, the team is able to start relatively quickly 
given their experiences in implementing inventories based on best practices in the country.  
 Outside of the project, GIZ has already committed to support the Government of Georgia with the revision 
of the current Regulations 179, 241 and 242 prior to project start, to ensure their timely revision.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
260. On-the-ground advocacy work is delayed due to ineffective implementation structure, insufficient 
capacities to engage effectively with households at the local/community level and lack of coordination 
with project’s financial partners and EE-AF suppliers (Activity 2.3) 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
Selection of Local Partner/EE for Activity 2.3 will be based on assessment of local capacities and 
existence of established implementation structure and operational capacities in the target regions. 
Consequently, the risk of operational delay to occur will be lower.  
 
Full time Communication Specialist/Task leader will be recruited by GIZ to ensure coordination 
between sub-contractors and partners, including EE-AF suppliers, and financing partners  
 
Communication task force will be established comprising representatives of TAISF (Activity 2.1), 
Financing partners (Activity 2.2) and sub-contractors to be engaged under Activity 2.3 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
261. Investment in EE-AF sector growth do not materialize despite TAISF support.

=== PAGE 91 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0  | PAGE 88 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
Maintaining comprehensive data-base of suppliers and establishing regular and direct lines of 
communication/marketing 
 
Undertaking regular surveys and capacity gaps assessment to tailor TAISF offerings to sector’s need 
and emerging opportunities 
 
Liaising with ARDA Partner Banks to identify bottlenecks and barriers faced by EE-AF suppliers in 
obtaining loans/meetings banks criteria  
 
Market research and dissemination of market intelligence about specific EE-AF business 
opportunities in Georgia and abroad among Georgian business and financing community (e.g. start-
up fora, investment conferences, etc.) 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
262. Insufficient uptake of EE stoves despite offered discount.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
Annual review of the project implementation to monitor performance/sales of EE-AF along with 
household survey to better understand preferences and barriers 
 
Local marketing campaign and activities of Local Information Points (under Activity 2.4) and 
Business Support Yards (VSY) under Activity 1.3 
 
Regular market survey/studies by partner FIs/MFIs to offer better tailored products to the 
need/profile of the targeted HHs   
Selected Risk Factor 10 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
263. Delay with adoption of EE policy package, including the new Energy and Climate Action Plan for 
2020-2030 and other relevant provisions of EU Energy acquis  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
Close collaboration and dialogue with EU and Energy Community, as well as other stakeholders 
promoting EU integration agenda 
 
Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development will act as the main beneficiary and counterpart 
for this Activity and will take the lead role in advising the project on risk mitigation measures

=== PAGE 92 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 89 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  
264. The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP) have been prepared in support of the project and are presented in Annex 6. The project has been 
screened against the International Finance Corporation (IFC) Performance Standards and the GCF and GIZ 
Environmental and Social Safeguards. An assessment of the environmental and social impacts of the Project was 
undertaken, and the Project has been considered as Medium risk (Category B); potentially rare or locally limited 
occurrence, largely reversible consequences, easy to manage. 
 
265. The project has the potential to cause low to medium environmental and social impacts. In total, 26 impacts 
were identified during the assessment; 11 were identified as low, 10 were rated as medium, and the rest as 
negligible or could not be rated since activities included the implementation of secondary laws not yet developed. 
A number of mitigations measures have been proposed to manage these impacts. 
 
266. The impacts include low to medium risks due to minor civil works during the construction phase and logging and 
maintenance of roads during the operations phase and include impacts on wildlife, risks of sedimentation and 
erosion, risks of hazardous spills on soils and surface water. Occupational, health and safety impacts were 
also identified as risks for the project workers during construction and also logging activities, in particular in the 
mountain slopes. Minor impacts also include increased waste and minor disturbance related to noise and dust 
during both construction and operations.  
 
267. Social impacts are mostly due to the application of the new Forest Code through the development of the individual 
SFM Plans which will forbid communities from felling trees for fuelwood and timber and impose restrictions on 
livestock grazing and gathering of Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFP). The main risk for communities concerns 
the restriction imposed on harvesting trees, due to the strong dependence of the communities to use fuelwood 
for cooking and heating community houses during the cold winter months and the high poverty status of rural 
communities. Appropriate actions are proposed to deal with these issues, e.g. activities under Component 3.  
 
268. The project does not require any involuntary land acquisition and/or resettlement. It will require land for the 
construction of 14 Business Service Yards (BSYs). These BSYs will be constructed in land belonging to the state 
and or acquiring brownfield sites which have been abandoned. Access to the brownfield sites will only be 
undertaken through voluntary agreements. Where a voluntary agreement cannot be established, the land will not 
be used. 
 
269. Prior to undertaking any of the project’s interventions, additional stakeholder engagement will be conducted to 
ensure that the local population is fully consulted to ensure the project will not impact them and/or their livelihoods, 
culture and traditions. In addition, during the implementation of the project, participatory consultation of the SFM 
Plans will be one of the key activities of stakeholder engagement and strongly supported in Activity 3.1 and 3.2. 
Awareness raising regarding the sustainable use of forests and benefits of the forests will be carried out throughout 
the implementation of the project. 
 
270. Capacity building of MoEPA, NFA and DES has been proposed as a tool to manage the project’s impacts. This 
includes capacity building on a) conflict management, mediation and dispute resolution; b) communication and 
engagement with communities; c) occupational health and safety (a cross-cutting theme that will be integrated 
throughout training modules and project activities); d) environmental communication; and e) identification of critical 
ecosystems, fauna and flora and strengthened biodiversity awareness. The objective is to build institutional 
competencies for dialogue and cooperation and increase environmental communication capacities within the three 
institutions to build inclusive sustainable development. 
 
271. Other appropriate and relevant avoidance and mitigation options have been proposed in ESMP, which will reduce 
the potential impacts of the project to an acceptable level (Annex 6b). 
 
272. Annex 7a “Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement Plan and Grievances Mechanism Report” summarizes the 
process of extensive stakeholder consultations undertaken throughout project preparation process to obtain 
feedback and discuss recommendations and concerns, the environmental and social impacts, the preliminary 
measures proposed by the project to manage negative impacts and explore opportunities to maximize positive 
impacts. All in all, 364 people have been consulted in 25 working meetings and 2 workshops including: 
 
Regional, local and community consultations in the three selected project regions and 8 target districts.

=== PAGE 93 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 90 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
Meetings with the NGOs in Tbilisi: The purpose of the meetings was to obtain feedback regarding the 
project and understand their concerns and obtain their recommendations regarding impact mitigations. 
 
Two validation workshops were held in Tbilisi with Government, MDBs, and members of civil society to 
present the project and the ESIA/ESMP. These meetings were organized by the MoEPA and the GIZ. 
 
273. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan is provided in Annex 7b, Chapter 3.4, including the grievance mechanism 
procedure, which is described in the Chapter 3.5 of the same report. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan 
274. The detailed findings of the Gender Assessment (GA) and the Gender Action Plan (GAP), can be found in the 
Annexes 8a and 8b to the FP. The process to develop these documents has been guided by the GCF Gender 
Policy and GCF and GIZ Gender Mainstreaming Guidelines and involved a) Review of all relevant project 
documentation, including regulatory documentation and the standards that the project will need to abide by; b) 
Analysis of secondary (existing documentation); c) Information gathering and stakeholder consultation in Tbilisi 
and the three target regions and preparation of the stakeholder engagement report; and d) Analysis of primary 
data from stakeholder engagement process. 
 
275. The GA identified women as being particularly vulnerable. This is because while fuel wood is usually cut in the 
forest by men, further splitting of wood, carrying it home and putting it in stoves is performed by women. So in 
fact, women are rather the ones who control the consumption of fuel wood and carry the burden associated with 
regular provision of heat supply in homes. For example, those women who already have been exposed to the use 
of AFs, such as briquettes refer very positively to this experience as briquettes “are easy in use and depending 
on the type of tree they are made of, give much warmth”. Poor households are also vulnerable as regards their 
ability to invest in efficient stoves, which are pricier than conventional ones. This limitation is particular prominent 
for women-headed households, which comprise 33% of the total in rural areas. 
 
276. Based on conducted assessment, the following key recommendations were made to address the identified 
vulnerabilities and ensure equal participation and benefits-sharing from the project: 
 
Strengthening gender competencies in partner structures 
 
Establishing gender-responsive framework conditions 
 
Include women as key actors and change agents in planning and decision-making processes; e.g. by 
promoting women cooperatives in the supply chain of raw materials for alternative fuel production 
 
Improve access of women to resources (fuel, forest, money, information); e.g. through household advisory 
services for EE-AF solutions and financing schemes that specifically focus on vulnerable households (women-
led households and single parents) 
 
Ensure gender mainstreaming in information campaigns, organized and led by women’s organization, to 
increase women’s visibility and generate knowledge within the community on the key role women play for the 
successful implementation of EE-AF solutions;  
 
Support the collection of gender-disaggregated data  
 
277. As a result of stakeholder consultation and conducted analysis, the following key gender-related results of the 
project has been agreed upon: 
 
Minimum 30% of participants in the FMP and business plan development consultations are women; 
 
All female representatives of municipal councils and gender focal points are invited to stakeholder 
consultations on forest related topics 
 
70% of the female-headed households in the target regions state that they have easy access to fuelwood 
through the new system 
 
100% of policies, regulations, training materials at the knowledge management and information platform, 
supported by the project are gender sensitive 
 
The FIMS has integrated gender-disaggregated data collection options in its concept 
 
At least 25%175 of beneficiaries of the voucher programme are women-headed households 
 
175 The average number of women-headed households in Georgia is 39%. However, the share in urban areas is higher than in rural areas. 
The voucher programme targets rural areas; therefore a conservative approach is taken here.

=== PAGE 94 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 91 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 
25%176 of the households visited by the technical advisers of the local information centers are female-headed. 
278. In order to ensure that the GAP is implemented and expected gender-related results are achieved, regularly 
monitored and evaluated, gender mainstreaming and monitoring training will be conducted for all GIZ and Project 
Implementation Unit staff (representatives of NFA, DES, EIEC, ARDA, GIZ) and responsibilities assigned 
accordingly. 
G.3. Financial management and procurement 
279. Financial management: The financial management of the project will follow GIZ’s internal rules and regulations. 
GIZ has bank accounts with Deutsche Bundesbank and Commerzbank. GIZ will not open a specific bank account 
for GCF proceeds and other GCF funds but will ensure that all funds provided are clearly identifiable from GIZ’s 
other funds by setting up separate cost units exclusively for the funds disbursed by the GCF for each funded 
activity (ledger accounts). Funds received and expenditures incurred will be booked to the respective cost unit 
according to generally accepted accounting principles and procedures accepted by the German government. As 
a general principle, GIZ disburses funds to the recipients in accordance with the progress of the project. The 
Executing Entities will have to prove the proper use of funds and the defined progress as a prerequisite for any 
further disbursement. Independent external auditors will perform annual financial audits of the project in line with 
International Auditing Standards. 
 
280. Procurement: In case of procurement by GIZ, GIZ will follow its own procurement guidelines. GIZ is required to 
comply with the relevant contracting rules as established in the German Act against Restraints of Competition 
(GWB), the German Regulation on the Award of Public Contracts (VgV) and, if applicable, the Contracting Rules 
for the Award of Public Service Contracts (VOB and UVgO) when procuring services, construction work, and 
supplies.  
 
281. When awarding contracts for supplies and services (including consultancy services) to be financed in full or in part 
from the grant agreement, the external Executing Entities will observe their own national regulation for public 
procurement and will in any case comply with the provisions mentioned in the Procurement Guidelines for projects 
funded by GCF/GIZ.  
 
282. The Procurement Guidelines shall not contradict the applicable national procurement law and/or regulations for 
public procurement, which apply in the Executing Entities country. In principle, the regulations of the Executing 
Entities country are to be observed; the procurement procedures mentioned in the Guidelines are obligatory 
minimum standards. While implementing a project with public funds the Executing Entities should take reasonable 
account of economic efficiency as well as ecological and social aspects. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
  
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  
Redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information. 
 
176 The average number of women-headed households in Georgia is 39%. However, the share in urban areas is higher than in rural areas. 
The awareness activities target rural areas, therefore a conservative approach is taken here.

=== PAGE 95 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 92 OF 92 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA No-objection letter 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility Study 
Annex 2a  Feasibility Study 
Annex 2b  Appendices 1-6 and 10 
Annex 2c  Appendix 7: Private Sector Study 
Annex 2d  Appendix 8: Capacity Needs Assessment 
Annex 2e  Appendix 9: EE & Alternative market profile supplier – Survey results 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and financial analyses 
Annex 3a  Economic and Financial Valuation Model 
Annex 3b  Economic and Financial Valuation Summary 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Project Budget 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Project Implementation Timetable 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category:  
Annex 6a Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
Annex 6b Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
Annex 6c ESIA Annex 1 - Environmental Assessment Code 
Annex 6d ESIA Annex 2 - Exclusion List 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
Annex 7a Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement Plan & Grievance Mechanism 
Annex 7b Annexes to Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement Plan & Grievance Mechanism 
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project-level action plan 
Annex 8a Gender Assessment (GA) 
Annex 8b Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
☐ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE Fee Budget Request  
☒ 
Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter 
Annex 13a Co-finance Letter – Government of Georgia 
Annex 13b Co-finance Letter - BMZ 
Annex 13c Co-finance Letter - SIDA 
Annex 13d Co-finance Letter – Crystal 
Annex 13e Co-finance Letter - SDC 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet 
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval 
Annex 15a GIZ Letter of Internal Technical Approval 
Annex 15b GIZ Letter of Internal Legal Approval 
Annex 15c GIZ Letter of Internal Approval – Safeguard and Gender Desk 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling/replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Other references 
Annex 22a GHG emissions calculations 
Annex 22b Overview of Project Concept 
Annex 22c Facility Graph 
Annex 22d Temporary Annex on Co-financing

=== PAGE 96 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 98 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or 
programme title 
Enabling implementation of forest sector reform in Georgia to reduce 
GHG emissions from forest degradation 
Existence of 
subproject(s) to 
be identified 
after GCF Board 
approval 
No 
Sector (public or 
private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH 
Environmental 
and social 
safeguards (ESS) 
category 
Category B 
Location – 
specific 
location(s) of 
project or target 
country or 
location(s) of 
programme 
Georgia - three target regions of Kakheti, Mtskheta-Mtianeti and Guria 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website 
Friday, May 8, 2020 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English and Georgian 
Explanation on 
language 
Georgian is the official language of Georgia. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
GIZ website 
ESIA 6a 
Georgian: 
GIZ ECOserve website 
ESIA 6a 
Other link(s) 
Environmental Information and Education Center (EIEC) website: 
English: 
ESIA 6a 
Georgian: 
ESIA 6a 
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture of Georgia (MEPA) 
website: 
English: 
ESIA 6a

=== PAGE 99 ===
Georgian: 
ESIA 6a 
 
National Forestry Agency (NFA) website: 
English: 
ESIA 6a 
 
Georgian: 
ESIA 6a 
 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a category B project is 
contained in the ‘Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and 
Environmental and Social Management Plan. Volume. 1 - Environmental 
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA).  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website 
Friday, May 8, 2020 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English and Georgian 
Explanation on 
language 
Georgian is the official language of Georgia. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
GIZ website 
ESMP 6b 
  
Georgian: 
GIZ ECOserve website 
ESMP 6b 
Other link(s) 
Environmental Information and Education Center (EIEC) website: 
English: 
ESMP 6b 
 
Georgian: 
ESMP 6b 
 
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture of Georgia (MEPA) 
website: 
English: 
ESMP 6b 
 
Georgian: 
ESMP 6 b 
 
National Forestry Agency (NFA) website: 
English: 
ESMP 6b 
 
Georgian: 
ESMP 6b 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B project is 
contained in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and

=== PAGE 100 ===
Environmental and Social Management Plan. Volume. 2 - Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (ESMP). 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on 
language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website 
Gender Assessment (GA) and Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
 
Friday, May 8, 2020 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English and Georgian 
Explanation on 
language 
Georgian is the official language of Georgia. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
GIZ website 
Gender Assessment 8a 
Gender Action Plan 8b 
 
Georgian: 
GIZ ECOserve website 
Gender Action Plan 8b 
Gender Assessment 8a 
Other link(s) 
Environmental Information and Education Center (EIEC) website: 
English:  
Gender Assessment 8a 
Gender Action Plan 8b 
 
Georgian: 
Gender Assessment 8a 
Gender Action Plan 8b 
 
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture of Georgia (MEPA) 
website: 
English: 
Gender Assessment 8a 
Gender Action Plan 8b 
 
Georgian: 
Gender Assessment 8a

=== PAGE 101 ===
Gender Action Plan 8b 
 
National Forestry Agency (NFA) website: 
English: 
Gender Assessment 8a 
Gender Action Plan 8b 
 
Georgian: 
Gender Assessment 8a 
Gender Action Plan 8b  
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, May 8, 2020 
Place 
The ESIA, ESMP, GA and GAP were made available at: 
 
NFA regional Offices: 
- 
Kakheti  
Kvareli, #6 Agmashenebeli Street 
- 
Mtskheta-Mtianeti  
Mtskheta, #17 Mukhrani Street  
- 
Guria 
Ozurgeti, #5 Giorgadze Street 
 
GIZ Office Tbilisi (hard copies): 
GIZ Office South Caucasus 
31 Griboedov Str. 
0108 Tbilisi, Georgia 
+995 32 2201800 
+995 32 2201801 
giz-georgia@giz.de  
 
GIZ website (soft copies) 
 
Partner website(s): 
EIEC website 
 
MEPA website 
 
NFA website 
 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of 
accredited 
entity’s Board 
meeting 
TBD after GCF Board approval 
Date of GCF’s 
Board meeting  
Tuesday, June 23, 2020 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 102 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP132 
Proposal name: 
Enabling Implementation of Forest Sector Reform in Georgia to 
Reduce GHG Emissions from Forest Degradation 
Accredited entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH 
(GIZ) 
Country/(ies): 
Georgia 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I.
Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The project aims to achieve a large volume of 
emission reductions (16.1 million tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent over 20 years) by 
implementing sustainable forest 
management at scale through the 
improvement of forest and rural energy value 
chains, tied to the provision of heating 
fuelwood in rural Georgia 
The project requires the coordination of a 
number of governmental and financial 
institutions and partnerships with the private 
sector, which makes implementation 
complex. The experience of the Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit in the forestry sector in the 
country makes it an ideal partner to 
implement the proposal 
The project aims to set up an innovative 
financial and technical support facility that 
integrates the forestry products supply chain 
and energy-efficient equipment for rural 
communities, tailored to the local barriers to 
the use of stoves and the historical usage of 
forests by communities. 
Component 3, to be financed with a grant 
from the Swiss Agency for Development and 
Cooperation, still requires further 
development, but, from a theory of change 
perspective, it helps strengthen the 
sustainability of the intervention by 
improving community involvement and 
transparency in the implementation of 
forestry management plans, developing 
formal livelihoods linked to forest value 
chains, and providing technical skills and 
vocational training. While not fully developed 
and requiring further due diligence, there 
was merit in including component 3 in the 
proposal due to its strong linkage with the 
rest of the intervention. Conditions will be 
included to ensure full compliance with GCF 
safeguards and integration with other 
components

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 103 
 
 
The project aims to leverage financing from 
the banking sector and reinvest revenues 
from the National Forestry Agency with a 
total investment of over EUR 140 million 
over the course of the project. 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XVIII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background and climate rationale 
3. 
Georgia is an Eastern European country with extensive forests that play a prominent 
role in the absorption of carbon dioxide. However, the absorption capacity in the land use, land-
use change and forestry sector is rapidly decreasing as a result of climate change impacts and, 
principally, of the demand for fuelwood from the rural population. Up to 90 per cent of rural 
households, or 1.43 million people, rely on fuelwood for their energy needs, most importantly 
heating during Georgia’s cold winters. This leads to forest degradation and loss of carbon 
absorption capacity, which is projected to decrease fivefold between 1990 and 2030. The 
Government of Georgia therefore prioritized the forest sector in its nationally determined 
contribution (NDC), aiming to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 6 million tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) by introducing sustainable forest management (SFM) on 250,000 
hectares of state-managed forest lands. 
4. 
The proposal by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) 
aims to introduce SFM, in line with Georgia’s NDC and the Forestry Sector Reform initiated in 
2013, in 270,807 hectares of forest in three target regions: Guria, Kakheti and Mtskheta-
Mtianeti, with the long-term transformational goal of bringing the totality of Georgian forests 
into the system.  
5. 
The implementation of successful SFM is a complex process requiring the coordination 
and support of public sector institutions, the private sector, and the rural population as 
historical users of forests for the fulfilment of their energy needs. The accredited entity (AE), 
GIZ, has identified gaps in technical capacity, enforcement and supervision, unreliable forestry 
inventories and databases, and inadequate monitoring and financing for the forestry sector.  
6. 
Furthermore, GIZ has also documented that there is strong potential in energy savings in 
the substitution of the traditional heatstoves, typically locally made and available at a low 
upfront cost, for energy-efficient ones, which last longer and consume approximately half the 
fuel. Rural consumers face very significant barriers to obtaining affordable financing for energy-
efficient cookstoves as well as a lack of information on the characteristics of the stoves to make 
informed decisions. The supply chain remains undeveloped, as producers of stoves also lack the 
ability to raise capital, implement quality standards or access certification. Prospective 
producers of alternative fuels such as pellets lack the ability to reliably access raw materials. A 
regulatory framework is also needed to provide an enabling environment for the development 
of the market. 
7. 
The proposal by GIZ presents a two-pronged approach to tackle the issue: component 1 
will support the establishment of a nation-wide SFM system, while component 2 will address 
the main driver of deforestation by reducing the consumption of fuelwood by the rural 
population through the development of a market for energy-efficient and alternative fuels. 
Component 3 will contribute to the sustainability of the project by addressing potential adverse

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 104 
 
 
effects of the Forestry Sector Reform safeguards on the rural population by diversifying 
livelihoods, ensuring the participation of the local population in forestry product value chains 
and strengthening local self-governance in forest-adjoining rural communities.  
2.1.1. 
Project financing 
Funding sources (EUR) 
Key GCF funding uses (EUR) 
GCF 
32,791,621 
Implementation of SFM: FMP development, 
SFM equipment, etc. 
14,207,155  
Govt. of Georgia 
118,056,871 
Forest supervision, provision of fuelwood, 
establishment of enabling environment  
7,837,939  
German Federal 
Ministry for 
Economic 
Cooperation and 
Development 
10,000,000 
Market development for energy efficiency 
and alternative fuels 
8,468,649  
Other 
17,098,970 
Monitoring, contingencies 
1,084,484  
Total 
177,947,642 
PMC 
1,193,394  
Abbreviations: FMP = forestry management plans, PMC = Project Management Costs, SFM = sustainable 
forest management. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Component 1: Sustainable forest management (total cost: EUR 138,909,825; GCF cost: EUR 
22,045,092, or 16 per cent) 
8. 
This component, which will receive the bulk of financing, will contribute directly to the 
implementation of the Forestry Sector Reform through the development and implementation of 
eight forestry management plans (FMPs) and the establishment of an enabling environment 
addressing barriers to the gradual expansion of SFM to other areas, including downstream 
legislation, institutional coordination and vocational education. FMPs will be 10-year plans 
developed by the National Forestry Agency (NFA), based on forest inventories, data analysis and 
consultations with the local communities, which will determine restoration and management 
activities, cutting operations and any other activities affecting the forest areas.  
9. 
GCF financing will also contribute to (i) the enhancement of the technical capacity of the 
NFA to supervise and enforce the legislation, as well as (ii) the monitoring/measurement, 
reporting and verification (MRV) of the forest sector. GCF funding will enable the procurement 
of specialized equipment capable of reaching remote areas to collect evidence of illegal 
activities, which is particularly important in a context where the informal collection of firewood 
and forest products has been common in rural settings. The establishment of a strong MRV 
architecture, requiring the development of tailored accounting systems, databases and modules, 
is critical to understand the status of the carbon sinks and the impact generated by the forests.  
10. 
Finally, activity 1.3 will support the creation of the infrastructure that will enable NFA to 
sustainably exploit the forests in accordance with the FMPs, generating revenues to finance the 
maintenance and expansion of NFA SFM operations. The project will support NFA in the 
development and operation of fourteen business service yards, including construction, purchase 
of equipment, training of staff, operational planning, and monitoring. Technical assistance will 
be provided to (i) develop guidelines, operating procedures and training to optimize the

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 105 
 
 
processing of timber as the key revenue-generating mechanism for NFA; and (ii) establish a 
mechanism to provide quality fuelwood to the population to address their energy needs.  
Component 2: Market development for energy efficiency and alternative fuels (total cost: EUR 
28,337,632; GCF cost: EUR 8,468,649, or 30 per cent) 
11. 
This component aims to create a paradigm shift in rural energy access in Georgia by 
moving from inefficient stoves and low-quality fuelwood, obtained from highly informal 
markets, to a market with efficient stoves, a reliable supply of quality fuelwood and the 
provision of technical services. 
12. 
The project will work on both the supply and demand side for energy efficiency and 
alternative fuel solutions. Supply-side barriers will be comprehensively addressed with the 
creation of the Technical Assistance and Investment Support Facility (TAISF) within the 
Agricultural and Rural Development Agency (ARDA). The Technical Assistance and Investment 
Support Facility will act as a one-stop-shop tasked with: 
(a) 
The improvement of technical, managerial and financial capacities of small and medium-
sized enterprises and cooperatives in the energy efficiency and alternative fuels supply 
chain through a training package and direct advisory services; 
(b) 
The certification of products in line with international standards, addressing critical 
information gaps for consumers and allowing the market to shift away from sub-
standard products; 
(c) 
Facilitation of access for energy efficiency and alternative fuels suppliers to financing 
through assistance in their development of business plans to support their loan 
applications via ARDA partner banks and to access ARDA investment support 
instruments; 
(d) 
Marketing support, including the development of a marketing strategy and product 
branding, identification of potential institutional customers and the publication of a 
catalogue; and 
(e) 
Investment support in the energy efficiency and alternative fuels supply chain, with 
publicly-funded financial instruments to enable energy efficiency and alternative fuels 
suppliers’ access to commercial loans via ARDA partner banks. A new specific 
investment support scheme for green energy producers/equipment suppliers would 
also be developed by ARDA through technical assistance from the Swedish International 
Development Agency (SIDA). 
13. 
Also on the supply side, the project identifies the scope for innovation in the 
development of specific products or technology packages tailored to the needs of rural 
households for which a market does not currently exist, such as central heating, insulation, solar 
water heating or biogas. Feasibility assessments and pipeline development for new energy 
efficiency and alternative fuel solutions would be conducted through a sub-activity financed by 
the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development to identify such 
opportunities. 
14. 
On the demand side, the project includes activities to implement consumer financing 
instruments, such as creating consumer awareness and providing technical service solutions, 
thus addressing the key financial and informational barriers identified.  
15. 
Access to finance is critical to generate demand for energy efficiency and alternative fuel 
solutions, as certified stoves may cost 5 to 10 times as much as conventional ones, represent a 
very substantial portion of the income of rural households and typically do not qualify for access 
to low-cost financing. The project will support consumer financing for energy-efficient stoves 
and alternative fuels with two interlinked financial instruments (see below), which would

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 106 
 
 
together stimulate demand for up to 30,000 stoves cumulatively until project end with about 
28,000 households switching to alternative fuels: 
(a) 
A results-based financial incentive instrument financed by GCF (EUR 3.6 million) in the 
form of a price discount (via a voucher scheme) on the purchase of an energy-efficient 
stove from certified suppliers for up to 30 per cent of the market price, which will be 
managed by ARDA; and 
(b) 
A consumer loans instrument, financed by local banks and micro-finance institutions 
(EUR 10.5 million), to households from local financial organizations, covering up to 70 
per cent of the costs of the energy-efficient stove and alternative fuels (e.g. upgraded 
solid biofuels) supply package. The project would also support microfinance institutions 
and partner banks to structure and promote consumer financing products. 
16. 
Due to the complex nature of the forestry reform, the informational gaps hindering 
consumer decision-making related to energy efficiency and alternative fuel solutions, and the 
importance of generating behavioural change in the management of forests by communities, the 
project features a strong informational and technical advisory support activity aimed at 
fuelwood users across rural Georgia. The activity covers a range of topics related to the forestry 
reform and energy efficiency and alternative fuels. This includes (a) the provision of 
information about locally available energy efficiency and alternative fuel solutions; (b) outreach 
and awareness-raising on the implications of the Forestry Sector Reform, the options for 
participating in forest management planning and implementation, the impact on fuelwood 
availability, price and availability of energy efficiency and alternative fuel alternatives, and the 
new supply chain of fuelwood via NFA; and (c) the provision of technical advisory services to 
fuelwood users to help them identify and apply optimal energy efficiency and alternative fuel 
solutions in their households. GCF will finance an awareness-raising campaign by the 
Environmental Information and Education Centre (EIEC) on SFM and the forestry reform 
agenda and its linkages with climate change and sustainable energy. 
17. 
Supporting the interventions above, this component will also develop the regulatory 
environment with the introduction and enforcement of energy-efficiency and environmental 
standards and labelling for energy efficiency and alternative fuel solutions, and the introduction 
of energy-efficient procurement practices in the public sector. 
Component 3: Livelihood opportunities and local self-governance in forest management (total cost: 
EUR 4,350,000, financed by the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation) 
18. 
This component, which is not fully developed and is dependent on the confirmation 
from the co-financing partner, would contribute to strengthening the sustainability of the 
proposal by enabling rural communities to better adapt to the changes introduced by the 
Forestry Sector Reform (for example, the loss of livelihoods related to the informal exploitation 
of forest products) and increase their involvement in the implementation of SFM in line with the 
Forestry Sector Reform’s focus on economic benefit-sharing by communities. The component 
would help strengthen the technical capacities of municipalities and citizens to engage in forest 
management and conservation, introducing participation and interest protection mechanisms in 
order to ensure transparent and inclusive forest management planning and implementation, 
developing professional skills and knowledge for forest management and conservation, and 
supporting the transition from informal fuelwood-related income sources to formal livelihood 
options available in various forest-related value chains. 
19. 
While the component is not fully defined and requires further due diligence, and despite 
not being essential, it is perceived as having, in principle, a significant positive impact on the 
sustainability and success of the project, with a low level of associated risk, and thus there is a 
strong case to consider it within the scope of this project. As the component is fully co-financed, 
it is proposed that GIZ fully develop and integrate the component in the relevant documentation 
after approval and prior to the effectiveness of the funded activity agreement (FAA).

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 107 
 
 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria 
3.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
20. 
The project has significant impact potential by contributing to the reduction of 16.1 
million tCO2eq over the project lifetime achieved through its focus on implementing SFM and 
promoting energy-efficient stoves and alternative fuels. The project addresses the key driver of 
forest degradation in Georgia, which is the unsustainable use and harvesting of fuelwood. The 
project targets forest restoration and the implementation of SFM on 270,807 hectares across 
the three regions of Guria, Kakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti. The lessons learned and experience 
built up by the project will, by the end of its implementation, play a crucial factor in scaling up 
SFM to the entire forest area of Georgia in accordance with the newly adopted forest code.  
21. 
The cascade effect of the SFM implementation and the introduction of the Georgia Forest 
and Rural Energy Investment Facility (GFREIF) will enable Georgia to further reduce emissions 
in the future, scale up the project in other regions where fuelwood dominates as the main a 
source of heating, and, secure innovative finance to the forestry and energy efficiency sectors.  
22. 
Beyond the project area, there will be significant opportunities to scale up the piloted 
approach promoted by the project with its implementation of SFM and GFREIF, not to mention 
the many spillover effects the project will have in neighbouring regions. The third component 
targets the diversification of forest-dependent livelihoods and will pave the way, jointly with 
SFM and GFREIF, for ensuring this in other regions by identifying the best approaches and 
mechanisms. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
   
        Scale: High 
23. 
The project promotes an innovative combination of supporting the implementation of 
SFM in accordance with the newly adopted forest code, and ensuring, through GFREIF, the 
opportunity for the forest sector, forest-dependent communities and innovative solutions in the 
energy-efficiency and alternative fuels sectors to establish a solid platform for the future and for 
upscaling to the entire country.  
24. 
GFREIF is a long-term solution that will be able to change and adapt itself overtime to 
meet the future demands Georgia will experience in the forest and energy sector. The facility 
can influence neighbouring countries facing similar challenges in their forest and energy nexus. 
Furthermore, GFREIF is unique due to its very adaptive approach, which can easily be 
replicated, including at subnational level in Georgia using various versions of GFREIF that are 
dedicated to meet local demands and challenges. GFREIF is also a key part of the exit strategy of 
the project and will help maintain and scale up the interventions piloted through GCF 
investments.  
25. 
Through component 3, the local communities will be strengthened, gain capacities and 
ownership in forest management, and be supported in diversifying their livelihoods. The 
combination of the three components builds a solid conglomerate of intervention, capacity-
building and investments that will benefit the country and its communities, private sector and 
forest resources in many years to come.  
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
        Scale: High 
26. 
 The project has high sustainable development potential due to its main focus and its 
combination of forest interventions, which promote sustainable investment with communities 
at the centre. The environmental co-benefits are achieved through healthier and better

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 108 
 
 
managed forests, the increasing flow of ecosystem services, and the conservation and 
management of biodiversity. Through the focus on energy-efficient stoves and the support from 
GFREIF, there will be significant improved health and living conditions at household level, and 
component 3 places a significant focus on creating sustainable and transformative livelihood 
conditions for communities with a significant impact on social co benefits. The economic co-
benefits are significant due to the innovativeness of GFREIF and its ability to cater to the needs 
of the local population and change over time to meet new challenges and opportunities in the 
forest-energy-nexus.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium 
27. 
The forest-energy-nexus in Georgia, with its current challenges of unsustainable 
harvesting and use of fuelwood, poses a significant problem for Georgia to solve. The project 
targets this issue at the core by not only supporting the implementation and scaling up of SFM, 
but also by introducing a strong financing platform. The Government of Georgia has identified 
the forest sector as a key priority as well as a need for additional support to build capacity to 
further implement SFM.  
28. 
The communities in the target region are considered some of the poorest and most 
vulnerable communities in the country, not to mention “energy poor” with no access to other 
sources of energy than fuelwood.  
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
29. 
 Country ownership is considered to be high due to key national targets and priorities 
set on the forest and energy sector. The project is fully aligned with the NDC objective for the 
forestry sector, which is to ensure 250,000 hectares of forests are under SFM by 2030, and also 
supports the newly adopted forest code with the implementation of SFM and the targeting of 
energy poverty and access in rural areas, which is a key priority for the government.  
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
30. 
 The rural areas of Georgia still rely nearly 100 per cent on fuelwood for meeting the 
daily energy demands for heating and cooking. There are no alternatives at present that are 
cheaper and cleaner at present. This dependency on fuelwood is likely to exist many years into 
the future. There is a strong need for public investments to help Georgia identify models such as 
those promoted by the project through the GFREIF to overcome the situation.  
31. 
The project presents a high level of efficiency and effectiveness. The cost per ton of CO2 
reductions is very low, at EUR 2.04 of GCF funding per tCO2eq reduced, benefitting from major 
impacts in the inefficient rural energy sector and sustainable forest management. The project 
has a high co-financing ratio of 4.4:1, and offers a unique opportunity to leverage significant 
public and private-sector finance for the forest and energy-efficiency sectors in the country by 
providing an enabling environment for attracting private sector finance and establishing 
possibilities for kickstarting a new market for energy-efficient stoves and alternative fuels. The 
financial sustainability is also adequate, with a financial IRR of 9.7% - the GCF grant helps make 
the investment financially viable. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 109 
 
 
32. 
The AE has classified the environmental and social risk category of the project as 
medium risk (category B), with risks and/or impacts that are potentially rare or limited to local 
occurrences, have largely reversible consequences, and are easy to manage. The Secretariat 
confirms the category B classification in line with the GCF Environmental and Social Policy and 
that the project is within the environmental and social risk accreditation level of the AE. It has 
prepared an environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) as well as an environmental 
and social management plan, which have identified the potential positive and adverse impacts 
of the project as well as provided for mitigation measures on the negative impacts. While none 
of the activities proposed by the project trigger the preparation of environmental assessments 
under national regulations, procedures for identifying and screening environmental and social 
issues of the interventions and preparing site-specific environmental and social management 
plans will be undertaken during project implementation. 
33. 
The project is not expected to require any involuntary land acquisition and/or 
resettlement and excludes activities that may result in involuntary resettlement or a negative 
change to existing legitimate tenure rights. It will, however, require land for the construction of 
the business service yards, which will be built on land belonging to the state and/or by 
acquiring abandoned brownfield sites through voluntary agreements. The introduction of 
selected value chains such eco-tourism in forests and mountain areas has to be appropriately 
assessed, and management measures have to be put in place. The promotion of forest-related 
value chains will also require formal employment and would need to have appropriate 
measures to ensure sound labour and working conditions. As the project also provides a subsidy 
to suppliers of certified energy-efficient stoves, the ESIA helps make sure that the suppliers 
adopt an environmental and social management system to ensure that their production 
operations comply with national regulations and safeguards requirements.  
34. 
The transition of communities from informally gathering fuelwood as sources of income 
to having formal livelihood options in various forest-related value chains could create economic 
displacement and thus requires support. The project’s intervention to strengthen capacities of 
communities in the target regions to participate in sustainable forest management, among other 
practices, also serves to mitigate potential adverse social impacts of the activities. The project 
will, however, exclude any activities that create significant adverse impacts on local people, 
including ethnic groups, as well as any activities in watersheds or land that is likely to 
contribute to the villages’ increased vulnerability to natural disasters.  
35. 
The project identified the presence of rural populations/communities dependent on 
forests as well as the presence of transient populations (cattle herders). It also highlighted the 
potential impact to vulnerable and transient populations, such as increased household energy 
costs with reduced opportunity to collect fuelwood, declining pastures for grazing and the 
introduction of non-timber forest product (NTFP) collection. Meaningful consultations with 
communities, including the identification of locations where grazing and gathering of NTFP will 
be allowed, will be arranged jointly with the concerned parties, while ensuring that transient 
populations (e.g. cattle herders) are included in the consultation process. The project will 
exclude activities that result in significant damage or loss to cultural property, including sites 
with archaeological (prehistoric), paleontological, historic, religious, cultural and unique natural 
values. 
36. 
The ESIA also includes institutional arrangements for project implementation with a 
focus on who will carry out specific functions relating to environmental and social safeguards in 
project implementation. This includes defining the roles and responsibilities of project staff and 
associated agencies in the implementation of the interventions, the environmental and social 
review, preparation and implementation of safeguard instruments, and monitoring and 
evaluation. In its due diligence criteria for executing entities (EEs), the AE also includes capacity 
to implement environmental and social governance standards. The project aims to provide

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 110 
 
 
capacity-building and strengthening to personnel from the Department of Environmental 
Supervision to ensure enhanced capabilities to prevent illegal fuelwood collection.  
37. 
The project conducted consultations with various stakeholders and plans to engage with 
them continuously throughout project implementation. Particular emphasis is given to ensuring 
those from the three target regions are able to participate in decision-making processes at the 
local level and have access to AE-level as well as activity-level grievance redress mechanisms. In 
line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism and the 
Secretariat’s Indigenous Peoples Focal Point will also be available for affected local 
communities. The project also includes monitoring and evaluation arrangements to monitor the 
implementation of the site-specific safeguard instruments, including the submission of annual 
performance reports to GCF. 
4.2 
Gender policy 
38. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan, and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.  
39. 
In the gender assessment, the AE provided information on the existence of an enabling 
environment to address gender issues and women’s empowerment in the Constitution of 
Georgia and the country’s adoption of a number of laws and regulations. Georgia is also a 
signatory of international conventions on gender equality such as the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. It has adopted institutional 
mechanisms for implementing the commitments made through the Constitution and various 
laws. However, although the legal mechanisms are provided for, there are challenges to 
ensuring gender equality actually happens, as international indices as well as popular 
perception points to low gender parity. The Law on Gender Equality (Article 10.1) ensures equal 
ownership rights to men and women, although inheritance practices are most often based on 
customary law and favour men in ownership rights of parental house and land plots. Georgia 
has adopted a law on the Elimination of Domestic Violence, Protection and Assistance to the 
Victims of Domestic Violence, however, domestic violence is high in the localities where the 
project is to be implemented, with women and men showing high degrees of tolerance and 
perceptions that it is somehow acceptable behaviour by both women and men. Early marriage 
also contributes towards increased exposure to domestic violence. 
40. 
The gender assessment, which is conducted based on a desk review as well as 
consultations with communities and non-governmental organization representatives, has 
indicated that there are inherent gender inequalities to the detriment of women and women-led 
households in general in the project locations. There is low representation of women in 
decision-making positions, despite the existence of a positive attitude of the population towards 
female leadership at both national and local levels. There is a segregation of employment 
opportunities as well, where the forestry sector is dominated by male employees, with men in 
the majority of the decision-making positions. This is linked to a lack of women with adequate 
education as well as to the fact that when women do engage, they engage in policy and analysis 
and not in actual forest inspection work and therefore do not have a complete view of important 
decisions being made. In addition to women’s participation in decision-making being limited 
outside the home, the same is reflected within the home. Women exercise less power in family 
decision-making processes and experience time poverty due to a higher load of non-paid work. 
Ownership and decision-making are generally considered and supported as the man’s role. Men 
are considered by society as the provider for the family, and woman are considered the 
homemakers. The ownership of dwellings, as well as means for agriculture and animal 
husbandry, is higher among men. There are gender-based divisions of labour, which creates 
time poverty for women as they perform the majority of household tasks, including the care of 
the children or sick family members, while at the same time they more engaged in farming and

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 111 
 
 
agricultural works, which is mostly subsistence farming. Poverty linked to unemployment was 
cited as the most urgent problem during consultations. Women-headed households, large 
families and families with children under 15 are particularly vulnerable to poverty.  
41. 
The forests are used in different ways by men and women, but with different intensity 
and purpose. Men go to forests much more frequently and for economic purposes, while women 
refrain from frequently going to the forest for fear of animal attacks. Women’s use of the forest 
is to collect fruit and herbs mostly for household consumption but also for commercial 
purposes. Fuelwood is usually cut in the forest by men who then split the wood and carry it 
home, while women make use of it for cooking, heating the home and other required works 
within the home. The cookstoves used in these households are mostly traditional ones, as the 
energy-efficient stoves are less affordable due to the poor economic situation of women-headed 
households and households with pensioners, in particular. There are three cooperatives that 
were established which could potentially address the fuel-related challenges by producing and 
promoting renewable energy and energy-efficient solutions to women. However, there are 
challenges with regard to demand for their product in the market.    
42. 
The AE, in fulfilling the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy, has provided a gender 
action plan. The gender action plan includes activities, baselines, indicators, targets, budgets and 
gender expertise to support the implementation of the gender action plan. The activities 
included will address issues identified in the gender assessment, such as (i) women’s ability to 
participate in the forest management plans and business plan development consultations; and 
(ii) the time poverty of women by ensuring project activities will take place in consideration of 
time and duration as well as providing childcare services during the planned measures and 
activities. In addition, to provide a protected space, the project will ensure the following: (i) 
women-specific consultations would be held in the women rooms; (ii) there is a minimum 
target of 30 per cent women for any consultations at local level; (iii) the employment of women 
for fuelwood and timber marketing would be encouraged to also address the higher levels of 
unemployment of women; and (iv) that the project provides women with access to fuel, stoves 
that increase efficiency and healthy working conditions while promoting women cooperatives 
in the supply chain of raw materials for alternative fuel production. The project will also ensure 
that financial incentives are attractive for women-led households to ensure the uptake of energy 
efficiency and alternate fuels. Awareness-raising activities as well as reviews of existing policies 
are included to ensure gender sensitivity and gender mainstreaming of existing policies and 
regulations; these sessions might also include information on domestic violence and its impacts.  
43. 
The project intends to include a livelihood component, which is still under development 
and is expected to ensure that there is a focus on women as part of the value chains for NTFP 
products and agro-forestry development. The findings and recommendation of this component 
will be integrated into a revised gender action plan as deemed necessary.  
4.3 
Risks 
4.3.1. 
Overall proposal assessment (medium risk) 
44. 
GCF is requested to provide a grant of EUR 32.7 million to support the establishment of 
a nationwide SFM system and the promotion of energy-efficient heating stoves and alternative 
fuels. These interventions are to address main drivers of Georgia’s forest degradation and 
unsustainable fuelwood consumption. The project aims to achieve co-financing from multiple 
sources: (i) a grant from the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, SIDA and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) (to be 
confirmed later) of EUR 10 million, EUR 2 million and EUR 4 million, respectively; subordinated 
debt from Crystal of EUR 10 million; and grant, in-kind and guarantees from the Government of 
Georgia of EUR 118 million.

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 112 
 
 
45. 
Although the project has revenue-generating activities, the AE has indicated that 
expected revenues from SFM activities in the districts will not be sufficient to cover both 
investment and operations and maintenance costs. The Government of Georgia has committed 
to fiscal consolidation under an ongoing International Monetary Fund programme. Based on 
these factors, the AE has proposed GCF grant financing for the project. 
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk) 
46. 
GIZ is an AE and one of the co-executing entities managing GCF resources amounting to 
EUR 11.75 million for this project. GIZ has been working in Georgia since 1992, and its country 
office manages regional programmes covering Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia.  
47. 
There are four other EEs for the project, namely ARDA, the Department of Environment 
Supervision (DES), EIEC and NFA. The AE has conducted capacity assessments of each EE. Based 
on the assessment, the project has been designed to address identified gaps such as the number 
of staff to be hired, training needs and knowledge management.  
4.3.3. 
Program specific execution risks (high risk) 
48. 
Revenue shortfall risks. The implementation of SFM will lead to the production of 
timber and fuelwood harvesting. It is expected that the sales proceeds of these outputs will 
finance the operations and maintenance cost for SFM. There is a risk of revenue shortfall due to 
lower volume and/or prices. The AE has indicated that the new FMP is expected to be in line 
with the projection, and impacts on revenues would therefore be minor. However, with regard 
to market fluctuations, it is hard to estimate the timber price in the market, and lower prices 
would lead to lower revenues. Therefore, it may prolong the maintenance of equipment or 
postpone of implementation.  
49. 
AE oversight for reflow. The estimated revenue of EUR 84.7million has been included 
as co-financing from the NFA, and it will be re-invested into the upscaling and operations and 
maintenance of SFM. The eligible revenue-generating forest management activities are defined 
in the new forestry sector legislation of the Government of Georgia, and NFA has the financial 
independence to generate and retain its own funds through the activities related to its 
mandates. While the AE did not provide clarifications on its oversight mechanism for the reflow 
of forest product revenues, the project may benefit if the AE monitors the reflow to ensure that 
there is no leakage during implementation and that the term sheet includes a clause for the 
plough back of revenues.  
50. 
Complex implementation arrangements and risk of underperformance. Complex 
implementation arrangements and co-financing directly linked to project performance would 
reduce the impact of the project without an appropriate coordination and monitoring 
mechanism. Parts of component 1 will be implemented via a performance-based grant 
mechanism: GCF funding of EUR 9.6 million will cover 50 per cent of the respective costs for 
equipment and forest/skid road construction, and another 50 per cent will be provided by the 
government (NFA). There will be performance assessments in years 1, 3 and 5 to consider the 
milestones achieved, including government co-financing. In component 2, there will be a 
requirement to provide a minimum 10 per cent equity contribution from potential energy-
efficient stove suppliers. The AE clarified that this contribution is not included as co-financing, 
as it cannot be confirmed because it is not yet known how many potential suppliers will apply 
for the loan product. In component 3, the SDC will sign a co-financing agreement prior to the 
second disbursement of GCF financing. The close monitoring of the AE is required for each 
activity to ensure that the envisaged co-financing materializes on time and achieve the planned 
performance.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 113 
 
 
51. 
Delay in government approval. The approval of policies and regulations is linked to 
political processes within the country and it is beyond project control. Delays in approval of the 
forest code, FMPs and key regulations may adversely impact the project and slow down project 
implementation. The AE suggested mitigating this by applying for a phased approach whereby 
the project anticipates high-priority actions and supports FMPs at different stages.  
52. 
Financial and economic analyses. The AE has provided financial and economic 
analysis to justify GCF concessionality and demonstrate its economic benefits. Without 
concessionality, the expected financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of component 1 (SFM) is 
2.4 per cent over 20 years. The EUR 13.2 million in GCF grant funding, covering approx. 25 per 
cent of the capital expenditure of SFM over the first seven years, would increase the FIRR to 9.7 
per cent. For component 2, the expected FIRR is 45 per cent without concessionality. However, 
it is theoretical due to the high cost of energy-efficient stoves and the lack of sizeable domestic 
markets. GCF grants will be used to incentivize the purchase of energy-efficient stoves in the 
form of a subsidy covering 30 per cent of the purchase price (GEL 300/EUR 100 per unit) via a 
voucher scheme. The economic analysis results in an economic internal rate of return of 34 per 
cent, assuming a base case carbon price of EUR 24. 
4.3.4. 
Compliance (medium risk) 
53. 
The activities within this project do not themselves pose an unusually high risk for 
money laundering, terrorist financing or prohibited practices.  The AE has indicated that it will 
have internal controls to sufficiently monitor and mitigate any risks of such illicit activities 
within the project.  Based on the information provided, Compliance risk is assessed as medium. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk) 
54. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains non-
material and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration level, results area or single 
proposal. 
4.3.6. 
Conclusion: 
55. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
 
Summary risk assessment 
Rationale 
Overall programme 
Medium 
The project has a complex 
implementation arrangement with 
multiple executing entities and co-
financiers, as well as revenue-
generating activities. Therefore, the 
coordination role of the accredited 
entity will be critical. The reflow of 
revenues from the project and the 
co-financing status needs to be 
closely monitored to achieve the 
envisaged project impact  
Accredited entity/executing 
entity capability 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
56. 
The EEs for the project are NFA (a legal entity of public law of the Ministry of 
Environmental Protection and Agriculture (MOEPA) of Georgia), DES (a state subagency of

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 114 
 
 
MOEPA), EIEC (a legal entity of public law of MOEPA) and ARDA, a non-entrepreneurial (non-
commercial) legal entity of MOEPA.  
57. 
Besides being the AE of the project, GIZ will act as an EE. As the AE, GIZ has the oversight 
responsibility for the overall project as defined in the accreditation master agreement (AMA) 
between GCF and GIZ. It will administer the funds on behalf of GCF and provide oversight 
guidance and quality assurance for the EEs. 
58. 
The AE will transfer GCF funds to the five EEs. The EEs DES, EIEC and NFA will all use 
the funds within the context of component 1: Sustainable forest management. The funds for 
ARDA will flow into component 2: Energy efficiency and alternative fuels. ARDA will transfer the 
GCF-financed funding of the household subsidy scheme for EE stoves via a voucher programme 
to the consumers. Banks and microfinance institutions will provide energy 
efficiency/alternative fuels financing to consumers via consumer loans. SIDA will provide 
funding to ARDA for technical assistance and transfer funding to a national institution (to be 
identified) to implement community mobilization with consumers as the final beneficiaries. 
59. 
The project will establish a Steering Committee as the main governing body for the 
project. The Committee will meet two times per year and members will consist of department 
heads/directors from ARDA, DES, EIEC, GIZ, Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development 
(MESD), MOEPA, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure, 
NFA, non-governmental organizations, SDA and SIDA. The mandate of the Steering Committee 
includes (i) providing overall guidance for the project; (ii) providing feedback and approving 
annual work plans, annual reports and audits; (iii) ensuring project coherence with the 
evolution of the international and national context; (iv) being informed of project adherence 
with the ESS and gender action plan objectives; and (v) supporting the coordination of project 
activities across different line ministries and between the private and public sectors and civil 
society (see section B.4., para. 145, of the funding proposal). A Project Implementation Unit, 
with representatives of all EEs, will be set up for the duration of the project. The mandate of the 
unit will include to discuss, monitor and promote the best possible synchronization of 
implementation between the EEs, ensure that budgets and work plans are on track, and monitor 
project progress and prepare monitoring reports, among other items.  
60. 
Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (in addition to the environmental 
and social management plan and gender action plan monitoring) will comply with the relevant 
GCF policies, as stipulated in the AMA, FAA and project-related financing agreements and 
implementation agreements with EEs and implementation partners, which EEs will extend to 
subgrantees. 
61. 
Details on the budget for component 3 are still pending and will be available once SDC 
funding is approved in December 2020. This may be a condition in the FAA, and the budget has 
been assessed based on this. This is a draft assessment and is subject to change based on further 
review of the updated funding proposal and budget. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
4.5.1. 
Logical framework  
62. 
The logical framework has been designed with relevant details, including reporting on 
core indicators for mitigation and impact, and outcome and output indicators for the result 
areas and project targets as per the GCF results management framework/performance 
measurement framework. Midterm and final targets are specified.  
63. 
There are four clear results areas and they are in turn given appropriate monitoring 
indicators. The result areas are (a) reduced forest degradation and enhanced timber stocks; (b) 
switch in the fuelwood supply from illegal outtakes to a sustainable level of outtakes by NFA for

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 115 
 
 
the population of the three target regions; (c) self-sustaining level of growth of energy-
efficiency/alternative fuels market reached (30 per cent market share for energy-efficient 
stoves and 15 per cent market share for alternative fuels); and (d) roll-out of SFM and 
continuous energy-efficiency/alternative fuels market development secured via an enabling 
regulative framework.  
64. 
GCF-level outcomes and impacts are specified in-line with the GCF pre-set results area 
guidelines. They are given quantitative as well as qualitative indicators. As for the qualitative 
indicators, a change process is explained with anticipated, gradual levels of progress towards 
the final target. Anticipated outcomes are: 
(a) 
M6.0 Increased number of small, medium and large low-emission power suppliers. This 
outcome is indicated by “M6.2 Number of households and individuals (males and 
females) with improved access”. It is foreseen that 30,730 households by year seven, the 
final year of project implementation, will be reached; and  
(b) 
M9.0 Improved management of land or forest areas contributing to emission reductions. 
This outcome is indicated by “M.9.1 Hectares of land or forests under improved and 
effective management that contributes to CO2 emission reductions”. It is foreseen that 
270,807 hectares of forest will be subject to forest management plans approved by 
MOEPA by year seven, the final year of project implementation.  
65. 
The anticipated impacts are: 
(a) 
M4.0 Reduced emissions from land use, reforestation, reduced deforestation, SFM, and 
conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks. This impact is indicated by 
“M4.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) reduced or avoided (including 
increased removals) – forest and land use”. It is estimated that the cumulative emission 
reduction by the end of year seven will be 5.3 million tCO2eq. 
66. 
Lastly, the core indicators are estimated, computed on the basis of foreseen impacts. 
Core indicators are:  
(a) 
E. 2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) to be reduced or avoided. 
An annual reduction of 805,000 tCO2eq is estimated, and 16.14 million tCO2eq should be 
abated over the 20 years of the expected lifetime of the project;  
(b) 
E. 2.2. Estimated cost per tCO2eq, defined as total investment cost/expected lifetime 
emission reductions. Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed is EUR 2.04 and total cost 
per tCO2eq reduced is EUR 11.06;  
(c) 
E. 2.3. Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme 
as a result of GCF financing, disaggregated by public and private sources. Expected total 
leverage ratio is 5.6; 
(d) 
E. 2.4. Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by sex. It 
is estimated that by the end of year seven, a total of 98,337 beneficiaries, of which 
51,135 are women, will have received the project-funded financial incentive for an 
energy-efficient stove. In terms of indirect beneficiaries, 1,000,000 will have received 
information and advisory support through the project, 520,000 of them female; and  
(e) 
E. 2.5. Number of beneficiaries relative to total population, disaggregated by sex. It is 
estimated that by the end of year 7 (end of project implementation), male direct 
beneficiaries will account for 1.8 per cent of the total population, and female direct 
beneficiaries will account for 1.9 of the total population. As for indirect beneficiaries, 
male indirect beneficiaries will account for 13 per cent of the total population, and 
female indirect beneficiaries will account for 14 per cent of the total population.  
4.5.2. 
Implementation timetable

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 116 
 
 
67. 
The funding proposal implementation timetable has been completed appropriately. It 
shows all activities and key milestones associated with each phase of the project, and they are 
consistent with the ‘logical framework’. 
4.5.3. 
Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements  
68. 
The arrangements for monitoring, reporting and evaluation (section E.7 of the funding 
proposal) are adequate. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
69. 
The AMA was signed with the AE on 15 November 2017, and it became effective on 18 
January 2019. 
70. 
The AE has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project . 
71. 
The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of Georgia. GCF is provided 
with privileges and immunities in the Republic of Georgia pursuant to the agreement signed 
between GCF and the Government of Georgia on the privileges and immunities of GCF dated 24 
August 2017. 
72. 
In the funding proposal and term sheet, it sets out that the operational details (detailed 
budget, logical framework and implementation plan) of Component 3 which will be further 
developed after the approval of the funding proposal by the Board but before the 2nd 
disbursement by the Fund. However, the implementation and contractual arrangements of 
Component 3 were assessed and agreed in the term sheet. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
73. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Signature of the FAA in a form and substance satisfactory to the Secretariat within 180 
days from the date of Board approval; and 
(b) 
Completion of legal due diligence, as well as full development and due diligence of 
component 3, to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 117 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP132 
Proposal name: 
Enabling Implementation of Forest Sector Reform in Georgia to 
Reduce GHG Emissions from Forest Degradation 
Accredited entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH 
(GIZ) 
Country/(ies): 
Georgia 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I.
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 
Impact potential 
    Scale: High 
1.
Based on the submitted funding proposal for the proposed project and annexes thereto,
which were reviewed by the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP), it can be concluded
that Georgia is committed to contributing towards international efforts to address climate
change. The country has recognized the important role its forest resources can play in
delivering climate mitigation responses. In a recent national study of the country’s future
greenhouse gas (GHG) emission pathway, the business as usual scenario showed that national
GHG emissions are expected to rise by 70 per cent by 2030. Therefore, in its nationally
determined contribution (NDC), Georgia recognized its forest sector as a primary source of GHG
emission reductions to alter the business as usual scenario. According to the NDC, the Georgian
forest sector can deliver an estimated 6 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2eq)
of GHG emission reductions through the introduction of sustainable forest management on
about 250,000 hectares (ha) of State-managed forest land over the period 2020–2030. Given the
potential of the forest sector of Georgia to deliver mitigation benefits, the project idea on which
this funding proposal is based was developed and submitted to GCF for funding.
2.
The funding proposal clearly explains that there is evidence that the land use, land-use
change and forestry sector of Georgia is facing a decreasing carbon absorption capacity,
primarily due to unsustainable fuelwood harvesting by rural households as a result of the need
to meet their ever-increasing energy demand. It is reported that about 90 per cent of rural
households in Georgia rely on fuelwood for their cooking and other energy needs; their
unsustainable sourcing of fuelwood from the forests of Georgia has been strongly attributed to
the degradation of forests in the country. Although climate change impacts have also been
identified as a further cause of forest degradation, the funding proposal emphasizes that the
major source of the degradation is unsustainable harvesting of wood products from forests.
3.
Sustainable forest management, which will be at the core of the proposed project
framework to deliver mitigation benefits, involves the management of forests so that their
benefits, including their use for timber and fuelwood, as well as their contribution to food
security, are optimized to meet the needs of society in a way that conserves and maintains
forest ecosystems for the benefit of present and future generations. Recognizing the continuing
degradation of forests in Georgia and the need to reverse that trend, the Government of Georgia
established a national programme titled “Transformational Forest Sector Reform Agenda”
(TFSRA) to place all forest land under an effective sustainable forest management programme.
The Government supports this proposed project submission to GCF as it will enable it to have a

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 118 
 
 
sustainable forest management framework in place to achieve the aims and objectives of the 
TFSRA.  
4. 
Aside from the sustainable forest management framework, which will help to reverse 
the observed degradation of forests in the country, and the role that unsustainable harvesting of 
wood from these forests is playing in the process of forest degradation, the funding proposal 
also recognizes the fact that efficient use of fuelwood can contribute to the restoration of the 
degraded forest, as less fuelwood will be required for the same purpose, thus conserving forest 
biomass. The project concept also takes into consideration the fact that, although wood 
harvesting is carried out unsustainably, some livelihood practices have developed that are 
directly linked to it. Therefore, the combination of the programme’s effects (sustainable forest 
management and efficient use of fuelwood) will eradicate these unsustainable practices, which 
represent livelihoods for some people living near those forests. The design of the proposed 
project recognizes the negative social effect of the elimination of these unsustainable livelihood 
practices that would occur without the introduction of sustainable alternatives. It therefore 
includes, as part of the proposed project activities, a component that is primarily aimed at 
addressing the potential adverse effects of the forest sector reform in order to safeguard the 
project.  
5. 
The above-mentioned considerations formed the focus of the concept of the proposed 
project, which was reviewed by the independent TAP. According to the information provided in 
the funding proposal and annexes thereto, the project has been developed around three major 
components based on the key concepts described above and in the following paragraphs below. 
The three components can be summarized as follows: 
Component 1: Introducing a nationwide sustainable forest management system that will cover all 
forests in Georgia 
6. 
The independent TAP review of the funding proposal indicated that the major objective 
of this component is to operationalize the key aims of sustainable forest management, which 
has been designed through bilateral cooperation over a period of years, and, through 
implementation in the forests targeted in this project, to establish the activities of the planned 
sustainable forest management and firmly scale up implementation in those forests. Activities of 
this component, which will be aimed at operationalizing and scaling up the sustainable forest 
management measures, will be focused on: 
(a) 
Establishing the nationwide main building blocks for sustainable forest management in 
Georgia with the following characteristics: 
(i) 
The appropriate policies and regulatory environment needed for the successful 
launch and operationalization of sustainable forest management across the 
entire country; 
(ii) 
The necessary knowledge, data and information system; and 
(iii) 
Appropriate human and institutional capacities; 
(b) 
Implementing sustainable forest management facilities in the following target regions of 
Georgia: 
(i) 
Kakheti; 
(ii) 
Mtskheta-Mtianeti; and 
(iii) 
Guria; and  
(c) 
Putting in place a robust business model for sustainable forest management.

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 119 
 
 
Component 2: Promoting market development for energy efficiency and alternative fuels1 
7. 
This component will be delivered through activities that will address the main driver of 
Georgia’s forest degradation, namely unsustainable fuelwood consumption by the rural 
population. The key pathway to tackling this driver is by accelerating the growth of energy 
efficiency (EE) and alternative fuel (EE/alternative fuel) opportunities in the supply of energy to 
rural consumers who, in the absence of the project, will continue to use fuelwood to meet their 
energy demand using highly energy-inefficient baseline technologies. Activities for this 
component will be aimed at promoting and developing the market for EE/alternative fuels, 
specifically for rural areas. Expected outcomes can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
Accelerating the EE and AF supply chain; 
(b) 
Catalysing the demand for EE/ and AF activities through consumer awareness-raising 
and provision of financial incentives; 
(c) 
Creating a conducive policy, regulatory and investment framework for the EE sector in 
partnership with EE-AF suppliers, the financial sector and the government framework 
for the EE/ and AE market; and 
(d) 
Addressing demand-side, supply-side and policy barriers to the EE/-AF market. The 
barriers that will be mitigated by this project activity as part of the component 2 
activities will include: 
(i) 
Underdeveloped markets for EE/ and AE technologies; 
(ii) 
Affordability of EE-AFs and access to finance, especially for poor households; 
(iii) 
Low consumer awareness about technologies and fuel alternatives and a 
reduction in fuelwood consumption; and 
(iv) 
Absence of an enabling policy and regulatory framework.  
Component 3: Promoting livelihood opportunities and local self-governance in forest management 
8. 
It is the view of the independent TAP, after reviewing the documents submitted for this 
project, that without component 3, the rural population living near the forests where the 
sustainable forest management measures will be implemented and who will be the key 
recipients of the EE-AF technologies that will be introduced into the market through the 
activities of component 2 may be out of sync with these developments. To carry out the 
activities of components 1 and 2 and at the same time effect a socially just transition to the new 
sustainable forest management, component 3 was designed and proposed. The focus of the 
component 3 activities will cover the people, institutions and policies that will be directly 
impacted by the activities and results of components 1 and 2. Without component 3, the 
barriers represented by people (especially rural inhabitants), institutions and the presence or 
absence of relevant policies may become barriers to the success of the entire project. 
9. 
Key issues that can become clear barriers to the success of the component 1 and 2 
activities, which the activities of component 3 will attempt to mitigate, include: 
(a) 
Absence of strategies, tools, instruments and capacities for municipal authorities to 
participate in sustainable forest management and conservation; 
(b) 
Insufficient participation and representation of local stakeholders in forest-
management-related decision-making; 
(c) 
Lack of qualified personnel and insufficient education opportunities in the forest sector; 
 
1 Alternative fuels in the context of this funding proposal refers to different forms of upgraded solid biofuels, which 
can be produced from woody or vegetable material by modern processes and technologies, such as briquettes, 
pellets or chips sourced from forestry and agricultural residues (e.g. hazelnut shells, vine pruning). Please refer to 
section 5.3.3.1 of the feasibility study for the full description of available alternative fuels in Georgia.

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 120 
 
 
(d) 
Underutilization of economic opportunities in forest-related value chains; and 
(e) 
Displacement of some livelihood activities centered on unsustainable livelihoods in the 
fuelwood market. 
10. 
Activities that will be carried out for each of the three components described above, as 
presented in the funding proposal, are summarized in table 1. 
Table 1:  Project components and activities 
COMPONENT 1: INTRODUCING A NATIONWIDE SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
THAT WILL COVER ALL FORESTS IN GEORGIA 
Activity 1.1: 
Development and implementation of sustainable forest management  
        Subactivity 1.1.1 
Development of the Sustainable Forest Management Plan 
        Subactivity 1.1.2 
Implementation of the Sustainable Forest Management Plan 
Activity 1.2: 
Strengthening forest supervision 
        Subactivity 1.2.1 
Strengthening of procedures, standards and protocols for enhanced forest 
supervision 
        Subactivity 1.2.2 
Implementation of improved forest supervision measures and techniques 
Activity 1.3: 
Provision of sustainably produced fuelwood by the National Forest 
Agency 
        Subactivity 1.3.1  
Support the establishment of the new mechanism for fuelwood provision to 
the local population 
        Subactivity 1.3.2 
Construction of 14 new and refurbishment of 1 existing business service 
yards 
Activity 1.4: 
Enhancement of the enabling environment for the nationwide 
implementation of sustainable forest management 
        Subactivity 1.4.1 
Strengthening of the legal framework for sustainable forest management 
        Subactivity 1.4.2 
Improvement of sector steering and coordination between the sectors 
involved 
        Subactivity 1.4.3 
Development of online knowledge management and training platform for the 
forest sector 
        Subactivity 1.4.4 
Improvement of vocational education and training for the forest sector 
        Subactivity 1.4.5 
Enabling improved integration of climate change adaptation in forest sector 
planning, management and monitoring 
Activity 1.5: 
Improvement of monitoring and measurement, reporting and 
verification systems for the forest sector 
        Subactivity 1.5.1 
Strengthening of the national forest monitoring and the measurement, 
reporting and verification architecture 
        Subactivity 1.5.2 
Development of Forest Information and Management System (FIMS) 
modules 
COMPONENT 2: PROMOTING MARKET DEVELOPMENT FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND 
ALTERNATIVE FUELS  
Activity 2.1: 
Developing the energy efficiency (EE) and alternative fuel 
(EE/alternative fuel) supply chain 
        Subactivity 2.1.1 
Establishing a technical assistance and investment support facility 
        Subactivity 2.1.2 
Feasibility assessment and pipeline development for new EE/alternative fuel 
solutions 
Activity 2.2: 
Implementing consumer financing Instruments for EE/alternative fuel 
solutions 
        Subactivity 2.2.1 
Design, implementation and marketing of the voucher programme for EE 
stoves for households 
        Subactivity 2.2.2 
Providing consumer financing for EE stoves and alternative fuels for 
households (co-financed by financial partners) 
        Subactivity 2.2.3 
Supporting microfinance institutions and partner banks to structure and 
promote consumer financing products for advanced EE/alternative fuel 
solutions 
Activity 2.3: 
Creating consumer awareness about EE/alternative fuel solutions and 
providing technical advisory services for fuelwood users

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 121 
 
 
        Subactivity 2.3.1 
Community mobilization, advocacy and advisory services on EE/alternative 
fuels to fuelwood users 
        Subactivity 2.3.2 
National advocacy and awareness-raising 
Activity 2.4: 
Enabling policies and regulations 
        Subactivity 2.4.1 
Capacity-building for the introduction and enforcement of EE and 
environmental standards and labelling for EE/alternative fuel solutions 
        Subactivity 2.4.2 
Facilitating the introduction of EE procurement practices in the public sector 
COMPONENT 3:PROMOTING LIVELIHOOD OPPORTUNITIES AND LOCAL SELF-GOVERNANCE IN 
FOREST MANAGEMENTa 
Activity 3.1: 
Development and introduction of municipal-level tools, practices, plans 
and capacities for participatory sustainable forest management and 
conservation 
Activity 3.2: 
Development, testing and promotion of local mechanisms to better 
protect interests of adversely affected stakeholders 
Activity 3.3: 
Development of professional skills on sustainable forest management 
and conservation through vocational education and international 
partnerships with centres of knowledge 
Activity 3.4: 
Introduction of selected value chains (e.g. timber, non-timber forest 
products, eco-tourism) 
a: The exact wording of the results and activities might change slightly before formal decision by the Swiss Agency for 
Development Cooperation. 
11. 
The total financing requested (GCF financing plus co-financing) for this project is EUR 
177.69 million. This is expected to be contributed as follows: 
(a) 
GCF: EUR 32.79 million from 100 per cent grant funding; and 
(b) 
Co-financing: EUR 144.90 million sourced as follows: 
(i) 
Grant, in-kind contributions and guarantees from the Government of Georgia: 
EUR 118.06 million; 
(ii) 
Grant from the German Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation and 
Development (BMZ): EUR 10.00 million; 
(iii) 
Grant from the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA): 
EUR 2.25 million; 
(iv) 
Grant from the Swiss Agency for Development Cooperation (SDC): EUR 4.09 
million; and 
(v) 
Subordinated loans from CRYSTAL: EUR 10.50 million. 
12. 
The potential mitigation benefits and co-benefits that will be delivered by this project 
include the following: 
(a) 
The proposed project will involve the implementation of sustainable forest management 
in forests in Georgia. Direct implementation of these management methods will range 
from better supervision of the forest restoration process and protection of the restored 
forest to active silvicultural measures within the forests.2 The project targets forest 
restoration and implementation of sustainable forest management on 270,807 ha across 
the three regions of Kakheti, Mtskheta-Mtianeti and Guria. These activities will deliver 
impacts at the following two levels:  
(i) 
At the first level, the overall planning and better implementation of sustainable 
forest management will lead to the reduction of the degradation of forests 
compared to the baseline scenario. This impact level will affect all forest areas, 
which will be protected and/or also actively managed; and  
 
2 See section 5.2.3 of the feasibility study.

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 122 
 
 
(ii) 
The second level consists of those forests where direct silvicultural measures 
will be implemented, which will include the promotion of natural regeneration 
and enrichment planting that will actively increase carbon stocks over time;  
(b) 
The Ex-Ante Carbon-balance Tool (EX-ACT Tool) of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) with tier 2 default values was used in the 
determination of the reduction in forest degradation when the sustainable forest 
management process that has been carefully designed as part of this project is 
implemented on about 270,807 ha of forest in Georgia. It has been estimated that the 
reduction in forest degradation as a result of implementing sustainable forest 
management measures on the targeted Georgian forest will deliver a GHG emission 
reduction of 2.104 MtCO2eq during the seven years of the project duration and 7.013 
MtCO2eq during the 20-year lifetime of the project;  
(c) 
Standwise data were used to determine species and density depth models, which in turn 
were used to determine the increase in tree density when sustainable forest 
management measures are implemented on the target areas. Forest lands where 
sustainable forest management measures will be implemented are only those within 
areas clearly identified as part of the multifunctional zoning, and will therefore include 
all protective function areas or areas eligible due to any other reason (e.g. those that are 
not easily accessible, situated at high altitude), where the carbon stock increases that 
will be gradually delivered as a result of the sustainable forest management measures 
cannot be disturbed. For this reason, it has been estimated that the sustainable forest 
management measures will cover a forest area of not more than 157,359 ha. 
Enhancement of carbon stocks in this forest area is estimated to deliver a GHG emission 
reduction of 3.194 MtCO2eq during the seven years of the project duration and 9.125 
MtCO2eq during the 20-year lifetime of the project;  
(d) 
The proposed project will result in GHG emission reductions through market 
development of EE/alternative fuels, especially where these solutions are adopted by 
rural households who, by using this efficient end-use equipment, will generate a 
substantial reduction in fuelwood consumption and, consequently, GHG emission 
reductions. A combination of United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) small-scale methodologies AMS-I.E.: Switch from non-renewable biomass for 
thermal applications by the user (version 9.0)3 and AMS-II.G.: Energy efficiency 
measures in thermal applications of non-renewable biomass (version 10.0)4 were used 
to estimate the GHG emission reductions that will result from the introduction of 
EE/alternative fuels into the market. AMS-II.G comprises efficiency improvements in 
thermal applications of non-renewable biomass, including the introduction of high-
efficiency biomass-fired project devices. AMS-I.E comprises activities to displace the use 
of non-renewable biomass by introducing various renewable energy technologies.5 It is 
estimated that the direct GHG emission reductions from the EE/alternative fuels sector 
will be about 1.83 MtCO2eq by the end of the project (seven years), with an additional 
reduction of 6.59 MtCO2eq over the project’s 20-year influence period. This GHG 
emission reduction estimate is not included in the mitigation benefit claims of this 
project to avoid double counting; and 
(e) 
The independent TAP agrees with the methodologies used in all these calculations as 
sound tools to deliver reliable estimates of GHG emission reductions. The total 
mitigation potential of the sustainable forest management measures that have been 
developed for this project and when implemented on the 270,807 ha of Georgian forest 
 
3 See <https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/DB/IO5FJLJFWT91R6B8SO5BC7TXSK27I2>.  
4 See <https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/DB/HLXIKEIBAXBE4EHO24H5IAB824MBD8>.  
5 See section 9.1.2.1 of the feasibility study for a description of the GHG calculations.

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 123 
 
 
has been reliably estimated to be 5.298 MtCO2eq in the seven years of project 
implementation, or 16.138 MtCO2eq over the 20-year lifetime of the project.  
13. 
In addition to the project mitigation benefits reported above, the project will deliver 
direct benefits to about 98,337 beneficiaries who will be the recipients of the project-funded 
financial incentives for EE stoves, which will target 30 per cent of the fuelwood-consuming 
households in the target regions. The project will also deliver indirect benefits to about 
1,000,000 people as co-benefits. Indirect beneficiaries are considered to be the people who will 
receive information and advisory support through the project. In total, 52 per cent of these 
beneficiaries (direct and indirect) are estimated to be women.  
14. 
The independent TAP concludes that this project intervention will deliver a high climate 
impact potential. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High  
1.2.1. 
Comprehensiveness 
15. 
In the absence of this project intervention, the forests of Georgia will continue to 
progressively degrade as the unsustainable sourcing of fuelwood from forests continues. Rural 
households who depend on this unsustainably sourced fuelwood for meeting their energy 
demand will continue to utilize the fuelwood in exceptionally low-efficiency cookstoves. The 
project design, which will introduce carefully planned and designed sustainable forest 
management measures on the target forest areas, will deliver a process that will, over a period 
of time, lead to a reversal of the degradation of the target forest areas and catalyse the 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks.  
16. 
Activities in components 1 and 2 of the proposed project will involve key participation 
from staff working at the National Forestry Agency (NFA), a Georgian State-owned institution 
that has the mandate to manage the forestry sector in the country. Without component 3, other 
forestry sector stakeholders (e.g. rural populations, municipal institutions whose mandate 
covers forest areas, forestry contractors, manufacturers and marketers of EE/alternative fuel 
technologies), may not be as involved as they should in the operationalization of components 1 
and 2. The full integration of component 3 into the project will ensure the engagement of these 
stakeholders who would have otherwise been marginalized, thus creating barriers to the 
success of the entire project. The integrated nature of the project will also enable the 
experiences gained during components 1 and 2 to help in diversifying livelihood strategies for 
the poorest and most vulnerable communities close to the targeted forests. These linkages and 
project integration will deliver comprehensive mitigation of barriers, which will further 
contribute to the success of the project and deliver a paradigm shift. 
17. 
In the absence of the proposed project, the forest of Georgia will continue to degrade, as 
adequate budgeting together with international grants may be inadequate to deliver a reversal 
of the forest degradation. The success of the proposed project will be catalysed by the grant 
from GCF by crowding in several other fund sources, enabling the sustainable forest 
management concept to move from an idea closely developed with bilateral and multilateral 
donor funds that enabled the design of the new sustainable forest management concept to 
implementation. This will not only enable Georgia to meet its national goal of commencing an 
aggressive reversal of the degradation of its forest, but will also enable the country to contribute 
to the international goal of mitigating climate change through the delivery of real and 
measurable GHG emission reductions. This will deliver a needed paradigm shift. 
18. 
The independent TAP believes that the structure of the forest management approach 
described in the funding proposal and annexes thereto, especially the basic sustainable forest 
management principles and integration of the project components, will deliver a workable

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 124 
 
 
governing framework for the forest sector that will be better than in the status quo ante 
situation and more structured and will deliver multidimensional benefits, including: (i) a 
reduction of forest degradation, estimated to amount to about 0.8 t biomass/ha/year; (ii) 
enhanced forest supervision and introduction of a new fuelwood provision mechanism; (iii) 
elimination of illegal logging, which is estimated to currently comprise 85 per cent of residential 
fuelwood demand in Georgia; and (iv) promotion of the market development of EE/AF 
technologies, which is described in the funding proposal as currently at a nascent stage. These 
benefits are comprehensive outputs of the proposed project, which supports the conclusion that 
the proposed project, if successfully implemented, will deliver a high paradigm shift. 
1.2.2. 
Innovation 
19. 
Innovation is partially delivered when changes are made to the way things are done 
according to the status quo, with value creation and the ultimate creation of a better way of 
doing what is failing and its survival through the  delivery of improved results. The status quo 
situation prevailing in the forest sector in Georgia before this proposed intervention was 
conceptualized can be characterized by a continuing degradation of the forests in the country, a 
situation that is presented convincingly in the funding proposal and annexes thereto, which is 
primarily due to unsustainable harvesting of wood from the forests. Successful implementation 
of the proposed project is, however, likely to: (i) decelerate the process of forest degradation in 
Georgia; (ii) eliminate illegal logging from the forests; (iii) introduce and gradually establish 
EE/alternative fuel technologies – which hitherto have been a nascent technology in a nascent 
market; and (iv) introduce new livelihood opportunities to people living in rural areas, 
especially those close to the target forests. This will result in changes to the baseline situation 
that, if delivered by this project, will deliver innovation. Thus, the proposed project structure is 
expected to change the status quo, both in terms of the ways in which forests are managed in 
Georgia, and the way in which rural energy is supplied and utilized at the end-user points in 
rural areas in Georgia. The success of the proposed project will catalyse replication of the 
project concept in other forests and villages in Georgia which are not included in the project 
target areas, thus delivering improved and expanded quality of the project through learning-by-
doing and, where this is replicated in other countries, further expanding the paradigm shift 
capacity of the project. 
1.2.3. 
Creation of an enabling environment/sustainability of outcomes 
20. 
The ability to sustain the sound outcomes of this project will only be engendered if the 
project itself is designed to deliver an enabling environment to do so. In reviewing the funding 
proposal and annexes thereto, the independent TAP specifically studied the documentation to 
identify any such enabling attributes of the proposed project. The following attributes built into 
the project delivery are likely to create such an enabling environment if the project is 
successfully implemented: 
(a) 
A legal and regulatory framework for sustainable forest management in Georgia 
will be created and strengthened: prior to the start of this project, BMZ funding of the 
Integrated Biodiversity Management in the South Caucasus (IBiS) project would have 
worked on overhauling the enabling regulations to align with the new Forest Policy of 
Georgia. However, the need for further reforms has been built into this project to ensure 
that a fit-for-purpose legal and regulatory framework is in place to support the 
sustainable forest management to be newly implemented in the country. A functional 
legal and regulatory framework is essential for the creation of an enabling platform that 
will ensure the sustainability of outcomes delivered by the proposed project. The 
independent TAP is therefore of the opinion that an enabling environment for the 
sustainable planning and implementation of this project and its replication in other 
forests in Georgia will be created by the proposed project;

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 125 
 
 
(b) 
Enhanced capacities of sustainable forest management focal stakeholders will be 
built: such focal stakeholders will include: (i) NFA, the agency with the national 
mandate for forest management in Georgia, whose capacities will be enhanced through 
the development and implementation of sustainable forest management strategies and 
who will be trained on techniques, management and operation of business service yards 
for fuelwood supply that will increase transparency and traceability in the forestry 
sector and ensure that harvesting levels are based on ecosystem-based forest 
management; and (ii) the Department of Environmental Supervision (DES), whose 
capacity will be strengthened with best methods to supervise the forestry system to 
reduce illegal use of forested areas, including illegal logging for fuelwood and industrial 
timber. The project has also been designed to address the barrier of capacities for 
sustainable forest management through the training of staff from NFA, public forest 
management bodies and private sector contractors on Forest Management Plan (FMP) 
development and the operationalization of best practices for sustainable forest 
management. The proposed project has also been designed to address the barrier 
associated with inadequate financing for sustainable forest management 
implementation by supporting NFA and private sector contractors to invest in 
sustainable forest management;6 
(c) 
Enhanced sector steering and coordination: through activity 1.4, the project 
structure has been designed to make use of the National Forest Program (NFP) process 
to facilitate improved cross-sectoral cooperation and coordination, as well as 
information-sharing via the working groups of NFP. The working groups of NFP consist 
of important public and private sector entities with relevance to the forestry sector of 
Georgia. This will enhance the cross-sectoral flow of information on sustainable forest 
management and the EE/alternative fuels component of this project. It will also enhance 
the enabling environment for the successful implementation and replication of the 
proposed project in the country; 
(d) 
The independent TAP observed that many subactivities under activities 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4 
and 2.4 have been designed to create a conducive policy, regulatory and operational 
environment for sustainable forest management and EE/alternative fuel technologies to 
succeed in Georgia. According to the information reviewed by the independent TAP, this 
will be achieved through:  
(i) 
The gradual phase-out of inefficient stoves from the market by introducing and 
facilitating the adoption of mandatory EE and environmental performance 
standards for domestic heating appliances; 
(ii) 
The creation of an initial strong demand for EE/alternative fuel products 
through focal development and application of energy-efficient public 
procurement policies; 
(iii) 
The provision of technical assistance to relevant public authorities to accelerate 
the transposition and practical implementation of the policy and regulatory 
instruments envisaged in the EE and AF, with direct relevance and implications 
for the EE-AF sector and the reduction of fuelwood consumption in rural areas; 
(iv) 
Two key policy instruments, which the proposed project via the Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), as the responsible 
executing entity, will support with BMZ funding for the: 
(1) 
Introduction and enforcement of the EE and environmental standards 
and labelling scheme for EE heating appliances (stoves); and 
 
6 For more detailed information on how the project addresses key barriers, please refer to section 6.2 of the 
feasibility study.

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 126 
 
 
(2) 
Introduction of EE procurement in the public sector; and 
(v) 
The independent TAP also noted that the proposed project framework has very 
elaborate activities to build the capacity of the domestic financial sector of 
Georgia to enable the provision of capital for the growth of the forestry sector; 
and 
(e) 
The independent TAP concludes that all these activities will contribute to establishing 
an enabling environment for the success of the proposed project and its replication in 
other forest areas that are not part of the target areas of this proposed intervention in 
Georgia. 
1.2.4. 
Potential for scaling up and replication 
21. 
The proposed project has been planned and designed to be implemented in eight target 
districts of Georgia. According to the information provided in the funding proposal, the target 
districts cover 14 per cent of the forests under the management of NFA. This means that there 
are ample forest areas under the management of NFA which are degraded and/or degrading 
that will require the same project intervention as proposed in this submission. The information 
presented in the funding proposal shows that if the scaling up of the sustainable forest 
management concept is implemented on all forest managed by NFA, there will be about 1.5 
million ha of forest remaining where the project, after the success of the “proof of concept” 
phase described above, is successfully completed. In addition, there are also forests in areas 
managed by other forest management bodies (e.g. the Adjara Forestry Agency, the Agency of 
Protected Areas), which are also obliged to implement sustainable forest management under 
the New Forest Code. Therefore, the potential for scaling up and replication of the project 
concept is high. The funding proposal states that the sustainable forest management concept 
and the enabling environment at the national level, when implemented, will require about seven 
years to be successfully delivered. The independent TAP believes that this is an adequate period 
of time to build the capacity of relevant forest sector stakeholders in Georgia (NFA, DES, etc.) to 
learn-by-doing and facilitate the scaling up and replication of the project idea to other parts of 
Georgia.  
1.2.5. 
Potential for knowledge-sharing and learning 
22. 
The project design and implementation plan includes a strategy for knowledge-sharing 
and learning that will use as a basis the related recent work carried out by the accredited entity 
(AE) (GIZ) and other donors on forests in Georgia. The proposed project aims to strengthen this 
by building in strategies for the dissemination of information and knowledge to relevant 
stakeholders of the country’s forest sector who will be involved in one way or another in 
implementing this project. The previously developed knowledge base, coupled with the fact that 
GIZ and other donors were involved in the design of the project concept in conjunction with 
many of the stakeholders, as well as the overarching influence of the new Forest Plan of Georgia, 
has provided a strong base for knowledge dissemination and learning. The dissemination of 
project information and knowledge-sharing has been built into the proposed project for the 
relevant stakeholders (some of whom were part of the project design and planning stage), 
including: public institutions (e.g. MoEPA, NFA, DES, the Environmental Information and 
Education Centre (EIEC) and the Agricultural and Rural Development Agency (ARDA)); the 
private sector (e.g. private sector contractors); local communities (populations in target 
districts on the topics of sustainable forest management, forests and climate change; and other 
populations on the topic of broader forest sector reform); civil society organizations; academic 
institutions; and international organizations (e.g. multilateral organizations, development 
cooperation organizations).

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 127 
 
 
23. 
Subactivity 1.4.3 of the proposed project involves the development of an online 
knowledge management and training platform for the forest sector of Georgia. Training 
modules and information materials developed as part of the other project activities will be 
integrated into a knowledge management and training platform. The system will include e-
learning elements, videos and knowledge storage, and will ultimately strengthen the 
management and dissemination of information. The platform will ensure that people engaged in 
the forestry sector have adequate knowledge and skills to effectively implement the actions 
considered under sustainable forest management under the New Forest Code through improved 
knowledge management and dissemination, and through the institutionalization of key sector 
trainings. The knowledge materials on new forest management developed under previous 
interventions involving GIZ7 and other bilateral cooperation, coupled with the new materials on 
sustainable forest management operations that will be developed as the project matures, as well 
as the development of the knowledge management and training platform, will combine to 
provide a robust environment that will enhance the strong potential of the project for 
knowledge-sharing and learning. 
24. 
The proposed project will deliver comprehensive and innovative attributes that the 
independent TAP believes will contribute strongly to a high paradigm shift potential. It will also 
deliver an enabling environment that will make the tangible outcomes of this intervention 
sustainable, while also enhancing replicability of the proof of concept to other forests in Georgia. 
The development of the knowledge management and training platform as part of this project 
will enhance the ability of the project to deliver robust knowledge-sharing and learning 
attributes that are essential for the scalability and replication of this project, and are important 
attributes for the delivery of a paradigm shift in the forest sector of Georgia. In the light of these 
observations, the independent TAP concludes that the paradigm shift potential of this project is 
high. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
                    Scale: High 
1.3.1. 
Alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals  
25. 
The independent TAP reviewed the funding proposal’s claims that successful delivery of 
the project would be aligned with specific Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The 
independent TAP agrees with the notion that if the project is successfully implemented, it will 
directly contribute to the achievement of the following SDGs: 
(a) 
SDG 1 (End poverty in all its forms everywhere): The project will result in lower energy 
expenses (up to 50 per cent or 300 Georgian lari (GEL) on average per household per 
year) due to the installation of energy-efficient technologies by 30,370 households. It 
will also create a platform to increase household incomes through value chain 
development and formal education opportunities;  
(b) 
SDG 3 (Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages): The project will 
deliver the following sustainable development benefits under SDG 3: (i) reduced impact 
of air pollution from fuelwood burning on human health (30,370 households); (ii) 
women and children in particular will benefit from such measures because they usually 
spend more of their time at home;8 (iii) sustainable forest management will further 
provide additional physical and mental health benefits, as people will be able to access 
 
7 GIZ is currently implementing projects in a range of forestry topics, including: REDD+, sustainable forest 
management and community-based forest management (SFM/CBFM), natural resource management (NRM), forest 
landscape restoration (FLR), forest law enforcement, governance and trade (FLEGT) and biodiversity 
8 Schmall S. 2015. Gender Analysis for the GIZ Programme “Integrated Biodiversity Management in the South Caucasus 
(IBiS)”. Tbilisi: Georgia.

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 128 
 
 
“restorative environments” to relax;9 and (iv) forests can also provide diverse 
recreational activities, supporting improvements in the physical fitness of the 
population;10 
(c) 
SDG 5 (Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls): The sustainable 
development benefits that the project will deliver under SDG 5 include: (i) women-
headed households constitute 33 per cent of all households in Georgia – over 10,000 
women-headed households will directly benefit from the project; and (ii) the labour 
burden for women will be decreased, as less fuelwood will need to be sourced;11 
(d) 
SDG 6 (Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all): 
Sustainable development benefits of the proposed project under SDG 6 include reduced 
sedimentation and erosion in waterways and improved water quality due to the 
adoption of sustainable forest management. Over two thirds of Georgia’s forests are 
located on hilly and mountainous areas and thus carry out key soil-protecting, water-
preserving, water-regulating, sanitary and other protective functions;12 
(e) 
SDG 7 (Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all): The 
sustainable development benefits that the project will deliver under SDG 7 include 
facilitating access to more efficient appliances and alternative fuels for 30,370 rural 
households; 
(f) 
SDG 8 (Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and 
productive employment and decent work for all): The sustainable development benefits 
that the project will deliver under SDG 8 include: (i) the creation of 867 jobs13 in the 
forestry sector during the project lifecycle for restoration, tending, harvesting, 
transportation and road building and maintaining activities in the project target regions; 
(ii) increased emphasis on occupational health and safety – required trainings, standard 
operating procedures, and vocational education and training will further strengthen this 
emphasis, along with the provision in the New Forest Code that all foresters and forest 
workers must hold formal qualifications by 2025; (iii) development of the alternative 
fuels sector will also create new employment opportunities in rural areas: currently, 
three existing briquette factories employ about 50 people. With an anticipated eightfold 
market growth for these products, a comparable increase in the sector workforce will 
occur; and (iv) value chain development, which will contribute to economic growth in 
local communities; 
(g) 
SDG 12 (Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns): The sustainable 
development benefits of the project under SDG 12 include more efficient use of natural 
resources through the provision of sustainably harvested and dried fuelwood14 and 
through investments in energy-efficient technologies and alternative fuels to close the 
fuelwood gap; 
(h) 
SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts): The sustainable 
development benefits that the project will deliver under SDG 13 include: (i) 
 
9 Hansmann R, Hug SM and Seeland K. 2007. Restoration and stress relief through physical activities in forests and 
parks. Urban Forestry and Urban Greening. 6(4): pp.213–225; Mitchell R. 2013. Is physical activity in natural 
environments better for mental health than physical activity in other environments? Social Science & Medicine. 91: 
pp.130–134; and FAO. 2019. Sustainable Forest Management Toolbox. Available at 
<http://www.fao.org/sustainable-forest-management/toolbox/en/>. 
10 FAO. 2019. Sustainable Forest Management Toolbox. Available at <http://www.fao.org/sustainable-forest-
management/toolbox/en/>.  
11 The Greens Movement of Georgia. 2015. Sustainable Management of Biodiversity, South Caucasus, Identification of 
Options to Improve Energy Situation in Dedoplistskaro Municipality. 
12 United States Agency for International Development. 2017. Climate Risk Profile: Georgia. Tbilisi: Georgia. 
13 A total of 650 jobs will be created at NFA and around 217 at service contractors. 
14 Huhtinen M. 2006. “Wood biomass as a fuel”. 5EURES Training Sessions, Supported by the European Commission 
under the Intelligent Energy–Europe Programme.

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 129 
 
 
implementing NDC actions at scale, building climate-related knowledge and capacities, 
and raising awareness on climate change mitigation; (ii) reducing GHG emissions owing 
to the adoption of sustainable forest management (reduced degradation and 
enhancement of carbon stocks) and more energy-efficient technologies; and (iii) 
strengthening the resilience of forest ecosystems to climate change, including through 
strengthening the protective function of forests and restoring ecosystem health and 
diversity; 
(i) 
SDG 15 (Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, 
sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land 
degradation and halt biodiversity loss): The sustainable development benefits of the 
project under SDG 15 include: (i) improved provision of ecosystem services.15 
Sustainable forest management will reverse ongoing forest degradation trends, which 
currently lead to the reduced provision of ecosystem services and loss of biodiversity. 
Mountain ecosystems are a core focus of the project, given that 98 per cent of Georgia’s 
forests are in hilly and mountainous areas. Climate-responsive measures to be 
implemented will consider the higher vulnerability of mountainous ecosystems and 
suitable adaptation strategies contributing to the sustainable management and, 
ultimately, conservation of mountain ecosystems,16 (ii) enhancement of biodiversity 
through sustainable forest management, considering improved planning processes 
(forest inventories, forest use zoning, and participatory multi-stakeholder processes) 
and implementation of sustainable forest management at scale. Improved monitoring of 
biodiversity through investments in Forest Information and Monitoring System (FIMS), 
sustainable forest management planning processes and management activities; (iii) 
protection of endemic species and restoration and rehabilitation of degraded forests 
through sustainable forest management. Targeted silvicultural practices will aim to 
restore ecosystem health and diversity (improving species variety, supporting diverse 
age classes in degraded areas);17 and (iv) sustainable forest management can reduce the 
incidence of and impacts from landslides,18 support river bank stabilization, enhance 
soil carbon and improve soil moisture, among other benefits;19 and 
(j) 
SDG 16 (Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide 
access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all 
levels): The sustainable development benefits of the project under SDG 16 include the 
improvement of the participatory approach to forest management planning and the 
introduction of conflict resolution mechanisms which contribute to the transparency 
and accountability of institutions involved in forest management and forest supervision. 
1.3.2. 
Economic co-benefits  
26. 
The rural population living close to the target forests will benefit the most from the 
proposed project activities. Most of the economic co-benefits discussed in the funding proposal 
reviewed by the independent TAP will be delivered to rural inhabitants. Among these economic 
co-benefits, the independent TAP believes that the following key co-benefits will be tangibly 
delivered by this project intervention to rural communities and other stakeholders:  
(a) 
Successful implementation and adoption of energy-efficient stoves will reduce the 
quantity of fuelwood required to provide energy for the same level of activities in the 
baseline scenario. According to the information provided in the funding proposal, this 
 
15 FAO. 2010. Managing Forests for Climate Change. Available at <http://www.fao.org/3/i1960e/i1960e00.pdf>.  
16 FAO. 2010. Managing Forests for Climate Change. Available at <http://www.fao.org/3/i1960e/i1960e00.pdf>; and 
Stritih J and Stritih A. 2018. Adjara Forest Climate Adaptation Strategy. Tbilisi: Georgia. 
17 Stritih J and Stritih A. 2018. Adjara Forest Climate Adaptation Strategy. Tbilisi: Georgia. 
18 FAO. 2011. Forests and Landslides. Bangkok: Thailand. 
19 FAO. 2010. Managing Forests for Climate Change. Available at <http://www.fao.org/3/i1960e/i1960e00.pdf>.

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 130 
 
 
reduction has been estimated to be about 50 per cent of the baseline fuelwood quantity 
for the same activity. The reduction will translate to saved income for many rural 
households; 
(b) 
It has also been estimated that about 867 jobs20 will be created in the forestry sector 
during the project lifecycle. The jobs will include restoration, tending, harvesting, 
transportation, road building and maintaining activities in the target forests. In addition, 
the alternative fuel subcomponent of the proposed project will create new employment 
opportunities in rural areas that will provide economic co-benefits to rural inhabitants 
and other communities who will seek employment created by these opportunities in 
rural areas; and 
(c) 
Furthermore, as stated in the funding proposal, the promotion of forest-related value 
chains will foster formal employment and income opportunities for communities in the 
three target regions. 
27. 
The above project activities will deliver tangible economic co-benefits. 
1.3.3. 
Social and health co-benefits  
28. 
In the baseline scenario of this project, combustion of fuelwood in inefficient cookstoves 
is a source of emissions of particulate matter (PM) 2.5 and carbon monoxides, which are 
internationally accepted sources of indoor pollution that the World Health Organization has 
associated with indoor combustion of fuelwood and a major link to serious health effects such 
as respiratory and cardiovascular mortality and morbidity, in particular for children. It has been 
estimated and presented in the funding proposal that the planned introduction of energy-
efficient cookstoves will result in reduced emissions of PM2.5 and carbon monoxides and thus 
over time will reduce the known serious health effects such as respiratory and cardiovascular 
mortality and morbidity, especially in children. The funding proposal also estimates that the 
planned installation of efficient cookstoves will result in improved indoor air quality leading to 
better health outcomes for at least 30,370 rural households to be supported by the project. This 
will deliver positive effects on life expectancy, learning abilities of children and improved work 
environment for adults.21 The independent TAP agrees that this will contribute to a high 
sustainable development potential of the project.  
1.3.4. 
Environmental co-benefits  
29. 
The independent TAP agrees with the view presented in the funding proposal that the 
project, if successfully implemented, will deliver environmental co-benefits through the 
introduction of energy-efficient stoves and the sustainable forest management processes and 
will reduce the degradation of the forests. This will deliver a pathway for reversing forest 
degradation, thus strengthening the role of biodiversity conservation and monitoring for the 
entire area of NFA-managed forest land. Through the proposed activities targeting knowledge- 
and information-sharing, capacity-building and the introduction of the knowledge management 
and training platform the project will also strengthen knowledge and information management 
and dissemination on biodiversity and forests in Georgia as a whole. In the opinion of the 
independent TAP, this will deliver a very tangible outcome that will be important in sustaining 
these environmental co-benefits in the replication of this project in other forests in Georgia over 
time.  
1.3.5. 
Gender-related co-benefits  
 
20 A total of 650 jobs will be created at NFA and around 217 jobs at service contractors. 
21 WHO. 2013. Health Effects of Particulate Matter. Copenhagen: World Health Organization.

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 131 
 
 
30. 
Women living in rural areas in Georgia are heavily dependent on fuelwood to meet their 
domestic energy needs. Therefore, successful implementation and operation of the proposed 
project will benefit women, who will not only have a more transparent way of sourcing 
fuelwood needs through the process that will be introduced by this project (to replace a heavy 
dependence on illegal sources), but will also need to source only half of the current volume to 
deliver the same level of end use. The funding proposal states that women-headed households 
constitute 33 per cent of rural households in Georgia; therefore, since it is estimated that over 
10,000 women-headed households will directly benefit from component 2 of the project, which 
will deliver EE/alternative fuel products, the independent TAP concludes that the gender 
mainstreaming impact of the proposed project is significant. 
31. 
In view of the above-mentioned contributions to various elements of sustainable 
development, the independent TAP concludes that the project will generate significant 
sustainable development potential as the successful implementation of this project is expected 
to deliver benefits directly to 98,337 beneficiaries and indirectly to about 1,000,000 
beneficiaries. Therefore, the independent TAP concludes that the sustainable development 
potential of this proposed project is high. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.4.1. 
Needs of the country and the rural population  
32. 
It is estimated that the population of Georgia in 2020 is about 3.99 million. Using the 
information provided in the funding proposal, the rural population is about 1.59 million, 
meaning that about 40 per cent of the population of Georgia live in rural areas of the country. 
According to the information in the funding proposal and annexes thereto, which was reviewed 
by the independent TAP, about 90 per cent of the rural population (around 1.43 million people) 
depend on fuelwood to meet their end-use energy requirements, in particular cooking. Given 
that the proposed project will increase the efficiency of fuelwood use in the end-use appliances 
commonly used in these rural areas, it is apparent that the project will deliver a need of the 
recipients through the reduced quantity of fuelwood needed to deliver the same end use by the 
baseline woodstoves, for example. Among the rural population,those most impacted by this 
effect will be women, who usually have responsibility for acquiring the fuelwood needed by the 
household.  
33. 
There will also be a significant positive impact on women from the introduction of a 
more organized fuelwood sourcing mechanism will be introduced by this project in comparison 
with the current high dependence on illegal sources. In terms of the needs of the country, the 
proposed project will, through the introduction of EE/alternative fuel systems and the 
sustainable forest management processes, decelerate the otherwise accelerating forest 
degradation and thus provide a platform within a few years for carbon sequestration that the 
country can claim to contribute to the international mitigation of global climate change. The 
proposed project will also deliver poverty alleviation benefits to recipients in the rural areas 
where this project will be implemented and where the rural poverty rate is quoted in the 
funding proposal as averaging slightly above 24 per cent. The proposed project will contribute 
to reducing this poverty level through: reduced spendings of rural households on fuelwood; and 
improved income generation for some of the recipients via alternative livelihood ventures that 
will be introduced as a co-benefit of this project, as well as improved and healthier living 
conditions due to reduced pollution in living quarters. With these co-benefits, it can be 
concluded that country needs and recipient needs will be largely met by the successful 
implementation of this project. Therefore, the proposed project will satisfy the needs of the 
country, while also delivering various tangible co-benefits to the rural population.  
1.4.2. 
Economic and financial needs of the country

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 132 
 
 
34. 
The key economic need of the country that will be met by successful implementation of 
the proposed project will be the promotion of economic growth in rural areas . Economic 
growth in rural areas will be fostered by the economic contribution of the proposed project 
activities to closing the rural–urban income gap that has existed for some time in Georgia. 
According to information presented in the funding proposal, rural households in Georgia earn 
on average only about 80 per cent of the average urban income. The level of earnings of rural 
households in the project target areas will be improved owing to a combination of increased 
earnings from alternative livelihood activities that will be introduced and enhanced by the 
project activities, coupled with savings from reduced expenditures on fuelwood resulting from 
the project’s EE/alternative fuel schemes and improved living conditions that will be 
engendered by reduced emissions of obnoxious products from combustion of fuelwood through 
the use of more energy-efficient EE/alternative fuel equipment. These effects will not only 
contribute to closing the rural–urban income gap but will also catalyse economic development 
and growth in rural areas  beyond the level in the baseline period.  
1.4.3. 
Strengthening the local capital market  
35. 
The grant from GCF is expected to crowd in financing from other sources, in addition to 
grant funding from GCF to build various capacities. This strengthening of the financial market 
will be essential for changing the baseline situation in which funding of this forest management 
intervention and other recent relevant interventions has depended on government budgetary 
allocations and international bilateral and multilateral grant support. As stated in the funding 
proposal, the Government’s financing options are constrained by fiscal consolidation and are 
expected to set limits on the government debt and budget deficit that will continue to allow only 
for increased spending on education and investments in infrastructure at the expense of 
expenditures on forest management, among others. Therefore, through GCF grants, this project 
will crowd in funds from other sources to reduce dependence on government-only funding. 
Furthermore, several component 2 activities may catalyse local financing entities to learn how 
to finance the types of activities that will be implemented in this project and hence strengthen 
their financing capabilities for future expansion of the project concept to other forests not 
covered by this current intervention.  
1.4.4. 
Institutional needs  
36. 
The baseline institutional capacities of both the public and private sectors of Georgia are 
insufficient to lay the foundation for an enabling environment for sustainable forest 
management and other components of this proposed project, despite the performance of the 
Government’s fund from the national budget and grant funding from bilateral and multilateral 
sources. Therefore, institutional strengthening that is built into the strategies of the proposed 
project is not only essential for the success of the proof of concept but also for expansion to all 
other forests in the country, according to the aspirational plan of the Government of Georgia. 
According to the funding proposal, the key government institutions in the forest sector for the 
implementation of this project whose capacity will be strengthened through learning-by-doing, 
capacity-building training and information-sharing will include the Ministry of Environmental 
Protection and Agriculture (MoEPA), NFA, DES and EIEC. The funding proposal states that 
through reform of the forest sector in Georgia, the mandates of these institutions is expected to 
increase the overall management efficiency and effectiveness of the forestry sector. In the 
course of the project design, a capacity assessment of these institutions was undertaken to 
review and analyse each institution’s mandate and the adequacy of their capacities, as well as to 
identify key areas where gaps exist and where improvements are needed. A key observation 
according to this pre-project assessment is that the capacities of these institutions are limited in 
relation to best practices for sustainable forest management (e.g. tree-cutting operations, low-
impact infrastructure development) and forest supervision (inspection and patrolling), among 
others. Consequently, it is understood from the information presented in the funding proposal

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 133 
 
 
that the project has been designed to comprehensively address identified barriers and gaps, 
including the institutionalization of trainings and improved knowledge management. In the 
opinion of the independent TAP, this will ensure that the institutional needs for the success of 
the project are met. It will also enhance the prospect of replication in other forests not currently 
covered by the proposed project.  
37. 
The various needs of the country, including the needs of rural populations, especially 
those who will be direct and indirect recipients of the co-benefits of this project, will be 
positively promoted by the success of this project, as discussed above. In addition, successful 
implementation of this project and its replication in other forests in the country not covered by 
the proposed intervention will be enhanced as the enabling environment for planning, 
implementing sustainable forest management will be built in the country as a result of this 
intervention. This indicates that the needs of the recipient country, its people and institutions 
will be highly met by the successful implementation of this project. As a result, the independent 
TAP concludes that the proposed project has a high potential to meet the needs of the country 
and its people. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.5.1. 
Evidence of country ownership through participation of government bodies  
38. 
The first key evidence of country ownership of this project is the strong participation of 
the following five key government institutions in the implementation of this project: NFA, 
MoEPA, DES (a subagency of MoEPA), EIEC and ARDA,22 a non-entrepreneurial (non-
commercial) legal entity of MoEPA. It is also important to point out that MoEPA is the GCF 
national designated authority (NDA) in Georgia. GIZ, the GCF AE that will also be one of the co-
financiers of this project, has been active in Georgia’s forest sector since 2013, starting with the 
regional (South Caucasus) IBiS project, which ended in November 2019 and was funded by BMZ 
and the Austrian Development Agency, and its successor programme ECOserve, which 
commenced in January 2019. Through this work, GIZ has had extensive interactions with all the 
above-mentioned national institutions and interacted actively with them during the design of 
the concept of the proposed project. The design of the proposed project builds on the lessons 
learned from these other donor projects and experiences in the country and seeks to address 
and complement them.23 The independent TAP believes that this provides robust evidence of 
strong support from the Government of Georgia for this proposed project.  
1.5.2. 
Alignment of the project with relevant national strategies  
39. 
Some of the key national plans and policies that this project is aligned with can be 
summarized as follows: 
(a) 
National Climate Strategy: the first national climate strategy of Georgia that the 
proposed project is aligned with is the country’s NDC, which was submitted to the 
UNFCCC on 7 May 2017. According to the NDC, Georgia is committed to reducing its GHG 
emissions by 15 per cent below the business as usual scenario by 2030. The conditional 
reduction target of this NDC is up to 25 per cent, which is equivalent to 43 per cent of 
emission intensity per unit of gross domestic product from 2013 to 2030. Georgia’s NDC 
singled out forests as the key sector for national climate actions and the only sector with 
quantified unconditional and conditional commitments. Through domestic action and 
funding, Georgia’s NDC will deliver emissions reduction of at least 1 MtCO2eq over a 
 
22 As of 1 July 2019, the official title of the Agricultural Projects Management Agency was changed to the Agricultural 
and Rural Development Agency. 
23 Please refer to section 5.4 of the feasibility study for further details of past and ongoing projects.

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 134 
 
 
period of 10 years on 45,000 ha from forest land and, conditional to receiving external 
support, will also deliver an emissions reduction of  up to 6 MtCO2eq on 250,000 ha of 
forest land over the period 2020–2030. Current updates of the NDC and the draft 
climate action plan of Georgia contain a plan to increase the targets in the submitted 
NDC by increasing the carbon sink capacity of the forest sector by 10 per cent, while the 
draft climate action plan includes a new conditional commitment to increase the forest 
area under sustainable forest management to 436,000 ha by 2030. According to the 
information provided in the funding proposal, these new increases in the country’s 
commitments drove the need for the submission of this proposed project to GCF for 
funding. The second national climate change strategy of Georgia with relevance to the 
objectives of this proposed project is the country’s nationally appropriate mitigation 
actions (NAMAs), which were also submitted to the UNFCCC in 2010. Key NAMAs that 
the proposed project is aligned with include:  
(i) 
“Adaptive Sustainable Forest Management in Borjomi-Bakuriani Forest District”, 
which was completed in 2016 and set the foundation for the Government’s 
implementation of sustainable forest management in the Borjomi-Bakuriani 
region and provides the platform for the inclusion of the unconditional 
contribution of the Government of Georgia outlined in its NDC in this proposed 
project; and 
(ii) 
In the NAMA document, emphasis is placed on the importance of seeking 
financial support for implementation of efficient use of biomass for equitable, 
climate-proof and sustainable rural development, as set out in the proposed 
project; and 
(b) 
Alignment with the existing GCF country programme: according to information provided 
in the funding proposal, Georgia’s country programme, which serves as the strategic 
framework for the country’s engagement with GCF, identifies four priorities for 
mitigation and four for adaptation, including “land use and forests” under mitigation; 
and “forests and biodiversity” under adaptation. In both areas, the GCF country 
programme is strongly aligned with the core strategies included in the proposed project. 
A component that will promote private investment in green assets and measures in 
Georgia is included in the Georgia’s Country Programme as a cross-cutting action. This 
cross-cutting measure is also a strategic activity of the proposed project. It can be 
concluded that the GCF country programme is aligned with the proposed project. 
1.5.3. 
Implementation capacity of the accredited entity for the proposed project  
40. 
GIZ, a GCF AE, will also serve as a co-executing entity for the proposed project. Direct co-
finance will flow from BMZ, SDC and GCF to the GIZ head office. GIZ will be responsible for 
transferring GCF funds and other co-financing made available to it to the five executing entities 
(NFA, DES, EIEC and ARDA) in its role as AE. GIZ, as an executing entity, will be responsible for 
the overall management of this project, including (i) participating in the work of the Steering 
Comittee; (ii) administrative, financial and technical oversight and supervision throughout 
project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver results and 
achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as the timeliness and 
quality of reporting to GCF; (v) participating as a GCF project coordinator in the Project 
Implementation Unit that will have as members all the key executing entities; and (vi) project 
closure and evaluation. The AE is well suited and prepared for these roles. The following 
information was presented in the funding proposal to support the readiness of GIZ to serve in 
the roles earmarked for it in this proposed project: 
(a) 
GIZ is one of the largest international providers of capacity development and technical 
assistance on climate change worldwide;

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 135 
 
 
(b) 
GIZ is currently carrying out over 300 climate-related projects worldwide, with 
combined funding of over USD 1.9 billion; 
(c) 
GIZ is currently implementing projects on a range of forestry topics, including: REDD-
plus, sustainable forest management, community-based forest management, natural 
resource management, forest landscape restoration, forest law enforcement, governance 
and trade, and biodiversity, all of which are closely linked with the objectives of this 
proposed project; 
(d) 
The current GIZ forestry portfolio amounts to EUR 467 million, allocated across 63 
forestry projects worldwide; and 
(e) 
GIZ has been active in Georgia’s forest sector since 2013 via the regional (South 
Caucasus) IBiS project, which ended in November 2019 and was funded by BMZ and the 
Austrian Development Agency, and its successor programme ECOserve, which started in 
January 2019. It supported the development of the Forest Sector Reform Strategy based 
on the principles of sustainable forest management, the New Forest Code and other 
policy and regulatory provisions enabling transition to sustainable forest management.  
1.5.4. 
 Executing capacity of the executing entity:  
41. 
according to the information made available to the independent TAP in the funding 
proposal and some of the annexes thereto, the project has been developed with active 
engagement from and under the strong leadership of the NDA (MoEPA). The initial project idea 
was initiated by NFA, MoEPA and the GIZ IBiS project in the summer of 2017 and the concept 
note was prepared through close consultation with key stakeholders in the sector. The draft 
version of the concept note was presented to the NDA and the government stakeholders and 
received approval for submission to the GCF Secretariat in July 2018 in the form of an 
endorsement letter. Since then, the project has formed part of Georgia’s GCF country 
programme. Representatives of the NDA have attended cross-sectoral multi-stakeholder 
workshops to provide feedback on the project. A no-objection letter has been provided by the 
NDA (see annex 1 to the funding proposal), confirming that the project conforms to the 
country’s national priorities, strategies and plans, and that it is in accordance with relevant laws 
and regulations. It is important to point out that the involvement of some of the leading 
stakeholders who will serve as executing entities for this project participated .in the earlier 
work of GIZ in this sector, This earlier activities of these entities, coupled with their involvement 
in the design of the proposed project, starting with the development of the concept note to the 
final document submitted, provides assurance that those entities are ready to play the roles 
earmarked for them. Furthermore, the project management capacities of each of these national 
executing entities have been assessed and confirmed through a due diligence process and any 
identified gaps have been included in the capacity-building programme of the proposed project. 
Various levels of training to bridge these gaps have been included for these national executing 
entities, which provides additional assurance that these executing entities will be able to 
efficiently deliver their expected roles. The national executing entities are NFA, DES, 
representing the State of Georgia, EIEC and ARDA. 
42. 
 According to information included in the funding proposal, the GIZ project preparation 
team met with a variety of stakeholders from the Government, private sector and civil society 
during several missions, including 25 planning workshops, a separate consultation workshop 
with non-governmental organizations and a field trip and stakeholder consultations in the 
target regions. The independent TAP concludes that adequate stakeholder consultations, 
including with women’s groups and relevant non-governmental organizations, have been 
carried out.

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 136 
 
 
43. 
The GCF NDA of Georgia, MoEPA, sent a no-objection letter to the GCF Secretariat to 
convey the highest level of support of the Government of Georgia to the GCF Secretariat on 30 
March 2020. This also indicates strong evidence of country ownership 
44. 
Based on the above analysis, the independent TAP considers that the country ownership 
of the project is high. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
          Scale: Moderately high 
1.6.1. 
Financial strucure 
45. 
The proposed project is requesting grant financing from GCF and other co-financing 
sources led by the Government of Georgia to implement sustainable forest management in the 
three target regions of Kakheti, Mtskheta-Mtianeti and Guria covering 270,807 ha of NFA-
managed forest land and to deploy EE technologies and alternative fuel solutions that can 
substantially reduce demand for fuelwood in the household sector in these target regions. The 
funding will also be utilized to develop livelihood opportunities and local self-governance in 
forest management in the target areas. GCF grant funding is expected to be complemented by 
co-financing, largely from the Government of Georgia (mostly in the form of grant, in-kind 
contributions and guarantees) and grant funding from BMZ, SIDA and SDC. A surbodinated loan 
from CRYSTAL completes the co-financing component of this project funding. The total funding 
for this project of EUR 177.69 million consists of a substantial contribution from the 
Government of Georgia in the form of grant, in-kind and guarantees, which amounts to slightly 
over 66 per cent of the total funding needs for the project. This further strengthens the view of 
the TAP that there is strong country ownership of this project. The structure of the funding also 
needs to be stressed, as it is made up of only 5.9 per cent as surbodinated debt with the rest as 
grants, in-kind funding and guarantees. The breakdown of the funding contribution from these 
sources, the types of fund and the total that will be provided for the project is presented in table 
2. 
Table 2: Breakdown of project funding 
S/N 
Source 
Type of fund 
Amount (EUR million) 
1. 
GCF 
Grant 
  32.79 
Subtotal GCF        
 32.79 
2. 
Co-financing 
 
 
a. 
BMZ 
Grant 
  10.00 
b. 
SIDA 
Grant 
    2.25   
c. 
SDC24 
Grant 
    4.09  
d. 
Government of 
Georgia 
 
Grant 
In-kind funding 
Guarantees 
118.0625 
e.  
CRYSTAL26 
Subordinate loans 
    10.50 
Subtotal co-financing 
144.90 
Project total  funding 
177.69 
Abbreviations: BMZ = German Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development, SDC = Swiss 
Agency for Development Cooperation, SIDA = Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency. 
 
24 Please note that this amount is indicative and is subject to final approval by SDC. 
25 Including EUR 84.7 million in revenues of NFA to be reinvested in project activities.  
26 The scheme is open to all banks and microfinance institutions and does not give any kind of exclusivity to CRYSTAL.

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 137 
 
 
46. 
About 18.5 per cent of the total funding for the project is requested from GCF as grant 
funding. The grant funding from GCF has been earmarked as follows: 67 per cent of GCF grant 
funding will be spent to support each of the five activities of component 1; 26 per cent will be 
spent on the four activities of component 2; while the balance of 7 per cent has been earmarked 
for project monitoring, project management costs and contingencies. Since all the activities of 
component 3 will be funded by grant funding from SDC, none of the GCF grant is earmarked for 
this component. To scale up public and private investment in low-carbon transformation of 
Georgia’s forestry and rural energy sectors, the project will establish, as an overarching 
financing framework, the Georgia Forest and Rural Energy Investment Facility. The GCF grant, 
by filling selected funding gaps while minimizing concessionality, will be crucial to the 
successful execution of the Georgia Forest and Rural Energy Investment Facility and many of the 
project activities. It is also stated in the funding proposal that the GCF grant will crowd-in a 
considerable public and private sector contribution – EUR 128.56 million – from households, 
EE/alternative fuel suppliers, private sector contractors in the forest sector, NFA and the 
financial sector. The Georgia Forest and Rural Energy Investment Facility will establish a 
sustainable financial mechanism to channel public investment in sustainable forest 
management by creating a viable business model for sustainable biomass supply to consumers 
and a revolving financing scheme to enable accumulation of NFA revenues and their 
reinvestment to scale up sustainable forest management across Georgia. In addition to the use 
of GCF grant funding, a performance-based GCF investment grant will be used to kick-start and 
initiate implementation of sustainable forest management in the three target regions of Georgia 
and, with technical assistance, to build the capacity of NFA to roll out sustainable forest 
management to other forest districts across the country. Another example of the use of the 
efficiency of the GCF grant funding is illustrated by the use of the GCF funds (less than 10 per 
cent), which will be used to provide financial incentives via a results-based grant voucher 
scheme to households to jump-start demand for EE stoves and enable rapid growth and 
capitalization of this new market segment. The review conducted by the independent TAP of the 
use of GCF funds in components 1 and 2 clearly shows that in addition to being used for building 
the capacity of relevant national entities in the proposed project, GCF funding is a critical 
catalyst for the success of many of the project activities.  
1.6.2. 
Co-financing/leveraging 
47. 
The project’s ratio of cumulative total finance leveraged is 1:6 (GCF – total leverage). 
The effectiveness of the GCF grant can be measured by the fact that each euro (EUR 1) from GCF 
will crowd in about 6 euros (EUR 6) of co-financing. The co-financing that will be crowded in 
will include: a subordinate loan (EUR 10.5 million, amounting to about 6 per cent of the total 
funding) whose terms were not provided in the funding proposal; and the rest as a combination 
of grant, in-kind contributions and guarantees (EUR 167.19 million, amounting to about 94 per 
cent of the total project funding). The counterpart funding contribution from the Government of 
Georgia constitutes the majority of the non-debt contribution (EUR 118.06 million, amounting 
to about 71 per cent of the non-debt funding), providing tangible evidence of the support of the 
Government of Georgia for the project. Key financial leveraging volumes and performances 
presented in the funding proposal can be summarized as follows: 
(a) Total finance leveraged  
(b) Requested GCF amount  
= EUR 184.71 million; 
= EUR 32.79 million; 
(c) Public source co-financed27 
= EUR 61.40 million; 
 
27 Including confirmed co-financing from CRYSTAL for EE stoves and alternative fuel loans.

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 138 
 
 
(d) Private source finance leveraged28  
= EUR 123.57 million; 
(e) Total leverage ratio ((e) = (b)/(a)) 
= 1:6;   
(f) Public source co-financing ratio          
      ((f) = (c) / (b))  
= 1:2; and  
(g) Private source leverage ratio               
      ((g) = (d) / (b)) 
= 1:4.  
48. 
The independent TAP is of the opinion that these financial leveraging ratios indicate 
sound cost-effectiveness of the project when compared with benchmark forestry projects 
recently funded by GCF. 
49. 
Considering that the successful implementation of this proposed project will deliver 
concrete and robust country benefits, while also delivering direct and indirect benefits to rural 
communities in the three target regions of Kakheti, Mtskheta-Mtianeti and Guria, the 
independent TAP considers that the proposed project is an effective way of utilizing the GCF 
funding.  
1.6.3. 
Cost efficiency 
50. 
The project is expected to deliver about 16.1 MtCO2eq of GHG emission reductions over 
a 20-year perid. The efficiency metrics that will be delivered by this project intervention were 
estimated as follows: 
(a) Total project financing29 
= EUR 177.69 million;    
(b) Requested GCF amount  
= EUR 32.79 million; 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
= 16.14 MtCO2eq; 
(d) Estimated cost per tonne of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (tCO2eq) ((d) = (a)/(c)) 
= EUR 11.06/tCO2eq; and 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed  
       ((e) = (b)/(c)) 
= EUR 2.0/tCO2eq. 
51. 
The independent TAP agrees with the conclusion in the funding proposal that the 
estimated GCF mitigation cost of EUR 2/tCO2eq, as presented above, when added to the project’s 
additional benefits (adaptation, economic co-benefits, etc.) represents excellent value for 
money. This was confirmed when the independent TAP compared this metric with the 
abatement cost of other approved GCF forestry projects, including the one cited in the funding 
proposal (FP019, Ecuador, titled “Priming Financial and Land-Use Planning Instruments to 
Reduce Emissions from Deforestation”), which has an abatement cost of about EUR 2.5/tCO2eq. 
1.6.4. 
Economic and financial rate of return of the investment 
 
28 Including reinvestment of NFA revenues: see annex 3 to the funding proposal on the financial and economic 
analysis. 
29 This includes all confirmed sources of co-financing for the project ( e.g. from SIDA and CRYSTAL), which will 
contribute to the achievement of the project climate objectives.

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 139 
 
 
52. 
The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) calculated for this project of 34 per cent and 
the net present value of EUR 83 million, even at a discount rate of 10 per cent and a carbon price 
of EUR 24/t, is considered to demonstrate a project that will deliver economic efficiency in spite 
of the carbon price used in the calculation. The independent TAP confirmed that the carbon 
price used may be reasonable given the mid-June 2019 price of carbon dioxide (CO2) allowances 
in the European Union Emissions Trading System. The independent TAP also confirmed that the 
carbon price is also consistent with the European Commission’s recommended CO2 price 
assumption of EUR 25/t in its Guide to Cost-Benefit Analysis of Investment Projects.30 The 
independent TAP is of the opinion that the robustness of the EIRR is also confirmed when a 60 
per cent reduction in the carbon price used in the analysis delivers an EIRR that is slightly 
higher (13 per cent) than the 10 per cent used in the cost of capital used in the economic 
analysis. 
53. 
The financial analysis of the project that was reviewed by the independent TAP showed 
that the component 1 activities will yield a financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of about 2.4 
per cent over the 20-year period conventionally used to evaluate the effectiveness of 
sustainable forest management projects when no GCF funding is available. According to the 
analysis presented in the funding proposal, the reason for this low financial viability is due to 
the fact that a substantial number of component 1 activities are public goods that will deliver no 
revenue (activities 1.1, 1.4 and 1.5), while several component 1 activities will generate financial 
reflows for the sector (for NFA) (activities 1.1 and 1.3); these reflows are inadequate to make 
the project component financially viable even at the lowest concessionary rate. Therefore, the 
independent TAP concurs with the results of the analysis that grant funding will be better for 
the financial viability of the component 1 activities. This is accentuated by the fact that when 
GCF grant funding is considered for component 1, it would increase the FIRR to 9.7 per cent, just 
above the sovereign cost of capital, indicating a more financially viable project. 
54. 
For component 2, GCF financing will be utilized only for activity 2.2 on implementing 
consumer financing instruments to replace conventional fuelwood stoves. Even though the 
financial analysis for this project component without GCF support calculated a very high FIRR 
(about 45 per cent over the 10-year useful lifetime of the stove), the independent TAP agrees 
with the conclusion that GCF grant funding will still be needed given that the widespread 
adoption of EE stoves is hindered by their high price point, product novelty and lack of sizeable 
production or imports. This being the case, the independent TAP agrees to the recommendation 
of the AE of a GCF grant covering 30 per cent (up to GEL 300 or EUR 100) of the price of each EE 
stove, as this will significantly kick-start the market for this new product. 
55. 
The independent TAP therefore concludes that the efficiency and effectiveness of 
implementation of this proposed project will be high. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
56. 
The independent TAP recommends that the GCF Secretariat should include in the 
financial closure agreement with the AE a request for the following information for inclusion in 
the annual performance report to be submitted by the AE to the Secretariat: 
(a) 
Report of the lessons learned by the key stakeholders who will be involved in and/or 
carry out all the activities in this project implementation. Such lessons, when 
documented, will ensure that useful lessons are applied during the replication of the 
success of this project in other forest areas not covered by this intervention in Georgia 
and beyond; and 
 
30 European Commission. 2014. Guide to Cost-Benefit Analysis of Investment Projects. Available at 
<https://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docgener/studies/pdf/cba_guide.pdf>.

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 140 
 
 
(b) 
The GHG emission reductions achieved throughout the duration of the project lifetime. 
This emission reduction reporting should cover: 
(i) 
Project parameters monitored by name, value and confidence interval; 
(ii) 
Emission reduction calculation methodologies utilized;  
(iii) 
The procedure used to develop the database; and  
(iv) 
The quality assurance/quality control methods used in preparing and reporting 
the data and the emission reduction calculations. 
57. 
The independent TAP recommends that the Board approve the project.

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 141 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP132) 
Proposal name: 
Enabling Implementation of Forest Sector Reform in Georgia to 
Reduce GHG Emissions from Forest Degradation 
Accredited entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH 
(GIZ) 
Country/(ies): 
Georgia 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
Impact potential 
Thank you very much for the review on impact potential. We do not have any remarks. 
Paradigm shift potential 
Thank you very much for the review on paradigm shift potential. We do not have any 
remarks. 
Sustainable development potential 
Thank you very much for the review on sustainable development potential. We do not have 
any remarks. 
Needs of the recipient 
Thank you very much for the review on needs of the recipient criteria. 
Country ownership 
Thank you very much for the review on country ownership of the project. We do not have any 
remarks. 
Efficiency and effectiveness

=== PAGE 142 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.04 
Page 142 
 
 
 
 
Thank you very much for the review on efficiency and effectiveness. We do not have any 
remarks. 
 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
Thank you very much for the overall remarks and suggestions for the annual reporting. We 
do not have any remarks and agree on the suggestions.

=== PAGE 143 ===
1 
Annex 8a 
Gender Assessment 
of the Project 
“Enabling implementation of forest sector reform in Georgia to 
reduce GHG emissions from forest degradation” 
Submitted to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
Written By 
Nana Sumbadze, 2019 
Gender documentation for FP132

=== PAGE 144 ===
2 
 
Table of Contents 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................... 3 
LIST OF TABLES ................................................................................................................... 4 
1. Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 5 
2. GCF and GIZ Guidelines for the Promotion of Gender Equality .......................................... 6 
3. Methodology of the Gender Assessment ............................................................................ 7 
4. Gender Equality: Georgia by International Indices and National Framework Conditions ..... 8 
5. Gender Equality in the Public Space: Representation and Participation ............................. 9 
6. Gender Equality in the Private Space: Decision-Making and Time Poverty ...................... 15 
7.  Human Capital ................................................................................................................. 17 
8. Gender-specific Patterns of Forest and Fuel Use ............................................................. 23 
9. Gender Composition of Staff of the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture 26 
10. General Conclusions ...................................................................................................... 27 
References ........................................................................................................................... 33 
Annex 1: Legal provisions and institutional mechanisms for ensuring gender equality in 
Georgia ................................................................................................................................ 36 
Annex 2: List of groups and persons consulted .................................................................... 37

=== PAGE 145 ===
3 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
APA 
 
 
Agency or Protected Areas 
CBO 
 
 
Community Based Organisation 
CEDEW 
 
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women 
CENN  
 
Caucasus Environmental NGO Network 
DES 
 
 
Department of Environmental Supervision 
ENPARD 
 
European Neighbourhood Program for Agriculture and Rural Development 
EU 
 
 
European Union 
GA 
 
 
Gender Assessment 
GAP 
 
 
Gender Action Plan 
GII 
 
 
Gender Inequality Index 
IDP 
 
 
Internally Displaced Person 
LEPL 
 
 
Legal Entity of Public Law 
MoEPA  
 
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture 
MDG 
 
 
Millennium Development Goals 
MP 
 
 
Member of Parliament 
NDI 
 
 
National Democratic Institute 
NFA 
 
 
National Forestry Agency 
NGO 
 
 
Non-Government Organisation 
SDG 
 
 
Sustainable Development Goals 
STEM  
 
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics 
UNDP  
 
United Nations Development Program 
UNFPA  
 
United Nations Population Fund 
VET 
 
 
Vocational Education and Training 
WWF  
 
World Wildlife Fund

=== PAGE 146 ===
4 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 
Sakrebulo’s gender composition in target municipalities………………………………………………10 
Table 2 
Number of members of Council of Civil Advisors………………………………………………………12 
Table 3 
Population distribution by regions and gender and average number of household members….…16 
Table 4 
Poverty headcount by regions……………………………………………………………………………18 
Table 5 
Persons with officially recognized disability status according to sex and regions……………………20 
Table 6 
Number of incidences of domestic violence in 2013-2018 by regions………………………..………21 
Table 7 
Percentage of married women aged 15-17 by region, area of residence and type of union………22 
Table 8 
Gender distribution of the staff responsible for forest management in MoEPA.………………....…26

=== PAGE 147 ===
5 
 
1. Introduction 
This Gender Analysis and Gender Action Plan has been prepared for the submission to the Green 
Climate Fund with the proposal “Enabling implementation of forest sector reform in Georgia to reduce 
GHG emissions from forest degradation”. This assessment aims to provide an overview of the gender 
situation in Georgia, identify gender issues that may be relevant to the project, and to examine potential 
gender mainstreaming opportunities. 
The project aims at reducing emissions from forest degradation through sustainable management of 
forests as well as promoting energy efficiency and alternative fuels to reduce fuel wood consumption as 
a main driver of forest degradation. The project will result in the reduction of national GHG emissions, 
equivalent to approximately 5.2 million tCO2 over seven years implementation period. 
Forests play a pivotal role for Georgia: They curb the occurrence of natural hazards and are essential 
for ensuring protection of water resources and providing clean air. Forests are sources of fuel wood and 
construction wood materials, provide space for grazing, hunting, collection of berries, food and medicinal 
plants for family consumption and commercial purposes. The growth of tourism activities increases the 
recreation value of forests. 
Long-term effects that forest exert besides the universal one also have a differential gender effect. 
Impacts of forest degradation reflect on women more severely than on men, as they are more involved 
in agriculture, and as primary care givers use water and fuel more than men, are more hardly hit when 
faced with problems in food production (Schimall, 2015). Besides, the fast-growing hospitality business 
involves more women than men, who in many cases are owners and managers of guest rooms and 
small hotels. Therefore, they heavily depend on recreation value of forests. Meanwhile wood cutting and 
processing, selling of firewood is the main income generating activity of many men, living in the vicinity 
of forests. Men go and use forests more often than women not only for felling trees, but also for hunting 
and herding. At the same time, women remain the main consumers of fuel wood, as they manage and 
control space heating, cooking and water heating. 
Effective measures targeting preservation of forests should rest on recognition of needs, interests and 
capabilities of both, women and men in relation of forest use. Therefore, before planning any policies 
for forest regeneration the needs of men and women should be recognized and taken into consideration.  
Resting on biological features and traditional role differentiation, gender in many respects determines 
difference in needs, possibilities and responsibilities for women and men. These differences have to be 
acknowledged and addressed. Although, gender equality is understood as both sexes having equal 
opportunities, it should stay at the centre of any policy-making or decisions. 
In 2015, the UN adopted a set of goals to end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure prosperity for 
all as part of a new sustainable development agenda. Each of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) has specific targets to be achieved over the next 15 year. Gender equality has been 
mainstreamed across the SDGs, but a whole SDG (SDG 5) is dedicated solely to it, aiming to achieve 
gender equality and empower all women and girls. It contains nine targets, including: ending all forms 
of discrimination against women and girls; ending all forms of violence against women and girls; 
eliminating harmful practices, such as early, forced and child marriage; achieving women’s full and 
effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision making in political, 
economic and public life; and, adopting and strengthening sound policies and enforceable legislation for 
the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels, among 
others (UNWOMEN, 2018a). 
The proposed project is in line with the aims outlined in the SDGs.

=== PAGE 148 ===
6 
 
 
2. GCF and GIZ Guidelines for the Promotion of Gender Equality 
According to the GCF’s Gender Policy, “proposed projects or programmes submitted to the Fund are 
required to be aligned with national policies and priorities on gender and with the Fund’s gender policy”. 
In the GCF’s Action Plan 2019 – 2021 it is further described that core elements include: 
1)  A mandatory initial socioeconomic and gender assessment, complementary to the environmental 
and social safeguards (ESS) process, which accredited entities will be required to undertake in order 
to collect baseline data, and to:    
(i) 
Determine how the project/programme can respond to the needs of women and men in view 
of the specific climate change issue to be addressed;  
(ii) Identify the drivers of change and the gender dynamics in order to achieve the 
project/programme adaptation or mitigation goals;  
(iii) Identify and design the specific gender elements to be included in the project/programme 
activities;  
(iv) Estimate the implementation budgets;  
(v) Select output, outcome and impact indicators; and  
(vi) Design project/programme implementation and monitoring institutional arrangements.  
 
2)  Gender equitable stakeholders’ consultations with the gender parameters provided in the policy.   
3)  Inclusion of gender perspective in the application of the mandatory project/programme social and 
environmental safeguards in line with project/programme-specific requirements of the Fund’s ESS 
in accordance with decision B.07/02”. 
4)  Project screening for gender sensitivity at the various stages of the project preparation, appraisal, 
approval, and monitoring process, by the relevant bodies (NDAs, accredited entities, the 
Secretariat).”   
The updated GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan 2018 – 2020 build on the previous core elements. The 
updates and lessons learnt can be summarized in five key aspects:  
1) The policy emphasizes gender responsiveness rather than gender sensitivity. Being gender 
responsive means that instead of only identifying gender issues or ensuring a “do no harm” 
approach, a process will substantially help to overcome historical gender biases. This is in line with 
the language used in UNFCCC decision COP20 (Lima Work Programme) and the Paris Agreement;  
2) In addition to requiring gender assessment, the policy suggests a mandatory requirement to submit 
project-level gender action plans;  
3) The policy outlines clear requirements at the project inception, implementation, monitoring and 
reporting stages as well as regarding roles and responsibilities among GCF, Accredited Entities, 
and National Designated Authorities/focal points;  
4) The policy aligns with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which make 
explicit commitments to gender equality both as a stand-alone goal on gender equality and women’s 
empowerment in SDG5 and as a cross-cutting theme across all the SDGs; and  
5) The action plan provides portfolio-level gender-responsive indicators to the Action Plan of the 
updated Gender Policy, together with indicative budgetary provisions related to knowledge 
management, capacity development, monitoring, evaluation and learning.  
In line with the above mentioned GCF Gender Policy and respective update, GIZ’s Safeguards + Gender 
Management System and Gender Strategy require that a gender analysis is conducted at an early stage

=== PAGE 149 ===
7 
 
of the preparation phase of a project to identify potentials for promoting gender equality and risks that 
need to be avoided or at least mitigated through specific measures. The results and recommendations 
of this analysis are directly considered for the objective, indicators, the methodological approach and 
the results monitoring system of the project.    
3. Methodology of the Gender Assessment 
The implementation of the Gender Assessment (GA) and the Gender Action Plan (GAP) used the 
following methodology and stages:  
• 
Review of all relevant project documentation, including regulatory documentation and the standards 
that the project will need to abide by; 
• 
Analysis of secondary (existing documentation); 
• 
Information gathering and stakeholder consultation in Tbilisi and the three target regions in Georgia 
identified by the project and preparation of the stakeholder engagement report; 
• 
Analysis of primary data from stakeholder engagement process; 
• 
Preparation of the GA and GAP. 
Procedures of stakeholder engagement were pursued following the review of project documentation and 
analysis of secondary data. Stakeholder engagement is a tool for identifying and mobilizing project 
stakeholders. It is the framework for all interactions with stakeholders (central and local government, 
individuals, associations, groups) that are impacted or have an interest in the project. The purpose of 
establishing 
engagement 
with 
stakeholders 
is 
to 
establish 
a 
transparent 
two-way 
communication/dialogue between the project and stakeholders, convey a strong commitment towards 
meeting the requirements of the GIZ, GCF and understand and manage the needs, interests, fears and 
motivations of stakeholders, and anticipate potential negative responses from women and men and 
provide mitigation measures. The aims of stakeholder consultations were defined as follows: 
1) Introducing the project; 
2) Identification of impacts and mitigations from stakeholder perspective; 
3) Understanding stakeholder suggestions and concerns; 
4) Obtaining a preliminary understanding of barriers towards pro-environment behavior (what drives 
the current behavior and how rural communities might be motivated to change behavior despite of 
the value of the felled tree) and understanding of socio-economic, cultural and gender barriers 
associated with using energy efficient stoves and alternative fuels (for example are there 
preferences for cooking with fuel wood and what would motivate a change in behavior); 
5) Assessment from the gender perspective of the level of participation of population in decision-
making on community issues and envisaging effective ways for increasing it; 
6) Estimation of the feeling of ownership of forests and ways for increasing it. 
7) Assessment of the gender composition of the three departments/institutions of the Ministry of 
Environmental Protection and Agriculture (MoEPA) (National Forestry Agency, Department of 
Biodiversity and Forest Policy, Department of Environmental Supervision) responsible for forest 
management.  
Stakeholder consultations were carried out in the period of March 5th 2019 to April, 8th 2019 in Tbilisi, 
Kakheti, Guria and Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions, jointly with the ESS expert (see also Stakeholder 
Engagement Report, Annex 7a to the Funding Proposal for details). As a result of the stakeholder 
mapping process, the following stakeholders were identified and consulted:

=== PAGE 150 ===
8 
 
Representatives of Georgian Government 
• 
National Forestry Agency (NFA) at the Ministry of Environment Protection and Agriculture; 
• 
Department of Biodiversity and Forest Policy at the Ministry of Environment Protection and 
Agriculture; 
• 
Department of Environmental Supervision (DES) at the Ministry of Environment Protection and 
Agriculture (MoEPA); 
• 
Representatives of National Forestry Agency in Kakheti, Guria and Mtskheta-Mtianeti; 
• 
Representatives of regional self-governance of Kakheti, Guria and Mtskheta-Mtianeti; 
• 
Representatives of Municipalities of Telavi, Akhmeta, Kvareli, Dedoplistskaro, Ozurgeti, Lanchkhuti, 
Chokhatauri, Tianeti. 
Population of Kakheti and Guria 
Population of the regions were selected with the aim to have representatives of urban and rural 
population living in close or in more remote distance from forests. Consultations in the following 
settlements were carried out: Vardisubani, Angokhi, Shilda and Dedoplistkaro in Kakheti region; Zoti, 
Lesa and Mtispiri in Guria region. 
Representatives of ecological NGOs 
• 
Representative of World Wildlife Fund of Georgia 
• 
Representative of Caucasus Environmental NGO Network 
Representatives of women’s NGOs 
• 
Director of Women’s Information Center 
• 
Director of Taso Foundation 
 
In total, 175 persons were consulted, among them 36 percent women and 64 percent men. The list of 
consulted individuals and groups is presented in Annex 2 of this report. 
4. Gender Equality: Georgia by International Indices and National 
Framework Conditions 
Georgia is not among the champions in gender equality. Its standing is rather low in the two most 
acknowledged international indices of gender inequality carried out annually by UNDP and the World 
Economic Forum: 
According to UNDP Gender Inequality Index (GII), which is a composite measure of inequalities in 
reproductive health (maternal mortality rate and the adolescent birth ratio), empowerment (share of 
Parliament seats hold by women and share of women with some secondary education) and labor force 
participation (proportion of women employed among women in working age population). In 2017, 
Georgia was ranked 78 among 160 countries (UNDP, 2018a). 
Another composite measure of gender equality, Global Gender Gap Index of the World Economic Forum 
was introduced in 2006 to measure the magnitude of gender-based disparities on four sub-indexes with 
scoring from 0 to 1. In 2018, Georgia ranked as 99 (score 0.677) among 149 countries, ranking 60 for 
educational attainment (score 0.996), 85 for economic participation and opportunities (score 0.654), 119

=== PAGE 151 ===
9 
 
for political empowerment (score 0.093) and 123 for health and survival (score 0.967) (World Economic 
Forum, 2018). 
Popular perception of gender equality in the country is in line with International Indices, pointing at the 
low level of equality. According to the results of one national survey, less than a quarter of Georgians 
(25 percent of men, and 21 percent of women) think that there is gender equality in the country (CRRC 
2015). 
Article 11 of the Georgian Constitution warrants gender equality. Since Declaration of Independence in 
1991, Georgia adopted a number of laws and regulations targeted at the achievement of gender equality 
and became signatory of all main International Conventions on gender equality: 
• 
The Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) 
• 
Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic 
violence (Istanbul Convention) 
• 
UNDP 1325 resolution on women, peace and security 
• 
Georgia is among 193 signatories of the 2030 Agenda of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); 
17 principles of sustainable development make explicit commitments to gender equality both as a 
stand-alone goal and as a cross-cutting theme across all the SDGs’ SDG 5 refers to gender equality 
and has 14 indicators, of which 11have established methodology and standards. 
A number of laws dealing with gender equality has been adopted, among them:  
• 
Law of Georgia on Combating Trafficking 
• 
Law of Georgia on the Elimination of Domestic Violence, Protection and Assistance to the Victims 
of Domestic Violence 
• 
Law of Georgia on Gender Equality 
Several institutional mechanisms were established for the achievement of gender equality, and they 
include: 
• 
Gender Equality Advisory Council in the Parliament with the mandate to develop and monitor action 
plan for ensuring gender equality 
• 
Gender Equality Department as a standing unit in the structure of the Public Defender’s Office 
• 
The Inter-Agency Commission on Gender Equality, Violence against Women and Domestic 
Violence Issues 
Key findings for proposed project  
Legal mechanisms warranting gender equality are in place, but they do not ensure equality. The 
international indices as well as popular perception points on low gender parity. While the project’s 
primary goal is not achieving gender equality, it still aims to promote gender empowerment through 
making existing legal mechanisms viable.  
5. Gender Equality in the Public Space: Representation and 
Participation 
Equality is linked with having power to make decisions. Presentation and participation are therefore 
necessary conditions.

=== PAGE 152 ===
10 
 
Representation 
In order to be adequately considered, women’s concerns have to be voiced and heard. Hence, 
representation of women in representative, executive bodies and at decision-making level at public and 
private institutions is necessary, although not sufficient prerequisite for reaching gender equality. 
Representation of women in Parliament is low, having only 16 percent of women as MPs, while world 
average is 23.7 percent (UNWOMEN, 2018a). Three women occupy high posts in Georgian Parliament, 
one being a deputy chair and two as heads of committees. Lower than in Parliament is the representation 
of women in self-government, where they comprise only 13 percent of 2058 members of Sakrebulo1 
(City Council). Moreover, out of 64 mayors/governors in the country only one is a woman. 
In project regions, the representation of women in Sakrebulo is even lower than country average, women 
comprise only 12.7 percent of elected members. 
Table 1: Sakrebulo’s gender composition in target municipalities 
Municipality 
Number 
Women 
Men Total 
Telavi 
3 
29 
32 
Kvareli 
4 
23 
27 
Akhmeta 
2 
17 
19 
Dedoplistskaro 
2 
26 
28 
Ozurgeti 
7 
38 
45 
Lanchkhuti 
5 
27 
32 
Chokhatauri 
6 
30 
36 
Tianeti 
4 
23 
27 
Total 
33 
227 
260 
% 
12.7 
87.3 
100 
 
The situation is similar on executive power level. Among eleven ministers, only four are women. These 
are the Minister of Regional Development and Infrastructure, who at the same time is the Vice Prime 
Minister, Minister of Justice, Minister of Economy and State Minister for Reconciliation and Civic 
Equality. 
The situation is better in judiciary, where 52 percent of judges are women. Among 58 ambassadors of 
Georgia only six are women (Women and Men, 2018). 
Men form the majority of public servants. Among 74,532 employees of 166 public authorities of Georgia, 
majority (70.7 percent) are men and 29.3 percent are women. Gender imbalance is especially great in 
law enforcement agencies, where men comprise 86.2 percent of the staff. The situation is better in all 
other spheres of employment, where men comprise 53 and women 47 percent of staff. Gender 
imbalance is especially apparent at high-ranking positions, even excluding male-dominated law 
enforcement agencies, men occupy 70.3 and women only 29.7 percent of decision-making positions. 
Inequality is more evident in self-governance bodies where women comprise only 24 percent of high 
ranked officials (IDFI,2013). 
 
1 Sakrebulo - a representative body, which exercises self-governance in the municipalities as defined by the Organic Law of 
Georgia on Local Self-Government.

=== PAGE 153 ===
11 
 
Despite the little representation of women on decision-making positions, the attitude of the population 
towards female leadership both at national and local levels is positive. Many surveys demonstrated that 
both, men and women favor women’s participation in public sphere. For example, Population’s Life 
Experiences in Georgia Survey (EBRD, 2016) found that 92.5 percent of men and 95.6 percent of 
women think that women make good local leaders. Further, 89.5 percent of men and 93.4 percent of 
women consider that women are as competent as men to occupy the position of either the president or 
the prime minister of the country. According to an NDI poll Georgians believe that there are too few 
women in parliament and self-governance, therefore 63 percent support quota legislation to increase 
women’s representation (NDI, 2018). 
Participation 
Civic participation in the country is low. Like some other post-communist countries Georgia can be 
defined as in a state of a “never ending transition to democracy”, with public space characterized by 
powerless citizens, a dominating state and a lack of issue-driven debate on public policy (Lutsevych, 
2013). The population is rarely involved in decision-making on important country issues. 
Voting dynamics over years are stable and low: In Parliamentary elections voters’ turnout in 2008 was 
53.2 percent, 59.3 percent in 2012 and 51.6 percent in 2016. The voting rate on presidential elections 
was 46.1 percent in 2013 and 56.2 percent in 2018 run off (IDFI, 2019). 
The organic law of Georgia on Local Self Government (2014) provides the legal framework for ensuring 
public participation. 
Article 85 obliges self-government to ensure participation of citizen in the activities of municipality, 
including sessions of Municipal bodies. The law lists five mechanisms for civil participation in local 
decision-making processes, these being: 
I. 
A general Assembly of settlement, which shall be duly constitute if it is attended by at least 20 
percent of its members’ 
II. 
A Petition; 
III. 
A Council of Civil Advisers; a deliberative body of a municipality Gamgebeli, or a Mayor or a 
district Gamgebeli, which shall be composed of entrepreneurial legal entities, NGOs and of the 
municipality population, comprising at least ten members, with one third of representatives of 
one gender at least; 
IV. 
Participation in the sessions of Municipality Sakrebulo and sessions of its commission; 
V. 
Hearing reports on the work performed by Gamgebeli/Mayor of the municipality and by a 
member of Municipality Sakrebulo. 
However, these legal provisions do not warrant participation. National Assessment of Georgian 
Municipalities points that only 7 percent of population is informed about the work of municipalities. 
Advisory Councils do not actually operate, in some municipalities they have not even been formed (IDFI, 
2017). According to the study of public policy (Transparency International, 2014), only 4 percent of 
surveyed attended any session of Municipal council, and only 30 percent think that Local Government 
represents the interests of people like them. A gender difference in these perceptions was not indicated 
in this study. 
Council of Civil Advisors 
Results of the consultations in the framework of the project are in line with above cited estimations. 
Council of Civil Advisors still has not been established in every municipality. Among eight municipalities, 
which were consulted by the project, two-Tianeti and Akhmeta do not have a council, and in remaining

=== PAGE 154 ===
12 
 
six municipalities, councils have been established only recently and have not yet met (Telavi 
municipality) or meet once in 3 or 4 months and are not effective. Women constitute 39 percent of Civil 
Advisory Councils in studied municipalities. 
Table 2: Number of members of Council of Civil Advisors 
Municipality 
Number 
Women 
Men Total 
Telavi 
4 
8 
12 
Kvareli 
5 
6 
11 
Akhmeta 
 
 
n/a 
Dedoplistskaro 
3 
9 
12 
Ozurgeti 
9 
6 
15 
Lanchkhuti 
4 
6 
10 
Chokhatauri 
4 
12 
16 
Tianeti 
 
 
n/a 
Total 
29 
47 
76 
% 
38.2 
61.8 
100 
                                               Source: Information of municipalities 
In fact, the only way a mayor communicates with the population is through the mayor’s trustees. Such 
mechanism operates in each of the target regions. Each settlement or a group of small size settlements 
has a trustee that is appointed by the mayor. This trustee acts as a liaison between the population and 
the municipality, spreads information and mobilizes population. During consultations, all interviewed 
members of municipalities pointed out that face-to-face communication with the population, mainly 
through trustees, but also through meetings in villages, is the most effective way of communication. 
In Kakheti regional office, the male representative evaluated the engagement of its population as very 
low. He accounted this to the lack of trust towards authorities.  
“Generally speaking, people think that their ideas will not be considered.” 
The same reason for low level of public engagement was cited in Kvareli municipality.  
Indirect indication of the validity of such explanation comes from a positive example of participation and 
women’s involvement in decision-making process, associated with the renewal of “The Village 
Development Program” by the Ministry of Infrastructure and Local Self-Governance. The Ministry 
assigns a fixed amount of funds to each village, depending on the size of the settlement. To this sum 
local municipality adds half of its amount from local budget. The decision on selecting the project to be 
implemented in the community is made by majority vote at the settlement assembly, which is considered 
eligible if it consists at least of 30 persons of the other gender. In the project implementation phase, the 
local population will be hired as manual workers.  
“Village Development Program serves as a perfect tool for the engagement of population in 
dialogue. It is also a great opportunity for the government to collect information on problems in 
community” (Male regional administration representative of Kakheti).  
Mayor’s advisors on gender 
Special legal provisions are made for increasing women’s participation in self-governing bodies. 
Amendments to the Law on Gender Equality, adopted in July 2017 points out that a mayor can determine 
the civil servant responsible for gender equality issues. As no provision was made in the law regarding 
building capacity of the mayor’s advisor on gender issues, it often is of formal nature and does not

=== PAGE 155 ===
13 
 
contribute to promoting gender equality. Some municipalities, e.g. Tianeti, have an advisor, and she 
combines advising on gender issues with her position as the Mayor’ assistant. The situation in Kvareli 
is similar where the advisor also attends to other duties and is not paid for advising on gender issues 
and does not have a job description for the position. In Guria, none of the three municipalities has a 
position of an advisor on gender issues. In Telavi however, Dedoplistskaro and Akhmeta municipalities, 
the gender advisor is paid for this position and has a job description.  
The formal character of gender advisors is stressed in UNDP Gender Equality Report. As a result of the 
situation review, the report proposes to strengthen the effectiveness of gender equality mechanisms at 
the sub-national level by, a) formalizing the gender focal point positions; b) ensuring their presence in 
all 64 municipalities; c) standardizing job descriptions for gender focal points and ensuring their 
continuous training (UNDP, 2018b). 
Women rooms 
In order to strengthen women’s participation, since 2012 municipalities are supposed to have women’s 
rooms. The idea of a women’s room according to the regional administration of Kakheti is to create a 
venue for a dialogue between stakeholders, women and men alike. All municipalities in Kakheti have 
Women’s Rooms. They were established in 2018 by Mercy Corps and EKS/ESPER, so that the region 
now has eight women’s rooms, seven in municipalities and one in the Azeri inhabited village of 
Iormugalo. The activities carried out in this space so far are limited to giving advice about municipality 
functions, copying materials and looking after children while caregivers visit authorities. Gender advisors 
do not have any strategic plans for using the rooms, although some, e.g. in Akhmeta are currently 
working on it. The room is mostly seen as a space for arranging meetings with persons with disabilities 
and organizing language courses. Today, not having the overall strategy, the effectiveness of the rooms 
depends on activity and creativity of their managers. The rooms in all municipalities of Kakheti are 
equipped in a similar way, with a sofa, shelves, a table and chairs, and table and chairs for children, a 
copying machine and a computer.  
“Now we are in the process of defining operational strategy of Women’s Rooms in region in 
order to make them effective and more vibrant” (Female representative of regional 
administration in Kakheti).  
Note that Guria and Mtsketa-Mtianeti municipalities do not have Women’s Rooms. 
NGOs and CSOs 
Voluntary organisations are considered as the most common venues of participation. The Non-
governmental sector is well developed in Georgia, although its distribution is very uneven. The 
overwhelming majority is located in the capital Tbilisi. Presently, 32 women’s NGOs are active in 
Georgia. There are more organisations present in the regions where donors have been active. 
About 50 NGOs are working on environmental issues and are considered to be active in the country. 
Most of their work is focused on climate change, water contamination, waste management, forests and 
biodiversity (The Centre of Environmental Information and Education, 2014). 
In the consulted regions, the NGO sector is regarded as underdeveloped. In total, ten NGOs are 
registered in Kakheti region included NGO “Pankisi Elderly Women's Council” in Pankisi Gorge. Further, 
16 NGOs are registered in Guria and two explicitly work on gender-related topics – “Women for Guria” 
and “Women's Initiative Group”. 21 NGOs are represented in Mtskheta Mtianeti and two work for women 
empowerment in the region - Women’s Association „Bazaleti“ and “Women for Healthy Future”. The 
consultations with the governmental sector as well as with the local population stated that the NGO

=== PAGE 156 ===
14 
 
sector is not active on regional or municipal level. The only exception where the NGO sector is 
prominently active is Pankisi Gorge of Kakheti Region. Some NGOs based in Tbilisi are working on 
gender issues in the regions, e.g. Taso in Guria and “Women for Peace” in Dedoplistskaro.  
Community Based Organisations (CBOs) are also rare. In Mtsketa-Mtianeti there is only one in Kazbegi, 
in Guria there are two. Situation is much better in Kakheti. Members of Kakheti regional administration 
pointed to their positive experience with CBOs. 
”The decisions are made more easily and effectively in the villages which have CBOs”. 
The majority of existing community organisations in Kakheti are headed by women and are selected by 
majority vote. 
Cooperatives 
Despite several attempts to boost creation of business cooperatives, their number is rather limited. 
Within the country, there are 1,538 registered agricultural cooperatives with 13,677 persons of which 
3,674 are women. Among them are 61 cooperatives in which all members are women, numbering 389 
persons (UNWOMEN, 2019b) 
The biggest number of cooperatives in targeted regions is in Kakheti, where more than 100 cooperatives 
operate. Their members are mostly men. However, in donor-funded cooperatives, women’s participation 
is conditioned and it works well. For example, there are cooperatives for honey production, which entirely 
consists of women. Mostly female members form the association of Kakheti are honey producers. 
Animal husbandry and viticulture cooperatives are predominantly male.  
In Guria, 45 cooperatives are registered: 22 in Lanchkhuti, 13 in Ozurgeti and 10 in Chokhatauri.  
In Tianeti municipality (Mtskheta-Mtianeti region) twelve cooperatives are operative. Within the 
framework of EU funded ENPARD program in Mtskheta-Mtianeti, some fruit processing small factories 
were opened. Tianeti factory is a cooperative comprising eleven members, out of which seven are 
women. The forest fruits and herbs, but also fruits from plots of local population, are dried both by solar 
and electric power. During the season, the factory employs additional 200 persons. 
While women head many NGOs and CBOs, business cooperatives are rather headed by men. However, 
some donor projects make the participation of women as a requirement. In these cases, women are 
usually among the leaders.  
Although the majority of existing cooperatives in Georgia are formed in agriculture sector, there are 
three local gender sensitive energy cooperatives which have been set up in three regions of Imereti, 
Samegrelo and Mtskheta-Mtianeti. The cooperatives’ main goal is to produce and promote renewable 
energy and energy-efficient solutions in a gender-sensitive way by replacing the use of fuelwood and 
fossil fuels in rural households, small businesses, and public buildings. They are not womens' 
cooperative per se, but gender-sensitive in the sense that in their charter is established so  that their 
board should be at least 40% women or men. Those cooperatives were established with support of the 
NGOs Women Engage for a Common Future (WECF) and Greens Movement of Georgia. 
The main product of the energy cooperatives is solar water heaters, however due to the lack of demand 
in the market and sales they are not dynamic cooperatives. Trained energy ambassadors are also there 
who have committed themselves to spread awareness on energy-efficient technologies in rural areas.   
Current activity status of gender-sensitive/women cooperatives in the EE/AF sector is low, however 
strengthening their role is possible during GCF project implementation via encouraging the involvement

=== PAGE 157 ===
15 
 
of EE/AF gender-sensitive cooperatives in the supply chain of raw materials for alternative fuel 
production and involvement of trained energy ambassadors in consumer awareness creation about the 
forest sector reform and other EE-AF solutions. 
Key findings for proposed project  
• 
Representation of women in national and local representative and executive bodies is not adequate; 
• 
The level of participation of the local population in decision-making on local issues is not adequate; 
• 
The reason for the lack of public involvement is the feeling that one’s position will not be considered; 
• 
The self-governance provides a structure for citizen‘s participation, but it is not effective: Citizen’s 
Advisory Councils are not even established in many municipalities and where they are established, 
they do not function effectively; 
• 
In regions, voluntary organisations are few and are far from being vibrant. Community organisations 
with elected heads are effective, but are rare so far; 
• 
Number of cooperatives is different among target regions, with the biggest number been in Kakheti 
and the smallest in Mtskheta-Mtianeti, but still is small; 
• 
The main channel of communication of citizens with self-governance bodies is face to face, through 
a trustee, appointed by the Mayor; 
• 
Municipalities have two mechanisms focused on women’s empowerment: The position of a gender 
advisor to Mayor and Women’s Room in municipality. However, not all municipalities have either 
advisor or women’s room. In Kakheti region where rooms are in place, they do not function 
effectively. 
• 
The project should seek to involve with women’s organisations, e.g. in providing advocacy and 
organizing information campaigns to increase women’s visibility and generate knowledge within the 
community on the key role women play for the successful implementation of EE-AF solutions. 
6. Gender Equality in the Private Space: Decision-Making and Time 
Poverty 
Next to public space, gender inequality is also apparent in private space. Women own less material 
resources than men do, exercise less power in family decision-making process and experience time 
poverty due to a higher load of non-paid work.  
Traditional gender role division in Georgia is still very common, especially in rural areas. It is supported 
and practiced by both women and men. Gender roles refer to ownership and decision-making, stressing 
man’s role of provider for the family and woman’s role as home keeper. Survey results confirm such 
attitude as 85.1 percent of men and 81.6 percent of women think that woman’s most important role is to 
keep family going, 68.3 percent of men and 59.0 percent of women think that it is better for everyone if 
the man earns money and woman takes care of home and children (UNWOMEN, 2018).  
Household composition 
There are more men- than women-headed households, which account for 39 percent in Georgia. The 
share of women headed households is bigger in urban settlements (GEOSTAT, 2018). Among 34 
percent of single member households, women comprise 28 percent. This tendency could be explained 
on the one hand by a higher life expectancy of women and higher share of unmarried women compared 
to unmarried men. In general, women-headed households are more vulnerable to poverty (UNDP, 
2017).

=== PAGE 158 ===
16 
 
Households comprise on average 3.3 persons. In Kakheti and Guria the number is 3.2 and in Mtskheta-
Mtianeti 2.1.  
Table 3: Population distribution by regions and gender, and average number of household members 
Region 
Population 
Male 
% 
Female 
% 
Average number of 
HH members 
Georgia 
3,713,804 
47.7 
52.3 
3.3 
Tbilisi 
1,108,717 
45.4 
54.6 
3.3 
Imereti 
533,906 
48.4 
51.6 
3.1 
KvemoKartli 
423,986 
49.2 
50.8 
3.7 
Ajara 
333,953 
48.8 
51.2 
4.0 
Samegrelo-ZemoSvaneti 
330,761 
48.1 
51.9 
3.3 
Kakheti 
318,583 
49.0 
51.0 
3.2 
ShidaKartli 
263,382 
48.7 
51.3 
3.3 
Guria 
113,350 
48.2 
51.8 
3.2 
Samtske-Javakheti 
160,504 
48.9 
51.1 
3.6 
Mtskheta-Mtianeti 
94,573 
50.4 
49.6 
3.1 
Racha-Lechkhumi and KvemoSvaneti 
32,089 
48.6 
51.4 
2.5 
Source: UNFPA 
Ownership of family assets 
The Law on Gender Equality (Article 10.1) ensures equal ownership rights to men and women. Although 
inheritance practice is most often founded on customary law and favors men in ownership rights of 
parental house and land plots. In households with adult male members property is usually registered on 
male’s name. This practice accounts for the gender-based disproportion in ownership, it is more 
common among men than among women. Ownership of dwelling, as well as means for agriculture and 
animal husbandry is higher among men. About 80 percent of men and 76 percent of women report 
ownership of dwelling. Men own 62.3 percent of agricultural parcels, 53.4 percent of large livestock, and 
66.7 percent of large agricultural equipment. (GEOSTAT, 2018). Land parcels owned by women are 
smaller than those owned by men (UNWOMEN, 2015).  
In the project regions women own in Guria 43.8 percent of agricultural land plots, in Kakheti 39.1 percent 
and in Mtskheta-Mtianeti 39.1 percent (UNWOMEN 2018b). 
Decision-making power 
Obtaining objective information on as who makes final decisions at home is not an easy task. As a rule, 
opinions differ among spouses and surveys often do not show similar results. E.g. According to the 
EBRD (2016) survey, decision-making power more often rests with men. In line with the existing practice 
majority considers this rightful. Both women (56 percent) and men (76 percent) think that man should 
make decisions at home. 57.8 percent of men and 42.2 percent of women reported making decisions 
over spending agricultural income (EBRD, 2016). Another survey points to making mostly joint decisions 
on spending income. This refers to income from selling agriculture products (73 percent), salaries (71 
percent), income from business (67 percent) and informal employment (64 percent), to pensions and 
government benefits (49 percent). Whenever decisions are made mainly by one spouse, in all cases 
except spending income from business, more women than men make decisions (UNWOMEN, 2018a). 
During project consultations, the consulted population declared that spouses or the whole family mostly 
make the decisions jointly, although some claimed that the household member with the higher income 
had more power, and this could be either men or women, although in reality most often it was the man.

=== PAGE 159 ===
17 
 
Time poverty and household tasks 
One of the problems women face is time poverty. The amount of household tasks and caring activities 
most often coupled with employment and/or farming do not leave much time to women for rest, 
entertainment and personal development. The lack of access to kindergartens in many regions further 
aggravates the problem - the only exception in the consultations being Dedoplistskaro. 
Women perform the majority of household tasks. About 46.3 percent of them are performed solely by 
women, while only 23.7 percent of them are done solely by men, the remaining 30 percent are performed 
jointly (Gender and Generation Survey, 2010). Making repairs and paying bills are the only tasks where 
men outnumber women (UNDP, 2017). Besides household tasks, women devote much of their time to 
the care of the children or sick family members. According to survey, women spend 45 hours a week on 
household tasks and caring for children, old and ill family members while men spend only 15 hours 
(UNWOMEN, 2018b). 
Women are also more engaged in farming and agricultural works working 80.33 days more than men. 
Women work 344.25 days per year, while men work 263.92 days. Women also spend more days in 
animal husbandry. The largest gap, constituting 130 days is noted in Kakheti region. Gender division is 
apparent in many agricultural and farming activities and types of work done. Poultry and small animal 
husbandry usually are seen as one of the women’s duties, while men and women do husbandry of larger 
animals jointly. If men are engaged more in income-generating agricultural and farming works, women 
usually spend more time in subsistence farming; e.g. men spend 91.34 days and women 54.76 for 
working in crops value chains (UNWOMEN, 2016).  
Key findings for proposed project  
• 
Despite existing provisions ensuring equality in ownership, men own more material assets than 
women; 
• 
Decisions at household levels are mostly done jointly by spouses, but in cases of disagreement men 
more often have a final say; 
• 
Women face time poverty as they perform the majority of household chores. Besides, they bear the 
main responsibility for caring after children and sick family members and all this is often coupled 
with paid employment or/and subsistence farming. 
7. Human Capital 
Poverty 
Poverty associated with high unemployment constitutes one of the main problem of the country. With 
Per Capita GDP in 2017 being 4,100 USD (World Bank, 2018) 32 percent of population lives under 2.5 
USD per day. 18.8 percent of rural and 14.3 percent of urban dwellers are qualified as persistent poor 
(WB, 2016). According to Geostat, the number of people living in poverty declined from 38.8% in 2007 
to 21.9% in 2017 (Geostat, 2018). Georgia counts 258,595 Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) out of a 
total population of 3.72 million, many of whom, like those experiencing extreme poverty, are particularly 
disadvantaged regarding the access to basic services and social inclusion. Children are at a higher risk 
of poverty than any other age group. Households headed by women, big size families and families with 
children under 15 are particularly vulnerable to poverty as well. Households with children comprise 78 
percent of households living in extreme poverty, the higher the number of children in the household, the 
greater the poverty risk (UNDP, 2017).

=== PAGE 160 ===
18 
 
Poverty rates not only differ across settlement type or family composition, but across regions as well. 
Table 4: Poverty headcount by regions (2.5 USD a day) 
No 
Region 
Percent 
1 
ShidaKartli 
51.9 
2 
Mtskheta-Mtianeti 
49.3 
3 
Guria 
45.3 
4 
KvemoKartli 
42.4 
5 
Samegrelo & ZemoSvaneti 
36.8 
6 
Kakheti 
35.3 
7 
Racha-Lechkhumi & KvemoSvaneti 
34.6 
8 
Imereti 
34.6 
9 
Ajara 
31.9 
10 
Tbilisi 
18.6 
11 
Samtskhe-Javakheti 
17.6 
                                                 Source: World Bank, 2016 
                                                    
As can be seen in the Table 4, the targeted project regions are among those experiencing high rates of 
poverty. In Mtskheta-Mtianeti the poverty rate accounts for 49.3 percent, in Guria 45.3 and in Kakheti 
35.3 percent. 
Poverty was cited as the most urgent problem during consultations. All prospective decisions upon 
purchasing energy-efficient stoves, insulation and use of alternative fuels were considered mostly only 
in regard to the prices.  
Economy and Employment  
As stated earlier, one of the main reasons for poverty is high unemployment. According to official 
statistics 12.7 percent of the population is unemployed, but real numbers are much higher, as those 
having plots are considered as employed (GEOSTAT, 2019). According to the 2014 Census, only 36.3 
percent of employed men and 28.6 percent of employed women are hired workers (Khakkert & 
Sumbadze, 2017). More men (63 percent) than women (51 percent) are employed among the 
economically-active population (GEOSTAT, 2018). In 2018, the ratio of female to male labor force 
participation was 73.4 percent, higher than the world average of 67.3 (World Bank, 2018a). 
More than 23 percent of the population is engaged in informal employment, with men and women equally 
involved in it. Informal employment is more widely spread in rural than in urban areas. The majority (60 
percent) work in agriculture, 23 percent provide different services, 8 percent, mostly men, are busy with 
repairs, 7 percent, mostly women, are doing domestic work and 6 percent are in sales (UNWOMEN, 
2018b). 
The gender wage gap can be considered as rather big, which amounted to 427 GEL in 2017. Men 
earned 1,197 GEL against women earning only 770 GEL. Difference in income is accounted by both 
horizontal and vertical segregation. The horizontal segregation is the result of women’s choice of 
traditionally female professions, which are the least remunerated. Women mostly can be found in such 
professions as life science and health; teaching professionals or associate professionals; and customer 
services clerks. Men are most occupied in the armed forces; they are legislators, general managers, 
physical, mathematical and engineering science professionals or associate professionals. In 2015, 47.2 
percent of women were employed in the three sectors health, education and culture (World Bank 2018b).

=== PAGE 161 ===
19 
 
In all professions, vertical segregation is also present, with women occupying lower positions than men 
and correspondingly earning less. For example, women comprise 65 percent of medical staff, but are 
usually rarely found on high managerial and hence well-paid positions (GEOSTAT, 2018). 
Employed women often experience dual burden as they have to fulfill their obligations at work and at 
home. The Labor Code of Georgia often is criticized for not corresponding to internationally accepted 
standards. Compensated Maternity leave amounts to 126 days (Article 27 of Labor Code). Additional 
parental leave amounts to a minimum two weeks per year, maximum 12 weeks until the child turns five 
years old and can be given to childcare-giver of either sex. The Law does not provide any protection to 
pregnant women from being dismissed by the employer, pressing women to restrain from using maternal 
leave. In the private sector, the provision of maternity leave is at the discretion of the employer. The 
state warrants only a one-time payment in the amount of 1,000 GEL. 
Agriculture is the biggest sector of employment, as approximately 43.4 percent of country’s territory is 
designated as agricultural land. It employs 50.9 percent of the active population, 54.1 percent of which 
are women. However, women are more engaged in low-value-added and a small-scale agricultural 
production (UNWOMEN, 2018c). About 40 percent grant beneficiaries of the programme “Produce in 
Georgia” are women, but this concerns only small and medium size businesses (SMEs). There are no 
women among large-scale grant beneficiaries. Gender equality issues are not reflected in the Regional 
Development Strategies 2017-2021 and are not detailed in Georgia’s Rural Development Strategy 2017-
2020. 
The stakeholder consultations demonstrated that although the population speaks of economic activation 
of women in recent years, and that in many household women are the main generators of income, men 
still remain the principal earners. The main economic activities in the studied regions concern: 
agriculture, animal husbandry, services and employment in public institutions. Many women are 
employed in public institutions, such as schools, kindergartens and municipalities. 
Small-scale agriculture and farming constitute the main income and subsistence sources for the local 
population. In Guria, seasonal work in Turkey also plays a significant role. In Kakheti wine production, 
grain and sunflower harvesting, as well as animal husbandry are the main income sources. Vineyards 
are associated also with development of touristic activities. The wine route – a network of vineyards, 
often with adjoining restaurants and guesthouses - is a favourable touristic attraction, especially during 
autumn. While in wine production more men than women are engaged, the opposite can be said of 
hospitality business that is more in the women’s hands. 
In all types of agricultural works and animal husbandry, both women and men are equally engaged. 
Nonetheless, the majority of tasks are gender-specific. In animal farms, men are occupied with herding 
and hey production, while women are busy in production of milk products. In agriculture, mechanical 
works are entirely done by men, while women are assigned to hoeing. Both women and men work as 
daily hired labourers. Here, in most cases the work is also gender specific. In all regions, there are 
organized teams of workers. In Kakheti, these are female, male and mixed gender teams, in Guria 
mostly mixed gender. The teams are well organized, ensure contracts and transportation. Women teams 
are also mostly led by women. Men and women get equal pay, the amount of course depends on the 
task. It fluctuates between 30 and 50 GEL in Guria and Kakheti. In wine factories, women are employed 
for sticking labels to bottles and for doing similar tasks. 
In Guria, the main crop is maize. Hazelnuts have been the main import product of the region, but in 
recent years pests have destroyed them. In Guria many women work in sewing factories in Poti where 
they commute daily. In total, 200 women are employed in Ozurgeti in sewing factories of famous brands.

=== PAGE 162 ===
20 
 
Unemployment is the main obstacle for men and women equally throughout the country – the same 
applies to the targeted regions. It stimulates both migration to other regions in Georgia as well as 
migration to other countries. Mountainous villages are especially threatened, e.g. in Mtskheta-Mtianeti 
region out of 289 villages, 50 are deserted, in addition in 50 villages the population does not exceed ten 
persons. 
The division of labour in the concerned regions is evident as cited previously in this report. Generally, 
women are involved in domestic activities providing subsistence and care to the household while men 
are more involved with monetized activities. There is a risk that the project will further accentuate the 
division of labour and benefits for women are not maximized if no actions are taken to minimize this risk. 
Section 10 therefore describes the proposed measures to ensure the positive benefits for women are 
maximized. 
Health 
Women’s life expectancy in Georgia exceeds men’s by 8.6 years - 77.2 years for women and 68.6 years 
for men in 2014. Women constitute 62.2 percent among those over 65 years of age in Georgia. In total, 
40 percent of men and 25 percent of women evaluate their health as good or very good in representative 
survey (CRRC, 2018), although the share of those with registered disability status is higher among male 
adult population, being 2.8 percent, than among women (2.4 percent) (Hakkert & Sumbadze, 2017). 
As can be seen from Table 5 in the targeted project regions occurrence of disability is high. In Guria 3.4 
percent of males and 3.1 percent of females, in Kakheti 3.1 percent of males and 2.5 percent of females 
and in Mtskheta-Mtianeti 3.1 percent of males and 2.6 percent of females have a registered disability 
status. 
Table 5: Persons with officially recognized disability status according to sex and regions. 
Region 
Population 
Male 
Disabled 
Male 
% 
Population 
Female 
Disabled 
Female 
% 
Tbilisi 
502,890 
11,115 
2.2 
605,827 
10,986 
1.8 
Adjara 
162,928 
4,104 
2.5 
171,025 
4,319 
2.5 
Guria 
54,660 
1,886 
3.4 
58,690 
1,822 
3.1 
Imereti 
258,598 
9,691 
3.7 
275,308 
8,954 
3.2 
Kakheti 
156,154 
4,886 
3.1 
162,429 
4,067 
2.5 
Mtskheta-Mtianeti 
47,645 
1,469 
3.1 
46,928 
1,224 
2.6 
Racha-Lechkhumi&KvemoSvaneti 
15,584 
887 
5.7 
16,505 
935 
5.7 
Samegrelo&ZemoSvaneti 
159,070 
4,779 
3.0 
171,691 
4,572 
2.7 
Samtskhe-Javkheti 
78,521 
2,113 
2.7 
81,983 
1,849 
2.3 
KvemoKartli 
208,532 
3,685 
1.8 
215,454 
3,355 
1.6 
ShidaKartli 
128,282 
4,454 
3.5 
135,100 
3,789 
2.8 
Georgia 
1,772,864 
49,069 
2.8 
1,940,940 
45,872 
2.4 
 Source: Calculated based on the 2014 General Population Census  
Maternal mortality remains a problem. In 2013, World Bank estimations show that it was 23 per 
100 000 childbirths (Transparency International, 2016). 
Education 
Georgia has a good record concerning education. Girls constitute 47 percent of basic level and 49 
percent of high school graduates. Girls outperform boys in national exams in almost all subjects, 
including Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). The share of girls and boys is

=== PAGE 163 ===
21 
 
similar among Vocational Education and Training (VET) graduates, but with 54 percent girls form the 
majority of University students (Sumbadze, 2015). 
Domestic violence and early marriage 
Domestic violence and early marriages are the barriers to health and education, concerning in much 
greater extent women than men. About 81 percent of population considers domestic violence and 72 
percent the early marriages as problems (NDI, 2018). The cases of domestic violence are high and 
since 2015 show 50 percent increase, though some experts account this not to higher incidence rates, 
but rather to higher reporting. Incidences of domestic and gender-based violence correspond to global 
and regional averages (WHO, 2013). In 2017, 3,599 women and 497 men were registered as victims of 
domestic violence and 393 women and 3,492 men as perpetrators (IDIF, 2019). 
Regions of Georgia differ by the reporting incidences of domestic violence. In years 2013-2018, the 
least number of incidences were registered in Guria, while in other targeted by the project region, 
Kakheti, the number was one of the highest in the country. When the number of incidences are 
calculated concerning population, Kakheti ranks second (0.25 percent) and Mtskheta-Mtianeti third (0.24 
percent) by the share of registered incidences, while Guria has one of the smallest share (0.16 percent). 
Table 6: Number of incidences of domestic violence in 2013-2018 by regions 
Region 
Number of incidences 
Population 
% 
Samtske-Javakheti 
421 
160,504 
0.26 
Kakheti 
784 
318,583 
0.25 
Mtskheta-Mtianeti 
231 
94,573 
0.24 
Imereti and Racha-lechkhumi 
1166 
565,995 
0.21 
ShidaKartli 
527 
263,382 
0.20 
Ajara 
648 
333,953 
0.19 
Guria 
187 
113,350 
0.16 
KvemoKartli 
702 
423,986 
0.16 
Tbilisi 
1779 
1,108,717 
0.16 
Samegrelo-ZemoSvaneti 
340 
330,761 
0.10 
Georgia 
6,785 
3,713,804 
0.18 
Source: Calculations based on IDFI and UNFPA data 
Nonetheless, incidences of domestic violence are much higher than officially registered. A 2017 
nationwide study conducted by UNWOMEN revealed that one of every seven women experienced 
sexual abuse during her lifetime. Study findings indicate that women and men show a high degree of 
tolerance towards physical violence against women in relationships, as almost one quarter of women 
(22 percent) and one third of men (31 percent) believe that beating the wife is justified at least under 
some circumstances. Moreover, almost one quarter of all women (23 percent) and nearly half of all men 
(42 percent) believe that a wife should obey her husband even if she disagrees (UNWOMEN, 2018). 
A World Bank study on gender-based violence in Georgia (WB, 2017) identified vulnerable domestic 
violence groups. Compared to the others, women who got married before the age of 18 were much 
more likely to suffer emotional abuse, as well as sexual and physical violence. The analysis 
demonstrates that respondents with stressed partners, who are unemployed, regularly drink alcohol and 
stay away from home, report higher levels of violence. Over half of all women declared they had no 
personal income, compared to less than a quarter of men. Men also control most household assets. 
Even in the cases where women are the legal owners of the property, often the men still control the 
wealth. Women often lack the job skills or networking capabilities to find work and achieve economic 
independence. This makes them dependent on their spouses. Therefore, they cannot easily report 
abusive behavior without risking their own economic survival. It is not expected that the project will 
increase domestic violence, This has not been considered an impact nor risk during the assessment

=== PAGE 164 ===
22 
 
process and stakeholder consultations. On the contrary, the project will bring awareness regarding 
gender issues and will empower women through the implementation of the mitigation proposed 
measures. Women will not be forced to participate in the employment, business, and community 
opportunities of the project. These sensitivities will be identified and properly communicated to ensure 
that they are managed if they do occur. 
Another problem impeding development of human capital is early marriage. According to information 
provided by the Georgian Ministry of Justice, in 2015, 611 child marriages were registered. In 2016, 
there decreased to only five. The number of parents who were still minors when registering the birth of 
a child also declined from 1,449 in 2015 to 1,278 in 2016. However, the figures for the number of minor 
parents having children considerably exceed the figures on early marriage, clearly indicating that the 
phenomenon continues, but marriages are not registered due to constrains introduced by law. The legal 
minimum age for marriage is established at 18 years. An amendment to Article 1108 of the Civil Code 
in 2015 postulates that for the marriage of a person younger than 18 years a court decision is needed.  
Early marriage negatively reflects on the mother’s and newborn’s health. It restricts women’s education 
and hence her chances for employment and prosperity. Early marriage very often results in dropping 
out of school. In 2015, 408 pupils aged 13-17 left schools because of marriage. Dropout for the reason 
of marriage is more common among girls than boys. Even when married girls want to continue school 
education, they encounter resistance, as parents of their classmates protest and say they do not want 
their children to have classes together with married women (Sumbadze, 2015). 
The surveys noted above demonstrate that early marriage often makes woman more vulnerable to 
domestic violence (World Bank, 2017). Early marriages are rooted in customs and traditions closely 
linked with religion and ethnicity. UNFPA (2014c) found that in the Kvemo-Kartli region 32 percent of 
married women among the Azeri were married before the age of 18, while five percent got married at 
the age of 13-14, and 16 percent at the age of 15-16. As can be seen from Table 8, Kakheti (12.4 
percent) and Guria (10.2 percent) have a high share of married women younger than 18 years (Hakkert 
& Sumbadze, 2017).

=== PAGE 165 ===
23 
 
Table 7: Percentage of married women aged 15-17 by region, area of residence and type of union  
(all marriages and only registered marriages) 
Source: Hakkert & Sumbadze, 2017 
Key findings for proposed project  
• 
Poverty is a main problem of the country as one third of the population lives on less than 2.5 USD 
a day. 
• 
Unemployment is the main reason of poverty; it is higher among men, than women. 
• 
Gender division of labour is evident in the proposed project regions. Men are more involved in 
monetized activities than women. 
• 
Agriculture is the biggest sector for employment. 
• 
Women spend more time than men in agricultural works, although men are more occupied in value 
added chains, while women are busier in subsistence farming.  
• 
The majority of agricultural tasks are gender-specific. 
• 
Wage Gender Gap constitutes 427 GEL and is accounted by horizontal and vertical gender 
segregation. 
• 
Women’s life expectancy by 8.6 years exceeds mens’. Women constitute 62.2 percent of persons 
over 65. 
• 
Women have slightly better educational attainment than men. 
• 
Domestic violence and early marriages are the main impediments of human capital – they are more 
frequent and have heavier consequences for women than men. There is an opportunity to use the 
project to bring awareness regarding gender issues, including domestic violence and its impacts. 
8. Gender-specific Patterns of Forest and Fuel Use 
Forest use 
The forests are used both by men and women, but with different intensity and purpose. Men go to forests 
much more frequently than women and they do this more for economic gain, e.g. for obtaining fuel wood 
and construction materials - not only for home consumption, but also for sale. In case of use of forests 
for non-timber products, men again do this for commercial means, collecting mostly mushrooms, 
chestnuts, walnuts, bladder nuts and decorative plants. Women restrain from going to forests due to 
threat of being attacked by animals. However, in cases when they go, they collect dewberries, 
Region 
Urban 
Rural 
Total 
All Registered 
All 
Registered 
All 
Registered 
Tbilisi 
2.6 
0.8 
8.8 
2.3 
2.7 
0.9 
Adjara 
9.9 
4.5 
8.8 
4.7 
9.4 
4.6 
Guria 
9.6 
2.9 
10.5 
4.1 
10.2 
3.7 
Imere 
5.7 
2.0 
8.2 
3.0 
6.9 
2.5 
Kakheti 
9.0 
1.7 
13.5 
4.1 
12.4 
3.5 
Mtskheta-Mtianeti 
3.2 
0.6 
5.0 
0.9 
4.5 
0.8 
Racha-Lechkhumi&KvemoSvane 
2.5 
1.3 
3.4 
0.4 
3.1 
0.6 
Samegrelo&ZemoSvaneti 
6.4 
2.9 
8.6 
3.6 
7.7 
3.3 
Samtskhe-Javakhe 
4.9 
1.3 
6.8 
2.6 
6.2 
2.2 
KvemoKartli 
6.0 
1.2 
20.8 
6.4 
14.4 
4.2 
ShidaKartli 
4.1 
1.7 
7.9 
2.2 
6.3 
2.0 
Georgia 
4.4 
1.5 
10.9 
3.8 
7.1

=== PAGE 166 ===
24 
 
raspberries, bilberries, cornelian cherries, “Ganzili”-wild garlic, dog rose and herbs mostly for household 
consumption, but also for commercial purposes. 
Non-timber products are unavailable in wet forests, i.e. forests that stand on wetlands. In Guria, there 
are no plants to collect for consumption and even taking fuel wood out of such forests is very difficult 
and time-consuming, especially in the raining season. 
Many people are using forests as pastures. Here, men are more involved with herding.  
Fuel use 
Wood for fuel is used universally for heating. Everywhere, notwithstanding having or not having piped 
gas, people in Georgia use fuel wood for heating. The overwhelming majority of the population heats 
only one room irrespective of either the size of the house or the number of the household members. In 
rare cases, two rooms are heated. The public institutions are also mostly heated by fuel wood or 
briquettes, only in rare cases large schools have a central gas heating system.  
People most often pay for fuel wood, but many depend heavily on obtaining it out of the forest for free. 
As one of the villagers commented: 
“Why should we buy fuel wood, when it is in abundance behind our houses?” 
During consultations such opinions were mainly heard from the villagers living in mountainous areas, 
where forests are close to their houses. They also expressed great discontent with the activities of 
licensed enterprises that were cutting trees there. 
In Guria, some villagers have plots where they grow trees for fuel. These are rapidly growing species, 
elms and acacia, that they cut and use as fuel wood. 
Fuel wood is usually cut in the forest by men, this may be a household member or a hired person. 
However, further splitting of wood, carrying it home and putting it in stoves is performed by women. So 
in fact, women are rather the ones who control the consumption of fuel wood. 
Besides heating, cooking and warming water, fuel wood is used for fireplaces, traditional baking of 
bread, distilling “Chacha”- spirit beverage and making preserves.  
Nowadays, in many kindergartens in Guria and Dedoplistskaro, briquettes are used. Teachers, who are 
almost exclusively female, are quite content with them. 
“We are very satisfied with briquettes, they are easy in use and depending on the type of tree 
they are made of, give much warmth” (Teacher of a kindergarten in Lesa).  
The only problem in Guria is the strorage where humidity is high, which negatively affects the quality of 
the briquettes. 
Use of stoves 
Some portion of the population uses more-energy efficient (the so called “Svanetian stoves”, which last 
for about 5 years). However, majority uses the cheaper, traditional ones, lasting for just one or two 
seasons. The choice is determined entirely due to restricted economic situation of the household. In five 
years-perspective, both stoves probably cost approximately the same, but despite understanding that 
more energy-efficient stoves have a better effect, for many it is difficult to pay a big sum at once.

=== PAGE 167 ===
25 
 
“We will buy enhanced stoves if the price would be lower than Svanetian stoves or if it would be 
possible to pay gradually” (Female participant of consultation in Guria).  
This restriction is more prominent for households who are below the poverty line, single-women 
households and households comprising of only pensioners. 
Recreational use of forests 
The use of forests for recreational purposes is rather rare and differs across regions. In Kakheti, there 
are many worshiping sites, which are frequented both by local population and internal or foreign tourists 
while there are very few such sites in Guria and Tianeti. The common problem in Kakheti is their 
accessibility as they are situated deep and high in the forests. The religious sites are kept very well, but 
camping sites are oftentimes littered: 
“Up to 15-20 km from Angokhi are beautiful waterfalls. Villagers go, but as for tourists to visit it, 
the road is needed (Female participant in Angokhi). 
The schools rarely take pupils to the forests; parents also seldom take children there.  
Ownership of forests 
Ownership entails usage right, legal or customary, and protection. The feeling of ownership of forests 
differs across geographic vicinity of settlement to forest and across gender. The ownership is very high 
among men living in villages bordering forests. The ownership is expressed both in a protest against 
use of forests by private businesses, and also in understanding of the need of their protection.  
“The forest is behind my house, and if I cut the tree today, tomorrow my house may be flooded.” 
(Men in Angokhi). 
Villagers living near forests claim a control over forest use for themselves. The population in Zoti, an 
isolated village situated in highlands of Guria, proposed to form village committee, which will check the 
acclaimed needs of inhabitants for wood materials for the construction or repair of their wooden houses, 
and will issue cutting permit.  
Key findings for proposed project  
• 
Wood for fuel and as construction material is used frequently 
• 
Mostly women use fuel wood and control their consumption; 
• 
Men use the forest much more intensively than women. In some places, women do not go to the 
forest at all. Men use forest mostly for obtaining fuel wood and construction materials and collecting 
economically profitable non-timber products, while women use forests for collecting berries, fruit 
and herbs mostly for home consumption, but for selling as well; 
• 
The feeling of ownership of forest differs by the distance of settlement from the forest. It is much 
higher in villages located near forests. The feeling was expressed mostly by men. 
• 
Attitude to using briquettes is positive due to experience of their use in public institutions. As the 
women constitute the majority of employees of such organisations, they are most active proponents 
of briquette use. 
• 
The use of forests for recreational purposes is not widely spread. Schoolchildren are rarely taken 
for camping into forests. A bit more frequented are sites of worship, but their remote location and 
lack of roads makes them difficult to access.

=== PAGE 168 ===
26 
 
9. Gender Composition of Staff of the Ministry of Environmental 
Protection and Agriculture 
The forestry sector is dominated by male employees. In the Ministry of Environmental Protection and 
Agriculture (MoEPA) departments of Biodiversity and Forest Policy, Department of Environmental 
Supervision (DES) and National Forestry Agency (NFA) are governmental bodies responsible for 
forests. Protected areas are managed by LEPL” Agency of Protected Areas (APA)”. 
Staff of the ministry 
As can be seen from Table 8, male personnel comprise 86.1 percent of the staff of all three bodies 
managing forests. Men are in the majority and comprise 75 percent on decision-making positions. The 
heads of all three departments are men. 
Table 8: Gender distribution of the staff responsible for forest management in MoEPA 
Positions 
Number 
of Males 
Number of 
Females 
Total 
Department of Biodiversity 
 
 
 
Head 
1 
 
1 
Deputy head 
 
1 
1 
Division head 
1 
1 
2 
Number of decision-makers 
2 
2 
4 
Employees 
12 
8 
20 
Total 
14 
10 
24 
National Forestry Agency (NFA) 
 
 
 
Head 
1 
 
1 
Deputy head 
2 
1 
3 
Division head 
2 
 
2 
Services head 
3 
1 
4 
Number of decision-makers 
8 
2 
10 
Employees 
378 
95 
473 
Total 
386 
97 
483 
Department of Environmental 
Supervision (DES)  
 
 
 
Head 
1 
 
1 
Deputy head 
2 
1 
3 
Division head 
2 
 
2 
Services head 
4 
4 
8 
Territorial body head 
8 
 
8 
Number of decision makers 
17 
5 
22 
Employees 
788 
82 
870 
Total 
805 
87 
892 
 
 
 
 
Total 
 
 
 
Decision-makers 
27 
9 
36 
Percent 
75 
25 
100 
Employees 
1,178 
185 
1,363 
Percent 
86.4% 
13.6% 
100% 
All 
1,205 
194 
1,399 
Percent 
86.1% 
13.9% 
100% 
       
 
Source: Interviews with heads and deputy heads of departments

=== PAGE 169 ===
27 
 
In the regional branches of the NFA, similar gender imbalance exists. In Kakheti, out of 44 employees, 
only five are women. They work in the sphere of analyses (three persons) and services (two persons). 
In Mtsketa-Mtianeti, among 35 employees only four are women, who work as analysts and in 
chancellery. In Guria, the forestry department employs 25 persons. The head and deputy heads are 
men. The department has two divisions in Ozurgeti, Lanchkhuti and Chokhatauri, which are both headed 
by men. Three women work on analyses and two more in chancellery. 
Gender imbalance in the forestry sector is accounted by Ministry staff and heads of territorial 
departments of targeted regions as rooted in sex differences, namely physical strength and endurance 
needed for fulfilling the tasks associated with being a ranger, in most cases an entry point to the 
profession. This is linked with the lack of women with adequate education since women are reluctant to 
pursue the profession of a forester. Therefore, women who work in forestry are specialized on forestry 
policy and analysis and are not engaged in actual inspection of forests. 
Education in forestry 
There are not many possibilities for acquiring the profession of a forester. All three levels of education 
in forestry, Bachelor, Master and PhD are provided by only two Universities, namely the Agriculture 
University of Georgia and Georgian Technology University. Master’s and bachelor’s degrees are 
available at Batumi Shota Rustaveli University and Tbel Abuseridze Educational University of Georgian 
Patriarchy, Master’s degres are provided at Ilia University, Vocational education in forestry (III, IV, V 
levels) can be obtained in Batumi University and of levels I-III in vocational colleges “Horizon”, Ozurgeti 
and Javakhishvili Borjomi Private School. Vocational education programme - Forest Work Specialist 
(Level IV)  in Akhaltsikhe, VET college “OPIZARI”, in Kachreti VET college “AISI” in Kobuleti - VET 
college “NEW WAVE” and in Mtskheta, VET college “Tsinamdzghvriantkari”. For the period of 2010-
2014, the total number of Bachelor Forestry programs graduates amounted to about 295 students, 29 
graduates were awarded the master’s degree and only one received a PhD degree at Agricultural 
University of Georgia. The most problematic issues students are facing is a poor knowledge base, lack 
of motivation to become a forester, outdated curricula and training modules, lack of modern training 
infrastructure and materials, and poor opportunities for on-the-job and mid-career training (Forest 
Education, 2015). 
10. General Conclusions and Implications for the Project 
It has become obvious that women on the one hand are still negatively impacted due to gender 
stereotypes, but on the other hand also have the potential to be important change agents in achieving 
the overall objective to enable the implementation of forest sector reform in Georgia to reduce GHG 
emissions from forest degradation. However, to strengthen women in their agency capacities is only one 
pillar to achieve a sustainable change. The societal and organisational structures also need to be 
supported in order to provide an enabling environment for gender-responsive governance. 
Based on the assessment, five intervention areas are identified: 
1) Strengthening of gender competencies in partner structures 
2) Gender-responsive framework conditions 
3) Women as key actors and target group 
4) Access of women to resources and benefits of the project 
5) Gender Mainstreaming and data collection

=== PAGE 170 ===
28 
 
10.1 Specific interventions for strengthening gender competencies in partner 
structures 
As the analysis shows, gender is still in most partner institutions a concept either unknown or at a very 
nascent stage of being mainstreamed. Taking into account the specific role of women in the project 
concerning fuel use, appliance use, forest use, access to resources and benefits of the project and 
decision making it is crucial to create a case for action, strengthen competencies and institutionalize 
gender aspects in the respective partner organisations. It will enable organizations to implement the 
Forest Sector Reform and the market development for energy efficient appliances and alternative fuels 
in a gender-sensitive manner. 
The following interventions in the partner structures have to be considered to close specific gender gaps 
identified in the gender assessment: 
• 
With the new mandate under the Forest Sector Reform of also supervising forest use, the 
Department of Environmental Supervision will in future engage even more with local population to 
control illegal activities in the forests. This may lead to potential conflict with forest users, men and 
women alike. It is therefore crucial to capacitate the Department on gender-differentiated aspects 
of forest, wood and non-timber forest products use. Further, it is essential to ensure gender-
mainstreaming of the new training system and include a module/component that focuses solely on 
the gendered nature of patterns in forest and fuel use. For the institutionalization of gender 
perspectives gender focal points/resource persons should be appointed in partner structures 
(MoEPA, NFA, DES, ARDA). These focal points should ensure that gender aspects are considered 
in the strategies, Standard Operational Procedures (SOPs) and activities of the respective 
institutions. Once respective persons are identified, training needs need to be addressed based on 
clear terms of reference of their role as gender resource persons. In addition, a network among 
them should be established to facilitate exchange and lessons learned. 
• 
Changes in cultural attitudes towards accepting women in non-traditional jobs do happen, However 
it is a long-term process and requires management support and decision-making consistency. 
Partners will comply with the project’s policies including a Human Resource Policy that will clearly 
describe equal opportunity for women, fair treatment and non-discrimination. This will also be 
extended to capacity building, skill development and trainings to ensure that specific efforts are 
designed so that women are included in the training programmes and any community project, such 
as local content and livelihood community programme activities (as described in the Environmental 
and Social Management Plan, ESMP). In addition, all job advertisements will specifically encourage 
women to apply. A set of monitoring indicators have been developed as part of the preparation 
process for the ESIA that will be regularly monitored to determine progress on ensuring that gender-
related issues have  been properly addressed by the project. 
• 
Decisions at household levels, including investment decisions, are mostly done jointly by spouses, 
but in cases of disagreement men more often have a final say. In addition, many women-led 
households are more vulnerable to poverty and have specific needs in lending processes. It is 
therefore crucial that in the implementation of consumer financing instruments for EE-AF solutions, 
the identified financial institutions providing loans to households for EE stoves and/or alternative 
fuels receive gender-specific advice on the design of loan programmes based on a need’s 
assessment. This will ensure that gender aspects are considered by the financial institutions. 
10.2 
Specific 
interventions 
to establish 
gender-responsive 
framework 
conditions 
Key for success and sustainability of project activities is a) the creation of a legislative and regulative 
framework, which safeguards project interventions and b) the development of implementation plans and

=== PAGE 171 ===
29 
 
standard operating procedures, which provide guidance for a medium-term period to all involved 
stakeholders. Since regulations, plans and SOPs set strategic directions, it is critical that gender-aspects 
are considered properly when developing and implementing them. Gender-responsiveness and gender-
sensitivity should be set as a minimum standard. Enhancing gender capacities in partner structures is 
an important step for ensuring gender-responsive frameworks. Both intervention areas should closely 
be linked. 
The following processes should be reviewed by a gender expert, guaranteeing that revised or new 
policies and regulations are gender-sensitive and responsive: 
• 
Sustainable FMPs and business plans to ensure they are gender sensitive and -responsive, equally 
reflecting areas traditionally used by men and women; 
• 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) on the provision of sustainably produced fuelwood and 
implementation of SFM by NFA / on forest supervisions by DES / on the financial investment 
instruments of ARDA;  
• 
Policies and regulations for the EE-AF sector. 
Any further regulations and policies that might take place and be advised by project staff will also have 
to be reviewed to ensure gender-responsiveness and gender-sensitivity.  
10.3 Specific interventions to include women as key actors 
The assessment shows that women face constraints to participate in decision making in their 
households and public processes. Reasons are manifold: As clearly stated in the gender assessment, 
men have more power in the private realm as they have a higher income and own and control more 
property than women do. Poverty is the problem for a large part of the population, but women are 
affected by it on a larger scale than men are. Women-headed households, single member families, 
which mostly comprise of women or elderly, among which are more women than men, are the most 
vulnerable people. Moreover, women are more prone to time poverty as they usually combine 
employment with care-giving responsibilities, leaving almost no time for leisure activities and personal 
development. 
To achieve the overall project objective, it is critical to include women as key actors and change agents. 
By acknowledging women as key actors, their role and visibility within the society will be increased, 
which in turn can lead to a transformative change by giving more opportunities to women. Nonetheless, 
even by including women more actively in planning and decision-making processes, the measures need 
to be designed to address the barriers women are facing. The project should focus on the following 
measures to integrate women as key actors and decision makers: 
• 
To address the aspect of time poverty, the project activities (such as trainings and consultations) 
should not take part in the evening hours, during weekends and over longer periods of time (more 
than two or three days) away from their home town, as to not collide with their duties at home. If 
possible, the provision of childcare services during the planned measures and activities should be 
made available. In addition, to provide protected space, women specific consultations should be 
held in the women rooms (in Kakheti region). 
• 
In the development and implementation of sustainable forest management plans in Guria, Kakheti 
and Mtskheta-Mtianeti, women need to be included in the planning and decision-making processes 
regarding FMPs. Based on the minimum target of 30% share of women, any consultation processes 
with local communities should include this amount or ideally reflecting the gender composition of 
the target municipality. Given the low number of women as elected representatives in municipal 
councils, the goal should be to always specifically invite all women who have a seat in the municipal 
council. In order to make the most of existing institutional mechanisms, the municipal Gender Focal

=== PAGE 172 ===
30 
 
Point should be informed and whenever possible included in processes. The employment of women 
for fuelwood and timber marketing should be encouraged. Women in general have a higher 
educational attainment and second, have a better understanding and access to the main consumer 
target group, since women control the use of fuel and oven use. To include higher numbers of 
women as forest patrollers and inspectors in the DES, it must be ensured that the infrastructure is 
appropriate for women as well (bathroom, changing rooms, safety precautions) and all staff has 
been undergone a Code of Conduct including aspects of sexual harassment.  
• 
For a sustainable EE-AF supply chain development, it is critical to encourage the participation of 
female entrepreneurs. Women’s rooms in municipalities can be used and/or reactivated for 
additional women’s-only training and coaching sessions to provide a safe space. Training of 
Trainers (ToT) can be used in two ways to improve women’s participation: First ToT can be 
specifically held for women with the purpose of women training women and second, to generate a 
gender balance in the talent pool of trainers. This allows women to generate an additional income 
and be in an instructor’s position in front of a mixed-gender group (which helps overcoming 
stereotypes). While scouting for potential trainers and female trainees, women cooperatives can 
serve here as multipliers. Women cooperatives also have a potentially crucial role in the supply 
chain of raw materials for alternative fuel production. They can help in identifying as well as 
strengthening existing and new female EE-AF producers to adequately represent women as asset 
holders and incorporate their experiences and perspectives. As has been pointed out in the 
assessment, women have a stronger voice in the NGO sector. Hence, advocacy and information 
campaigns need to be organized and led by women’s organisations to increase women’s visibility 
and generate knowledge within the community on the key role women play for the successful 
implementation of EE-AF solutions. 
• 
To address women’s specific requirements, the project will work with the concerned municipalities, 
the Gender Focal points established in the municipalities, and the Women’s Rooms that are 
available (alternative venues will be established within the administrative buildings in those 
municipalities that do not have Women’s Rooms yet). They can be used as public venues regarding 
specific issues that women might want to address and discuss, including domestic violence. As 
seen in Kakheti during the consultation process, the authorities mentioned an increase in domestic 
violence reporting since efforts had been made by the municipalities to bring awareness on domestic 
violence within the communities. 
• 
The Project’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan presents the proposed grievance mechanism. The 
availability of the grievance mechanism will be presented and communicated in the concerned 
municipalities and villages and also during the elaboration of the Sustainable FMP, the Livelihood 
Programmes and Local Content initiatives It will also be published in the municipality boards and 
will be introduced to the Gender Focal Points. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan discusses the 
need to hold meetings specifically with women (as done during the consultation process), during 
these meetings the project staff will remind women of the availability of the grievance mechanism. 
 
10.4 Specific interventions to ensure access to resources and benefits of the 
project 
Since women and especially women-led households are structurally disadvantaged in Georgia, it is 
essential that access to resources and benefits of the project is ensured and promoted. This includes 
access to fuelwood and stoves, financial support programmes, forest products and relevant information. 
The project has to ensure that gender gaps in access to resources and project benefits are addressed 
by the following measures: 
Access to fuelwood, stoves and respective support programmes:

=== PAGE 173 ===
31 
 
Access to high-quality fuel is crucial for women, since they are the main users of fuelwood. The new 
fuelwood delivery mechanism (fuelwood harvesting, drying and storage plus delivery to households by 
NFA) ensures that only dry fuelwood of high quality reaches the households. At the same time, it is 
being used in more efficient heating and cooking appliances, which provide better heating and cooking 
patterns. Women as main users of fuelwood for heating and cooking benefit via less exposure to in-
house fumes (reduced health impacts), faster and better heating of the house (comfort increase) and 
via less need of re-fueling the appliance (time saving). In addition, men do not have to collect and harvest 
fuelwood by themselves anymore, which also frees their time for economic activities. 
To ensure that quality fuelwood benefits women and reaches also women-led households, NFA should 
ease the access to the fuelwood delivery system for women, especially for women-headed households. 
NFA should establish a respective monitoring system to track accessibility. 
Other barriers encountered by women include poor access to financial capital and bank loans due to a 
low level of property and asset ownership as well as lack of awareness. To guarantee women’s 
economic participation, measures to support women’s access to finance and business development 
opportunities are needed (ADB, 2018). Recent studies highlight asymmetries in women´s access to 
relevant resources necessary for economic development and financial sustainability in Georgia, such 
as business and trade networks (often a male domain), financial literacy and know-how, training and 
technical support and market information (Crystal, 2019). Since women are the main users of the new 
stoves and alternative fuels, access for women to the respective financial support programmes is 
therefore crucial. 
The project has to ensure uptake of EE and AF with women-led households and financial incentives are 
attractive and accessible to women-led households as well as women who are married. 
The project has to make sure that women-led households are a specific target group, being addressed 
via targeted measures in the awareness raising activities of the project (see below, access to 
information). This will lead to a high rate of women-led households being specifically informed on the 
benefits of EE-AF solutions. Second, to strengthen the access to the micro-finance component financial 
literacy workshops should be organised jointly with the gender councils and gender focal points of the 
municipalities. Third, a gender impact assessment should be done to assess the accessibility of loan 
programme for women and women led households and adjustments to the programme will be done 
accordingly. Fourth, it is recommended that the project commits itself to have at certain percentage of 
beneficiaries of the voucher programme to be women led households. 
Access to forest products: 
The assessment has shown that women collect non-timber forest products (NTFP) mainly for non-
commercial use. In principle, NTFP also provide a potential source of income for women via value chain 
development. According to the new Forest Code, there are no restrictions on collection of non-timber 
forest products for household consumption purposes. It will still be allowed to access the forest and to 
collect these products. For commercial use negotiations have to take place to include the commercial 
utilization of these products by rural communities into the SFMPs (see above proposed measures on 
women’s participation in SFMP development). 
The project has to ensure that collection of NTFP for personal consumption by women is respected by 
DES in its forest supervision function (see proposed measures above). In addition, it has to enable rural 
communities and especially women to create additional income sources via commercial utilization of 
NTFPs, if possible. To facilitate livelihood improvement, the Accredited Entity is in discussion with an 
international donor to add a livelihood component to the project. This component will focus on creating

=== PAGE 174 ===
32 
 
additional livelihood value chains for NTFP products and agro-forestry value chains with a specific focus 
on women. The component is under development and will be integrated in the project at the end of 2020. 
Access to information on forest use and alternative fuels and energy efficient stoves: 
Access to information for women is a pre-condition to participate in discussions and to facilitate women’s 
decision-making. Women need to be informed about the changes in forest use, the opportunities linked 
to it and about the benefits and opportunities in energy efficiency and use of alternative fuels. Timely 
and transparent information targeted to women and women-led households will enable them to take 
informed decision on household investments and potential income generation opportunities. The 
foreseen awareness activities of the project (Activity 2.3) should take these aspects into account by 
utilizing instruments and mechanisms, which directly target women and women-led households. 
To facilitate access to information for this specific group the awareness activities should include the 
following design elements: 
• 
Include the institutional mechanism of the municipal gender focal point and gender council for 
advocating purposes; 
• 
Establish working relations between local information points and municipal gender focal points to 
reach women and to feed in diverse women’s perspectives; 
• 
Focus household advisory services for EE-AF solutions specifically on women-headed and 
vulnerable households in order to increase the information sovereignty among before mentioned 
households. 
• 
To gender-mainstream all awareness materials 
Lastly, household advisory services for EE-AF should specifically focus on women-headed and 
vulnerable households in order to increase the information sovereignty among before mentioned 
households. 
10.5 Specific interventions to ensure gender mainstreaming 
Gender Mainstreaming should be ensured through either external experts or by building up internal 
capacities. This is essential to ensure that any campaign, knowledge management and compilation of 
information specific to the forest sector reform and fuel use includes implicitly and explicitly the gender 
dimension. Successful gender mainstreaming and gender-responsive policy making depends on the 
availability of gender disaggregated data and needs to be supported throughout the project.

=== PAGE 175 ===
33 
 
References 
Asian 
Development 
Bank, 
ADB 
(2018). 
Georgia. 
Country 
Gender 
Assessment, 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/479186/georgia-country-gender-
assessment.pdf.  
Badurashvili, I., E.Kapanadze, and Sh.Tsiklauri. (2010). “Generations and Gender Survey in Georgia.” 
II wave Report. Tbilisi: Georgian Centre of Population Research / UNFPA. 
Center of environmental information (2014). Estimation of environmental protection education in 
Georgia. Tbilisi. In Georgian. 
Civil Code of Georgia (2006). https://matsne.gov.ge/document/download/31702/75/en/pdf. 
Constitution of Georgia. https//matsne.gov.ge/en/document/View/30346. 
CRRC (2014). NDI: Women’s Political Participation in Georgia, 2014. Retrieved on October 2015 from 
www.caucasus barometer.org/en/no2014ge. 
CRRC (2017). Casucasus barometer. https://caucasusbarometer.org/en/cb2017ge/HLTHRAT-by-
RESPSEX. Last accessed in May,10, 2019. 
Crystal (2019. Social Impact Measurement, 2019. A Summary of Social outcomes of Crystal’s 
Operations with its Business Clients.  
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), „Gender Strategy – Gender Pays Off“, 
March 2012. 
EBRD (2016). Population’s Life Experiences in Georgia Survey. 
GEOSTAT (2018). Women and Men in Georgia.  
Green Climate Fund, Gender Policy and Action Plan, March 2015, GCF/B.09/10, Annex II, section IV, 
paragraph 4.4. 
Green Climate Fund, “Gender Policy and Action Plan”, June 2018, GCF/B.20/07. 
Green Climate Fund, “Updated Gender Policy and Action Plan 2018 - 2020”, March 2015, GCF/B.09/10. 
Green Climate Fund, “Guiding Framework and Procedures for Accrediting National, Regional and 
International Implementing Entities and Intermediaries, Including the Fund’s Fiduciary Principles and 
Standards and Environmental and Social Safeguards”, 7 May 2014, GCF/B.07/02. 
Forest Education Strategy (2015). Recommendations for developing forest education strategy in 
Georgia. 
Hakkert, R.; Sumbadze, N. (2017). Gender monograph: Gender Analysis of 2014 Georgian General 
Population Census Data. UNFP: Tbilisi.  
IDFI (2013). Statistics of Public Servants in the Public Authorities of Georgia in Terms of Gender. 
https://idfi.ge/en/statistics-of-public-servants-in-the-public-authorities-of-georia.  
IDFI (2017). National Assessment of Georgian Municipalities. 
https://idfi.ge/en/national_assessment_of_georgian_municipalities. Last accessed on April 20, 2019.

=== PAGE 176 ===
34 
 
Labor Code of Georgia (2013). https://matsne.gov.ge/en/document/download/1155567/5/en//pdf. Last 
accessed May 5, 2019. 
Law of Georgia on Gender equality. https//matsne.gov.ge/en/document/download/91624/3/en/pdf. 
Last accessed May 10, 2019. 
Local Self-Government Code (2014). 
https://matsne.gov.ge/en/document/download/2244429/15/en/pdf. Last accessed May 5, 2019.  
Lutsevych, O. (2013). Chatham House briefing paper. How to Finish Revolution. Civil Society and 
democracy in Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine. January. REP BP 2013/01. 
NACRES (2019). Eco-tourism Development for Borjomi Municipality State Forest Fund. Draft Report. 
NDI (2018). NDI Poll. 
Regional Development Strategies 2014-2021. www.mrdi.gov.ge/en/news/regional-development 
strategies-2014-2021-regions-georgia. 
Rural Development Strategy of Georgia 2017-2020. Enpard.ge/wp-content/…/Rural-Development 
Strategy-of –Georgia-2017-2020.pdf. Last retrieved May 10. 2019. 
Schimall, S. (2015). Gender analysis for the GIZ program Integrated Biodiversity management in the 
South Caucasius (IBiS). 
Strategy of Agricultural Development in Georgia 2015-2020. www.moa.gov.ge/Download/Files/227. 
last retrieved on May 10, 2019. 
Sumbadze, N. (2015). Access to University education: barriers and ways of overcoming them. Tbilisi. 
IPS. 
Transparency International (2014). Study of Public perception on the work of local governments. (in 
Georgian). http//caucasusbarometer.org/ge/ti2015ge/LOCGOVTU/. 
Transparency International (2016). Challenges of maternal and child health in Georgia. 
https://www.transparency.ge/en/blog/chall;enges-maternal-child-health-georgia. Last accessed May 
10, 2019. 
UNDP (2018a). Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update. 
UNDP (2018b). Gender equality in Georgia.  
UNDP (2017). Scaling-up multi-hazard early warning system and the use of climate information in 
Georgia.  
UNFP. 2014 General Population Census. https//georgia.unfpa.org/en/publications. 
UN WOMEN (2013). Public Perceptions on Gender Equality in Politics and Business. 
UN WOMEN (2015). Gender and employment in the South Caucasus and Western CIS. 
UN WOMEN (2018a). Turning Promises into Actions: Gender Equality in the2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development. 
UN WOMEN (2018b). Women’s economic inactivity and engagement in informal sector in Georgia. 
UN WOMEN (2018c). Gender Assessment of Agriculture and Local Development Systems in Georgia.

=== PAGE 177 ===
35 
 
WHO (2013). Global and Regional Estimates of Violence Against Women: Prevalence and Health 
Effects of Intimate Partner Violence and Non-partner Sexual Violence. Geneva: WHO. 
World Bank (2016). Georgia: Recent Trends and Drivers of Poverty Reduction. 
World Bank (2017). Gender based violence. 
World Bank (2018a). Occupation segregation and declining gender wage gap. Case Study of Georgia.  
World Bank (2018b). Policy Research paper 8583. 
World Economic Forum (2018). The Gender Gap Report 2018. 
WVS (2014). World Value Survey. www.worldvaluesurvey.org.

=== PAGE 178 ===
36 
 
Annex 1: Legal provisions and institutional mechanisms for ensuring gender equality 
in Georgia 
1994. Accession of the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW) without reservations.  
2004. Establishment of Gender Equality Advisory Council in the Parliament with the mandate to develop 
and monitor action plan for ensuring gender equality. 
2004. The nationalization of Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) MDG 3 – promotion of gender 
equality and empowerment of women, has been adjusted to the Georgian context through two key 
targets (i) ensuring gender equality in employment and (ii) ensuring equal access to activity in the 
political domain and at all levels of management.  
2006. Adoption of the State Concept on Gender Equality by the Parliament.  
2006. Adoption of the Law of Georgia on Combating Trafficking.  
2006. Adoption of the Law of Georgia on the Elimination of Domestic Violence, Protection and 
Assistance to the Victims of Domestic Violence.  
2010. Adoption of the Law of Georgia on Gender Equality. 
2013. Appointment of Prime Minister’s Assistant on Human Rights and Gender Equality Issues.  
2013. Establishment of Gender Equality Department as a standing unit in the structure of the Public 
Defender’s Office.  
2014. Adoption of the Law on Non-discrimination.  
2014. Signing the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women 
and domestic violence (Istanbul Convention). 
2016. Presentation of initial plan of Nationalization of SDGs. Georgia is among 193 signatories of the 
2030 Agenda of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 17 principals of sustainable development 
make explicit commitments to gender equality both as a stand-alone goal and as a cross-cutting theme 
across all the SDGs. SDG 5 refers to gender equality and has 14 indicators. 
2017. Ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against 
Women and Domestic Violence. (Istanbul Convention). 
2017. Establishment of the Inter-agency Commission on Gender Equality, Violence against Women and 
Domestic Violence Issues.  
2018. Establishment of Human Rights Department in the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  
2018. Adoption of National Action Plan for 2018-2020 on the Human Rights.  
2018. Adoption of National Action Plan for 2018-2020 on Women, Peace and Security (UN SCR 1325).  
2018. Adoption of National Action Plan for 2018-2020 on the Measures for Combating Violence against 
Women and Domestic Violence and Protection of Victims/Survivors.

=== PAGE 179 ===
37 
 
Annex 2: List of groups and persons consulted 
# 
Municipality 
Community 
Stakeholder 
Men 
Women  
Total 
1 
Tbilisi 
n/a 
MoEPA (Biodiversity and 
Forestry Division, NFA) 
1 
3 
4 
2 
Tbilisi 
n/a 
MoEPA (Environmental 
Supervision) 
0 
1 
1 
3 
Tbilisi 
n/a 
WWF 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Telavi 
Telavi 
Regional Government 
3 
1 
4 
5 
Telavi 
Telavi 
Regional Forestry Service 
Department 
2 
0 
2 
6 
Telavi 
Vardisubani 
Community Members 
15 
0 
15 
7 
Akhmeta 
Akhmeta 
Municipality staff 
1 
2 
3 
8 
Akhmeta 
Angokhi 
Community Members 
15 
2 
17 
9 
Kvareli 
Kvareli 
Municipality staff 
0 
2 
2 
10 
Kvareli 
Shilda 
Community Members 
16 
0 
16 
11 
Tbilisi 
n/a 
WWF 
1 
0 
1 
12 
Tbilisi 
n/a 
Energy Efficiency 
1 
1 
2 
13 
Tbilisi 
n/a 
Green Movement and Women 
for Common Future 
0 
2 
2 
14 
Ozurgeti, Lanchkhuri, 
Chokhatauri 
Ozurgeti 
Regional Government, 3 
Municipality staff 
8 
11 
19 
15 
Lanchkhuti 
Zodi 
Community Members 
18 
5 
23 
16 
Ozurgeti 
Mtispiri 
Community Members 
5 
22 
27 
17 
Chokhatauri 
Lesa 
Community Members 
12 
4 
16 
18 
Ozurgeti 
Ozurgeti 
NFA 
5 
0 
5 
19 
Dedoplistskharo 
Dedoplistskharo 
and Khornabuji 
Community Members 
5 
5 
10 
20 
Dedoplistskharo 
Dedoplistskharo 
Municipality staff 
2 
1 
3 
21 
Tbilisi 
n/a 
Women’s Information Center 
0 
1 
1 
22 
Tbilisi 
n/a 
Taso Foundation 
0 
1 
1 
 
Total 
 
 
111 
64 
175

=== PAGE 180 ===
1 
 
Annex 8b 
 
 
Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
 
of the Project 
  
“Enabling implementation of forest sector reform in Georgia to 
reduce GHG emissions from forest degradation” 
 
Submitted to the Green Climate Fund (GCF)

=== PAGE 181 ===
2 
 
 
Introduction 
The rural population of Georgia heavily depends on forests for the livelihood. Forests are used for fuel 
wood, construction materials, hunting, food, collection of berries and medical herbs, honey-keeping, 
rest, entertainment and worship. 
Project planning often is based on ‘male norm”, excluding women who often lack skills, resources and 
time for participation in decision-making. The participation of women ensures understanding of activities 
carried by women, their needs and interests and enables to incorporate the knowledge they have (IUCN, 
2010). 
The Gender Assessment of the proposed project demonstrated that although the climate and use of 
natural resources reflects both at women and men, their impact often is different due to different needs 
and capabilities that men and women possess. 
 
The Gender Action Plan (GAP) is designed to ensure that the project: 
• 
Lowers gender inequality;  
• 
Addresses the needs and constraints of women, girls, men, and boys;  
• 
Avoids any risks of adverse gender impacts;  
• 
Ensures women’s participation, promotes their leadership qualities;  
• 
Ensures women are included as planners, co–implementers and agents of change 
• 
Contributes to reducing the gender gap of climate change-exacerbated social, economic and 
environmental vulnerabilities. 
 
Target groups 
Project activities should be directed to five main target groups: women, men, youth, educational 
institutions, project staff and staff of executing entities and implementing partners. 
• 
Men and women  
Men and women reveal different patterns of behavior in dealing with the forest and its products. 
While men go into forests much more often than women, and do this for felling trees, hunting, 
herding and collecting food products mostly for economic aims, women in forests collect non-
timber products mainly for family consumption. Women are the main consumers of fuel wood 
as at home they control its use for heating, cooking and hot water supply. Besides women are 
the best agents of change and multipliers as they are concerned with upbringing of children as 
in private settings and also at educational institutions, constituting overwhelming majority of its 
staff. 
• 
Youth is an important target group as the long term impact of the project depends on them as 
decision-makers in the future. 
• 
Educational Institutions - Children and youth, as well as teaching and academic staff can be 
best reached in educational settings. 
• 
Project staff and staff of Executing Entities - Gender sensitivity of the staff and gender 
mainstreaming in the projects are essential for the implementation of planned activities.

=== PAGE 182 ===
3 
 
 
Resources 
I. 
Legal provisions aim to increase women’s participation in decision-making. The law on self-
governance lists a number of mechanisms for the civic engagement of the population, however 
many of these mechanisms are not utilized. These mechanisms could be utilized to strengthen 
the engagement of men and women within the framework of the project. 
II. 
Women’s rooms, which exist in all Municipalities of Kakheti region, can be used as Information 
centers for the project and can provide space for trainings and meetings.  
III. 
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs), Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and 
voluntary associations provide a useful context of participation and should be supported by 
project activities. 
IV. 
GIZ will employ a full-time ESS+gender expert within the project to take care of the 
implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and the Gender 
Action Plan (GAP) as well as to screen documents, standard operating procedures (SOPs), 
policies and regulations on gender-sensitiveness and responsiveness. The expert has a budget 
of 18,000 EUR available for consultants and advisory services (see details below in GAP). 
Additional budget is already integrated in various activities of the project (see details below in 
GAP). 
Partners 
I. 
National Forestry Agency (NFA), Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture (MoEPA), 
Ministry of Education, Science, Culture and Sports, Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons 
from the Occupied Territories, Labor, Health and Social Affairs; Ministry of Regional 
Development and Infrastructure, should be considered as the main partner organizations of the 
project in gender aspects.  
II. 
Patriarchate, as the institution enjoying high trust of population, having an interest and expertise 
on environmental issues, it is running Georgian Patriarchate Community College of Decorative 
Gardening can be involved. 
III. 
NGOs working on environmental and gender issues, such as: CENN, which has elaborated an 
institutional model and action plan for management of recreational forests in Georgia; has an 
experience in Kakheti region of organizing Rural Women’s Councils; has different activities 
targeting youth, like Niko Ketskhoveli competion. NACRES which compiled eco-tourism 
development action plan for Borjomi forests; TASO working on women’s issues and running 
Rural Women’s Groups in Guria. ”Women for peace”, Tbilisi based NGO with activities in 
Dedoplistskaro, aiming at combating Domestic Violence. 
IV. 
Media, especially Television, internet and radio should be used for awareness raising 
campaigns. The use of social media is also to be supported. 
The specific gender action plan of the project is presented below:

=== PAGE 183 ===
4 
 
Gender Action Plan 
 
Activity 
Actions and Targets 
Indicators 
Responsible 
Institution and 
resources 
Output 1: Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) 
1.1. Development and 
implementation of 
sustainable forest 
management plans in Guria, 
Kakheti and Mtskheta-
Mtianeti 
• 
Women are included in and own the planning and decision-
making processes regarding forest management plans (FMPs). 
In consultation processes with local communities it is ensured 
that women make up a minimum of 30 % (critical mass) or 
ideally 50%, reflecting the gender composition of the target 
municipality. 
• 
When working with municipal councils ensure that all elected 
female representatives are included and actively involved as 
well as given the time and space to speak (given the already 
low number of 12,7%) 
• 
Gender expert will revise the FMPs and business plans to 
ensure they are gender sensitive and -responsive, equally 
reflecting areas traditionally used by men and women 
• 
Inclusion of municipal Gender Focal Point in all processes, 
needs assessment of gender focal points regarding gender-
specific areas on SFM 
Minimum 30% of participants in the 
FMP and business plan 
development consultations are 
women. 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 30% (Quarter 4, year 2)  
 
100% of FMPs and business plans 
are at least gender-sensitive or 
ideally–responsive, where 
applicable 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 100% (Quarter 4, year 2) 
 
All female representatives of 
municipal councils and gender focal 
points are invited to stakeholder 
consultations on forest related 
topics (FMP development, 
Business Plan development, 
regular stakeholder consultations, 
conflict resolution meetings) 
Baseline: None 
Target: All1 (FMP/Business Plan: 
Quarter 4, year 2; other meetings: 
ongoing year 1-7) 
Responsible: 
MoEPA, NFA 
 
Resources: 
GIZ ESS+Gender 
expert 
1.2. Strengthening of forest 
supervision 
• 
The overall training system for the Department of 
Environmental Supervision (DES) includes one training 
One training module on gender 
equality in the DES part is 
Responsible: 
DES 
 
 
1 Quantification not possible since number of female representatives of municipal councils might change due to elections

=== PAGE 184 ===
5 
 
component for DES staff on gender equality and the 
specificities in the forest sector. 
• 
Gender expert revises SOPs, training modules to ensure they 
are gender-sensitive in terms of language and content 
• 
DES trainer pool receives training on gender-equitable and 
sensitive training and management 
• 
Encourage hiring female forest patrollers and inspectors in DES 
integrated in the knowledge 
management and training platform 
Baseline: 0 training module 
Target: 1 training module (Quarter 
3, year 2)  
 
One training for the DES training 
pool conducted on gender-
equitable and –sensitive training 
and management conducted 
Baseline: 0 training 
Target: 1 training (Quarter 3, year 
2) 
Resources: 
GIZ ESS+Gender 
expert 
 
4,000 EUR for 
module 
development by 
external expert 
1.3. Provision of sustainably 
produced fuelwood by the 
National Forestry Agency 
(NFA) 
• 
Ensuring the fuelwood delivery system is accessible for women, 
especially for women-headed households. Establish a 
respective monitoring system to track accessibility.  
• 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) will be revised by a 
gender expert to ensure they are gender-sensitive and enable 
gender-responsive monitoring. 
• 
Encourage NFA to employ women for fuelwood and timber 
marketing. 
70% of the female-headed 
households in the target regions 
state that they have easy access to 
fuelwood through the new system 
(survey as part of the regular 
household visits under activity 2.3 
“Awareness creation via local 
information points and advisory 
services”) 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 70% (Quarter 4, year 4) 
 
All SOPs for BSYs are checked by 
gender expert. 
Baseline: None 
Target: All (Quarter 1, year 2) 
Responsible: 
NFA, MoEPA 
 
Resources: 
GIZ ESS+Gender 
expert 
 
4,000 EUR for 
development of 
accessibility 
concept (as part of 
advisory contract of 
int. experts in SOP 
development for 
BSYs, Project Sub-
Activity 1.3.1) 
1.4. Enhancement of 
enabling environment for the 
nation-wide implementation 
of ecosystem-based SFM 
• 
Gender expert to review revised policies and regulations to 
ensure they are gender-sensitive and equitable 
• 
All training materials at the knowledge management and 
training platform are revised by the gender expert to ensure 
they are gender-sensitive in terms of language and content 
• 
Knowledge management and information platforms for MoEPA, 
NFA and DES include material on gender-relevant issues 
regarding SFM and related topics, e. g. on gender-segregated 
100% of policies and regulations 
supported by the project are gender 
sensitive. 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 100% (Quarter 4, year 3) 
 
All training materials at the 
knowledge management and 
Responsible: 
MoEPA, NFA, 
DES, EIEC 
 
Resources: 
GIZ ESS+Gender 
expert

=== PAGE 185 ===
6 
 
use of forest and fuel, reasons/power dynamics behind the 
gender segregated use, etc. 
• 
The vocational trainings at the VET colleges have one lecture 
module on gender-related issues in forest management and it is 
ensured that the overall curriculum has been adequately 
gender-mainstreamed 
• 
Encourage women in participating in the VET college courses 
on forest management 
information platform are gender-
sensitive. 
Baseline: None 
Target: All (Quarter 4, year 6) 
 
 
In each cluster of training modules 
for MoEPA, NFA (plus forest private 
sector companies), DES a gender 
component is included. 
Baseline: No gender component 
Target: 3 gender components 
(Quarter 4, year 3) 
 
 
Gender lecture integrated in the 
curriculum of the four VET colleges 
offering courses for forest 
management. 
Baseline: No gender lecture 
Target: 1 gender component in 
each curricula (Quarter 4, year 3) 
 
10,000 EUR for 
training module 
and lecture 
development by 
int./local experts 
 
 
1.5. Improvement of 
monitoring and 
measurement, reporting and 
verification (MRV) systems 
for the forest sector 
Promote women as operators of Forest Information and 
Management System (FIMS). 
 
Ensure FIMS collects gender-disaggregated data and promote 
gender-responsive monitoring of the forest sector (where 
applicable).  
The FIMS has integrated gender-
disaggregated data collection 
options in its concept. 
Baseline: No option 
Target: Option integrated (Quarter 
4, year 3) 
Responsible: 
EIEC 
 
Resources: 
GIZ ESS+Gender 
expert 
 
International 
experts for the 
development of 
FIMS take this 
aspect into account 
within their 
contracts under 
Sub-activity 1.5.1

=== PAGE 186 ===
7 
 
 
Activity 
Actions and Targets 
Indicators 
Responsible Institution 
Output 2: Development for Energy Efficiency (EE) and Alternative Fuels (AF) 
2.1. EE-AF supply chain 
development 
• 
Encourage participation of women entrepreneurs in 
the EE/AF supply chain 
• 
Women’s rooms in municipalities can be used and/or 
reactivated for additional women’s only training and 
coaching sessions to provide a safe space.  
• 
The Training of Trainers (ToT) specifically of women 
with the purpose of women training women, but also 
for women to be able to generate an additional income 
and be in an instructor’s position in front of a mixed-
gender group to overcome stereotypes. Special 
attention shall be given to women cooperatives as 
multipliers. 
• 
Promote women cooperatives in the supply chain of 
raw materials for alternative fuel production 
• 
When new EE-AF products are being identified, 
adequate representation of women as future asset 
holders needs to be ensured. 
At least 30% of the EE-AF 
supply chain stakeholders that 
are trained/coached are 
women. 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 30% (Quarter 4, year 
2) 
 
One specific training of female 
instructors/trainers in the 
value chain development 
process conducted. 
Baseline: 0 
Target 1 (Quarter 4, year 1)  
 
 
 
 
Responsible: 
Agricultural and Rural 
Development Agency 
(ARDA)  
 
Resources: 
GIZ ESS+Gender expert 
 
 
2.2. Implementing consumer 
financing instruments for EE-AF 
solutions 
• 
Women should be the main target group as main care 
giver at home and primary handlers of fuelwood. 
• 
Gender impact assessment of viability of financing 
schemes for stoves to ensure that loans and micro 
credits are accessible for women, especially women-
led households and single parents. 
• 
Strengthening financial literacy in target regions and 
municipalities, anchoring respective activities (e. g. 
financial literacy workshop within the context of 
international women’s day) in municipal action plans 
through the advocating power of the gender councils 
and gender focal points. Use of Women’s Rooms in 
At least 25%2 of beneficiaries 
of the voucher programme are 
women-headed households. 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 25% (Quarter 4, year 
6) 
 
Gender impact assessment 
conducted 
Baseline: 0 impact assessment 
Target: 1 impact assessment 
(Quarter 4, year 1) 
Responsible: 
ARDA, Crystal micro-
finance and other (M)FIs 
 
Resources: 
GIZ ESS+Gender expert 
 
4,000 EUR for local 
consultant to conduct 
impact assessment 
 
 
2 The average number of women-headed households in Georgia is 39%. However, the share in urban areas is higher than in rural areas. The voucher 
programme targets rural areas, therefore a conservative approach is taken here.

=== PAGE 187 ===
8 
 
municipalities for relevant activities (integral part of 
project Activity 2.3 “Awareness creation and advisory 
services”). 
• 
Once identified, financial institutions providing loans to 
households for EE stoves and/or alternative fuels 
should receive gender-specific advice, if needed. 
 
At least 1 financial literacy 
event (trainings, information 
meetings etc.) conducted in 
each of the 3 target regions 
(organized by implementing 
partner of project Activity 2.3) 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 3 (Quarter 4, year 2) 
Costs for financial literacy 
events (2,000 EUR per 
event) are included in the 
budget for awareness 
creation, Activity 2.3 
 
 
2.3. Creating consumer 
awareness about forest sector 
reform, EE-AF solutions and 
provision of technical advisory 
services for fuelwood users 
• 
Local information points for forest sector reform and 
municipal gender focal points should establish working 
relations to ensure flow of information and to reach 
women 
• 
Advocacy and information campaigns organized and 
led by women’s organization, to increase women’s 
visibility and generate knowledge within the 
community on the key role women play for the 
successful implementation of EE-AF solutions. 
• 
Household advisory services for EE/AF should 
specifically focus on women-headed and vulnerable 
households 
• 
All knowledge and information materials are gender-
mainstreamed 
• 
National campaigns are gender mainstreamed. 
25%3 of the households visited 
by the technical advisers of the 
local information centers are 
female-headed. 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 25% (Quarter 4, year 
5) 
 
At least 2 women 
organizations are part of the 
implementation of the 
awareness activities in the 3 
regions 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 2 (Quarter 4, year 2) 
 
The national campaign 
implemented by EIEC are 
gender-mainstreamed 
Baseline: 0 mainstreamed 
campaign 
Target: 1 mainstreamed 
campaign (Quarter 4, year 3) 
Responsible: 
GIZ, Environmental 
Information and Education 
Centre (EIEC), contracted 
NGO(s) 
 
Resources: 
GIZ ESS+gender expert 
 
3 The average number of women-headed households in Georgia is 39%. However, the share in urban areas is higher than in rural areas. The awareness 
activities target rural areas, therefore a conservative approach is taken here.

=== PAGE 188 ===
9 
2.4. Enabling policies and 
regulations for EE-AF sector 
•
Gender expert to review revised policies and
regulations to ensure they are gender-sensitive and
equitable
100% of policies and 
regulations supported by the 
project are gender sensitive. 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 100% (Quarter 4, year 
3) 
Responsible: 
Ministry of Economy and 
Sustainable Development 
(MESD), MoEPA 
Resources: 
GIZ ESS+Gender expert 
General: Gender sensitivity of Executing Entities 
Cross-cutting 
•
Train Executing Entities staff in Gender
Mainstreaming.
•
Insure consideration of gender related issues at all
levels of project planning, implementation and
monitoring.
•
Ensure collection of gender desegregated data.
Gender mainstreaming and 
monitoring training conducted 
for all GIZ and Project 
Implementation Unit staff 
(representatives of MoEPA, 
NFA, DES, EIEC, ARDA, GIZ) 
conducted 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1 (Quarter 2, year 1) 
Responsible: 
GIZ 
Resources: 
GIZ ESS+Gender expert 
__________
