=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20074
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20074
creationDate: D:20200724105519+09'00'
modDate: D:20200724115808+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
18 – 21 August 2020 
Virtual meeting 
Provisional agenda item 11 
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
28 July 2020 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum I 
Funding proposal package for FP129 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled " Afghanistan Rural Energy Market Transformation 
Initiative -  Strengthening Resilience of Livelihoods Through Sustainable Energy 
Access"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
69 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
70 
Secretariat’s assessment 
73 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
86 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
95 
Gender documentation 
96

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Afghanistan Rural Energy Market Transformation Initiative – 
Strengthening Resilience of Livelihoods Through Sustainable 
Energy Access 
Country(ies): 
Afghanistan 
Accredited Entity: 
United Nations Development Programme 
Date of first submission: 
[2018-06-22] [V.1]  
Date of current submission  
[2020/06/26]  
Version number 
[V.9]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 0 OF 64 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 1 OF 64 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or private 
sector 
Public 
 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
Not applicable  
 
A.4. Result area(s) 
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☒ 
Energy access and power generation:   
 
☐ 
Low-emission transport:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:  
 
☐ 
Forestry and land use:   
 
 
 
 
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☐ 
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
 
  
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security: 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution:  
100% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
 
 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  
173,082 tCOeq  
A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  
49,000 beneficiaries (of 
which over 23,500 are 
women) benefiting from 
access to resilient energy 
systems 
0.17% of total population 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  
21,398,843 USD  
A.9. Project size 
Small (Upto USD 50 
million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
17,198,843 USD 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
 
☒ Grant 
USD 17,198,843 
 
☐ Loan 
Enter number 
☐ Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐ Equity  
 
Enter number 
☐ Results-based  
 
     payment 
 
Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
5 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
25 years1 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
11/4/2019 
A.14. ESS category  
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
As SAP Funding Proposal 
A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme? 
Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
Government of Afghanistan acting through the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and 
Development (MRRD).  
 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
1. Due to a long period of neglect and under-investment after decades of instability and war, the energy 
infrastructure in Afghanistan, in particular in rural areas, is now in a dire state, causing a situation in which the

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 2 OF 64 
 
use of diesel and kerosene fuel is the current model for rural energy use with resulting high GHG emissions. 
On a binary basis, the national grid connected electrification rate is 30%2 which means that nearly 24.5 
million people in Afghanistan3 are not connected to modern energy although a large part of the rural 
population may have some sort of electricity access, often through the use of diesel generators.  
2. Renewable energy mini-grids (‘mini-grids’) are expected to play an important role in bridging the electricity 
access deficit in Afghanistan in a timely manner, while at the same time offering clean, low-emission energy 
services. The opportunity around mini-grids is centered around a number of key trends – lower hardware 
costs (e.g., solar modules, energy efficient appliances), disruption via the advent of digital and cellular 
technologies, and potential interest from the private sector, bringing new, innovative business models.  
3. However, the traditional power sector policy and regulatory frameworks in Afghanistan, focused on the 
national grid and centralized generation, are not suitable for mini-grids given differences in the cost 
structures, size and economic profiles of consumer bases and the magnitude of electricity sales. Mini-grid 
development in Afghanistan – and the potential for eventual, scaled-up commercial investment – will need an 
enabling environment consisting of policies and regulations (e.g. for licensing and tariffs setting), green 
procurement guidelines, institutional frameworks, delivery models and financing, technological solutions, 
capacity building, proof-of-concept pilots and cross-sector linkages. 
4. The objective of the project is to kick-start rural renewable energy market transformation in Afghanistan and 
create the conditions for upscaling and long-term sustainability, through a combination of: (1) policy and 
regulatory design, facilitating public and private sector financing; (2) capacity building and awareness raising 
of the public and private sectors and end-users; and (3) investment in the set-up of 3 greenfield solar mini-
grids, providing access to 49,000 beneficiaries of which 23,500 women, and creation of an “upscaling 
platform” to facilitate additional solar mini-grid investments. The upscaling platform will consist of: (i) a 
knowledge platform, including a solar mini-grid practical development manual, online evidence and data 
sharing tools, and full technical studies for 5 additional mini-grids; (ii) development and mainstreaming of 
green procurement policies for solar mini-grids; and (iii) development and mainstreaming of environmental 
and social governance (ESG) policies for solar mini-grids. 
5.  Ultimately, the project aims to contribute, in a phased approach, to a large volume of solar mini-grid 
development in Afghanistan and – with the long-term improvement in macroeconomic and security conditions 
– the eventual involvement of private investment for mini-grid development beyond operation and 
maintenance only. The project covers the first, pilot phase out of a three-phased development process of 
mini-grid market development in Afghanistan, set out in Figure 1 on page 6. This first phase is based on a 
semi-utility mini-grid ownership model with outsourced operation & maintenance to the private sector. This is 
expected to create a basis for private sector interest in mini-grid development and to contribute to the build-
up of expertise in technical and managerial aspects related to mini-grid design, construction, and operation & 
maintenance. This will include data gathering and key performance indicators including, but not limited to: 
demand profiles for electricity; revenue streams, willingness to pay and average revenue per user (APRU); 
exploration of smart meters and different payment models; and optimizing system-sizing and mini-grid 
financial viability by means of productive use stimulation. Following this first pilot phase, a second scale-up 
phase in Afghanistan can consist of moving towards further private sector engagement, including initial 
private sector ownership BOOT/BOO4 models, with considerable public support via development banks. The 
ultimate goal of mini-grid development in Afghanistan is reflected in a third, maturity phase - served by wide-
spread private sector-based BOOT/BOO models with minimal public support. This project covers the first pilot 
phase, while the scale-up phase and maturity phase fall outside of the scope of this submission.  
6. This approach will create the basis for mainstreaming renewable energy mini-grid solutions and continued 
reduced GHG emission as compared to the alternative, diesel-generated power. The project will result in 
173,082 tCO2eq reduction from the implementation of 3 solar mini-grids5. The implementation of three proof-
of-concept solar mini-grid pilots will thereby address enhanced resilience to climate change impact for 49,000 
beneficiaries, of whom 23,500 are women as a result of the additional services that will become available with 
Tier 36 level of energy access.  
7. Grant financing is requested from the GCF to develop the necessary basis for renewable energy mini-grid 
mainstreaming, thereby reducing GHG emissions from diesel and kerosene use in rural areas. A grant 
 
1 Mini-grid useful life, counted from the first year when the mini-grid starts producing electricity. 
2 The World Bank Group, 2017. Afghanistan Country Snapshot, Washington, DC, USA. 
3 On the basis of estimated 35.5 mln population in 2017: http://data.worldbank.org/country/afghanistan. 
4 Build-Own-Operate-Transfer (BOOT)/Build-Own-Operate (BOO) 
5 Emission reduction over the 25-year lifetimes of 3 solar mini-grids 
6 See World Bank/ESMAP 5 Tiers of energy access described in ESMAP/World Bank, 2015, Beyond Connections, Energy Access 
Redefined,

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 64 
 
request from the GCF is considered appropriate as the financial constraints under which the Government of 
Afghanistan operates, coupled with private investors’ risk aversion toward rural mini-grid projects, creates a 
situation in which Afghanistan continues to depend on foreign grants for energy development in the medium 
term7.  
 
7 See also: 1. CAREC: Study for Power Sector Financing Roadmap, Mobilizing Financing for Priority Projects, Afghanistan, PwC Report. 
September, 2016. 2. Debt Sustainability Analysis Afghanistan, November 2017, IMF, Washington.

=== PAGE 8 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 64 
 
 
 
8 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_electricity_consumption, based on the World Fact Book 
9 Average per capita electricity consumption in Afghanistan is 141 kWh per person per year 
10 Based on emission factor of 0.8 kgCO2/kWh-eq for diesel fuelled electricity 
11 IEA, 2017, Energy Access Outlook 2017 – From Poverty to Prosperity, OECD/IEA Paris 
12 Based on 12.5 million people served by renewable energy solutions instead of diesel generators, using 141 kWh per capita annual 
energy usage and emission factor of 0.8 kgCO2/kWh-eq for diesel fuelled electricity 
13 The ASERD project was funded through bilateral grant funding from Spain and South-Korea 
14 See further analysis of barriers to renewable energy development in Feasibility Study- Annex II 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate rationale and context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
8. The Afghanistan Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) identifies extreme hunger and poverty as key problems for Afghanistan, and 
states that climate change impacts could further deepen this by reducing livelihood opportunities, agricultural 
production, and the availability of energy, water and other natural resources. Rural energy poverty is 
considered to be urgent where the total energy generation capacity in Afghanistan covers only a 30% grid 
connected electrification rate nationwide, and 141 kWh per capita annual energy usage8. Especially in rural 
areas, the population is dependent on diesel generated electricity while 95% of rural population is using solid 
fuel for cooking and heating. Large rural areas will unlikely be connected to the grid during the next decades, 
due to remoteness, difficult terrain and resulting required high investment costs per client. The well-known 
concept of the water, energy and food (WEF) nexus means that the three sectors — water security, energy 
security and food security — are inextricably linked and that actions in one area more often than not have 
impacts in one or both of the others. It is clear that access to energy is critical for addressing the various 
dimensions of climate change resilience and wider social and economic development. 
9. The baseline option for meeting increased energy demand in rural areas, as their income levels grow, is 
diesel generated power in the absence of clean alternatives. Diesel generated power is known for its high 
GHG emission content of some 2.8 kgCO2/liter. Among the alternative options for energy access, renewable 
energy (RE) systems offer the best opportunity to serve the rural communities by leveraging Afghanistan’s 
abundant natural resource potential without cost-prohibitive grid extension or GHG-intensive diesel systems.  
In a baseline scenario, Afghanistan would pursue its development using mainly fossil fuels, as other countries 
have. In particular in rural areas, where expansion of a national grid is not expected in the short and medium 
term, this causes a situation in which the use of diesel and kerosene fuel is the baseline and the future model 
for rural energy use. This would likely result in GHG emissions in Afghanistan continuing to increase at 
current rates for the period to 2025 and beyond. Afghanistan strives to maintain low per capita GHG emission 
levels but appropriate support in the form of finance, capacity building, technology and legal assistance is 
needed for Afghanistan to achieve substantial socio-economic development while maintaining low per capita 
GHG emission levels. Even with the current low average per capita electricity consumption in Afghanistan9,  if 
24.5 million people that are not connected to the national electricity grid would satisfy a 141 kWh per annum 
energy consumption on the basis of diesel fueled power, this would amount to 2.76 million tCO2 emissions 
per year which can be avoided if 100% of the unelectrified population of Afghanistan would be serviced by 
renewable energy mini-grids10. Using estimates from IEA’s Energy Access Outlook 201711, an “electricity for 
all at lowest cost” scenario could be realized by 2030 with some 50% of the unelectrified population electrified 
by renewable energy mini-grids and other renewable energy off-grid solutions, thereby avoiding 1.4 million 
tCO2 emission reduction per year in the case of Afghanistan12. 
10. The Afghanistan Sustainable Energy for Rural Development (ASERD) program laid the foundation for this 
proposal by starting the development of feasibility studies for mini-grid development in rural areas in 
Afghanistan13. The program aimed for establishing a technology-neutral, sustainable service delivery 
arrangement to provide thermal and electrical energy in rural areas of Afghanistan for household, social and 
productive needs. The experiences in the ASERD program not only provided deep insights in the situation of 
rural renewable energy development in Afghanistan but also contributed to a further analysis of the barriers 
to RE development in rural areas in Afghanistan14. Given the financial constraints under which the 
Government of Afghanistan operates, the bilateral funds provided for ASERD allowed for the designs and 
Detailed Project Reports of 5 renewable energy mini-grids as well as (on-going) construction of one 
renewable energy mini-grid. Given the situation that Afghanistan continues to depend on donor support, any 
follow-up grant funding of the ASERD project has not yet been secured.  
11. The barriers to realizing the full potential of RE for rural energy access in Afghanistan can be described under 
two broad but interrelated categories: lack of institutional and financing mechanisms to involve private sector

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 5 OF 64 
 
 
both in the short term and long term; and inadequate technical and market knowledge to design and 
implement innovative projects.  
12. While a legal and regulatory framework for managing the overall energy and renewable domains has been 
developed by means of the Renewable Energy Policy (RENP), institutional conditions for rural energy 
development in general and renewable energy mini-grids in particular are still in a nascent stage of 
development. Experience has shown that if institutional support is inadequate and compounded by technical, 
economic and social issues, this may result in unsustainable or defunct mini-grid systems. If mini-grids are to 
play a significant role in providing access to reliable and affordable electricity, a robust policy framework is 
essential. Dedicated policies on mini-grids are still missing while regulatory instruments providing safeguards 
and balancing the interests of the village energy users and the rural energy service provider are not available.  
13. The limited access to credit remains one of the main constraints to private sector and renewable energy 
market development in Afghanistan. 90% of investments needed by businesses were financed by 
own/internal sources and only 3.4% of businesses had a bank loan/credit. Access to finance came third 
among the biggest problems faced by business in Afghanistan with 17% considering this as the biggest 
problem. In addition, companies investing in and developing solar projects in Afghanistan are exclusively 
focused on on-grid projects where revenues are guaranteed by power purchase agreements (PPAs) with the 
national utility DABS. PPAs are not available for unconnected mini-grids, whose remote rural locations also 
increase the risk of service interruption and revenue losses due to security issues. Even though private 
sector finance is very challenging on the short and medium term, it will be important to create rural energy 
business and service delivery models that engage the private sector and financial institutions and leverage 
donor and government resources to create scalable and replicable models that can work on the longer term.  
14. Renewable energy development in Afghanistan thus far primarily focused on hydropower development, 
which is where technical knowledge is available to a greater extent. While other RE technologies such as 
solar energy show rapidly falling capital costs, as well as the potential to benefit from digital and business 
innovations, these still remain at a very nascent stage in Afghanistan, even though they may be able to offer 
viable alternatives to the seasonal availability of hydropower. There is thus a need to move to a technology-
neutral approach which can utilize all available renewable energy resources – solar, hydro, wind, biomass as 
well as grid network extension and hybrid options to provide lowest cost electrical and thermal energy to rural 
areas. Lack of technical skills and information, perceived technology performance uncertainty and risk and 
higher cost of capital due to lack of experience in mini-grids act as market entry barriers for RE mini-grids. 
This often results in technical and financial failure of RE mini-grids system. Even though some experience 
with hydro mini-grids exist, the ability to design, engineer, procure, construct and maintain mini-grids based 
on other RE technologies, in particular solar, has been limited. 
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) 
 
15. The key problem this project proposes to address is the high greenhouse gas emissions expected to result 
from the use of diesel generators in the absence of energy access in rural areas in Afghanistan and the 
absence of enabling conditions that allow a market development towards renewable energy mini-grids that 
can both ensure energy access for the non-grid connected population of Afghanistan as well as provide 
clean, low carbon emission, electricity production. The objective of the proposed project is to transform rural 
renewable energy markets leading to reduced emissions and strengthen adaptive capacities of the 
communities around them. This will be achieved by (i) targeted de-risking activities strengthening the rural 
energy and renewable energy policy and regulatory framework, (ii) capacity building of government 
institutions and private sector to create the skills and financial capacities to identify and seize business 
opportunities in RE mini-grid development in future (iii) investment in the implementation of 3 solar mini-grid 
pilots and (iv) the creation of an upscaling platform to enable future development and implementation of 
additional solar mini-grids. Core problems that have been identified in Afghanistan in this respect consist of 
limited renewable energy penetration in Afghanistan and a very low level of on-grid energy access, with 
currently 30% connected to the national grid. Moreover, dependence on diesel generators for rural energy 
access hampers productivity of rural economies and the national utility DABS has national grid expansion as 
its key priority, thereby having lack of time and resources towards off-grid electrification. The RE projects that 
have been realized so far, thereby focused mostly on domestic lighting with limited penetration in enterprises, 
productive applications and agricultural sectors while inherent political and security risks have restrained the 
introduction of state-of-the art technologies and concepts in RE and prevented skills and knowledge 
development of RE enterprises. Moreover, ministries and departments dealing with energy, water, rural

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 6 OF 64 
 
 
 
15 Build-Own-Operate-Transfer (BOOT)/Build-Own-Operate (BOO) 
development, agriculture and environment lack a coordinated vision to promote RE as means for multi-
sectoral development.  
16.  The project covers the first, pilot phase out of a three-phased development process of mini-grid market 
development in Afghanistan, set out in Figure 1 below. This first phase is based on a semi-utility mini-grid 
ownership model with outsourced operation & maintenance to the private sector. This is expected to create a 
basis for private sector interest in mini-grid development and to contribute to the build-up of expertise in 
technical and managerial aspects related to mini-grid design, construction, and operation & maintenance. 
This will include data gathering and key performance indicators including, but not limited to: demand profiles 
for electricity; revenue streams, willingness to pay and average revenue per user (APRU); exploration of 
smart meters and different payment models; and optimizing system-sizing and mini-grid financial viability by 
means of productive use stimulation. Following this first pilot phase, a second scale-up phase in Afghanistan 
can consist of moving towards further private sector engagement, including initial private sector ownership 
BOOT/BOO15 models, with considerable public support via development banks. The ultimate goal of mini-grid 
development in Afghanistan is reflected in a third, maturity phase - served by wide-spread private sector-
based BOOT/BOO models with minimal public support. This project covers the first pilot phase, while the 
scale-up phase and maturity phase fall outside of the scope of this submission. 
Figure 1 Three phases of mini-grid market development in Afghanistan 
 
 
17. The scale up phase is expected to be served by the regulatory and institutional framework developed in this 
project as well as the financial de-risking strategy identified that can offer minigrid developers economically 
viable business opportunities. As part of the exit strategy of the project, discussions will concentrate on 
implementation of the 5 minigrids that have been designed in the project whereby RESCOs trained in the 
project will be guided in the steps needed to come to financial close for minigrid development and 
implementation. Discussions with donors and financial institutions have already started and will be continued 
to set up a follow-up project that will prepare Afghanistan for the scale up phase of minigrid development in 
the country.  
18. Complemented by co-financing by the MRRD and UNDP, GCF resources will be used to address the 
following barriers inhibiting rural renewable energy market transformation: 
-  Lack of incentives and guidelines for private sector to participate in rural electrification projects 
-  Lack of technical standards and guidelines for mini-grid development 
-  Lack of coordination among institutions on long term energy planning and mini-grid development 
-  Lack of financial instruments that can de-risk challenges such as security, financial, currency and defaulting

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 7 OF 64 
 
 
 
16 Private-sector investors/operators of solar projects were interviewed where seven Afghani companies were identified that invest in and 
operate in on-grid solar projects but are not yet interested in off-grid minigrids. More detailed discussions were held with the two most 
prominent (Zularistan and Qadarqan).  
risks 
-  Lack of awareness, exposure and experience on use and benefits of RE mini-grids among government 
institutions 
-  Lack of awareness, exposure and experience on use and benefits of RE mini-grids among beneficiaries  
-  Limited private sector capacities to design, engineer, procure, construct, operate and maintain RE mini-
grids, business opportunities in different mini-ownership models and absent learning in pilot mini-grids 
-  Insufficient implemented proof-of-concept solar mini-grids with successful O&M 
-  Lack of institutionalized knowledge center, lack of mini-grid pipeline ready to install 
-  Lack of procurement guidelines and consideration of environmental standards in procurement  
-  Lack of safeguards guidelines and consideration of safeguards standards in procurement  
19. Key inputs that are expected to reverse the current situation consist of a combination of (i) targeted de-risking 
activities to address key mini-grid investment risks, (ii) capacity building of government institutions, 
beneficiaries and private sector (iii) investment in the implementation of 3 solar mini-grids with a combined 
capacity of 2.6 MW, in the provinces of Kandahar, Parwan and Khost, and (iv) the creation of an upscaling 
platform to enable MRRD and later on the Renewable Electrification Department under DABS, to 
independently lead the future implementation of additional solar mini-grids.  
20. As shown in the ToC below, the project is comprised of three Outputs which will occur in parallel. Output 1, 
addressing Energy Market Risk, focuses on strengthening the enabling institutional and regulatory framework 
for mainstreaming rural renewable energy markets by undertaking a set of 4 activities. These are: i) 
regulations for mini-grids and tariff mechanisms and structure developed and approved; ii) technical 
standards and guidelines developed for design and operation of mini-grids; iii) policy on fostering institutional 
reform and coordination mechanism among responsible institutions for mini grid development developed; and 
iv) a framework for financial de-risking and financial incentives for RE mini-grids designed. Output 2, 
addressing Social Acceptance Risk and Labour Risk, comprises of capacity building of all relevant 
stakeholders as well as institutionalizing training for future sustainability. Specific activities include: i) capacity 
strengthening activities designed and delivered for government entities on technical, managerial, 
administrative and financing aspects of RE mini-grids; ii)  community commitment, ensuring revenues and 
stability of the mini-grid systems, and local business interest activities designed and delivered for 
beneficiaries of 3 solar mini-grids ; and iii) capacity strengthening activities designed and delivered for private 
sector developers and operators on designing, operating and maintaining mini-grids as well as increasing 
capacities to promote productive use aimed at increasing resilience.  This Output is concentrating solely on 
capacity building of all relevant stakeholders for mini-grid development, including government and 
beneficiaries with a specific focus on private sector capacities. Capacity building for the private sector will 
target RESCOs as identified by the Afghanistan Renewable Energy Union (AREU) as well as RESCOs that 
will be selected for O&M services of the 3 solar mini-grids in Activity 3.1 and potential RESCOs that could 
arise from local enterprises and will be identified during project implementation16. Capacity building activities 
for the private sector RESCOs will focus on creating the skills and financial capacities to identify and seize 
business opportunities in RE mini-grid development. Output 3, addressing Developer Risk, will  provide 
proof-of-concepts for future reference by means of the implementation of 3 solar mini-grids with a total 
installed capacity of 2.6 MW in the provinces of Kandahar, Parwan and Khost, and create knowledge, 
procurement and ESG tools (collectively, the “upscaling platform”) to concretely enable MRRD to upscale the 
project through additional mini-grid implementations in the future. The 3 solar mini-grids implemented will be 
owned and regulated by MRRD but operated and maintained by Afghani private sector companies under 
outsourcing contracts and after a competitive selection process. The objective of the upscaling platform as 
well as the de-risking activities in Outputs 2 and 3 is that private sector companies will, in the future, also 
invest in the implementation of additional mini-grids – subject to the improvement of Afghanistan’s 
macroeconomic and security conditions. 
21. The theory of change diagram in Figure 2 describes the key problems as well as barriers that prevent these 
problems to be addressed whereas it shows how the suggested activities lead to three outputs that relate to 
de-risking the investment environment for renewable energy mini-grid development. Section B.3 (Project 
Description Summary) further expands on the key elements of the theory of change.

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 8 OF 64 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Theory of Change 
 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) 
Project Description Summary: 
22. The objective of the project is to prepare the ground for rural renewable energy market transformation in 
Afghanistan through a combination of (i) targeted de-risking activities to address key mini-grid investment 
risks, (ii) capacity building of government sector, beneficiaries and private sector, (iii) investment in the 
implementation of 3 solar mini-grids with a combined capacity of 2.6 MW, in the provinces of Kandahar, 
Parwan and Khost, and (iv) the creation of an upscaling platform to enable MRRD to independently lead the 
future implementation of additional solar mini-grids. The project will: create the necessary conditions via 
policy and regulatory strengthening, as well as institution and capacity building of government, beneficiaries 
and private sector; provide capital (GCF grant plus MRRD and UNDP co-finance) for investment in the 3 
solar mini-grids, which will require a capital expenditure of USD 12.4 million and will be operated under 
outsourcing contracts by domestic private sector solar mini-grid developers; and set-up an upscaling platform 
consisting of knowledge tools (step-by-step solar mini-grid implementation handbook, online data sharing 
platform and investment design reports for 5 additional mini-grids) and procurement and ESG best practices 
and guidelines. The intent of the upscaling platform is that it leads to either public or private investment, with 
private sector engagement encouraged.  
1.1 Regulations for mini-grids and tariff mechanisms 
and structure developed and approved
2.1 Capacity strengthening activities designed and 
delivered for government entities on technical, 
managerial, administrative and financing aspects of RE 
mini-grids
3.1 Construction of 3 greenfield solar mini-
grids, O&M by RESCOs, customers connected 
and using electricity
1.2 Technical standards and guidelines developed for 
design and operation of mini-grids
2.2 Community commitment activities and local business 
interest designed and delivered for beneficiaries of 3 
solar mini-grids
3.2 Set-up of knowledge platform 
1.3 Policy on fostering institutional reform and 
coordination mechanism among responsible 
institutions for mini grid development developed 
2.3  Capacity strengthening activities designed and 
delivered for private sector on designing, operating and 
maintaining mini-grids as well as incentivizing 
productive use aimed at increasing resilience
3.3 Green procurement policy for mini-grids 
developed and mainstreamed
1.4 Framework for financial de-risking RE mini-grids 
designed
3.4 Social and environmental safeguards 
policy for mini-grids developed and 
mainstreamed
Lack of incentives and guidelines for private sector to participate 
in rural electrification projects
Lack of awareness, exposure and experience on use and benefits of RE 
mini-grids among government institutions
Insufficient implemented proof-of-concept solar mini-
grids with successful O&M
Lack of technical standards and guidelines for mini-grid 
development
Lack of awareness, exposure and experience on use and benefits of RE 
mini-grids among beneficiaries 
Lack of institutionalized knowledge center, lack of 
mini-grid pipeline ready to install
Lack of coordination among institutions on long term energy 
planning and mini-grid development
Limited capacities to design, engineer, procure, construct, operate 
and maintain RE mini-grids
Lack of procurement guidelines and consideration of 
environmental standards in procurement 
Lack of financial instruments that can de-risk challenges such as 
security, financial, currency and defaulting risks
Lack of safeguards guidelines and consideration of 
safeguards standards in procurement 
A    T    T    R    I    B    U    T    I    O    N                      G    A    P
GOAL
USE OF 
OUTPUTS
Continued strengthening of regulatory 
environment, continued learning of policy 
makers
Dissemination of experiences, improvement of 
existing productive activities, improvement of 
health, and education, business skills expanded
Replication of pilots, dissemination of 
experiences, continued learning and 
using of the knowledge platform
OUTCOMES
BARRIERS
ACTIVITIES
1. Energy Market Risk de-risked by policy, 
regulatory and institutional development for 
improved renewable energy (RE) services in 
rural areas 
2. Capacity and engagement of the existing and 
potential mini-grid market actors and stakeholders 
strengthened on RE mini-grids
3. Construction of 3 greenfield solar 
mini-grids and set-up of an “upscaling 
platform” to facilitate additional mini-
grid investments
OUTPUTS
Enabling regulatory and financial conditions for 
continued renewable energy mini-grid 
development
Private sector strengthened, including capacities in productive use 
stimulation, and increase of private sector activities in renewable 
energy mini-grid development
Reduced emissions through increased low-emission energy access and power generation

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 9 OF 64 
 
 
 
17 Build-Own-Operate-Transfer (BOOT)/Build-Own-Operate (BOO) 
18  UNDP & ETH Zurich (2018). De-risking Renewable Energy Investment: Off-Grid Electrification. United Nations Development 
Programme, New York, NY and ETH Zurich, Energy Politics Group, Zurich, Switzerland  
19 UNDP & ETH Zurich (2018). De-risking Renewable Energy Investment: Off-Grid Electrification. United Nations Development Programme, 
New York, NY and ETH Zurich, Energy Politics Group, Zurich, Switzerland. 
20 A detailed description of the site selection process is presented in Chapter 7 of the Pre-Feasibility Study. 
21 Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS) is the national power utility in Afghanistan. 
23. The project covers the first, pilot phase out of a three-phased development process of mini-grid market 
development in Afghanistan, set out in Figure 1. This first phase is based on a semi-utility mini-grid 
ownership model with outsourced operation & maintenance to the private sector. This is expected to create a 
basis for private sector interest in mini-grid development and to contribute to the build-up of expertise in 
technical and managerial aspects related to mini-grid design, construction, and operation & maintenance. 
This will include data gathering and key performance indicators including, but not limited to: demand profiles 
for electricity; revenue streams, willingness to pay and average revenue per user (APRU); exploration of 
smart meters and different payment models; and optimizing system-sizing and mini-grid financial viability by 
means of productive use stimulation. Following this first pilot phase, a second scale-up phase in Afghanistan 
can consist of moving towards further private sector engagement, including initial private sector ownership 
BOOT/BOO17 models, with considerable public support via development banks. The ultimate goal of mini-grid 
development in Afghanistan is reflected in a third, maturity phase - served by wide-spread private sector-
based BOOT/BOO models with minimal public support. This project covers the first pilot phase, while the 
scale-up phase and maturity phase fall outside of the scope of this submission. 
24. De-risking is that central mechanism by which this project will act. Public de-risking measures can improve 
the risk-return profile of investment opportunities18 in two ways: policy de-risking instruments and financial 
de-risking. The GCF grant will contribute to policy de-risking by funding technical assistance and capacity 
building activities.  Policy de-risking measures, which address the underlying barriers that create investment 
risks, can be a cost-effective first step in creating an enabled investment environment. These instruments 
utilize policy and programmatic interventions to mitigate risks related to e.g. permits and approvals, 
generation licences, land rights and address overlapping institutional responsibilities, lack of staff capacities 
and knowledge. The GCF grant will contribute to financial de-risking by reducing the capital expenditure 
faced by MRRD for the construction of the 3 solar mini-grids mentioned above and, as a result, increase the 
financial IRR from negative values to a commercially acceptable +20%. The realization of attractive financial 
IRRs will act as proof-of-concept for future private sector investors in Afghani mini-grids. 
25. In order that the project’s design takes a systematic approach, the project utilizes the taxonomy of mini-grid 
investment risks developed under UNDP’s DREI (Derisking Renewable Energy Investment) framework19. 
The project targets in particular the following investment risk categories, defined as follows:  
• 
Energy Market Risk: Risk arising from limitations and uncertainty in the energy market regarding market 
outlook, access (regulations), price (tariffs) and competition.  
• 
Social Acceptance Risk:  Risks arising from lack of awareness and resistance to renewable energy and 
mini-grids in end-users and communities. 
• 
Labour Risk: Risks arising from the lack of skilled and qualified potential employees at mini-grid operators 
(including, engineering, customer acquisition, operations/maintenance). 
• 
Developer Risk: Risks arising from limitations in the mini-grid operator's management capability (system 
sizing and design, business model selection), and its creditworthiness and cash flow.  
 
26. The project will target 8 provinces, with an approach that overcomes the limitations of isolated and one-off 
efforts thus far. Target communities have been selected after a pan-Afghan survey of 56 sites across 32 of 
the country’s 34 provinces20. Site selection for the implementation of 3 solar mini-grids and 5 investment 
design reports was based on the analysis of demand and supply patterns, potential loads, ability to pay for 
energy services, the national grid extension plan from DABS avoiding locations with potential for grid 
extension in the next 10 years 21 and a security assessment on the basis of the UN Security Map. The 
implementation of 3 solar mini-grids and development of 5 additional investment design reports will provide 
an optimum contribution to the intended paradigm shift of the project as they are broadly spread throughout 
Afghanistan. Moreover, the 8 sites were selected on the basis of their potential for productive use and 
willingness to pay, thereby favouring successful deployment of RESCO services for Operation and 
Maintenance services. Pre-feasibility studies conducted for all these 8 sites describe the demographic and 
socio-cultural aspects as well as energy baseline scenarios of these communities. The total combined 
population covered by the 3 implemented mini-grids is approximately 49,000. An additional 63,720 people will

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 10 OF 64 
 
 
 
22 Feasibility Report- Strengthening resilience of livelihoods through sustainable energy access- Afghanistan Rural energy market 
transformation initiative- Annexure II 
be served once the 5 additional mini-grids designed will be implemented by MRRD. Of the total, 47% is 
female population. All selected sites have good presence of enterprises (tailoring shops, vegetable oil 
extraction units, commerce) and agricultural activities. Each site has a primary health center, school and 
mosques. Most sites have police stations present at their locations. The project will benefit all of these 
enterprises and institutions22. Figure 3 details the selected locations and the Pre-Feasibility Study (Annex II) 
further explains the main characteristics of the areas served. 
 
Figure 3 Proposed mini-grids (3 implemented, 5 designed) and related provinces 
 
 
 
 
Description of Project Outputs and Activities 
 
Output 1: Energy Market Risk de-risked by policy, regulatory and institutional development for improved 
renewable energy (RE) services in rural areas 
 
Activity 1.1: Regulations for mini-grids and tariff mechanisms and structure developed and approved 
 
27. One of the recurrent prerequisites discussed in the context of RE sector development is the need for policies 
and regulatory direction from the government. As the Renewable Energy Roadmap for Afghanistan 
(RER2032, 2017) describes, there is a need for a dedicated policy on mini-grids to kick-start this segment in 
Afghanistan. The first activity of the project addresses the development of a mini-grid policy that will 
institutionalize and support the development of RE mini-grids in the country for the purpose of rural 
electrification. The mini-grid policy developed under this output will signal the Government of Afghanistan’s 
intent to encourage RE in rural energy markets and will provide a direction for private sector participation. 
This will set the foundation for rural renewable market transformation. The mini-grid policy will be developed 
through a consultative process by involving public sector players – Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 11 OF 64 
 
 
 
23 www.undp.org/DREI 
Development (MRRD), Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW) and DABS – beneficiaries and private sector 
players of the Afghanistan Renewable Energy Union (AREU), and will address alignment with the National 
Energy Supply Program (NESP) and Renewable Energy Policy (RENP), permits and approvals, generation 
licensing, land rights, rural electrification strategies and institutional arrangements. Close cooperation 
between MRRD and MEW to define clear roles and responsibilities, as well as collaboration with Ministry of 
Health (MoH), the Ministry of Education (MoE) and the Ministry of Interior (MoI), is needed so that electricity 
delivery to health centres and posts, schools, police stations and outposts and street lights in rural areas are 
part of the policy development. 
28. A baseline market study analysing energy systems, actors, productive use potential, impacts on beneficiaries 
and business models, together with a DREI analysis simulation, will inform the development of the mini-grid 
policy. Economic sustainability of mini-grids includes affordable tariffs for consumers while ensuring the 
financial viability of the project over the long term. Further analysis on willingness to pay for energy in rural 
areas, and the creditworthiness of end-users, will inform the development of regulations that will balance 
financial viability and a fair tariff structure for mini-grids.  
29. In general, policy development under the project will follow the steps of common policy framework 
procedures consisting of: i) identification and scope of the policy problem to be addressed; ii) draft, consult 
and finalise policy instrument; iii) get policy instrument government approved; iv) communicate, implement 
and monitor policy instrument; v) review policy instrument and re-design where needed, following previous 
steps. Gender mainstreaming will be applied by means of further gender analysis in relation to energy policy 
as well as gender training for relevant government staff.  
30. Sub-activities for the above activity include: 
1.1.1 Conduct Derisking Renewable Energy Investment (DREI)23 analysis simulation for solar mini-grids to 
inform the development of de-risking policies and tailored interventions to support RE mini-grid development.  
1.1.2  Conduct a baseline market study analysing energy systems, actors, productive use potential, impacts 
on beneficiaries and business models to inform the development of regulations and incentives for mini-grids 
1.1.3 Conduct complementary analysis on willingness to pay for energy in rural areas, to inform mini-grid 
policy and tariff structure development 
1.1.4 Develop regulations to ensure fair tariff structure for mini-grids. 
1.1.5 Develop Mini-grid Policy to align with the National Energy Supply Program (NESP) and Renewable 
Energy Policy (RENP), including licensing, rural electrification strategies and institutional arrangements.1.1.6 
Organize consultation process involving Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD), Ministry 
of Energy and Water (MEW), Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS), and market actors of Afghanistan 
Renewable Energy Union (AREU) and beneficiaries to discuss the draft mini-grid regulations and tariff 
structure by conducting workshops and business forum  
1.1.7 Disseminate and communicate government approved mini-grid regulation and tariff structure results in 
workshops in all relevant regions as well as through regular government communication channels to relevant 
government and private sector stakeholders. 
1.1.8 Conduct a gender mainstreaming training for the MRRD, MEW and DABS government staff  
 
Activity 1.2: Technical standards and guidelines developed for design and operation of mini-grids 
31. Energy market risks can also comprise of uncertain market regime with regard to standards and codes 
required for certain technology implementation. Technical standards create a common understanding and 
basis of expectations among developers, operators, regulators and consumers on the various levels of 
acceptable service delivery including technical, safety, cost and reliability issues. Under this output, a set of 
technical standards and guidelines for mini-grids will be developed in reference to the available international 
codes and standards for material choice, system design and service level for generation equipment, 
distribution grid, and electricity service standards and purposefully designed for rural contexts in Afghanistan.  
32. A review of existing technical standards and needs assessment for complementary standards for mini-grid 
development will inform the development of the technical standards for mini-grids. The mini-grid policy will be 
developed through a consultative process by involving public sector players MRRD, MEW, DABS,

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 12 OF 64 
 
 
 
24 Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS) is the government owned national vertically integrated utility electricity utility which provides 
electricity primarily in urban and peri-urban areas 
25 Renewable Energy Roadmap 2032 (RER2032), ADB, March 2017 
26 Rural Electrification Corporation REC (India), Infrastructure Development Company Limited IDCOL (Bangladesh) 
beneficiaries and private sector players of AREU and will follow the steps of common policy development 
procedures.  
33. Sub-activities for the above activity include: 
1.2.1  Conduct review of existing technical standards and needs assessment for complementary technical 
standards for mini-grid development  
1.2.2 Develop/update draft technical standards and guidelines for design and operation of mini-grids 
(generation equipment, distribution grid, and electricity service standards) purposefully designed for rural 
contexts. 
1.2.3 Organize consultation process involving MRRD, MEW, DABS, and market actors of AREU and 
beneficiaries to discuss the draft technical standards for design and operation for mini-grids by conducting 
workshops. 
1.2.4 Provide technical assistance to the government to facilitate approval of the technical standards and 
guidelines for mini-grids – including enforcement mechanisms – and get government approval. 
1.2.5 Disseminate government-approved technical standards and guidelines for mini-grids in workshops in 
all relevant regions as well as through regular government communication channels. 
 
Activity 1.3: Policy on fostering institutional reform and coordination mechanism among responsible institutions for 
mini-grid development developed  
34. Appropriate institutional arrangements that enable effective deployment and subsequently, operation, 
management, and maintenance of RE mini-grids is critical for scaling up the development of mini-grids as a 
significant option for providing electricity services. In Afghanistan, government institutions can play a role in 
building and operating mini-grids while others have a set of responsibilities including defining national and 
jurisdiction-level energy policy and electrification goals and setting rural electrification strategies. E.g. the 
MRRD has a Renewable Energy and Enterprise Development (REED) department which is responsible for 
rural energy development up to a size of 1 MW installed capacity while the Ministry of Energy and Water 
(MEW) has a Renewable Energy Department (MEWRED) which is responsible for developing renewable 
energy and rural energy projects of 1 MW or higher installed capacity. Overlapping and unclear institutional 
responsibilities can contribute to market risk and hinder mini-grid development. This activity addresses 
institutional reform and will establish a coordination mechanism among responsible institutions for 
streamlined coordination of mini-grid planning. 
35. In order to supplement and compliment DABS, the national power utility in Afghanistan24, the project will 
initiate the creation of a separate Rural Electrification Department (under DABS) (RED) that will be 
capacitated to design, plan and implement rural electrification projects mainly based on RE technologies so 
that DABS will in future be able to take over tasks from the MRRD in developing off-grid solutions under 1 
MW. This is aligned to the recently finalized Renewable Energy Roadmap 2032 (RER203225) as developed 
under the authority of the Ministry of Energy and Water in 2017. The RER2032 concludes as one of crucial 
conditions for growth of the RE sector that an institution for rural electrification is needed where DABS should 
have responsibilities. The Rural Electrification Department (under DABS) may be given responsibilities for 
generation, transmission and distribution exclusively in rural areas. Given that most of rural Afghanistan is not 
connected to the national grid, a dedicated rural electrification department shall provide greater focus on 
meeting the rural power shortage scenario. The department, once fully operational, will undertake all 
activities related to rural electrification including site identification, land acquisition, raising and managing 
finances and regulatory approvals, including support to local enterprises such as RESCOs. The project will 
develop the organizational charter for the RED after conducting wide stakeholder consultations, including 
possibilities of twining arrangement with similar institutions in the region to encourage south-south learning 26. 
36. Coordination between institutions responsible for electricity generation, distribution and application is 
important for realizing the potential of RE in Afghanistan. The current cooperation between the MEW and the 
MRRD is based on the responsibility of MRRD to cover rural renewable energy development up to 1 MW in 
close coordination with MEW. In order to guarantee clear roles and responsibilities of the MEW and the 
MRRD in line with new responsibilities of the Rural Electrification Department (under DABS), an effective

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 13 OF 64 
 
 
 
27 More information on the DREI methodology for mini-grids can be found at www.undp.org/DREI  
coordination mechanism amongst these institutions is an important step to ensure synchronized development 
of the sector and will be part of the policy development under the activity. 
37. Sub-activities for the above activity include: 
1.3.1 Organize stakeholder consultations (e.g. containing inter-ministerial platform or Energy Sector 
Coordination Group, and coordination with regional administrations and village electrification committees) to 
coordinate on-grid and off-grid electrification. 
1.3.2 Establish coordination mechanism among responsible institutions to coordinate on-grid and off-grid 
planning and national, regional and village level interaction and to allow for continuous updating of mini-grid 
policy, financial mechanisms and technical standards. 
1.3.3 Organize stakeholder consultations on possible arrangements for a Rural Electrification Department 
(under DABS), including possibilities of twinning arrangement with similar institutions in the region. 
1.3.4 Develop mandate and operational conditions for a Rural Electrification Department (under DABS). 
1.3.5 Develop the organizational charter for a Rural Electrification Department (under DABS). 
1.3.6 Provide training to DABS staff on De-risking Renewable Energy Investment (DREI), rural RE mini-grid 
systems and on mandate of RED in encouraging rural RE development in Afghanistan.  
 
Activity 1.4: Framework for financial de-risking RE mini-grids designed 
38. One of the challenges identified in Afghanistan, and in developing countries in general, for private sector 
investment in RE mini-grids is to improve the current financial viability of mini-grids. With current inputs for 
hardware costs and financing costs, and without support, the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) from mini-
grids and the implied tariffs for end-users can be prohibitive. To address this barrier, the project proposes to 
design a framework for financial de-risking and/or financial incentives for RE mini-grids, on the basis of 
detailed techno-economic analyses, including a DREI analysis simulation27. The framework will essentially be 
a viability gap funding mechanism, which will recommend the most cost-effective instruments and design, for 
example concessional financing and/or direct grants (capital subsidy, tax incentives), to achieve the requisite 
financial viability. Sources of funding will be explored varying from government funds, climate funds and 
funding by international financial institutions and/or multilateral development banks, including innovative 
approaches whereby initial grant funds can be used to develop mini-grids from which revenues could 
capitalize a revolving fund. Subsequent implementation of this framework will be a key step in the phased 
approach to develop the mini-grid market, and engage the private sector, in Afghanistan. 
39. The development of the framework will be informed by a rigorous process, consisting of expert panel 
discussions and consultation involving all relevant stakeholders consisting of MRRD, MEW, DABS, and 
market actors of AREU and beneficiaries. Strategies to be discussed can include mechanisms to 
compensate for risks (direct incentives, e.g. capital subsidies) and to transfer risk (e.g. concessional debt or 
guarantees). The applicability of these strategies will in part depend on the macroeconomic and security 
developments in Afghanistan – direct incentives are likely required to a greater extent in the near-term, due to 
the very high risk perception of Afghanistan at the moment. A viability gap funding mechanism will be 
discussed in light of Afghanistan Government’s discussions on setting up a Renewable Energy Fund which 
has thus far not yet materialised. Mechanisms that involve using possible revenues from donor supported 
mini-grids to be used for setting up a Renewable Energy Fund will be part of possible solutions to discuss. 
However, the project will not directly implement revolving funds nor channel concessional funding (e.g. 
loans). 
40. Resulting from the above-described process, a most promising funding strategy for financial incentives and 
de-risking of RE mini-grid development will be further elaborated to explore potential government and climate 
finance. 
41. Sub-activities for the above activity include: 
1.4.1 Set up panel consisting of experts from AREU, MRRD, MEW and DABS and international (south-south) 
experts to discuss findings of DREI Analysis simulation (Activity 1.1.1) in order to draft most suitable financial 
incentive and de-risking scenarios for mini-grid development in the project specifically and for renewable 
energy development in general.

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 14 OF 64 
 
 
1.4.2 Develop the structure of a mini-grid viability gap funding mechanism, including potential sources of 
(climate) finance to be used for capitalizing a viability gap funding mechanism as well as a roadmap for 
medium- and longer-term financing need for rural electrification. 
1.4.3. Develop financial incentive and de-risking packages for mini-grid development, integrating the viability 
gap funding mechanism with additional incentives (e.g. facilitation of land acquisition, streamlining permit 
procedures) based on findings from Activity 1.4.1 and 1.4.2.  
1.4.4 Organize consultation process involving MRRD, MEW, DABS, and market actors of AREU and 
beneficiaries to discuss the financial incentive and de-risking packages for rural mini-grid development.  
1.4.5 Develop funding strategy for most promising financial incentive and de-risking package, containing 
viability gap funding mechanism and additional incentives (including accessing climate finance to implement 
mini-grids). 
 
Output 2: Capacity and engagement of the existing and potential mini-grid market actors and stakeholders 
strengthened on RE mini-grids 
42. The second output of the project will undertake capacity building of institutions on demand-side as well as 
supply-side of energy systems and services. On the supply-side, the ability of relevant ministries and 
government institutes to extend their expertise on rural RE mini-grids with specific professional staff to be 
further trained in technical, managerial and financial aspects of RE mini-grids, thus creating capacity at scale. 
On the demand-side, capacity in the agricultural cooperatives, self-help groups, community development 
councils, NGOs, research organisations and public institutions will be enhanced to understand and accept 
RE systems as a means to provide energy to enhance their incomes and other benefits. The market sector is 
of specific focus for capacity building as the intention of the project is to build capacities of private sector 
entities to become fully fledged actors in the second, scale up phase of mini-grid development right after this 
project ends. For that, private sector capacities will be built in the areas of design, installation, operations and 
building maintenance skills but also in tariff design and revenue collection mechanisms as well as knowledge 
about promoting productive uses of energy using a mini-grid system. 
 
Activity 2.1: Capacity strengthening activities designed and delivered for government entities on technical, 
managerial, administrative and financing aspects of RE mini-grids 
43. Building and strengthening of institutions is a pre-requisite for developing the RE sector in Afghanistan. This 
involves strengthening of capacities across MEW, MRRD and other key ministries and provincial 
governments on technical, managerial, administrative and financing aspects of RE projects. Strengthening of 
monitoring capacities in the National Environment Protection Agency (NEPA) will allow for adequate 
monitoring of project results. The project will start this process, which will need to grow towards a scheme of 
continuous process of knowledge acquisition and knowledge management, in order to stay updated with the 
latest developments in the RE sector internationally and also to incorporate lessons learned from local as 
well as international experiences.  
44. The development of a suitable capacity building package will be informed by a capacity needs assessment of 
national and local government entities to map the gaps in technical, planning and managerial capacity of 
government entities with regard to mini-grid development and assess capacity needs. Important input for 
capacity building activities will be derived from results of Component 1 and 3, e.g. results with regard to 
licensing (Activity 1.1.5), tariff regulations (Activity 1.1.4 and 1.1.6), rural energy master planning (Activity 
1.3.2), tendering and procurement of mini-grids (Activity 3.1.1 and 3.1.2), monitoring of results (Activity 3.1.4) 
and investment prospectus (Activity 3.2.3). 
45. As there is no real standard method on how to estimate the contribution of off-grid electrification to 
greenhouse gas emission avoidance, its potential role as a mitigation option may be underestimated in 
official greenhouse gas reporting. The project will therefore develop a system for GHG monitoring, verification 
and reporting to UNFCCC and train the capacities of NEPA in order to be able to take up the responsibilities 
related to reporting off-grid GHG emission reduction contribution. 
46. Sub-activities for the above activity include: 
2.1.1 Conduct capacity needs assessment of national and local government entities to map the gaps in 
technical, planning and managerial capacity of government entities with regard to mini-grid development and 
assess capacity needs.

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 15 OF 64 
 
 
2.1.2 Build technical, planning and managerial capacities of national government entities such as MEW, 
MRRD and other key ministries and provincial and local governments on rural RE mini-grid systems planning  
2.1.3 Develop greenhouse gas (GHG) emission monitoring, verification and reporting methodology for the 
measurement and estimation of (changes) in GHG emissions from off-grid and renewable energy 
technologies at national and (sub)national level. 
2.1.4 Build capacities of National Environment Protection Agency (NEPA) in measurement and reporting of 
GHG emission changes from off-grid electrification to support formulation of NDS and other climate reporting 
 
Activity 2.2: Community commitment and local business interest activities designed and delivered for beneficiaries of 
3 solar mini-grids 
47. An important condition for sustainability of mini-grids is the involvement of the community it serves. 
Depending on the particular mini-grid business model pursued, community contributions can take the form of 
land, labor, local construction materials and/or economic ownership. Communities may also face, and need 
to overcome, perception challenges at mini-grid tariffs that differ from grid-connected tariffs. Communities are 
also central to mini-grid developers’ promotion of productive use, providing labor and entrepreneurship. A 
detailed understanding of the evolving demand profile from communities can be key to demand-side 
management approaches. Communities can thereby be directly related to economic viability of mini-grid 
operations.  
48. For the 3 solar mini-grids that will be implemented under Activity 3.1, where community involvement is 
essential for successful operation and increasing the potential of productive use, the project will consult 
extensively with the local communities and local businesses to play an important role in productive uses of 
energy while they will need to be capacitated in understanding the economic potential that RE mini-grids can 
offer.  
49. Sub-activities for the above activity include: 
2.2.1 Conduct assessment to identify present local business and other relevant players in the communities 
that are served by the 3 solar mini-grids that are important for creating commitment at village level to mini-grid 
development  as well as conduct additional surveys to collect further detailed gender disaggregated data such 
as women headed households in the three project sites, baselines of women’s organizations, women lead 
enterprises, women farmer cooperatives and specific data on female youth and elderly.  
2.2.2 Support the relevant stakeholders identified in 2.2.1 for consultation as part of the implementation 
process of 3 solar mini-grids. Build capacities of local enterprises on productive use potential and importance 
of a fee-for-service in order to keep the mini-grids operational. Organise training on basic business operations 
and added value creation for existing enterprises by using electricity from the mini-grids. Support local 
enterprises in accessing micro-finance to invest in technology that can create added value to existing 
businesses.  
2.2.3 Organise a communication campaign to raise awareness of the social and economic benefits of 
renewable energy mini-grids.  
 
Activity 2.3: Capacity strengthening activities designed and delivered for private sector on designing, operating and 
maintaining mini-grids as well as incentivizing productive use aimed at increasing resilience 
50. If mini-grid investment in Afghanistan is to truly scale up, then private sector investment will be central. The 
private sector can bring capital, entrepreneurship, and expertise. Past experience in Afghanistan has 
demonstrated that relying solely on communities for operations and maintenance does not reliably lead to 
system sustainability. As such, in this project, Renewable Energy Service Companies (RESCOs) will be 
supported and trained, in order to grow a nascent private sector mini-grid industry in Afghanistan. A RESCO 
is an entity that provides energy services to consumers in a particular area, usually in an off-grid location. 
The services of a RESCO can vary from functioning as a mini-utility that combines both generation and 
distribution of electricity or it can have a more limited scope whereby one (government) entity is responsible 
for generation whereas the RESCO functions as the distributor, selling the electricity to consumers and 
servicing operation and maintenance costs. In this first, pilot phase of mini-grid development in Afghanistan, 
RESCOs operate under a semi-utility model to offer Operation and Maintenance services in mini-grids owned 
by the MRRD. The RESCOs in this project, as a result of a combination of capacity building and experience 
from providing O&M in a pilot mini-grid, are expected to obtain the capacities needed for becoming a full-

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 16 OF 64 
 
 
 
28 Build-Own-Operate-Transfer (BOOT)/Build-Own-Operate (BOO) 
29 See stakeholder consultation in Annex II Pre-Feasibility Study. 
30 Please note that the RESCOs that will be operating and maintaining the 3 solar mini-grids implemented under Component 3.1 will be 
selected on the basis of a competitive selection process. 
scale RESCO in the second, scale-up phase after this project ends. A full scale RESCO can also undertake 
pre-project activities such as site selection, load and enterprise development, feasibility study preparation 
and engineering design as well as co-own (in PPP models) or fully own mini-grids (in BOOT/BOO models28). 
The RESCOs participating in the capacity building activities will be selected by the MRRD through a 
solicitation and due diligence process based on criteria including track record/years of experience, 
management quality and expertise, financial strength and geographic coverage and will be supported via a 
RESCO networking platform, initially set-up by MRRD. A consultative meeting held with renewable energy 
enterprises has endorsed their interest in forming RESCOs for the project29. The Afghanistan Rural Energy 
Union, AREU, having more than 40 private sector company members operating in the renewable energy 
sector, can thereby be an important source for identifying potential RESCOs. In addition to local enterprises, 
agricultural cooperatives, particularly women led ones, would also be involved as RESCOs.  
The three RESCOs that will be selected for operation and maintenance services for the 3 solar mini-grids 
implemented under Component 3.1, will also be included in the capacity building activities of Component 2.3 
and thereby contribute to the learning experience of RESCOs that are not yet directly involved in mini-grid 
activities 30. 
51. Capacity building of the private sector will focus on technical training for RE developers and RE service 
providers on various aspects of rural RE mini-grids such as: 
- system sizing,  
- design and installation (resource assessment, supply and demand analysis, design, installation considering 
the technical standards, guidelines and regulations developed under Output 1).  
On the financial side, capacity building will address mini-grid and RE system business models, including: 
- financing options,  
- administration,   
- tariff setting,  
- the critical role of productive uses.  
Finally, training of local technicians for O&M of solar PV and hydropower mini-grids as well as operators and 
administrators’ manuals in local languages will be part of this activity.  
52. RESCO training will further consist of identification of potential productive use of electricity in order to 
increase the load factor and create additional cash revenues to strengthen possible future RESCO business 
models through a profit margin on electricity sales. Especially productive use potential contributing to higher 
agricultural productivity, decreased post-harvest losses, increased electricity based small industries and 
decreased loss of live-stock due to extreme weather will be emphasized in order to contribute to increased 
resilience to climate change.  
53. The project recognizes the importance of gender inclusion in the project interventions. Hence, the project not 
only incorporates RE technologies that would benefit women by giving them access to cleaner energy, better 
health and education facilities; but also involves and benefits women enterprises on the supply side of RE by 
involving women agricultural cooperatives and tailoring shops.  
54. The RESCO principles developed under the project will be applied in the 3 solar mini-grids that will be 
implemented in the project.  
55. Sub-activities for the above activity include: 
2.3.1 Conduct capacity needs assessment of private sector players to map the gaps on design, installation, 
operation, planning and finance of off-grid RE systems. 
2.3.2 Engage with relevant stakeholders to establish RESCO model and develop a RESCO model that serves 
the conditions for mini-grid development in Afghanistan. 
2.3.3  Technical training designed and delivered for private sector players and energy service 
companies/RESCOs on various aspects of rural RE electrification: design, installation, resource and least-
cost assessment, supply and demand analysis, payment systems, design and planning of productive uses, 
RESCO models, voluntary certification guidelines for RE service providers, formulation of feasibility studies 
and bankable proposals.

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 17 OF 64 
 
 
 
31 Regulations to be developed will provide the enabling conditions to support future development of minigrids but are not 
directly a prerequisite for the development of the 3 solar minigrid pilots 
32 The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) is an international standards organization that prepares and 
publishes international standards for all electrical, electronic and related technologies – collectively known as 
"electrotechnology" 
33 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Standards Association is an organization within IEEE that develops 
global standards in a broad range of industries, including power and energy. 
2.3.4 Create a RESCO networking platform to exchange good practices and learning (including financing of 
mini-grids). 
2.3.5 Develop guidelines for the voluntary certification of RE technology installers and rural energy service 
companies (RESCOs), managed by the RE industry itself. 
 
Output 3: Construction of 3 greenfield solar mini-grids and set-up of an “upscaling platform” to facilitate 
additional mini-grid investments 
56. This output will set up 3 greenfield solar mini-grids in the Kandahar, Parwan and Khost regions, for a 
combined capacity of 2.6 MW, providing electricity to approx. 7,800 households (49,000 people) and 1,050 
small businesses. The construction of the mini-grids will cost USD 12.4 million and will be funded by GCF 
with small co-finance from MRRD and UNDP.  
57. In addition, this output will set up an upscaling platform to facilitate the implementation of additional mini-grids 
leveraging on the knowledge and best practices developed from the initial three, consisting of: (i) a 
knowledge platform, including a solar mini-grid practical development manual, online evidence and data 
sharing tools, and full technical studies for 5 additional mini-grids; (ii) development and mainstreaming of 
green procurement policies for solar mini-grids; and (iii) development and mainstreaming of ESG policies for 
solar mini-grids. Ultimately, the project aims to contribute, in a phased approach, to a large volume of solar 
mini-grid development in Afghanistan and – with the long-term improvement in macroeconomic and security 
conditions – the eventual involvement of private investment in the sector.  
Activity 3.1: Construction of 3 greenfield solar mini-grids (2.6 MW in total) 
58. The project will implement 3 greenfield solar mini-grids for a total capacity of 2.6 MW, requiring a total capital 
investment (capex) of USD 12.4 million and a total budget of USD 13.4 million including approx. USD 1 
million in transaction costs (tendering, negotiation, supervision and monitoring & evaluation). Full technical 
designs and specifications are already available and can be found in Annex II. In the absence of a complete 
set of standards and regulations currently available in Afghanistan (subject of interventions under Output 1), 
the mini-grids are designed in accordance with international or UNDP standards and where applicable 
national standards31. There is therefore no dependence of the mini-grids construction in relation to the results 
of Output 1. Specifications of materials and equipment ensures the selection of latest technologies available 
in the market, e.g. the crystalline silicon solar photovoltaics for the mini-grids are in accordance with IEC 
6121532, Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) design uses IEEE33 and IEC standards. Market analysis 
shows that latest technologies are accessible and in-use for the solar mini-grids.  The UNDP safeguards 
policy has been used to conduct a Social and Environmental Impact Assessment. 
The table below provides an overview of the 3 mini-grids. 
Mini-grid location: 
Kandahar 
Parwan 
Khost 
Capacity 
1.0 MW 
0.6 MW 
1.0 MW 
Number of beneficiaries 
2, 081 households (14,500 
people) and 516 
commercial users 
2,000 households (12,000 
people) and 142 
commercial users 
3,725 households (22,500 
people) and 400 
commercial users 
Capex 
$4.4m 
$3.5m 
$4.5m 
Construction period 
50% in year 1 
50% in year 2 
25% in year 1 
75% in year 2 
100% in year 2 
Start of operations 
H2 of year 2 
Q4 of year 2 
Beginning of year 3 
Battery replacement cost 
(15-year lifetime) 
$1.75m 
$1.25m 
$0.9m 
Affordable tariff – 
residential ($/kWh) 
$0.10 
$0.10 
$0.10

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 18 OF 64 
 
 
 
34 UNDP, along with MRRD, will select the private company for the operations and maintenance of the mini-grid through a 
competitive bidding process. 
35 More detailed content of O&M contracts can be found in the Detailed Project Reports of the 3 solar mini-grids in Annex II 
Affordable tariff – 
commercial ($/kWh) 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.20 
Annual revenues at full 
capacity 
$230,000 
$125,000 
$220,000 
Annual O&M fees paid to 
operator 
$77,000 
$60,000 
$77,000 
GCF grant required to 
achieve approx. 20% IRR 
$3.8m 
$3.2m 
$3.9m 
Grant as % of capex 
86% 
93% 
86% 
59. The mini-grids will be owned by the Ministry for Rural Development (MRRD) and operated by private sector 
companies (one or more) under simple outsourcing contracts to be selected on the basis of a competitive 
tendering process34. The exact minimum eligibility criteria for RESCOs that will be selected for O&M on the 
basis of a competitive tendering process will be determined as part of project implementation. Given the aim 
to advance private sector solutions to mini-grids, the criteria will seek to select RESCOs that have the 
potential to receive follow-up private investment. Formulation of the criteria will take into consideration the 
typical due diligence areas of investors, including but not limited to:  
- Determining the legal identity, and any legal issues, around the company/cooperation 
- Track record. Demonstrating operational capability 
- Management quality. Profile and expertise of company’s leadership 
- Business plan for, and financial viability of, proposed RESCO activities 
- Existing financial standing and credit-worthiness of the company/cooperative 
The operators will not be exposed to the risk that electricity sale volumes may undershoot predictions and 
any difficulties in enforcing and collecting user tariffs. The construction of the mini-grids will be outsourced to 
separate construction contractor(s). Both the operator(s) and construction contractor(s) will be selected 
based on competitive tenders designed by the project. Two established Afghani operators of solar plants 
(including a 15 MW on-grid plant) have already expressed interest in participating in the tenders. Operation 
and maintenance contracts between MRRD and RESCOs will be based on simple outsourcing contracts that 
determine requirements for RESCOs including development of a detailed maintenance and operational 
schedule, tariff collection arrangements, service level agreements, availability or “uptime” guarantees, 
performance ratios and yield guarantees, production guarantees, performance incentives and energy based 
contracts (linking plant production (kWh/y) with O&M service provider revenues35. The regulatory agreement 
between MRRD and RESCO will also stipulate the treatment of excess cashflows and related MRRD 
obligations in expenses for battery replacement.   
60. The locations of the mini-grids are such that connections to the DABS grid and, therefore, any purchase 
power agreement with DABS, are not foreseen in the near or medium future. Electricity will be sold directly to 
customers, with MRRD – as mini-grid owner – bearing revenue risk. The mini-grids will charge a residential 
tariff of USD 0.10/kWh and a commercial tariff of USD 0.20/kWh. Both tariff levels have been determined 
through ability-to-pay surveys already conducted in the target communities and are sufficient to cover the 
operation, maintenance and management costs of the mini-grids. The tariffs are paid in local currency 
(Afghani) and have been set for 25 years under the expectation that the Afghani devaluates against the USD 
over time. Willingness-to-pay and ability-to-pay surveys have been conducted in the areas of the 3 mini-grids 
(see also Detailed Project Reports in Annex II). These are essential because the financial feasibility of a mini-
grid project depends largely on the ability of users to pay a tariff that generates enough revenue to cover the 
costs of operations, maintenance and repairs for the mini-grid system. Specifically, the tariff would result in 
monthly electricity bills (based on reasonable estimates of consumption for lighting and basic appliances) that 
are comparable to the cost currently incurred for household energy use on the basis of kerosene (for basic 
lighting). The residential tariff is higher than the highly-subsidized USD 0.07/kWh tariff currently applied by 
DABS to households connected to the grid elsewhere in Afghanistan. On the other hand, both the residential 
and commercial tariffs are lower than the cost of diesel generation, which would be the alternative baseline 
scenario for users that require full electrification (for lighting and use of domestic appliances) – the cost of 
diesel generation is estimated by IRENA at USD 0.35/kWh. Users will also pay (in instalments) a connection 
fee to MRRD to cover the cost of meters and their installation.  
61. The GCF grant would fund 88% of capex and related construction costs, for a total commitment of USD 10.9 
million. The remaining USD 1.5 million of co-finance for capex will be provided by MRRD (USD 1 million) and

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 19 OF 64 
 
 
 
36 An escrow is a financial arrangement where a third party holds and regulates payment of the funds required for two 
parties involved in a given transaction 
37 Given that the financial analysis shows a net cash flow from year 15 to 25 of 2.93 mln$ (see Annex IIIb), this can be 
attributed for 14 additional mini-grid designs (200 k$ each) and development of an updated mini-grid handbook. 
38 Given that the financial analysis shows a net cash flow from year 15 to 25 of 2.93 mln$ (see Annex IIIb), this can be 
attributed for 14 additional mini-grid designs (200 k$ each) and development of an updated mini-grid handbook. 
39 UNDP, along with MRRD, will select the private company for the operations and maintenance of the mini-grid through a 
competitive bidding process. 
40 Note that for procurement activities higher than 500,000 Af (~ 7,000 US$), UNDP will also conduct procurement activities 
as well as payment to vendors. The tenor of the O&M contract will be 25 years. 
41 An escrow is a financial arrangement where a third party holds and regulates payment of the funds required for two 
parties involved in a given transaction 
UNDP (USD 0.5 million). The large GCF grant proportion is justified by the negative IRR of the mini-grids 
without concessionality, which is in turn driven by relatively high construction costs, due to the remoteness of 
the areas and the first-time nature of the project there, as well as maintaining tariffs at affordable level. See 
section B.5 for a justification of grant size and minimum concessionality. 
62. In addition, MRRD will commit to keep in escrow36 any excess cashflows (revenues less operation and 
maintenance fees paid to the operator) accumulated in the 15 years before the replacement of the battery, to 
be spent towards the latter investment (requiring a total investment of USD 3.9 million for the 3 mini-grids, at 
today’s prices). UNDP will ensure that the escrow account will be set up as part of the project implementation 
to ensure that withdrawals from the fund can only take place at the occasion of a “trigger event”, in this case 
at first instance the payment for battery replacement in year 15. Trigger events will be defined and can only 
consist of investments related to battery replacement for the 3 mini-grids in the project until year 15. After 
year 15, trigger events can be the development of new mini-grids designs (e.g. funding technical studies), 
updated handbook for mini-grid development or further support to the knowledge sharing platform and 
materials37.The escrow account will be set up such that it cannot contribute to capital investment in additional 
mini-grids but can only be spent on investments in the public goods domain. MRRD will commit to re-invest 
excess cashflows accumulated in the last 10 years of a mini-grid useful life, and any excess cashflows in the 
first 15 years above and beyond the cost of battery replacement, to support the knowledge platform (Activity 
3.2) e.g. by means of development of new mini-grids designs (e.g. funding technical studies), updated 
handbook for mini-grid development or further support to the knowledge sharing platform and materials38.  
63. As part of setting up and strengthening private sector engagement in mini-grid development in Afghanistan, 
the three RESCOs selected for the O&M of the 3 solar mini-grids39 will be involved in discussions on potential 
arrangements for increasing their business interest, either in the 3 solar mini-grids of the project or in other 
mini-grid development activities. These arrangements, facilitated by the project, will be the subject of analysis 
and discussions between the RESCOs and MRRD after 2 years of successful operation of the mini-grids. 
Also, different ownership models will be analysed and on the basis of feasibility assessments, proposed to 
the three RESCOs. The RESCOs will also be actively involved in exploring potential for participation in PPP 
business models for the development of the 5 mini-grids for which the project will develop investment design 
reports as part of the knowledge platform of Activity 3.2. The 3 RESCOs selected for Operation and 
Maintenance of the 3 solar mini-grids will participate in the capacity building activities under Activity 2.3, 
especially on encouraging productive use in mini-grids and identification of (future) business models in mini-
grid development. They will thereby actively contribute their experiences in the O&M for the 3 solar mini-grids 
to the other RESCOs participating in the capacity building activities under Activity 2.3. 
64. Sub-activities for the above activity include: 
3.1.1: Organization of tender processes to appoint the construction contractor(s) and the mini-grid 
operator(s), and to procure equipment, according to international best practices. 
3.1.2: Negotiation and signing of mini-grid legal and regulatory agreements, including the outsourcing 
agreement with operator (including competitive pricing and KPIs aimed at ensuring adequate service quality) 
and a regulatory agreement with MRRD mirroring, to the extent possible, those typical of energy PPPs40. 
The regulatory agreement will also stipulate the treatment of excess cashflows and related MRRD 
obligationsby means of an escrow account .  
(MRRD will commit to keep in escrow41 any excess cashflows to be spent towards the latter investment in 
battery replacement. An annual overview of excess funds during the project implementation will be 
discussed in the Project Board (with UNDP as a senior supplier), to keep track of funds being available for 
battery replacement. By the end of the project, an outlook of excess cashflows and future investment

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 20 OF 64 
 
 
 
42 https://www.scalingsolar.org  
strategy will be presented and discussed in the Project Board as part of the exit strategy. The escrow 
account will continue to be overseen by the Ministry of Finance and the MRRD after the project ends.)  
3.1.3: Implementation and supervision of mini-grid construction to ensure it is on time, on budget and in 
compliance with technical specifications prescribed to the contractor.  
3.1.4: Monitoring and evaluation system of mini-grid performance, including collection of data and evidence 
(e.g. regarding tariff collection, service quality, compliance with budget, unforeseen risks and lessons learnt) 
to feed into the knowledge platform.  
 
Activity 3.2: Set-up of knowledge platform 
65. With this activity, the project aims to create the conditions for scalability in the form of additional solar mini-
grid implementations. Evidence of success and lessons learnt from the 3 mini-grids implemented by the 
project should also facilitate fund-raising from a wider range of donors and, subject to the macroeconomic 
and security developments in the country, possibly also commercial or impact investors. Scalability will be 
facilitated by: (i) the production of step-by-step guidelines on solar mini-grid implementation, for MRRD use; 
(ii) the set-up of an online platform to share KPIs and lessons learnt on solar mini-grid development 
specifically tailored to Afghanistan, based on data collected from the 3 initial mini-grids; and (iii) the 
development of an additional 5 RE mini-grids designs (3 solar and 2 hydro) in pre-identified areas of 
Afghanistan, for ready implementation by MRRD and to facilitate fund-raising from other donors or investors.  
66. Sub-activities for the above activity include: 
3.2.1: Production of a detailed, step-by-step mini-grid implementation handbook for use by MRRD for the 
design, tendering, construction and operation of future mini-grids.  
(The handbook will build on concrete evidence and best practices that will emerge during the implementation 
of the 3 mini-grids under activity 3.1. It will also reflect industry guidelines published by recognized 
institutions, such as the IFC’s Scaling Solar program42 and the World Bank’s Public-Private Infrastructure 
Advisory Facility (PPIAF), but will be tailored to Afghanistan’s specificities. The handbook will also be 
available to any stakeholders, such as contractors, operators and financiers interested in participating in 
Afghani solar mini-grids. For that purpose, the handbook will include fully-developed templates of legal, 
regulatory and financing agreements for speedy and cost-efficient replication and negotiation.) 
3.2.2: Set-up of online knowledge sharing platform and materials.  
(The online platform will be a real-time, centralized depository of data and information on existing solar mini-
grids in Afghanistan. Data will be collected from the 3 initial mini-grids through remote monitoring and regular 
(quarterly and annual) performance assessments based on a pre-defined set of KPIs. The full technical 
designs and regulations of the 3 mini-grids will be available for easy replication.) 
3.2.3:  Development of investment design reports in an additional 5 solar mini-grids sites already identified. 
The design reports will comply with the green procurement and ESG guidelines developed under activities 
3.3 and 3.4 (see below).  
(Development of investment design reports for an additional 5 RE mini-grids (3 solar and 2 hydro). Sites 
have already been identified in the provinces of Bamian, Laghman, Paktika, Urozgan and Daikundi based on 
analysis of demand and supply patterns, potential loads, ability to pay for energy services, the national grid 
extension plan from DABS and a security assessment based on the UN Security Map (see also Feasibility 
Study, Annex II). Demand patterns analysed will include availability of social services in the target sites, the 
potential for productive use of energy, and women empowerment considerations. The design reports will be 
ready for implementation by MRRD or for tendering to the private sector, should market conditions and the 
risk perception of Afghanistan improve in the medium term. RESCOs receiving capacity building support 
under Activity 2.3 (including the RESCOs selected for O&M services of the 3 solar mini-grids under Activity 
3.1) will be involved in discussions on expanding their business in the development of the 5 mini-grids by 
exploring the potential for participation in PPP business models for the construction and operation of the 5 
mini-grids, including support in the financial models and discussions with potential national and international 
financers.)

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 21 OF 64 
 
 
 
43 ISO 20400:2017 provides guidance to organizations, independent of their activity or size, on integrating sustainability within procurement 
44 https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/operations1/undp-social-and-environmental-standards.html 
Activity 3.3: Green procurement policy for mini-grids developed and mainstreamed 
67. In order to mainstream climate change considerations into government processes, the effective application of 
green government procurement (GGP) is needed and can potentially have great impacts in the development 
and implementation of solar mini-grids as long as mini-grids will remain to be based on government 
procurement, at least in the near term future. The project will therefore develop a green procurement policy 
for mini-grids procurement, using guidance from ISO 20400043, to facilitate the use and purchase of most 
environmentally-friendly services and products for mini-grids. In addition, this policy will be aligned to NEPA’s 
policies and national environmental standards related to the establishment of mini-grids in the country. A peer 
review of the final draft policy by an expert panel composed of national and international green procurement 
experts will ensure the highest possible quality. 
68. The capacities of the relevant ministries involved in mini-grid procurement processes, especially MEW, 
MRRD and DABS in light of the establishment of the RED (under DABS) will be strengthened to be able to 
apply the green procurement guidelines.  
69. Sub-activities for the above activity include: 
3.3.1: Conduct review of existing procurement regulation and needs assessment for complementary 
standards for green procurement policy for mini-grid development. 
3.3.2: Develop/update green procurement policy and guidelines for mini-grid procurement including manual 
and green procurement database with online-reporting system. 
3.3.3: Organize training to build capacities of national entities, especially MEW, MRRD and where relevant 
other key ministries on green procurement guidelines for mini-grid development. 
 
Activity 3.4: Social and environmental safeguards policy for mini-grids developed and mainstreamed 
70. In general, solar mini-grids have the potential to cause moderate environmental and social impacts. Land 
clearing for the construction of mini-grids is considered minimal by area and intensity of impact and will not 
cause significant permanent loss of vegetation. However, there can be a potential for hazardous waste after 
the end of the project from used batteries of photovoltaic systems.  
71. In order to mitigate any potential environmental and social impact of mini-grid development, the project 
foresees in the development of standards related to social safeguards and environmental sustainability of 
mini-grids, using UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards44 as guidance and specific Environmental and 
Social Safeguards assessment tools for mini-grid development, such as developed by the World Bank, as 
input for safeguard policy development. Such regulatory instruments should also provide safeguards and 
balance the interests of the village energy users and the rural energy service provider and lay out the 
principles which encourage long term service delivery and specify mechanisms to resolve and redress 
conflicts. 
72. Sub-activities for the above activity include: 
3.4.1 Conduct review of existing social and environmental safeguards standards and needs assessment for 
complementary standards for mini-grid development. 
3.4.2 Develop/update standards related to social safeguards and environmental sustainability of mini-grids 
(recycling of components at end-of-life, social and environmental considerations of mini-grid location and 
mini-grid construction, ensuring minimal impact on river flora and fauna). 
3.4.3 Develop grievance redress mechanism related to social and environmental safeguards regulations for 
mini-grid development. 
3.4.4 Design and conduct trainings for national and local government entities such as MEW, MRRD and 
other key ministries and provincial governments on social and environmental safeguards for mini-grid 
development. 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 22 OF 64 
 
 
 
45 The STAA was signed on 10 May 1956. 
46 https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=245&Menu=BusinessUnit 
47 DABS = Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat, the national power utility in Afghanistan. MoEW = Ministry of Energy and Water, MAIL = 
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock 
73. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to the 
Standard Technical Assistance Agreement (STAA) between UNDP and the Government of Afghanistan45 
and as per the policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP POPP46. 
74. The national executing entity - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner/Executing Entity’ in 
UNDP terminology - is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, 
policies and procedures, including the NIM Guidelines. These include relevant requirements on fiduciary, 
procurement, environmental and social safeguards, and other performance standards. In legal terms, this is 
ensured through the national Government’s signature of the UNDP Standard Technical Assistance 
Agreements (STAA), together with a UNDP project document which will be signed by the Implementing 
Partner/Executing Entity to govern the use of the funds. 
75. The (national) Implementing Partner/Executing Entity for this project is the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation 
and Development which is accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the monitoring and 
evaluation of project interventions, achieving project outcomes, and for the effective use of resources made 
available by UNDP. The management arrangements for this project are summarised below in Figure 4. 
76. UNDP’s overall role as an Accredited Entity is to provide oversight and quality assurance through its 
Headquarters, Regional and Country Office units. This role includes: (i) day-to-day oversight supervision, (ii) 
oversight of project completion, (iii) oversight of project reporting. It also includes oversight roles in relation to 
reporting and knowledge-management. The ‘project assurance’ function of UNDP is to support the Project 
Board by carrying out objective and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role 
ensures appropriate project management milestones are managed and completed. Project assurance has to 
be independent of the Project Manager; therefore, the Project Board cannot delegate any of its assurance 
responsibilities to the Project Manager. A UNDP Programme Officer, or Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 
Officer, typically holds the project assurance role on behalf of UNDP at the country level, with support from, in 
this case, the Global Environmental Finance Unit (responsible for managing GCF resources) at the 
Headquarter (HQ) and Regional level. The ‘senior supplier’ role of UNDP is to represent the interests of the 
parties which provide funding and/or technical expertise to the project (designing, developing, facilitating, 
procuring, implementing). The senior supplier’s primary function within the Board is to provide guidance 
regarding the technical feasibility of the project. The senior supplier’s role must have the authority to commit 
or acquire supplier resources required. Typically, the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity, UNDP and/or 
donor(s) would be represented under this role.  
Figure 4 Governance Arrangement47

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 23 OF 64 
 
 
 
77. The project will be governed by a Project Board. The Project Board is responsible for making, by consensus, 
management decisions when guidance is required by the Project Manager. Project Board decisions will be 
made in accordance with standards that shall ensure management for development results, best value money, 
fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international competition. In case a consensus cannot be reached 
within the Board, final decision shall rest with the UNDP Programme Manager. 
78. Project Board will consist of a group of representatives responsible for making consensus-based strategic and 
management decisions for the project. It will oversee the project implementation; review compliance with GoA, 
UNDP and GCF requirements; and ensure implementation of the management plan for the risks identified. The 
Board will be comprised of: 
• 
An Executive (role represented by National Implementing Partner) that holds the project ownership and 
chairs the Board. The Executive will be MRRD. 
• 
A Senior Supplier representative providing guidance regarding the technical feasibility of the project, 
compliance with donor requirements, and rules pertaining to use of project resources. This role will be 
fulfilled by UNDP in its capacity as GCF AE;  
• 
Senior Beneficiary representatives who ensures the realisation of project benefits from the perspective of 
project beneficiaries; and the National Project Director, Deputy Minister of MRRD who is responsible for 
the overall direction, strategic guidance, and timely delivery of project outputs.  
• 
The Board will also include additional membership including representatives from relevant GoA ministries, 
Development Partners, Non-Government Organisations and the Afghanistan National Designated Authority 
to the Green Climate Fund. The Board will meet once every six months and/or upon a call by the National 
Project Director.  
Project Board 
Senior Beneficiary 
MRRD, MoEW, MAIL, 
NGOs, DABS, private 
Executive  
MRRD 
Senior Supplier 
UNDP 
National Project Director 
Deputy Minister, MRRD 
Project Assurance  
UNDP 
Project Manager 
Technical Advisory Team 
MRRD, MoEW, MAIL, NEPA, 
DABS, civil society, Private sector 
Project Support Team 
CTA, finance officer, admin officer, 
procurement officer and other 
technical staff

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 24 OF 64 
 
 
79. The Project Manager will run the project on a day-to-day basis within the constraints laid down by the Project 
Board. The Project Manager function will end when the final project terminal evaluation report and other 
documentation required by the GCF and UNDP, has been completed and submitted to UNDP.  The Project 
Manager is responsible for day-to-day management and decision-making for the project. The Project 
Manager’s prime responsibility is to ensure that the project produces the results specified in the project 
document, to the required standard of quality and within the specified constraints of time and cost. 
Management Arrangements 
80. Using established practice under NIM, the Government will designate a National Project Director (NPD) who 
will be the Deputy Minister of MRRD. The NPD will provide up to 50% of his/her time, and be responsible for 
the overall direction, strategic guidance, and timely delivery of project outputs. This position is not 
remunerated by GCF resources but are Government financed positions. MRRD will recruit a Project Manager 
(PM), paid for by the project, who will be responsible for day-to-day operations and the management of a 
team of professionals and technical staff, including an international Chief Technical Advisor (who will also be 
recruited by UNDP to implement the project).  
Project-Support  
81. The PM will be supported by a core team of technical and support staff forming the Project Management Unit 
(PMU) located at MRRD to execute project activities, including day-to-day operations of the project, and the 
overall operational and financial management and reporting. UNDP will perform the project assurance role in 
line with the requirements outlined in the AMA. This includes management of funds, programme quality 
assurance, fiduciary risk management, timely delivery of financial and programme reports to GCF and other 
requirements as per the AMA. The MRRD will implement the project. UNDP will manage the funds from GCF, 
and will disburse based on the direct payment modality.  
82. Direct payment refers to the arrangement where payments are made directly by UNDP to vendors and other 
third parties providing goods or services for agreed upon programme activities on behalf of the implementing 
partner upon request and following completion of the activities. Under this modality, the Executing Entity 
(/Implementing Partner (IP)) is responsible/accountable for the project expenses and carries out the 
procurement actions for procurement activities up to 500,000 Af (~ 7,000 US$), but requests UNDP to make 
the payments to vendors. For procurement activities higher than 500,000 Af (~ 7,000 US$), UNDP will also 
conduct procurement activities as well as payment to vendors. UNDP provides accounting services and 
banking services to the EE/IP. The UNDP and the Government of Afghanistan acknowledge and agree that 
those services are not mandatory and will be provided upon Government request and specified in the Letter 
of Agreement. See flowchart below for the financial flow. 
 
 
 
83. The Technical Advisory Team (TAT) consists of technical level staff from all Ministries and NGOs, 
represented on the Project Board. It will provide the platform for debate and contributions across the project 
outputs at a more technical and working level. 
 
Regulation, taxation and insurance: Please see Annex IX_A – Legal Due Diligence 
GCF
UNDP (AE)
Direct Procurement of 
Goods & Services
Procured Service 
Providers (NGOs)
MRRD
(Procurement 
preparation < 7,000$)

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 25 OF 64 
 
 
 
48 IMF Country Report 19/157 (June 2019): https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2019/06/07/Islamic-Republic-of-Afghanistan-
Fifth-Review-Under-the-Extended-Credit-Facility-Arrangement-46973  
84. For the implementation of 3 solar mini-grids, there are regulatory requirements related to Afghanistan’s 
existing Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) regulations. However, the 5 investment design reports will 
comply with green procurement and safeguards standards developed in the project in order to meet 
regulatory requirements once these mini-grids will be implemented.  
85. Section 7 of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations provides, inter alia, that 
the United Nations, including its subsidiary organs, is exempt from all direct taxes, except charges for utilities 
services, and is exempt from customs duties and charges of a similar nature in respect of articles imported or 
exported for its official use. Also, the goods and services procured directly by Government of Afghanistan 
implementing partners, are exempt from customs duties and will be tax free. All the project 
procurement/inputs will be tax free.  
86. For the implementation of project activities, the contractors, selected through bidding processes, will provide 
and maintain insurance against the following. Insurance costs are included in the estimated activities costs.  
i. All risks in respect of its property and any equipment used for the execution of the activities in their 
contracts.  
ii. Appropriate coverage for employees to cover claims for personal injury or death in connection with 
their activities in the contracts.  
iii. Liability insurance in an adequate amount to cover third party claims for death or bodily injury, or loss 
of or damage to property, arising from or in connection with the provision of services under the Contract 
or the operation of any vehicles, boats, airplanes or other equipment owned or leased by the Contractor 
or its agents, servants, employees or sub-contractors performing work or services in connection with the 
Contract. 
 
87. An MoU between MRRD and MEW is in place which promotes a strong collaboration on energy development 
issues. No agreements are in place at this point with other stakeholders but where needed may be drafted 
during project implementation. 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
88. The proposed project offers a unique opportunity for GCF to support the country in its ambition to provide 
low-carbon energy solutions for rural vulnerable population through mini-grid market development. Given the 
nascent stage of the mini-grid and more generally solar market in the country, the project will allow creating 
an enabling environment for RE and support the country in discontinuing the current energy provision 
pathways (dependent on diesel and kerosene fuel). The project is to be seen as the starting point for 
Afghanistan in its journey to address the underlying barriers for the rural renewable energy market to 
develop. 
89. Several alternative sources of funding were explored through meetings and interviews, including: (i) the 
Government of Afghanistan, (ii) international donor organizations and (iii) the private sector, in particular solar 
project developers. All confirmed that they are severely limited or altogether unable to contribute to project 
funding, for the following reasons: 
• 
GoA is facing a severe macroeconomic and fiscal situation, compounded by security and political 
uncertainty. As recipient of an IMF Extended Credit Facility, GoA has committed to a path of fiscal 
stability which drastically restricts its ability to incur further sovereign debt or budget deficits. The IMF 
expressly recommends that any external financing is in the form of grants or concessional funding.48 In 
this context, GoA’s commitment to provide USD 1 million in cash co-finance (provided by the Ministry of 
Finance and channeled through MRRD) is very significant. GoA will also contribute in-kind to project 
management, through the provision of personnel, office space, IT and transport equipment (in-kind 
contribution worth USD 2.2 million). 
• 
International donors to Afghanistan currently prioritize other areas, such as security, peace, governance, 
women empowerment and health. In addition, donor activities are currently on hold due to heightened 
uncertainty surrounding the outcome of the political elections and the direction of the peace process. 
UNDP discussed the project and potential co-finance opportunities with the Korean, Japanese and 
European Union (EU) representations in Afghanistan, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), GIZ and 
FMO. In addition to the general feedback summarize above, institution-specific constraints were also 
noted. In particular, in the energy sector ADB prioritizes projects targeting the extension of the electric 
grid. GIZ (with funding support from the EU) has already committed resources to the renewable energy

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 26 OF 64 
 
 
 
49 The escrow account will ensure that withdrawals from the fund can only take place at the occasion of a “trigger event”, in 
this case at first instance the payment for battery replacement in year 15. The escrow account will be overseen by the 
Ministry of Finance, the MRRD and the UNDP so that the release of funds at the occasion of the trigger event is coordinated 
with all parties involved. 
50 Given that the financial analysis shows a net cash flow from year 15 to 25 of 2.93 mln$ (see Annex III), this can be 
attributed for 14 additional mini-grid designs (200 k$ each) and development of an updated minigrid handbook. 
sector in northern Afghanistan, including the construction of mini-grids (not yet started); at this moment, it 
is unable to make further financial commitments in this area.  
• 
Private-sector investors/operators of solar projects were also interviewed. Seven Afghani companies 
were identified that invest in and operate on-grid solar projects. Discussions were held with the two most 
prominent (Zularistan and Qadarqan). Neither indicated an interest in investing equity in the mini-grids, 
noting that they only invest in solar projects connected to the grid, where DABS is contractually obligated 
to buy electricity under a power purchase agreement. Such agreements are not possible in mini-grids in 
remote rural areas, leaving any investor exposed to the risk of revenues undershooting expectations. This 
risk is compounded by the fragile security situation in rural Afghanistan, which could result in service 
interruptions and revenue losses. While declining to co-finance, the companies confirmed their interest in 
operating the mini-grids under simple outsourcing contracts on a cost-plus basis. 
• 
Commercial banks in Afghanistan have no track record in lending to solar projects, and would likely share 
the same concerns (revenue stability and security risks) expressed by the operators. The latter noted that 
even some on-grid renewable projects could not attract debt finance in the past, and were funded entirely 
with equity and donor funds. 
90. USD 6.3 million of the GCF grant will fund public-good type activities with no immediate, quantifiable financial 
reflows – namely the whole of outputs 1 and 2, the whole of activities 3.2, 3.3, 3.4 and 4.1, and USD 1 million 
in transaction costs incurred to implement the 3 mini-grids under activity 3.1 (such transaction costs reflect 
the proof-of-concept nature of the 3 mini-grids and will be substantially lower in additional mini-grids 
implemented in the future). For these, a grant is deemed as the most adequate instrument.  
91. Activity 3.1 (implementation of 3 mini-grids) capex of USD 12.4 million will lead to the generation of reflows in 
the form of electricity tariff revenues. However, under the realistic tariff assumptions discussed in B.3, such 
revenues will not be sufficient to generate, over the 25-year lifetime of the mini-grids, a positive financial IRR. 
The GCF grant would fund 88% of capex and construction costs, for a total commitment of USD 10.9 million. 
The remaining USD 1.5 million of co-finance for capex will be provided by MRRD (USD 1 million) and UNDP 
(USD 0.5 million). The GCF grant would bring the financial IRR to around 20% in all 3 mini-grids, a level that 
just about reflects the risk of operating in a precarious environment such as a rural Afghanistan. While the 
mini-grids will be owned by a public entity (MRRD), for replicability and scalability purposes and with the hope 
to attract private capital to future mini-grid development, it is important that the 3 mini-grids implemented by 
the project demonstrate that, with minimum concessionality, market-level IRRs are achievable. The table 
below summarizes IRRs with and without concessionality, and grant size. Please refer to Annex 3 for a 
detailed description of the financial model. 
Mini-grid location: 
Kandahar 
Parwan 
Khost 
Capex (years 1-2) 
$4.4m 
$3.5m 
$4.5m 
IRR without concessionality (over 
25-year mini-grid lifetime since 
start of operations) 
-6.4% 
-13.5% 
-4.4% 
GCF grant  
$3.8m 
$3.2m 
$3.9m 
IRR with GCF grant 
22.0% 
18.9% 
19.0% 
GCF grant as % of capex 
86% 
93% 
86% 
 
92. MRRD, as owner of the mini-grids, will benefit from the concessionality. MRRD, however, will commit to keep 
in escrow any excess cashflows (revenues less operation and maintenance fees paid to the operator) 
accumulated in the first 15 years of a mini-grid’s operations, to be spent towards battery replacement in year 
16 of mini-grid operation (the latter requiring a total investment of USD 3.9 million for the 3 mini-grids)49. 
MRRD will also commit to re-invest excess cashflows accumulated in the last 10 years of a mini-grid’s 
operations, and any excess cashflows in the first 25 years of operations which are above and beyond the 
cost of battery replacement, to support the knowledge platform (Activity 3.2) e.g. by means of development of 
new mini-grids (e.g. funding technical studies), updated handbook for mini-grid development or further 
support to the knowledge sharing platform and materials50. Excess cashflows from the investment, therefore,

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 27 OF 64 
 
 
 
51 IRENA, Renewable Energy Technical Costs, 2012. 
52 Bloomberg, New Energy Outlook, 2017. 
will not be spent by MRRD for purposes inconsistent with the general objective of the project or for budget 
deficit reduction. 
93. Mini-grid customers (households and small businesses) will not disproportionately benefit from the project’s 
concessionality, in the form of highly subsidized electricity tariffs. The latter have been determined through 
willingness-to-pay surveys in all three target sites and will be set at levels that compare – but do not 
represent a discount to – the cost of electricity from diesel and kerosene-powered generators. Specifically, 
households in the target areas spend around AFG 250/month (USD 3.2) to operate generators. The project 
assumes that roughly the same budget will be devoted to electricity bills from the mini-grids. Assuming that 
each household will need 200W of energy (2-3 electricity bulbs and a TV or small appliance) and will use 
electricity 6 hours a day, the implied tariff is around USD 0.08-0.10/kWh. A tariff of USD 0.10 kWh is 
considered acceptable on the basis of Willingness-to-Pay and Ability-to-Pay surveys conducted in the 3 sites 
for solar mini-grid development and has been used in the financial model). These tariffs are higher than the 
highly-subsidized tariff of USD 0.07 charged by the grid operator DABS, which shows the financial 
commitment rural users are willing to make in order to obtain electricity in their remote locations. 
94. Co-finance provided by UNDP and MRRD will be in the form of grants (and also in-kind, in the case of 
MRRD) and therefore pari passu to the GCF contribution.  
95. In the absence of GCF’s support, the development of the solar energy sector in rural Afghanistan will happen 
at a much slower pace. Setting up institutions for implementation of rural energy projects (i.e. RED) through 
GCF involvement and policy de-risking to create the enabling conditions for solar mini-grid development will 
act as a catalyst, giving a long-term support to rural energy markets beyond this project. Through this 
catalytic role, the project will be able to help overcome critical policy, institutional, technical and operational 
barriers standing in the way of setting up climate changed focused energy access projects in Afghanistan that 
are targeted at livelihoods. This will enable stakeholders such as the private sector, banks, technology 
suppliers, O&M providers and other actors to get more confidence required for bringing in their own 
investments in the rural renewable energy market in future. 
96. The grant request from the GCF is considered appropriate as the financial constraints under which the 
Government of Afghanistan operates including its severely restricted borrowing capacity creates the situation 
that Afghanistan continues to depend on foreign grants for energy development in the medium term. 
Afghanistan’s financial sector continues to be in a precarious position, especially since 2002 when the formal 
financial sector was almost non-functioning and the legal framework was practically ineffective. 
Internationally, the risk profile of Afghanistan precludes the long-term project financing of assets, and, as a 
result, direct foreign investment has been limited to grant funding from multilateral institutions, including in the 
power generation sector. 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
97. The project – with its combination of capacity building activities, on one hand, and concrete proof-of-concept 
construction of 3 mini-grids, on the other – is specifically designed as the pilot phase of a longer multi-phased 
development process of mini-grid development in Afghanistan with the objective of long-term sustainability 
and replicability.  
98. In particular, financial sustainability will be ensured by several factors: 
• 
The successful example of mini-grid implementation in rural Afghanistan will reduce the risk 
perception of similar projects for donors, operators and potentially also private sector investors. The 
achievement of the target financial IRR of approx. 20% will show to private sector investors that, with 
adequate concessionality, their involvement in solar mini-grids can be financially attractive. 
• 
The expected reduction in cost of solar PV technology over-time will raise the financial IRR of such 
projects and reduce the need for concessionality. Reductions are expected to apply to various 
hardware costs, in particular solar modules and batteries. For instance, solar PV module prices have 
dropped by 99% in the last 40 years51 and lithium ion battery prices have dropped by 79% since 
2010.52  
• 
Development of a viability gap funding mechanism is an important activity in the project. This will be 
developed in light of Afghanistan Government’s discussions on setting up a Renewable Energy Fund 
which has thus far not yet materialised. Mechanisms that involve using possible revenues from donor

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 28 OF 64 
 
 
supported mini-grids to be used for setting up a Renewable Energy Fund will be part of possible 
solutions to discuss. Although this project will not directly implement revolving funds nor channel 
concessional funding (e.g. loans), it is aimed for that by the end of the project, a funding strategy for 
the most promising financial de-risking package is developed and ready to be capitalized in order to 
ensure financial sustainability after the project ends. 
• 
Long-term improvement in macroeconomic conditions and household income, coupled with evidence 
of more reliable and convenient electricity supply from the mini-grid (vs. diesel generators), should 
lead to long-term tariff increases, which will reduce the need for concessionality in future projects. 
The potential for gradual tariff increases in the 3 mini-grids (e.g. in 5-year intervals) will be explored 
during the project period. 
• 
The upscaling platform is specifically designed with replicability in mind. The knowledge platform 
(step-by-step implementation handbook, online data and resources, and preparation of an additional 
5 mini-grids designs ready for implementation), coupled with clear green procurement and ESG 
guidelines, will reduce the time and transaction costs of mini-grid design, legal and financial 
arrangements, implementation and monitoring. The fact that the upscaling platform will be developed 
in conjunction with the proof-of-concept implementation of 3 mini-grids is aimed at maximizing its 
future effectiveness and applicability. 
• 
A team of 100 MRRD and DABS staff will benefit from extensive capacity building, including hands-
on involvement in the implementation of the 3 mini-grids under activity 3.1. Capacity building will aim 
to enable MRRD (and later on the RED under DABS) to lead independently the whole process. 
• 
International best practices will be incorporated at every step of the mini-grid implementation and 
reflected in the upscaling platform and MRRD and DABS capacity building. The application of such 
practices will not only improve quality of execution but also facilitate the future involvement of 
international stakeholders, including donors, investors/operators and contractors. 
99. If mini-grids are to play a significant role in providing access to reliable and affordable electricity, a robust 
policy and regulatory framework is essential. Regulatory sustainability will be developed in the project 
through a combination of regulations for mini-grids and tariff mechanisms and technical standards and 
guidelines for design and operation of mini-grids. 
100. 
Institutional sustainability through policy de-risking and ecosystem development by way of mini-
grid policy and Rural Electrification Department (under DABS) will ensure that upon GCF’s exit beyond 5 
years, the rural renewable markets are sustainable and expanding. With the funding from the GCF to create 
and train RESCOs for mini-grid development, operation and maintenance, the project proposes significant 
private sector involvement in the development and operations and maintenance (O&M) of 3 solar mini-grids 
implemented in the project. The expectation is thereby that private sector participation will be increased in the 
rural renewable energy sector. This is the pattern already evident in Afghanistan’s grid-connected energy 
supply where a period of grant-funded capital investments resulted in the track-record necessary for private 
sector investment. Ultimately, as these systems become de-risked from a policy, technical and operating 
perspective in rural off-grid supply with a clear regulatory framework and institutional mechanisms in place, 
RESCOs will be able to raise finance from local banks to build, own and operate (B-O-O) these systems.  
101. 
In addition, the proposed project will generate valuable knowledge as well as curriculum 
development for universities and vocational centers that will contribute to other projects and initiatives in 
this sector beyond the project end. Simultaneously, it will also help in creating knowledge within the 
MRRD on good management and governance practices that would be shared with other Ministries and 
departments. Specifically, the process of conceptualizing, creating and strengthening the mini-grids 
RESCOs will be a valuable knowledge product to be applied in other sectors across Afghanistan and in 
RE sector in other neighboring countries. Learning is expected to be significant on the impact of energy 
interventions on climate change adaptation through encouragement of productive uses combined with 
design of RE mini-grids. The body of evidence created shall result in replication and scaling up of similar 
interventions.  
102. 
If mini-grid investment in Afghanistan is to truly scale up, then private sector investment will be 
central. Market knowledge sustainability is therefore created in the project by means of supporting 
and training Renewable Energy Service Companies (RESCOs) in order to grow a nascent private sector 
mini-grid industry in Afghanistan. By the end of the project, 1,000 people will have been trained on 
various aspects of rural RE mini-grids such as system sizing, design and installation (resource 
assessment, supply and demand analysis, design, installation considering the technical standards, 
guidelines and regulations developed under Output 1) while on the financial side, capacity building will

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 29 OF 64 
 
 
 
 
address mini-grid and RE system business models, including financing options, administration and tariff 
setting and the critical role of productive uses. This will allow the RESCOs not only to be able to offer 
O&M services but also initiate mini-grid development once the financial viability gap funding mechanism 
is in place. 
103. 
Social sustainability will be ensured by extensive stakeholder involvement in the communities 
benefiting from the 3 implemented mini-grids and the additional 5 to be designed. Willingness-to-pay 
studies have already been conducted to ensure the affordability of mini-grid tariffs and to avoid creating 
an excessive financial burden on users, which could ultimately jeopardize the successful implementation 
of the mini-grids. The outcome of these studies and prospective tariffs will be extensively socialized in 
the target communities to ensure that they fully appreciate the benefits of a reliable supply of electricity 
from a renewable source and the fairness of the proposed tariffs. Similarly, the business-enhancing 
potential of reliable electricity will be explained to local business owners. 
104. 
Gender-based sustainability. The proposed project will generate gender analysis through 
stakeholder engagement and project interventions which will support in addressing the cross-cutting 
gender issue in the relevant sector after the project life.  The assessment and implementation of the 
gender‐related activities in responding to the expanding threat of climate change, including gender roles 
and responsibilities, resource use and management, and decision making raised by the project will help 
the women to be an active player in the sector. The interventions of the proposal will support the 
engagement, development and input into the design of responding to the expanding threat of climate 
change and building the resilience of the most vulnerable communities through sustainable energy 
access.

=== PAGE 34 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 30 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
17,198,843 
USD ($)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) 
Subordinated loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) 
Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity 
return 
 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) 
Grants 
17,198,843  
 
 
 
(vii) 
Result-based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing information 
Total amount 
Currency 
4,200,000 
USD ($) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation 
and Development 
Grant 
1,000,000 
USD ($) 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
UNDP 
Grant 
1,000,000 
USD ($) 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation 
and Development 
In kind 
2,200,000 
USD ($) 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Click here to enter text. 
Options 
Enter amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
• 
Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
21,398,843 
USD ($) 
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page) 
N/A 
 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Output 
Activity 
Indicative 
cost 
Options 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Output 1: Energy 
Market Risk de-
risked by policy, 
regulatory and 
institutional 
development for 
improved 
renewable 
energy (RE) 
services in rural 
areas 
Activity 1.1 
Regulations for 
mini-grids and 
tariff 
mechanisms 
and structure 
developed and 
approved 
764,748 
564,748 
Grants 
200,000 
In-kind 
MRRD 
Activity 1.2 
Technical 
standards and 
guidelines 
developed for 
464,000 
264,000 
Grants 
200,000 
In-kind 
MRRD

=== PAGE 35 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
design and 
operation of 
mini-grids 
Activity 1.3 
Policy on 
fostering 
institutional 
reform and 
coordination 
mechanism 
among 
responsible 
institutions for 
mini grid 
development 
developed 
605,560 
405,560 
Grants 
200,000 
In-kind 
MRRD 
Activity 1.4 
Framework for 
financial de-
risking RE 
mini-grids 
designed 
503,960 
303,960 
Grants 
200,000 
In-kind 
MRRD 
Output 2: 
Capacity and 
engagement of 
the existing and 
potential mini-
grid market 
actors and 
stakeholders 
strengthened on 
RE mini-grids  
Activity 2.1 
Capacity 
strengthening 
activities 
designed and 
delivered for 
government 
entities on 
technical, 
managerial, 
administrative 
and financing 
aspects of RE 
mini-grids 
738,268 
538,268 
Grants 
200,000 
In-kind 
MRRD 
Activity 2.2 
Community 
commitment 
activities 
designed and 
delivered for 
beneficiaries of 
3 solar mini-
grids 
558,000 
358,000 
Grants 
200,000 
In-kind 
MRRD 
Activity 2.3 
Capacity 
strengthening 
activities 
designed and 
delivered for 
private sector 
on designing, 
operating and 
maintaining 
mini-grids and 
maintaining 
mini-grids as 
well as 
incentivizing 
975,000 
775,000 
Grants 
200,000 
In-kind 
MRRD

=== PAGE 36 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
productive use 
aimed at 
increasing 
resilience 
3. Construction 
of 3 greenfield 
solar mini-grids 
and set-up of an 
“upscaling 
platform” to 
facilitate 
additional mini-
grid investments 
3.1 
Construction of 
3 greenfield 
solar mini-grids 
13,393,588 
11,893,588 
Grants 
1,000,000 
500,000 
Grants 
Grants 
MRRD 
UNDP 
3.2 Set-up of 
knowledge 
platform 
1,877,500 
1,177,500 
Grants 
500,000 
200,000 
Grants 
In-kind 
UNDP 
MRRD 
3.3 Green 
procurement 
policy for mini-
grids 
developed and 
mainstreamed 
357,500 
157,500 
Grants 
200,000 
In-kind 
MRRD 
3.4 Social and 
environmental 
safeguards 
policy for mini-
grids 
developed and 
mainstreamed 
354,000 
154,000 
Grants 
200,000 
In-kind 
MRRD 
4. Project management 
806,719 
606,719 
Grants 
200,000 
In-kind 
MRRD 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
21,398,843 
17,198,843 
4,200,000 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☐      No ☒ 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please 
provide a brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities, 
to the extent possible. 
 
105. 
Output 2 will undertake capacity building of institutions on demand-side as well as supply-side of 
energy systems and services. On the supply-side, the ability of relevant ministries and government institutes 
to extend their expertise on rural RE mini-grids with specific professional staff to be further trained in 
technical, managerial and financial aspects of RE mini-grids, thus creating capacity at scale. On the demand-
side, capacity in the agricultural cooperatives, self-help-groups, community development councils, and the 
population served by the 3 solar mini-grids will be enhanced to understand and accept RE systems as a 
means to provide energy to enhance their incomes and other benefits. The total GCF funding for these 
activities will be USD 1,671,268. 
106. 
Capacity building of the private sector will focus on technical training for RE developers and RE 
service providers on various aspects of rural RE mini-grids such as system sizing, design and installation 
(resource assessment, supply and demand analysis, design, installation considering the technical standards, 
guidelines and regulations developed under Output 1), for a total budget of USD 6.8 million excluding 
MRRD’s in-kind co-finance. On the financial side, capacity building will address mini-grid and RE system 
business models, including financing options, administration and tariff setting and the critical role of 
productive uses. Finally, training of local technicians for O&M of solar PV and hydropower mini-grids as well 
as operators’ and administrators’ manuals in local languages will be part of this activity.

=== PAGE 37 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
107. 
Overall, the project will contribute to a lower GHG emissions trajectory while triggering increased 
resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions. Sustainable 
access to reliable and cost-effective energy through the RE mini-grids shall strengthen community-level 
coping strategies and improve income. The 3 implemented solar mini-grids address 49,000 beneficiaries (of 
which 23,500 are women) as users of electricity at homesteads, for agriculture and enterprise development. 
About 12 schools, 3 RE-enabled health centres and approx. 1,050 small businesses will be addressed in the 
3 implemented solar mini-grids in this project.  
108. 
The 3 solar mini-grids implemented under Activity 3.1 will have a mitigation potential of 173,082 
tCO2eq over their 25-year lifetimes. In most cases, RE electricity will replace and/or avoid the use of diesel 
fuel and in some cases kerosene. The Table 1 below summarises the project’s mitigation benefits. Please 
refer to Annex II Pre-Feasibility Study for the detailed calculations. 
109. 
The 5 additional mini-grids designed as part of Activity 3.2 are expected to be implemented after the 
GCF project and have a mitigation potential of 379,746 tCO2eq (not included in CO2 emission reduction in this 
FP submission).  
 
Table 1 Estimated CO2 emission mitigation potential of 3 solar mini-grids implemented in Kandahar, Parwan and Khost 
Sectors 
Potential for 
mitigation 
(kWh/year) 
System for 
replacement 
Emission 
factor 
Annual 
Emission 
Reduction 
(tCO2e) 
Useful life of 
system 
(years) 
Total 
mitigation 
potential 
(tCO2) 
3 solar mini-grids 
implemented 
4,555,200 
3 solar mini-
grids 
Varying 
emission 
factors53 
~3,600 
25 (from first 
year of 
operation) 
 
173,082 
Expected emission reductions after project implementation (not included in this FP submission): 
5 mini-grids 
designed 
8,935,20054 
3 solar and 2 
hydro mini-
grids 
Varying 
emission 
factors55 
15,189 
25  
 
379,74656 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
110. 
Potential for scaling-up and replication. The project is specifically designed for replication and scale-up by 
providing (i) policy de-risking for mainstreaming mini-grids, (ii) providing a platform for private sector 
engagement through training and supporting private sector RESCOs and a Rural Electrification Department 
(under DABS), (iii) supporting technical and commercial packages of interventions (e.g. mini-grids + 
RESCOs), (iv) developing a track-record of mini-grid designs ready for procurement or tendering, (vi) 
implementing 3 proof-of-concept solar mini-grids and (vii) necessary capacity building among public, private 
and community groups for effective management of technology. Taken together, these factors enable a 
transformational shift to clean energy delivery in rural areas explicitly linked to improving climate resilience 
and establishing a low-carbon model of economic development. The barrier each activity addresses and its 
ability to support rural renewable energy market transformation and thereby strengthened adaptive capacity, 
is illustrated in the Theory of Change. 
111. 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning. The creation of the upscaling platform in Output 3, and 
particularly the knowledge platform in Activity 3.2, is specifically meant to formalize and mainstream any data 
evidence, best practices and procurement and ESG policies developed by the project and put in place in the 
implementation of the 3 solar mini-grids. The knowledge platform will include a step-by-step mini-grid 
 
53 Using AMS I L methodology, see Annex II 
54 Based on 2.5 MW solar mini-grids with capacity factor of 20% and 1.3 MW hydro mini-grids with capacity factor 40% and excluding 
degradation. 
55 Using AMS I L methodology, see Annex II 
56 Calculated based on an average emission factor of 1.7 as estimated from emission calculation for 3 solar mini-grids in Annex II

=== PAGE 38 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
implementation manual, an online data and information service and 5 ready-to-implement mini-grid designs. 
The knowledge platform is crucial to both learning and scaling-up/replication objectives. 
112. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment. The project approach takes into account the fact 
that current financial constraints in Afghanistan preclude immediate public or private investment for capital 
costs of the RE interventions at the scale required to achieve this paradigm shift. However, by addressing the 
non-financial barriers that hinder private investment including setting up a Rural Electrification Department 
(under DABS), by taking policy de-risking measures, and through proof-of-concept construction of 3 mini-
grids (with concessionality provided by GCF), the conditions are established (as in the case of grid-connected 
private power supply) to catalyze private sector capital investments for future renewable energy off-grid 
interventions. On the supply-side, the ability of private sector operators to extend their expertise to operate as 
RESCOs will be developed, along with the development of a networking platform to share knowledge, thus 
creating capacity at scale. 
113. 
Contribution to regulatory framework and policies. The project’s construct is focused on creating an 
enabling environment through improved legislation and regulations as well as capacity building and improved 
green procurement and ESG processes. Systematic capacity building is foreseen for public institutions and 
research organizations while also agricultural cooperatives, self-help-groups, community development 
councils and NGOs will receive capacity building to support understanding and acceptance of RE systems as 
a means to provide energy to enhance their incomes and other benefits in order to guarantee the demand for 
RE systems now and in the future.  
114. 
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development In summary, the project is highly scalable. 89% of 
Afghanistan’s rural population does not have grid connectivity, surveys have repeatedly demonstrated 
community willingness to pay for reliable and modern forms of energy, and the Government and international 
development partners place energy access as a top priority for national development and climate change 
response efforts. It should also be noted that these conditions are shared in other countries, and that the 
potential for replication and scale-up is not restricted to Afghanistan.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
115. 
Economic co-benefits. The 3 solar mini-grids implemented under activity 3.1 will result in the employment of 
29 staff hired by the mini-grid operators during the 25-year project lifespan. More importantly, the mini-grids 
will provide reliable electricity to over 1,050 small enterprises, contributing to business continuity and growth. 
Other small businesses may be launched as a result of the availability of a reliable source of power. In 
general, the reliability of energy supply as well as the ease of obtaining a connection (time, cost, procedures) 
contribute to the business environment of a country, and are one of the ten criteria used by the World Bank in 
compiling its Doing Business rankings.57 Further, the project can potentially catalyze local manufacturing of 
some of the solar equipment that will result in savings of import duties currently being levied.  
116. 
Number of jobs created. RE interventions will result in employment being generated through jobs in the 
enterprises that will benefit from enhanced access to energy. In addition, the project seeks to contribute to 
securing livelihoods in the 3 sites for solar mini-grid implementation as well as 5 designs for RE mini-grids. 
These livelihoods are expected to be in agriculture, farm-based and off-farm livelihood options. Further, the 
project can potentially catalyze local manufacturing of some of the RE equipment that will result in savings of 
import duties currently being levied. The establishment of RESCOs will create jobs as well.  
117. 
Social and environmental benefits. Introduction of cleaner energy sources replacing diesel generated 
electricity will result in reduction of exposure to air pollution. Electrification of health clinics allows the 
provision of medical services at night, greater use of more advanced medical equipment, helps retain 
qualified staff in rural health centers, and allows local clinics to keep needed medicines on hand among other 
benefits. An Environmental and Social Safeguards Screening was conducted (See Annex) which categorized 
the project as Medium Risk due to potential risks related to land use for mini-grids, potential waste resulting 
from mini-grids and potentially adverse impacts on gender equality.  
118. 
Gender-sensitive development. Women represent 47% of direct beneficiaries in the 3 mini-grids 
implemented by the project, and a similar percentage can be expected in the 5 additional mini-grids designed 
under activity 3.2. The project is designed to enhance the development of women. Access to energy is an 
intervention that has proven to contribute to economic empowerment of women. A study in South Africa 
found that electrification of rural communities resulted in a 9% increase in female employment58. Another 
 
57 https://www.doingbusiness.org/en/methodology/getting-electricity  
58 Dinkelman, Taryn. 2011. "The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evidence from South Africa."American Economic 
Review, 101(7): 3078-3108.

=== PAGE 39 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
study conducted in Guatemala also shows a similar result where electrification increases women’s 
employment59. Both studies attribute the increase in employment to the fact that electricity frees up women’s 
time by increasing their efficiency of domestic chores, such as cooking, and reducing the time they spend on 
collecting wood, thus allowing them to spend more time on education and other skill building activities. The 
project specially targets the development of agricultural cooperatives, and the final evaluation of the UNDP 
Afghanistan Gender Equality Programme (GEP II) found that women’s income on average has increased by 
200% where cooperatives were supported by the programme.  
119. 
A gender assessment was undertaken to provide an overview of the gender situation in Afghanistan, with a 
specific focus on climate change resilience, and identify gender issues that are relevant to the proposed 
‘Afghanistan rural energy market transformation initiative - Strengthening resilience of livelihoods through 
sustainable energy access’ project, while examining potential gender mainstreaming opportunities. On the 
basis of analysis of the gender dimension along political, social and cultural domains in Afghanistan, gender 
mainstreaming activities for the project are described in the gender action plan (Annex IV).  
120. 
Grievance mechanisms. The project makes provision for a complaint’s register along with a two-tiered 
Grievance Redress Mechanism, appropriate for the project and consistent with the UNDP’s Stakeholder 
Response Mechanism: Overview and Guidance (2014) and World Bank Group Safeguards Policies.  The 
Grievance Redress Mechanism establishes goals and objectives along with eligibility requirements to make a 
complaint and/or grievance.  It has been designed that all parties will act in good faith throughout the process 
and more importantly, that is will be arbitrary in nature in trying to achieve mutually acceptable resolutions for 
all parties.  The Grievance Redress Mechanism also provides for the covering of costs for legitimate 
complaints or grievances so as individuals and/or groups are not disadvantaged by bring complaints to the 
attention of CSO and UNDP.  Finally, if complainants remain dissatisfied with the outcomes at the project 
level, the Grievance Redress Mechanism allows individuals and/or groups to also file a complaint with the 
Social and Environmental Compliance Unit within the Office of Anticorruption and Integrity within the UNDP 
or the appropriate national legal or judicial authority e.g., the Courts. 
121. 
The operationalization/development of a Project Level Grievance Mechanism (GRM) is planned for the first 
year of implementation. The full details of these GRM will be agreed upon during the Inception Phase, a 
process that will be overseen by the Project Manager. Interested stakeholders may raise a grievance at any 
time to the Project Management Unit, the Executing Agency (UNDP) or the Implementing Agency (MRRD). In 
addition to the project-level and national grievance redress mechanisms, complainants have the option to 
access UNDP’s Accountability Mechanism, with both compliance and grievance functions. The UNDP’s 
Social and Environmental Compliance Unit (SECU60) investigates allegations that UNDP's Standards, 
screening procedure or other UNDP social and environmental commitments are not being implemented 
adequately, and that harm may result to people or the environment. 
122. 
Stakeholder engagement. As part of the consultation of relevant stakeholders, six workshops were 
organized in 6 different regions throughout Afghanistan61. During the workshops, discussions took place 
about climate change and the GCF, about the energy deficits in the region and the benefit of renewable 
energy and finally about the project design, including discussion about possible mini-grid sites and the theory 
of change of the project. Stakeholders present in the workshops included representatives of MRRD, MEW, 
MAIL, NEPA, where relevant international agencies, NGOs, private sector representatives from AREU and 
Community Development Councils. On the basis of the involvement of stakeholders during the project 
design, a stakeholder engagement plan was developed that identifies relevant stakeholders for each of the 
project activities, see Annex II Chapter 8.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
123. 
Afghanistan is a high-risk profile country according to the NRVA 201262. The Global Adaptation Index ranks it 
as the most vulnerable in 2012 country in the world, taking into account the country’s exposure, sensitivity 
and ability to cope with climate related hazards, worsened by the socio-political conflicts and security. Coping 
with the impacts of climate change is a major challenge for development in Afghanistan given that its 
 
59 “Electrification and the Household”,Grogan & Sadanand 2009 
60 For more details see www.undp.org/secu-srm 
61 Workshops were organised in the North Region, South Region, East Region, West Region, Central South East Region and Southeast 
Region.  
62 National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (NRVA 2012)

=== PAGE 40 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
negative effects are likely to be most severely felt by the poor and marginalized due to their high dependence 
on subsistence agriculture and limited capacity to cope with the impacts of climate variability and extremes.  
124. 
The Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (CCSAP) for Afghanistan identified high levels of exposure 
and vulnerability to climate change for most parts of Afghanistan. There is evidence of an increase in extreme 
events, with floods almost an annual occurrence in spring (every year between 2012 and 2015). There also 
were dry years in the country between 1996-2003, while the drought of 2008 was particularly severe. The 
CCSAP indicates that several key sectors are seriously vulnerable to climate change impacts including 
agriculture, water resources, forest and soil conservation, health and others. 
125. 
The project is aligned to Afghanistan’s NDCs which targets GHG reductions. It builds upon one of the key 
learnings from previous development efforts and targets clean energy delivery for improved economic, social 
and health outcomes. Site and technology selection were geared towards economic activity, health centres, 
and schools in areas recognized as among the most vulnerable to climate change, as well as emphasizing 
solutions that target local water resource management and health effects upon women and children. 
126. 
The concerns of the Government of Afghanistan to prevent greenhouse gas emissions to contribute to 
mitigation are well reflected in Afghanistan’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) as submitted as INDC 
to the UNFCCC Secretariat in September 2015 and converted to NDC in November 2016. In the NDC, 
Afghanistan outlines its intended contribution of reducing its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 13.6% 
below the 2030 business-as-usual scenario, by 2030. It explains that this contribution is conditional on the 
receipt of international support. 
127. 
On the financial side, the country faces serious constraints. Per capita GDP of Afghanistan is among the 
lowest in the world, while access to energy is lower than most developing countries. The Afghan economy is 
still recovering from decades of civil war and conflict. Levels of industrialization are yet to reach pre-1980 
levels, while the tax regime is weak with low levels of compliance. Most of the development activity in the 
country is carried out by development partners. This is one of the reasons why MRRD and the Government of 
Afghanistan seek GCF support in implementation of the proposed project. 
128. 
Please refer to section B.5 for a detailed discussion concerning the unavailability of other sources of funding 
from the project, including from GoA, international donors and the private sector. 
129. 
Nearly 24.5 million people in Afghanistan63 are not connected to modern energy. Mostly rural settlements are 
faced with lack of energy access while often being dependent on costly and unhealthy kerosene for lighting or 
diesel for power generators. Gaps in key rural energy infrastructure services not only prevent the 
electrification of vulnerable communities, but also limit the potential for local economic and social 
development. There is a clear connection between energy access and level of living standards while it can 
also contribute to gender equality and improvements in health64. Providing universal energy access for 
households, however, is not enough to ensure economic and social development. Energy also needs to be 
available for productive uses such as agriculture and industry to help achieve the SDG goal on poverty. This 
project therefore not only foresees in clean energy access to 49,000 beneficiaries (of which over 23,500 are 
women) but also puts strong emphasis on encouraging productive use of energy. Especially productive use 
potential contributing to higher agricultural productivity, decreased post-harvest losses, increased electricity 
based small industries and decreased loss of live-stock due to extreme weather will be emphasized in order 
to contribute to increased resilience to climate change. 
130. 
Energy is the backbone of the national economy of each country and also, living standard of each country's 
citizens is indicated by GDP of the country which is claimed to be about 90% dependent on per capita energy 
consumption. Afghanistan with its $520 GDP per capita65 and 148 kWh electricity consumption per capita in 
201866, ranks among the lowest in the world. The main reasons that only 9% rural and 30% of the whole 
country's population has access to electricity is the fact that the majority of the population live in the rural 
area, and expansion of the existing transmission network will be very expensive. Since 2001, the main focus 
of endeavors has been on reconstruction and expansion of the national power grid. However, given that the 
national grid is being developed almost from scratch, it is accepted that there are swathes of the country, that 
the national grid will not be able to serve them in the near future.67 The needs of the recipients in the project 
targeted areas are therefore high in the context of ensuring energy access.  
 
63 On the basis of estimated 35.5 mln population in 2017: http://data.worldbank.org/country/afghanistan. 
64 WEO 2017 Special Report: Energy Access Outlook, IEA, 2017  
65 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=AF  
66 https://www.worlddata.info/asia/afghanistan/energy-consumption.php  
67 Theoretical potential and utilization of renewable energy in Afghanistan, Gul Ahmad Ludin, Mohammad Amin Amin, Assadullah 
Aminzaym Tomonobu Senjyu,; AIMS Energy, 2017, 5(1): 1-19. doi: 10.3934/energy.2017.1.1,

=== PAGE 41 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
131. 
Development of renewable energy is one of the priority areas for low-emission development for Afghanistan 
(NAMA, 2015), particularly in the context of energy access to rural communities. The Afghanistan CCSAP 
201568 strengthens the legal and institutional framework for taking action on climate change in Afghanistan by 
adopting a judicious mix of adaptation and mitigation measures. 
132. 
The CCSAP acknowledges that Afghanistan still has low levels of carbon emissions per capita as well as 
gross emissions; while it is still committed to stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere 
and adopt a development path that is climate friendly, without compromising on rapid economic growth and 
human development. Hence, the short and medium terms goals of CCSAP are to strengthen the core sectors 
of agriculture and rural development to protect them from adverse impacts of climate change. The CCSAP 
has four targets: protect its population from climate-change related extremes; improve rural livelihood 
security; prevent land degradation; and increase the share of renewable energy in the overall energy mix. 
133. 
The NAMA 201569 for Afghanistan has identified renewable energy, energy efficiency, efficient transportation, 
and waste management as priority areas for low emissions development. Promotion of Renewable Energy 
(RE) systems for enhancing energy access in rural areas with an objective of enterprise development is one 
of the focus areas of the NAMA.  
134. 
Afghanistan submitted its INDC in September 2015 and converted it to NDC in November 2016 which covers 
energy, natural resources management, agriculture, waste management and mining as focus areas70. The 
NDC targets a 13.6% reduction in GHG emissions by 2030; energy production using hydropower, solar 
energy-based systems, wind and biomass, clean cooking-cum-heating devices and clean fuels feature as 
prominent mitigation contributors. The adaptation actions include a focus on development of a system to 
monitor and assess vulnerability and adaptation to climate change; development of water resources through 
rehabilitation and reconstruction of small, medium and large-scale infrastructure; planning for proper 
watershed management; and increased irrigated agricultural land and regeneration of degraded forests. 
135. 
The Renewable Energy Roadmap for Afghanistan, RER2032, indicates the ambition to reach a renewable 
energy target of 5000 MW by 2032. MEW thereby considers rural renewable energy programs as a crucial 
part of such development and the need for RESCOs is mentioned as one of the preconditions to guarantee 
sustainable operation of rural renewable energy projects.   
136. 
The Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) will be the National Executing Partner 
(Implementing Partner of UNDP). Within its mandate, the MRRD is responsible for developing and 
implementing programs promoting responsible social and financial growth in rural areas, primarily in the non-
farm sector. The MRRD has a Renewable Energy and Enterprise Development (REED) department which is 
responsible for rural energy development up to a size of 1 MW installed capacity. Similarly, the Ministry of 
Energy and Water (MEW) has a Renewable Energy Department (RED) which is responsible for developing 
renewable energy and rural energy projects of 1 MW or higher installed capacity.  
137. 
Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS) is the government owned national vertically integrated utility 
electricity utility which provides electricity primarily in urban and peri-urban areas. DABS will take 
responsibility as the initial owner of the mini-grids up until the Rural Electrification Department (under DABS) 
has been established.  
138. 
The MRRD has been a partner of UNDP for more than a decade, since early 2002. The MRRD has 
implemented all three phases of the NABDP from 2002-2016 and the AREDP in Kandahar and Helmand 
2013 -2015. The NSP and NABDP have focused on rural development and electrification programmes, 
implemented and managed through CDCs. Recently, the MRRD is the implementing partner of the ASERD 
2016-2018 project which focused on increasing access to electricity, clean cooking and heating options, 
developing innovative financing models and capacity development of key stakeholders.  
139. 
In addition, MRRD is implementing the project on Livelihood Improvement in Tajik-Afghan Cross-border 
Areas (LITACA), which is a new three-year cross border initiative, implemented by UNDP Tajikistan in 
cooperation with UNDP Afghanistan and the MRRD. The project aims to promote stability and security in the 
districts of Khatlon Region of Tajikistan and Kunduz and Takhor Provinces of Afghanistan through improving 
livelihoods and resilience of bordering rural communities. The MRRD, MEW and DABS will provide support in 
 
68 Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (CCSAP 2015)  
69 Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA 2015)  
70 Afghanistan’s first Intended Nationally Determined Contribution or INDC, September 2015: 
http://www4.unfccc.int/ndcregistry/PublishedDocuments/Afghanistan%20First/INDC_AFG_20150927_FINAL.pdf

=== PAGE 42 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
terms of local community involvement, liaising with other institutions such as cooperatives and RESCOs, 
regulatory development and local field support.  
140. 
MRRD, being the executing entity (implementing partner in UNDP terminology), is responsible for managing 
the project and achieving the results defined in the proposal. MRRD has committed a total of US$ 1.0 million 
in cash co-financing and US$ 2.0 million in in-kind contributions. The accountability of MRRD is specifically 
defined as the responsibility to:  
• 
Manage the overall conduct of the project; implement activities by mobilizing goods and services; 
checking on progress and watching for plan deviations; ensuring that changes are controlled and 
problems addressed; monitoring risks; and, reporting on progress. 
• 
Report, fairly and accurately, on project progress against agreed work plans in accordance with the 
reporting schedule and formats included in the project agreement; 
• 
Maintain documentation and evidence that describes the proper and prudent use of project resources in 
conformity with the project agreement and in accordance with applicable regulations and procedures. This 
documentation will be available on request to project monitors and designated auditors. 
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
141. 
As discussed in section B.5, the project structure combines a series of public-good type activities – necessary 
to de-risk and facilitate the scale-up of renewable mini-grids in Afghanistan – with investment in the 
construction and implementation of 3 solar mini-grids to act as concrete proof-of-concept for public and 
private capital providers. Public-good activities are ideally suited to grant financing. GCF grants are also 
necessary for the implementation of the 3 mini-grids, whose financial profile is currently unattractive due to 
their remote location and ensuing high costs, impossibility of a power purchase agreement and the need to 
maintain electricity tariffs at affordable levels. Other than a grant contribution from MRRD and UNDP, other 
sources of public and private finance are currently unavailable, as verified by interviewing a range of potential 
capital providers. The crowding-out risk is therefore absent in this project. 
142. 
Concessionality will be minimized by sizing the GCF grant for the 3 mini-grid construction to a level that is just 
about sufficient to turn an otherwise negative financial IRR into an approx. 20% IRR. Achievement of the 
latter, thanks to the GCF grant, is critical to demonstrating to future, prospective private investors that 
renewable mini-grids in Afghanistan can be financially attractive, with the appropriate level of concessionality. 
This will facilitate the scaling-up of additional mini-grids, in conjunction with the long-term improvement in the 
country’s macroeconomic and security conditions. 
143. 
Financial IRR calculations are relevant for Activity 3.1 (implementation of 3 solar mini-grids), the only one that 
generates financial reflows. As detailed in section B.5 and the financial model in Annex 3, the financial IRR of 
all 3 mini-grids without concessionality would be negative (Kandahar -6.4%, Parwan -13.5%, Khost -4.4%). A 
GCF grant covering 86%, 93% and 86% of capex for the Kandahar, Parwan and Khost mini-grids, 
respectively, would increase their financial IRRs to +22.0%, +18.9% and 19.0%. 
144. 
The amount of concessionality required to make future mini-grids, including the 5 designed within the 
knowledge platform, financially attractive is expected to decline, in line with the declining cost of RE 
technology, the standardization of processes promoted by the upscaling platform, and lower risk premia 
required by private investors with the long-term improvement in the country’s macroeconomic and security 
conditions. In summary, the project aims to minimize concessionality while at the same time putting in place 
the optimal conditions for sustainability and replicability. 
145. 
In terms of efficiency and effectiveness, the GCF cost per tCO2eq removed is USD 99 based on emissions 
from the 3 solar mini-grids implemented (173,082 tCO2eq71). This is based on a total GCF grant of USD 17.2 
million. 
146. 
The economic analysis results show that the project generates a positive EIRR of 11%, which is higher than 
the 10% rate conventionally targeted in similar economic analyses. Using a fixed hurdle rate or 6-12% as 
discount rate/hurdle rate for economic analysis is inline with generally accepted practice by several DFIs such 
as ADB,72 and it is also UNDP’s guidelines for economic analysis of projects. In fact, ADB’s latest economic 
analysis guidelines actually now recommend 9% discount rate for economic analysis (6% for social sector 
 
71 Emission reduction over the 25-year lifetimes of 3 solar mini-grids 
72 https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/32256/economic-analysis-projects.pdf (Page 52, section on ‘Minimum 
required discount rate’)

=== PAGE 43 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
projects). Hence, the 10% discount rate used for this economic analysis is actually more stringent than ADB 
guidelines. See Annex 3 for detailed assumptions.  
147. 
The mini-grids design is in accordance with international standards and applicable national standards. 
Specifications of materials and equipment ensures the selection of latest technologies available in the 
market. For example, the crystalline silicon solar photovoltaics for the mini-grids are in accordance with IEC 
61215, Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) design uses IEEE and IEC standards. Market analysis shows 
that latest technologies are accessible and in-use for the solar mini-grids. 
148. 
The mini-grids are designed to use pre-paid smart meters where the users will pay beforehand for the use of 
electricity. For the maximum use of electricity from the grids and thus for maximum emission reduction, 
MRRD will create rural economic zones around the mini-grids where off-peak hour electricity can be used for 
small-industry and production activities.

=== PAGE 44 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK   
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both. 
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development 
 
 
E.2. Core indicator targets 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
and cross-cutting only) 
Annual 
6,923 tCO2 eq  
 
Lifetime 
 173,082 tCO2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) 
(a) Total project financing 
 21,398,843    USD    
(b) Requested GCF amount  
 17,198,843   USD 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
173,082  tCO2eq (direct) 
 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
124 USD / t CO2eq (direct) 
 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed 
(e = b / c) 
99 USD / t CO2eq (direct) 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross-cutting only) 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
4,200,000   USD 
(g) Public source co-financed 
4,200,000   Choose an item. 
(h) Private source finance leveraged  
_____   Choose an item. 
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
0.24   
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
0.24  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
_____  
.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
N/A 
Indirect 
N/A 
For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 17. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
N/A 
Indirect 
N/A 
For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.

=== PAGE 45 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
E.3. Fund-level impacts 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low-emission 
energy access and 
power generation 
M1.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided - gender-
sensitive energy access 
power generation 
Site visits 
Implementatio
n quarterly 
reports by 
MRRD and 
technology 
vendors 
Third party 
independent 
verification 
reports (not 
conducted by 
mini-grid 
operators nor 
government) 
 
0 direct 
emissions 
reduced 
(CO2 
emissions 
from the 
use of 
diesel 
generators
) 
4,408 tCO2 
emissions 
reduced 
 
(Cumulative 
emission 
reduction 
mid of year 
2 (mid-
term)) 
20,519  
tCO2 
emission
s 
reduced 
 
(Cumulati
ve 
emission 
reduction 
by the 
end of 
year 5 
(Final) 
derived 
from 3 
solar 
mini-
grids) 
 
 
Emission factor 
based on 
assumption of 
diesel generators in 
baseline/alternative 
scenario 
 
Social and economic 
co-benefits in terms of 
productive use of 
electricity including 
enhanced climate 
resilience (linked to 
M6.0) 
Meter 
readings from 
RESCO’s  
Questionnaire
-based 
surveys (QBS 
/ Interviews)  
Third party 
independent 
verification 
reports (not 
conducted by 
mini-grid 
operators nor 
government) 
 
Average 
annual 
total 
electricity 
use for 
productive 
uses in 3 
mini-grids: 
0 MWh 
Average 
annual total 
electricity 
use for 
productive 
uses in 3 
mini-grids: 
>300 MWh 
Average 
annual 
total 
electricity 
use for 
productiv
e uses in 
3 mini-
grids: 
>600 
MWh 
No major disaster 
occurred in the 
project locations 
that may delay the 
installation of the 
RE technology. 
The political and 
security situation 
enables timely 
project 
implementation 
E.4. Fund-level outcomes 
Expected Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumption
s 
Mid-term) 
Final 
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
M5.1 Institutional 
and regulatory 
systems that 
improve 
incentives for low-
emission planning 
and development 
and their effective 
implementation  
 
 
Government 
reports 
demonstrating 
approval and 
dissemination of 
the policies/ 
regulations/guide
lines  
Online 
publication of 
policies and 
standards 
Absent 
dedicated 
government 
entity  
capacitated to 
design, plan, 
incentivize and 
implement rural 
electrification 
projects 
promoting mini 
grids 
 
Mandate for 
Rural 
Electrification 
Department 
prepared  
Drafts available 
of: 
• Mini-grid 
policy (1) 
• Technical 
standards for 
mini-grids (8) 
•  
• Rural 
Electrification 
Department 
(under 
DABS) 
established 
(1)  
capacitated 
to design, 
plan, 
incentivize 
and 
implement 
rural 
electrification 
projects 
Constructive 
relations for 
collaboration 
between 
national 
Government 
entities, 
regional and 
local 
government to 
refine policy, 
regulatory and 
planning 
frameworks.

=== PAGE 46 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 
73 Level 1 = no coordination mechanism; Level 2= 1 coordination mechanism in place; Level 3 = 1 coordination 
mechanism in place, meeting regularly with appropriate representation (gender and decision-making 
authorities); Level 4 = 1 coordination mechanism in place, meeting regularly, with appropriate representation, 
with appropriate information flows and monitoring of action items/issues raised. 
 
Mini-grid 
development is 
not guided by 
appropriate 
policies, 
regulations and 
technical 
standards 
 
• Green 
procurement 
policy for RE 
mini-grids (1) 
• Social and 
environment
al safeguards 
regulations 
for RE mini-
grid 
developed 
(1) 
promoting 
mini grids 
 
 
 
• Mini-grid 
policy 
developed 
and 
government 
approved (1) 
• Technical 
standards for 
mini-grids 
developed 
and 
government 
approved 
and applied 
to 5 mini-grid 
designs(8) 
• Green 
procurement 
policy for RE 
mini-grids in 
place (1) 
• Social and 
environment
al safeguards 
regulations 
for RE mini-
grid in place 
(1) 
 
M5.2 Number and 
level of effective 
coordination 
mechanisms 
Minutes of the 
coordination 
meetings 
 
 
Baseline = level 
173 
 
  
Midterm = level 
2 
 
Final = level 4 
 
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large 
low-emission power 
suppliers 
M6.2 Number of 
households and 
individuals (males 
and females) with 
improved access 
to low-emission 
energy sources  
 
Site visits, 
Implementation 
quarterly reports 
by MRRD and 
technology 
vendors. 
Third party 
independent 
verification 
reports (not 
conducted by 
mini-grid 
operators nor 
government) 
 
 
0 households 
with access to 
mini-grids in the 
selected areas 
 
 
2,600 
households; 
16,330 people 
(7,700 women) 
with access to 
solar mini-grids  
7,800 
households; 
49,000 people 
(23,500 
women) with 
access to solar 
mini-grids  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capacity of 
services 
provider to 
manage RE 
technology 
remains 
sufficient to 
service the 
market/deman
d 
 
M6.3 MWs of low-
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated as a 
Site visits, 
Implementation 
quarterly reports 
by MRRD and 
technology 
vendors. 
Absent RE 
mini-grids for 
energy access 
in the selected 
areas. No 
1.6 MW solar 
mini-grid 
capacity 
installed 
(1 MW solar 
mini-grid 
2.6 MW solar 
mini-grid 
capacity 
installed 
(1 MW solar 
mini-grid

=== PAGE 47 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
result of GCF 
support  
 
Third party 
independent 
verification 
reports (not 
conducted by 
mini-grid 
operators nor 
government) 
 
relevant CO2 
reductions. 
 
Kandahar 
installed and 
600 kW solar 
mini-grid 
Parwan 
installed) 
Kandahar 
installed and 
600 kW solar 
mini-grid 
Parwan 
installed and 1 
MW solar mini-
grid Khost 
installed)

=== PAGE 48 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 
74 “Risk perception” is based on a scale where 1 = high risk (risk perception related to policy and regulatory 
environment among 80-100 percent of the total surveyed stakeholders/private sector to invest into RE mini-
grids in Afghanistan), 2 = medium high risk (risk perception related to policy and regulatory environment among 
60-80 percent of the total surveyed stakeholders/private sector to invest into RE mini-grids in Afghanistan), 3 = 
medium risk (risk perception related to policy and regulatory environment among 40-60 percent of the total 
surveyed stakeholders/private sector to invest into RE mini-grids in Afghanistan), 4 = low risk (risk perception 
related to policy and regulatory environment less than 40 percent of the total surveyed stakeholders/private 
sector to invest into RE mini-grids in Afghanistan)  
 
75 Level of capacity on mini-grid policy, technical standards for design & operation of mini-grids is based on a 
scale where 1 = level of capacity is low (less than 20% of officials have good understanding of difference 
between on-grid and off-grid energy development, good understanding of economic impact of mini-grids, good 
understanding of productive use for mini-grids, good understanding of gender aspects in mini-grid development) 
2 = level of capacity is modest (between 20% and 40% of officials have good understanding of difference 
between on-grid and off-grid energy development, good understanding of economic impact of mini-grids, good 
understanding of productive use for mini-grids, good understanding of gender aspects in mini-grid 
development), 3 = level of capacity is moderate (between 40% and 60% of officials have good understanding of 
difference between on-grid and off-grid energy development, good understanding of economic impact of mini-
grids, good understanding of productive use for mini-grids, good understanding of gender aspects in mini-grid 
development), 4 = level of capacity is good (more than 60% of officials good understanding of difference 
between on-grid and off-grid energy development, good understanding of economic impact of mini-grids, good 
understanding of productive use for mini-grids, good understanding of gender aspects in mini-grid development) 
 
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators 
Expected 
Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumpti
ons 
Mid-term 
Final 
1. Energy 
Market Risk 
de-risked by 
policy, 
regulatory and 
institutional 
development 
for improved 
renewable 
energy (RE) 
services in 
rural areas 
1.1  
Risk perception 
among mini-grid 
stakeholders with 
regard to market risk 
(regulatory and 
institutional 
environment) as a 
result of mini-grid 
policy, technical 
standards and O&M 
guidelines and 
institutional 
coordination. 
 
Stakeholder/private 
sector surveys to 
assess the impact 
of the policy de-
risking measures 
on the risk 
perception to invest 
into mini-grids 
(after policies/ 
standards are 
approved /issued) 
Risk 
perception 
= level 174 
Risk perception 
= level 2 
Risk perception 
= level 4 
The 
government 
remains 
committed 
to approve 
the policies 
and 
disseminate 
the relevant 
guidelines 
 
1.2 # Level of 
capacity of 
Government and non-
Government officials 
(20% females) in 
mini-grid policy, 
technical standards 
for design & operation 
of mini-grids 
Survey among 
government 
officials to assess 
the level of 
capacity in mini-
grid policy, 
technical standards 
for design & 
operation of mini-
grids 
 
 
 
Level of 
capacity = 
level 175 
 
Level of capacity 
= level 2 
 
Level of capacity 
= level 4 
Lessons 
learned are 
identified 
and 
analyzed in 
a timely 
manner, 
supporting 
the effective 
sharing of 
knowledge.

=== PAGE 49 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 
76 Level of understanding on gender impact and opportunities for gender inclusiveness of rural mini-grid 
development is based on a scale where 1 = less than 20% of officials have a positive perception towards 
including gender inclusiveness in future mini-grid design and procurement of RE mini-grids (e.g. mandate 
female productive use opportunities and female entrepreneurship); level 2 = between 20% and 40% of officials 
have a positive perception towards including gender inclusiveness in future mini-grid design and procurement of 
RE mini-grids (e.g. mandate female productive use opportunities and female entrepreneurship); level 3 = 
between 40% and 60% of officials have a positive perception towards including gender inclusiveness in future 
mini-grid design and procurement of RE mini-grids (e.g. mandate female productive use opportunities and 
female entrepreneurship); level 4 = more than 60% of officials have a positive perception towards including 
gender inclusiveness in future mini-grid design and procurement of RE mini-grids (e.g. mandate female 
productive use opportunities and female entrepreneurship)  
 
77 Level of capacity on rural mini-grid systems planning is based on a scale where 1 = less than 20% of staff 
has good understanding of on-grid versus off-grid energy systems planning, limited understanding of renewable 
energy resource planning and selection, limited understanding of measurement and reporting of GHG emission 
changes from off-grid electrification 2 = between 20% and 40% of staff has good understanding of on-grid 
versus off-grid energy systems planning, good understanding of renewable energy resource planning and 
selection, good understanding of measurement and reporting of GHG emission changes from off-grid 
electrification, 3 = between 40% and 60% of staff has good understanding of on-grid versus off-grid energy 
systems planning, good understanding of renewable energy resource planning and selection, good 
understanding of measurement and reporting of GHG emission changes from off-grid electrification, 4 = more 
than 60% of staff has good understanding of on-grid versus off-grid energy systems planning, good 
understanding of renewable energy resource planning and selection, good understanding of measurement and 
reporting of GHG emission changes from off-grid electrification 
 
78 “Capable of identifying productive use opportunities” is based on a scale where 1 = limited to no knowledge on 
productive use; Level 2 = households and businesses aware of renewable energy and know how/where to get 
related information; Level 3 = households and businesses engaged with support activities and requesting 
additional information on productive use for their specific situation; Level 4 = households and business 
knowledgeable about productive energy use and identified concrete opportunities by means of expanding 
business or introducing new business 
 
1.3 Level of 
understanding of 
Government officials 
with on gender impact 
and opportunities for 
gender inclusiveness 
of rural mini-grid 
development  
 
Survey among 
government 
officials on 
understanding 
gender impact and 
opportunities of 
rural mini-grid 
development 
 
Level of 
understan
ding = 176 
 
Level of 
understanding = 
2 
 
Level of 
understanding = 
4 
Survey 
exercise 
during 
training 
understood 
by 
participants 
 
 
2. Capacity and 
engagement of 
the existing and 
potential mini-
grid market 
actors and 
stakeholders 
strengthened 
on RE mini-
grids 
 
2.1 Level of capacity 
of national provincial 
and local 
governments staff on 
rural RE mini-grid 
systems planning 
Survey among staff 
of national, 
provincial and local 
governments to 
assess the level of 
capacity in rural RE 
mini-grid systems 
planning 
 
Level of 
capacity = 
level 177 
 
Level of capacity 
= level 2 
 
Level of capacity 
= level 4 
 
Willingness 
of 
stakeholder
s at 
national, 
regional 
and village 
level to 
participate 
in trainings 
and of 
females to 
participate 
(see also 
Gender 
assessment
) 
 
2.2 Level of 
capability78 of 
community and local 
business 
representatives in 
Khost, Parwan and 
Kandahar in 
understanding and 
Surveys, 
disaggregated by 
gender  
 
Level = 1 
Level = 2 
Level = 4

=== PAGE 50 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 
79 Level of business interest is based on a scale where 1 = limited to no knowledge of mini-grids; Level 2 = 
businesses aware of various aspects of rural RE electrification and know how/where to get related technical 
support; Level 3 = businesses engaged with support activities and indicating interest in follow-up training; Level 
4 = business knowledgeable about mini-grid development and developing or capable of developing mini-grid 
business plans 
 
80 Level of effectiveness of Operation and Maintenance by RESCOs is based on a scale where 1 = no 
Operation and Maintenance by RESCOs in place; 2 = Operation and Maintenance by RESCOs in place, mini-
grid users are moderately satisfied (e.g. unclarities on billing, no full responsiveness) 3 = Operation and 
Maintenance by RESCOs in place, mini-grid users are satisfied (e.g. no unclarities on billing, RESCOs are 
responsive to most queries); 4 = Operation and Maintenance by RESCOs in place, mini-grid users are highly 
satisfied (e.g. no unclarities on billing, RESCOs are responsive to all queries) 
 
81 Level of adequateness is based on a scale where 1 = no knowledge platform existing; Level 2 = businesses 
have heard of knowledge platform but do not know how to use the information; Level 3 = businesses know the 
knowledge platform and know where to find specific information but have only used the information in 1 case; 
Level 4 = businesses know the knowledge platform, know where to find specific information and used the 
information for (future) mini-grid development in at least 3 cases 
 
identifying productive 
use opportunities  
Availability 
of good 
experts to 
deliver 
trainings 
and 
workshops 
 
2.3 Level of business 
interest79 in RE mini-
grid development of 
private sector and 
energy service 
companies /RESCOs 
(10% females)  
Surveys, 
disaggregated by 
gender 
Level = 1 
Level = 2 
Level = 4 
3. Construction 
of 3 greenfield 
solar mini-grids 
and set-up of 
an “upscaling 
platform” to 
facilitate 
additional mini-
grid 
investments 
3.1 Level of customer 
satisfaction on the 
Operation and 
Maintenance of mini-
grids by RESCOs. 
Surveys among 
mini-grid users on 
effectiveness of 
Operation and 
Maintenance of 
mini-grids by 
RESCOs  
 
Level = 
180 
 
Level = 2 
 
Level = 4 
 
Extreme 
weather 
does not 
damage 
infrastructur
e works.  
Availability 
of good 
experts to 
deliver 
knowledge 
platform 
3.2 Level of 
adequateness81 of 
knowledge platform 
serving the needs and 
interest of private 
sector for future mini-
grid development 
Surveys among 
relevant private 
sector stakeholders 
Level = 1 
Level = 2 
Level = 4 
3.3 Customers 
connected and using 
electricity 
Meter readings 
from RESCO’s  
Questionnaire-
based surveys 
(QBS / Interviews)  
Third party 
independent 
verification reports 
(not conducted by 
mini-grid operators 
nor government) 
 
Average 
annual 
total 
electricity 
use in 3 
mini-grids: 
0 MWh 
of which 
for 
productive 
uses: 
0 MWh 
Average annual 
total electricity 
use in 3 mini-
grids: 
2,220 MWh 
of which for 
productive uses: 
>300 MWh 
Average annual 
total electricity 
use in 3 mini-
grids: 
4,188 MWh 
of which for 
productive uses: 
>600 MWh 
No major 
disaster 
occurred in 
the project 
locations 
that may 
delay the 
installation 
of the RE 
technology. 
The political 
and security 
situation 
enables 
timely 
project 
implementa
tion

=== PAGE 51 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 
82 The DREI methodology was developed by UNDP, see http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/environment-
energy/low_emission_climateresilientdevelopment/derisking-renewable-energy-investment.html  
E.6. Activities  
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Activity 1.1 Regulations for mini-grids and tariff mechanisms and structure developed and approved 
1.1.1 Conduct De-risking 
Renewable Energy Investment 
(DREI) analysis82 simulation for 
solar mini-grids to inform the 
development of de-risking policies 
and tailored interventions to 
support RE mini-grid 
development. 
1.1.2 Conduct a baseline market 
study analysing energy systems, 
actors, productive use potential, 
impacts on beneficiaries and 
business models to inform the 
development of regulations and 
incentives for mini-grids 
1.1.3 Conduct complementary 
analysis on willingness to pay for 
energy in rural areas, to inform 
mini-grid policy and tariff structure 
development 
1.1.4 Develop regulations to 
ensure fair tariff structure for mini-
grids 
1.1.5 Develop Mini-grid Policy to 
align with the National Energy 
Supply Program (NESP) and 
Renewable Energy Policy 
(RENP), including licensing, rural 
electrification strategies and 
institutional arrangements. 
.1.6 Organize consultation 
process involving Ministry of Rural 
Rehabilitation and Development 
(MRRD), Ministry of Energy and 
Water (MEW), Da Afghanistan 
Breshna Sherkat (DABS), and 
market actors of Afghanistan 
Renewable Energy Union (AREU) 
and beneficiaries to discuss the 
draft mini-grid regulations and 
tariff structure by conducting 
workshops and business forum 
 
1.1.7 Disseminate government 
approved mini-grid regulation and 
tariff structure results in 
workshops in all relevant regions 
as well as through regular 
government communication 
channels to relevant government 
and private sector stakeholders 
1.1.8 Conduct a Gender 
mainstreaming training for 
A baseline market study 
analysing energy systems, 
actors, productive use 
potential, impacts on 
beneficiaries and business 
models will inform the 
development of the mini-grid 
policy as well as a DREI 
analysis simulation to come to 
clear understanding of the 
energy market risk to be 
addressed by the mini-grid 
policy.  Assessment how 
gender is currently 
mainstreaming in the energy 
sector will be part of the 
baseline study. Further 
analysis on willingness to pay 
for energy in rural areas will 
inform the development of 
regulations that will ensure fair 
tariff structure for mini-grids. 
 
The mini-grid policy will be 
developed through a 
consultative process by 
involving public sector players 
MRRD, MEW, DABS, 
beneficiaries and private 
sector players of the 
Afghanistan Renewable 
Energy Union (AREU), and 
will address alignment with 
the National Energy Supply 
Program (NESP) and 
Renewable Energy Policy 
(RENP), permits and 
approvals, generation 
licensing, land rights, rural 
electrification strategies and 
institutional arrangements. 
 
 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
develop DREI simulation study 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
conduct a market study on rural 
renewable energy mini-grid 
development 
• 
Conduct surveys on Willingness-
To-Pay for energy in rural areas 
• 
Undertake the development of 
mini-grid policy (legal and 
technical services) 
• 
Undertake the development of 
tariff structure regulations for 
mini-grids (legal and financial 
services) 
• 
Plan workshops for consultation 
process on newly developed 
draft policies 
• 
Plan national and regional 
awareness raising 
workshops/meetings to sensitize 
all key stakeholders on new 
policies and regulations 
 
 
• DREI simulation study 
developed 
• Market study on rural 
renewable energy 
mini-grid development 
conducted 
• Surveys on 
Willingness-To-Pay 
for energy in rural 
areas conducted 
• Mini-grid policy (legal 
and technical 
services) developed 
• Tariff structure 
regulations for mini-
grids (legal and 
financial services) 
developed 
• Workshops for 
consultation process 
on newly developed 
draft policies 
conducted 
• National and regional 
awareness raising 
workshops/meetings 
to sensitize all key 
stakeholders on new 
policies and 
regulations conducted

=== PAGE 52 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 
83 Renewable Energy Roadmap 2032 (RER2032), ADB, March 2017 
MRRD, MEW and DABS 
government staff. 
 
Activity 1.2 Technical standards and guidelines developed for design and operation of mini-grids 
1.2.1 Conduct review of existing 
technical standards and needs 
assessment for complementary 
technical standards for mini-grid 
development 
1.2.2 Develop/update draft 
technical standards and 
guidelines for design and 
operation of mini-grids 
(generation equipment, 
distribution grid, and electricity 
service standards) purposefully 
designed for rural contexts 
1.2.3 Organize consultation 
process involving MRRD, MEW, 
DABS, and market actors of 
AREU and beneficiaries to 
discuss the draft technical 
standards for design and 
operation for mini-grids by 
conducting workshops  
1.2.4 Provide technical assistance 
to the government to facilitate 
approval of the technical 
standards and guidelines for mini-
grids – including enforcement 
mechanisms - and get 
government approval  
1.2.5 Disseminate government 
approved technical standards and 
guidelines for mini-grids in 
workshops in all regions as well 
as through regular government 
communication channels 
 
Under this activity, a set of 
technical standards and 
guidelines for mini-grids will 
be developed in relation to 
material choice, system 
design and service level for 
generation equipment, 
distribution grid, and electricity 
service standards and 
purposefully designed for rural 
contexts in Afghanistan.  
 
A review of existing technical 
standards and needs 
assessment for 
complementary standards for 
mini-grid development will 
inform the development of the 
technical standards for mini-
grids. The mini-grid policy will 
be developed through a 
consultative process by 
involving public sector players 
MRRD, MEW, DABS, 
beneficiaries and private 
sector players of the 
Afghanistan Renewable 
Energy Union (AREU) and will 
follow the steps of common 
policy development 
procedures.  
• 
Procure expertise services to 
review existing technical 
standards for mini-grid 
development 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
develop technical standards and 
guidelines for design and 
operation of mini-grids 
• 
Organize workshops for 
consultation process on newly 
developed draft technical 
standards 
• 
Organize national and regional 
awareness raising 
workshops/meetings to sensitize 
all key stakeholders on new 
technical standards 
 
 
 
 
• 
Existing technical 
standards for mini-
grid development 
reviewed 
• 
Technical standards 
and guidelines for 
design and 
operation of mini-
grids developed 
• 
Workshops for 
consultation process 
on newly developed 
draft technical 
standards organised 
• 
National and 
regional awareness 
raising 
workshops/meetings 
to sensitize all key 
stakeholders on 
new technical 
standards organised 
  
Activity 1.3 Policy on fostering institutional reform and coordination mechanism among responsible 
institutions for mini grid development developed 
1.3.1 Organize stakeholder 
consultations on coordination 
mechanism (e.g. containing inter-
ministerial platform or Energy 
Sector Coordination Group, and 
coordination with regional 
administrations and village 
electrification committees) to 
coordinate on-grid and off-grid 
electrification. 
1.3.2 Establish coordination 
mechanism among responsible 
institutions to coordinate on-grid 
and off-grid planning and national, 
regional and village level 
interaction and to allow for 
continuous updating of mini-grid 
The project will initiate the 
creation of a separate Rural 
Electrification Department 
(under DABS) (RED) that will 
be capacitated to design, plan 
and implement rural 
electrification projects mainly 
based on RE technologies. 
This is aligned to the recently 
finalized Renewable Energy 
Roadmap 2032 (RER203283). 
The Rural Electrification 
Department (under DABS) 
may be given responsibilities 
for generation, transmission 
and distribution exclusively in 
rural areas.  
 
• 
Organize workshops for 
consultation process on setting 
up a coordination mechanism 
• 
Organize workshops for 
consultation process on 
developing a Rural Electrification 
Department 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
develop an organizational 
charter for a Rural Electrification 
Department (under DABS) 
• 
Procure services to develop 
training material on rural 
renewable energy development 
for newly established Rural 
Electrification Department 
• 
Conduct training for staff of for 
newly established Rural 
Electrification Department 
 
• 
Workshops for 
consultation process 
on setting up a 
coordination 
mechanism 
organized 
• 
Workshops for 
consultation process 
on developing a 
Rural Electrification 
Department 
organized 
• 
Organizational 
charter for a Rural 
Electrification 
Department (under 
DABS) developed 
• 
Training material on 
rural renewable

=== PAGE 53 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 
84 The DREI methodology was developed by UNDP, see http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/environment-
energy/low_emission_climateresilientdevelopment/derisking-renewable-energy-investment.html 
policy, financial mechanisms and 
technical standards. 
1.3.3 Organize stakeholder 
consultations on possible 
arrangements for a Rural 
Electrification Department (under 
DABS), including possibilities of 
twinning arrangement with similar 
institutions in the region 
1.3.4 Develop mandate and 
operational conditions for a Rural 
Electrification Department (under 
DABS) 
1.3.5 Develop the organizational 
charter for a Rural Electrification 
Department (under DABS) 
1.3.6 Provide training to Rural 
Electrification Department staff on 
rural RE mini-grid systems and 
mandate of RED in encouraging 
rural RE development in 
Afghanistan  
The department, once fully 
operational, will undertake all 
activities related to rural 
electrification including site 
identification, land acquisition, 
raising and managing 
finances and regulatory 
approvals, including support 
to local enterprises such as 
RESCOs. The project will 
develop the organizational 
charter for the RED after 
conducting wide stakeholder 
consultations, including 
possibilities of twining 
arrangement with similar 
institutions in the region. 
 
 
 
energy development 
for newly 
established Rural 
Electrification 
Department 
developed 
• 
Training for staff of 
for newly 
established Rural 
Electrification 
Department 
conducted 
 
Activity 1.4 Framework for financial de-risking RE mini-grids designed 
1.4.1 Set up expert panel to 
discuss findings of DREI Analysis 
simulation (Activity 1.1.1) in order 
to draft most suitable financial de-
risking scenarios for mini-grid 
development in the project 
specifically and for renewable 
energy development in general. 
1.4.2 Develop the structure of a 
mini-grid viability gap funding 
mechanism, including potential 
sources of (climate) finance to be 
used for capitalizing a viability gap 
funding mechanism as well as a 
roadmap for medium- and longer-
term financing need for rural 
electrification. 
1.4.3. Develop financial de-risking 
packages for mini-grid 
development combining the 
viability gap funding mechanism 
with additional incentives (e.g. tax 
holidays, facilitation of land 
acquisition, streamlining permit 
procedures) based on findings 
from Activity 1.4.1 and 1.4.2  
1.4.4 Organize consultation 
process involving MRRD, MEW, 
DABS, and market actors of 
AREU and beneficiaries to 
discuss the financial de-risking 
packages for rural mini-grid 
development  
The project proposes to 
design a framework for 
financial de-risking RE mini-
grids based on DREI analysis 
simulation84 to eventually 
come to a strategy to finance 
and/or co-finance both public 
and private sector rural RE 
mini-grid development e.g. by 
means of viability gap funding 
mechanism in combination 
with other stimuli such as tax 
incentives.  
 
The development of a 
financial de-risking strategy 
will be informed by a rigorous 
process, consisting of expert 
panel discussions and 
consultation involving all 
relevant stakeholders 
consisting of MRRD, MEW, 
DABS, and market actors of 
AREU and beneficiaries. 
Strategies to be discussed 
can include mechanisms to 
transfer risk and mechanisms 
to compensate for risks. A 
viability gap funding 
mechanism will be discussed 
in light of Afghanistan 
Government’s discussions on 
setting up a Renewable 
Energy Fund. Mechanisms 
that involve using possible 
revenues from donor 
supported mini-grids to be 
• Procure expertise services to 
develop de-risking scenarios 
addressing overall risk levels and 
access to finance constraints for 
rural RE mini-grids 
• Procure expertise services to 
develop the structure of a mini-
grid viability gap funding 
mechanism as well as long term 
roadmap 
• Procure expertise services to 
develop financial de-risking 
packages for mini-grid 
development 
• Organize workshops for 
consultation process on financial 
de-risking packages for rural 
mini-grid development 
• Procure expertise services to 
develop funding strategy for 
most promising financial de-
risking package 
 
 
 
 
• De-risking scenarios 
addressing overall 
risk levels and 
access to finance 
constraints for rural 
RE mini-grids 
developed 
• Structure of a mini-
grid viability gap 
funding mechanism 
as well as long term 
roadmap developed 
• Financial de-risking 
packages for mini-
grid development 
developed 
• Workshops for 
consultation process 
on financial de-
risking packages for 
rural mini-grid 
development 
organized 
• Funding strategy for 
most promising 
financial de-risking 
package developed

=== PAGE 54 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
1.4.5 Develop funding strategy for 
most promising financial de-
risking package containing 
viability gap funding mechanism 
and additional incentives 
(including accessing climate 
finance to implement mini-grids) 
used for setting up a 
Renewable Energy Fund will 
be part of possible solutions to 
discuss. 
Activity 2.1 Capacity strengthening activities designed and delivered for government entities on 
technical, managerial, administrative and financing aspects of RE mini-grids 
2.1.1 Conduct capacity needs 
assessment of national and local 
government entities on RE mini-
grids to map the gaps in technical, 
planning and managerial capacity 
of government entities and assess 
capacity needs 
2.1.2 Build technical, planning 
and managerial capacities of 
national government entities such 
as MEW, MRRD and other key 
ministries and provincial and local 
governments on rural RE mini-
grid systems planning 
2.1.3 Develop greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emission monitoring, 
verification and reporting 
methodology for the 
measurement and estimation of 
(changes) in GHG emissions from 
off-grid and renewable energy 
technologies at national and 
(sub)national level 
2.1.4 Build capacities of NEPA in 
measurement and reporting of 
GHG emission changes from off-
grid electrification to support 
formulation of NDS and other 
climate reporting 
 
The project will start a process 
of strengthening capacities 
across MEW, MRRD and 
other key ministries and 
provincial governments on 
technical, managerial, 
administrative and financing 
aspects of RE projects, which 
will need to grow towards a 
scheme of continuous process 
of knowledge acquisition and 
knowledge management, in 
order to stay updated with the 
latest developments in the RE 
sector internationally and also 
to incorporate lessons learned 
from local as well as 
international experiences.  
 
The development of a suitable 
capacity building package will 
be informed by a capacity 
needs assessment of national 
and local government entities 
to map the gaps in technical, 
planning and managerial 
capacity of government 
entities with regard to mini-
grid development and assess 
capacity needs. 
 
The project will develop a 
system for GHG monitoring, 
verification and reporting to 
UNFCCC and train the 
capacities of NEPA in order to 
be able to take up the 
responsibilities related to 
reporting off-grid GHG 
emission reduction 
contribution. 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
conduct a capacity needs 
assessment and to develop a 
suitable training package  
• 
Organize workshops for capacity 
building of national and local 
government entities on technical, 
planning and managerial 
capacities for rural RE mini-grid 
systems planning 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
develop a greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emission monitoring, 
verification and reporting 
methodology for the 
measurement and estimation of 
(changes) in GHG emissions 
from off-grid and renewable 
energy technologies at national 
and (sub)national level 
• 
Conduct training for NEPA in 
measurement and reporting of 
GHG emission changes from off-
grid electrification 
 
 
 
• 
Capacity needs 
assessment 
conducted and 
suitable training 
package developed 
• 
Workshops 
organized for 
capacity building of 
national and local 
government entities 
on technical, 
planning and 
managerial 
capacities for rural 
RE mini-grid 
systems planning 
• 
A greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emission 
monitoring, 
verification and 
reporting 
methodology 
developed for the 
measurement and 
estimation of 
(changes) in GHG 
emissions from off-
grid and renewable 
energy technologies 
at national and 
(sub)national level 
• 
Training for NEPA 
organized in 
measurement and 
reporting of GHG 
emission changes 
from off-grid 
electrification 
Activity 2.2  Community commitment and local business interest activities designed and delivered for 
beneficiaries of 3 solar RE mini-grid systems  
2.2.1 Conduct assessment to 
identify present local business 
and other relevant players in the 
communities that are served by 3 
mini-grids that are important for 
creating commitment at village 
level to mini-grid development  as 
well as conduct additional surveys 
to collect further detailed gender 
disaggregated data such as 
women headed households in the 
three project sites, baselines of 
women’s organizations, women 
lead enterprises, women farmer 
The project will start a process 
of strengthening capacities 
across communities, 
agricultural cooperatives, self-
help groups and community 
development councils to 
address the characteristics, 
economics, business models 
and financial instruments used 
for rural and renewable 
energy while an all-
encompassing and multi-
stakeholder targeted national 
level campaign on RE is 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
conduct a capacity needs 
assessment and to develop a 
suitable training package  
• 
Organize workshops for capacity 
building of relevant community 
stakeholders on productive use 
potential and community 
contributions to identified mini-
grids for investment design 
reports 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
develop a communication 
campaign to raise awareness for 
the social and economic benefits 
of renewable energy mini-grids 
 
 
• 
Capacity needs 
assessment 
conducted and 
suitable training 
package developed 
• 
Workshops 
organized for 
capacity building of 
relevant community 
stakeholders on 
productive use 
potential and 
community

=== PAGE 55 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
cooperatives and specific data on 
female youth and elderly. 
 
2.2.2 Support relevant community 
stakeholders identified for 
consultation during development 
of investment design reports, 
including to discuss potential 
contributions from the community 
by means of land, labor or 
resources. Build capacities of 
local enterprises on productive 
use potential and importance of a 
fee-for-service in order to keep 
the mini-grids operational. 
Organise training on basic 
business operations and added 
value creation for existing 
enterprises by using electricity 
from the mini-grids. Support local 
enterprises in accessing micro-
finance to invest in technology 
that can create added value to 
existing businesses. 
 
2.2.3 Organise a communication 
campaign to raise awareness for 
the social and economic benefits 
of renewable energy mini-grids  
 
expected to help overall 
understanding of the sector.  
 
The development of a suitable 
capacity building package will 
be informed by an 
assessment to identify present 
local business and other 
relevant players in the 
communities that are served 
by the 3 solar mini-grids that 
are important for creating 
commitment at village level to 
mini-grid development.. 
contributions to 
identified mini-grids 
for investment 
design reports 
• 
Communication 
campaign 
developed to raise 
awareness for the 
social and 
economic benefits 
of renewable 
energy mini-grids 
 
Activity 2.3 Capacity strengthening activities designed and delivered for private sector on designing, 
operating and maintaining mini-grids and maintaining mini-grids as well as incentivizing productive 
use aimed at increasing resilience 
 
2.3.1 Conduct capacity needs 
assessment of private sector 
players to map the gaps on 
design, installation, operation, 
planning and finance of off-grid 
RE systems 
2.3.2 Engage with relevant 
stakeholders to establish RESCO 
model and develop a RESCO 
model that serves the conditions 
for mini-grid development in 
Afghanistan. 
2.3.3 Technical training designed 
and delivered for private sector 
players and energy service 
companies/RESCOs on various 
aspects of rural RE electrification: 
design, installation, resource and 
least-cost assessment, supply 
and demand analysis, payment 
systems, design and planning of 
productive uses, RESCO models, 
voluntary certification guidelines 
for RE service providers, 
formulation of feasibility studies 
and bankable proposals 
The project will set up 
Renewable Energy Service 
Companies (RESCOs) who 
will be trained to be able to 
operate and maintain the 
equipment of a mini-grid and 
to collect a fee-for-service. 
RESCOs will be selected 
through a solicitation and due 
diligence process and would 
be organised into a RESCO 
networking platform. Capacity 
building of the private sector 
will focus on technical training 
for RE developers and RE 
service providers on various 
aspects of rural RE mini-grids 
such as system design and 
installation (resource 
assessment, supply and 
demand analysis, design, 
installation considering the 
technical standards, 
guidelines and regulations 
developed under Output 1). 
On the financial side, capacity 
building will address mini-grid 
and RE system governance 
and business models, 
including financing options, 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
conduct a capacity needs 
assessment and to develop a 
suitable training package  
• 
Set up a local expert panel and 
procure expertise to establish a 
RESCO model that serves the 
conditions for mini-grid 
development in Afghanistan 
• 
Organize workshops for capacity 
building of for private sector 
players and energy service 
companies/RESCOs on various 
aspects of rural RE 
electrification: design, 
installation, resource and least-
cost assessment, supply and 
demand analysis, payment 
systems, design and planning of 
productive uses, RESCO 
models, voluntary certification 
guidelines for RE service 
providers, formulation of 
feasibility studies and bankable 
proposal 
• 
Set up a RESCO networking 
platform 
• 
Set up a local expert panel and 
procure expertise to establish 
voluntary certification of RE 
technology installers and rural 
 
• 
Capacity needs 
assessment 
conducted and 
suitable training 
package developed 
• 
Local expert panel 
set up and RESCO 
model established 
that serves the 
conditions for mini-
grid development in 
Afghanistan 
• 
Workshops 
organized for 
capacity building of 
for private sector 
players and energy 
service 
companies/RESCO
s on various aspects 
of rural RE 
electrification:  
• 
RESCO networking 
platform set up 
• 
Local expert panel 
set up and voluntary 
certification 
established of RE 
technology installers

=== PAGE 56 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
2.3.4 Create a RESCO 
networking platform to exchange 
good practices and learning 
(including financing of mini-grids). 
2.3.5  Develop guidelines for the 
voluntary certification of RE 
technology installers and rural 
energy service companies 
(RESCOs), managed by the RE 
industry itself  
 
administration and tariff 
setting (revenues at least 
covering operating costs 
including salaries, loan 
payments, and repair and 
maintenance) and the role of 
productive uses. Finally, 
training of local technicians for 
O&M of solar PV and 
hydropower mini-grids as well 
as operators’ and 
administrators’ manuals in 
local languages will be part of 
this activity.  
energy service companies 
(RESCOs), managed by the RE 
industry itself 
and rural energy 
service companies 
(RESCOs), 
managed by the RE 
industry itself 
 
Activity 3.1 Construction of 3 greenfield solar mini-grids (2.6 MW in total) 
3.1.1: Organization of tender 
processes to appoint the 
construction contractor(s) and the 
mini-grid operator(s), and to 
procure equipment, according to 
international best practices. 
3.1.2: Negotiation and signing of 
mini-grid legal and regulatory 
agreements, including the 
outsourcing agreement with 
operator (including competitive 
pricing and KPIs aimed at 
ensuring adequate service 
quality) and a regulatory 
agreement with MRRD mirroring, 
to the extent possible, those 
typical of energy PPPs. The 
regulatory agreement will also 
stipulate the treatment of excess 
cashflows and related MRRD 
obligations by means of an 
escrow account. 
3.1.3: Implementation and 
supervision of mini-grid 
construction to ensure it is on 
time, on budget and in 
compliance with technical 
specifications prescribed to the 
contractor.  
3.1.4: Monitoring and evaluation 
of mini-grid performance, 
including collection of data and 
evidence (e.g. regarding tariff 
collection, service quality, 
compliance with budget, 
unforeseen risks and lessons 
learnt) to feed into the knowledge 
platform 
The project will use the 
technical designs available for 
3 solar mini-grids in Khost, 
Kandahar and Parwan 
province as a basis for 
procuring services needed to 
implement the 3 greenfield 
solar mini-grids. This will 
include organizing the tender 
processes, drafting the 
necessary legal agreements, 
setting up the agreements for 
outsourcing operation and 
maintenance to RESCOs. 
Once procurement is finalized, 
the project will closely 
supervise and monitor 
implementation of the mini-
grids as well as monitor the 
results of the mini-grid in 
terms of technical 
performance but also in terms 
of social and economic 
impact. All monitoring results 
and impact evaluation will 
feed into the knowledge 
platform being developed 
under Activity 3.2.  
• Procurement of expertise to 
develop procurement packages on 
the basis of technical designs of 3 
solar mini-grids, containing all the 
design information plus preparation 
of the special conditions of contract 
for the implementation or selection 
of construction contractor for the 
project 
• Procurement of expertise services 
to construct solar mini-grid 
Kandahar 
• Procurement of expertise services 
to construct solar mini-grid Parwan 
• Procurement of expertise services 
to construct solar mini-grid Khost 
• Procurement of expertise to monitor 
and supervise implementation of 
mini-grid construction to ensure 
timely execution and quality 
assurance 
• Procurement of expertise services 
to monitor mini-grid performance 
including data collection to feed into 
the knowledge platform 
 
• Procurement packages 
developed on the basis 
of technical designs of 
3 solar mini-grids, 
containing all the 
design information plus 
preparation of the 
special conditions of 
contract for the 
implementation or 
selection of 
construction contractor 
for the project 
• Solar mini-grid 
Kandahar constructed 
and operational 
• Solar mini-grid Parwan 
constructed and 
operational 
• Solar mini-grid Khost 
constructed and 
operational 
• Monitoring and 
supervision of 
implementation of 
mini-grid construction 
in place to ensure 
timely execution and 
quality assurance 
• Mini-grid performance 
monitored including 
data collection to feed 
into the knowledge 
platform 
 
Activity 3.2 Set-up of knowledge platform 
3.2.1: Production of a detailed, 
step-by-step mini-grid 
implementation handbook for use 
by MRRD and DABS for the 
design, tendering, construction 
and operation of future mini-grids.  
3.2.2: Set-up of online knowledge 
sharing platform and materials.  
3.2.3: Development of investment 
design reports in an additional 5 
solar mini-grids sites already 
identified. The design reports will 
Using international experience 
as well as results from the 3 
solar mini-grids implemented 
in the project, an 
implementation handbook for 
the design, tendering, 
construction and operation of 
future mini-grids will be 
developed. 
 
The green procurement policy 
and safeguards standards will 
• 
Procure expertise to develop a 
step-by-step mini-grid 
implementation handbook 
• 
Procure expertise to set-up 
structure of an online knowledge 
sharing platform and materials 
• 
Procure expertise to input data 
and information on the online 
knowledge sharing platform in 
local language 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
conduct participatory mapping, 
 
. 
• 
A step-by-step mini-
grid implementation 
handbook 
developed 
• 
Structure of an 
online knowledge 
sharing platform and 
materials set up 
• 
Data and 
information on the

=== PAGE 57 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
comply with the green 
procurement and ESG guidelines 
developed under activities 3.3 and 
3.4 (see below). 
be applied to developed 
Detailed Investment Design 
Reports for 5 solar mini-grids 
at selected locations for 
distribution of electricity to the 
target population. Site 
selection was based on 
analysis of demand and 
supply patterns, potential 
loads, ability to pay for energy 
services, the national grid 
extension plan from DABS 
and a security assessment on 
the basis of UN Security Map.  
 
Pre-feasibility studies for 5 
solar mini-grids are available 
that will provide the basis for 
detailed technical designs. 
The project will thereby 
specifically look into 
opportunities for 
encouragement of productive 
use and demand-side issues 
(e.g., availability of social 
services, productive uses of 
energy in relation to 
livelihoods; roles of women 
and female household heads). 
vetting, and siting of solar mini-
grid systems in 5 pre-identified 
areas including identification of 
exact location 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
develop detailed assessment to 
support customized design of 
solar mini-grids in 5 pre-identified 
areas 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
develop Detailed Investment 
Design Reports for solar mini-
grids in 5 pre-identified areas in 
line with green procurement 
guidelines, social and 
environmental safeguards 
regulations and productive use 
perspectives 
 
online knowledge 
sharing platform 
input in local 
language 
• 
Participatory 
mapping, vetting, 
and siting of solar 
mini-grid systems in 
5 pre-identified 
areas conducted 
including 
identification of 
exact location 
• 
Detailed 
assessment 
developed to 
support customized 
design of solar mini-
grids in 5 pre-
identified areas 
• 
Detailed Investment 
Design Reports 
developed for solar 
mini-grids in 5 pre-
identified areas in 
line with green 
procurement 
guidelines, social 
and environmental 
safeguards 
regulations and 
productive use 
perspectives 
 
Activity 3.3 Green procurement policy for mini-grids developed and mainstreamed   
 
3.3.1 Conduct review of existing 
procurement regulation and 
needs assessment for 
complementary standards for 
green procurement policy for mini-
grid development 
3.3.2 Develop/update green 
procurement policy and guidelines 
for mini-grid procurement 
including manual and green 
procurement database with 
online-reporting system 
3.3.3  Organize training to build 
capacities of national entities, 
especially MEW, MRRD and 
where relevant other key 
ministries on green procurement 
guidelines for mini-grid 
development  
The project will develop a 
green procurement policy for 
mini-grids procurement to 
facilitate the use and 
purchase of most 
environmentally friendly 
services and products for 
mini-grids.  
 
The capacities of the relevant 
ministries involved in mini-grid 
procurement processes, 
especially MEW, MRRD and 
the newly established RED 
(under DABS) will be 
strengthened to be able to 
apply the green procurement 
guidelines.  
• Procure expertise services to 
review of existing procurement 
regulation and needs assessment 
for complementary standards for 
green procurement policy for mini-
grid development 
• Procure expertise services to 
develop/update green 
procurement policy and guidelines 
for mini-grid procurement 
including manual and green 
procurement database with 
online-reporting system 
• Organize workshops for capacity 
building of national entities, 
especially MEW, MRRD and 
where relevant other key 
ministries on green procurement 
guidelines for mini-grid 
development 
 
 
• Existing procurement 
regulation reviewed 
and needs 
assessment 
conducted for 
complementary 
standards for green 
procurement policy 
for mini-grid 
development 
• Green procurement 
policy 
updated/developed 
and guidelines for 
mini-grid 
procurement in place 
including manual and 
green procurement 
database with online-
reporting system 
• Workshops organized 
for capacity building of 
national entities, 
especially MEW, 
MRRD and where 
relevant other key 
ministries on green 
procurement 
guidelines for mini-
grid development 
Activity 3.4 Social and environmental safeguards policy for mini-grids developed and mainstreamed

=== PAGE 58 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
3.4.1 Conduct review of existing 
social and environmental 
safeguards standards and needs 
assessment for complementary 
standards for mini-grid 
development 
 
3.4.2 Develop/update standards 
related to social safeguards and 
environmental sustainability of 
mini-grids (recycling of 
components at end-of-life, social 
and environmental considerations 
of mini-grid location and mini-grid 
construction, ensuring minimal 
impact on river flora and fauna). 
3.4.3 Develop a grievance 
redress mechanism related to 
social and environmental 
safeguards regulations for mini-
grid development 
3.4.4 Design and conduct 
trainings for national and local 
government entities such as 
MEW, MRRD and other key 
ministries and provincial 
governments on social and 
environmental safeguards for 
mini-grid development 
In order to mitigate any 
potential environmental and 
social impact of mini-grid 
development, the project 
foresees in the development 
of standards related to social 
safeguards and environmental 
sustainability of mini-grids. 
Such regulatory instruments 
should also provide 
safeguards and balance the 
interests of the village energy 
users and the rural energy 
service provider and lay out 
the principles which 
encourage long term service 
delivery and specify 
mechanisms to resolve and 
redress conflicts. 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
review of existing social and 
environmental safeguards 
standards and needs 
assessment for complementary 
standards for mini-grid 
development 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
develop/update standards 
related to social safeguards and 
environmental sustainability of 
mini-grids 
• 
Procure expertise services to 
develop a grievance redress 
mechanism related to social and 
environmental safeguards 
regulations for mini-grid 
development 
• 
Organize workshops for capacity 
building of national entities, such 
as MEW, MRRD and other key 
ministries and provincial 
governments on social and 
environmental safeguards for 
mini-grid development 
 
• 
Existing social and 
environmental 
safeguards 
standards reviewed 
and needs 
assessment for 
complementary 
standards for mini-
grid development 
• 
Standards related to 
social safeguards 
and environmental 
sustainability of 
mini-grids 
developed/updated 
• 
Grievance redress 
mechanism 
developed related to 
social and 
environmental 
safeguards 
regulations for mini-
grid development 
• 
Workshops 
organized for 
capacity building of 
national entities, 
such as MEW, 
MRRD and other key 
ministries and 
provincial 
governments on 
social and 
environmental 
safeguards for mini-
grid development 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Besides the arrangements (e.g. annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please give a summary of the 
project/programme specific arrangements for monitoring and evaluation. Please provide the types of interim 
and final evaluations. Describe Accredited Entity (AE) project reporting relationships, including to the 
NDA/Focal Point and between AE and Executing Entity (EE) as relevant, identifying reporting obligations from 
the EE to the AE. This should relate to the frequency of reporting on project indicators, implementation 
challenges and financial status. 
149. Project-level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the 
UNDP Evaluation Policy. The primary responsibility for day-to-day project monitoring and implementation 
rests with the Project Manager, supported by a highly experienced and qualified international Chief 
Technical Advisor (CTA). The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient 
implementation of the project. The Project Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country 
Office of any delays or difficulties during implementation, including the implementation of the Monitoring & 
Evaluation (M&E) plan, so that the appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. The 
Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility 
and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results. 
150. 
The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual 
supervision missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project-level M&E 
requirements as outlined in the UNDP POPP. Additional M&E, implementation quality assurance, and 
troubleshooting support will be provided by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project 
target groups and stakeholders including the NDA Focal Point will be involved as much as possible in 
project-level M&E.  
151. 
A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document has been signed by all 
relevant parties to: a) re-orient project stakeholders on the project strategy and discuss any changes in the 
overall context that influence project implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project 
team, including reporting and communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the

=== PAGE 59 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
results framework, re-assess baselines as needed, and discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles 
and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; d) review financial reporting procedures and mandatory 
requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; e) plan and schedule Project Board 
meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project Manager will prepare the inception report 
no later than one month after the inception workshop. The final inception report will be cleared by the 
UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor, and will be approved by the Project 
Board.  
152. 
A project implementation report (PIR) will be prepared for each year of project implementation. The 
Project Manager, the UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide 
objective input to the annual PIR. The Project Manager will ensure that the indicators included in the 
project results framework are monitored annually well in advance of the PIR submission deadline and will 
objectively report progress in the Development Objective tab of the PIR. The annual PIR will be shared 
with the Project Board and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office will coordinate the input of the 
NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR. The quality rating of the previous year’s PIR will be 
used to inform the preparation of the next PIR. The final project PIR, along with the terminal evaluation 
report and corresponding management response, will serve as the final project report package.  
153. 
An independent mid-term review (MTR) process will be undertaken and the findings and responses 
outlined in the management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced 
implementation during the final half of the project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review process 
and the final MTR report will follow the standard templates and guidance available on the UNDP 
Evaluation Resource Centre. The final MTR report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the 
UNDP Regional Technical Advisor, and will be approved by the Project Board. The final MTR report will be 
available in English. An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months 
prior to operational closure of the project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE 
report will follow the standard templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource 
Centre. The final TE report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical 
Advisor, and will be approved by the Project Board. The TE report will be available in English. The UNDP 
Country Office will include the planned project terminal evaluation in the UNDP Country Office evaluation 
plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the management response to the 
public UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) (erc.undp.org). The MTR and TE will be carried out by an 
independent evaluator. The evaluation report prepared by the independent evaluator is then quality 
assessed and rated by the UNDP Independent Evaluation Office.  
154. 
The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project 
financial closure in order to support ex-post evaluations. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and 
evaluation plan will be included in the UNDP project document.  
155. 
UNDP will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the Reporting Period, including semi-annual 
reporting, in accordance with the AMA and Funded Activity Agreement (FAA). UNDP has country 
presence and capacity to perform such functions. In the event of any additional post-implementation 
obligations over and above the AMA, UNDP will discuss and agree these with the GCF Secretariat in in 
the final year of the project and will prepare a post-implementation monitoring plan and budget for 
approval by the GCF Board as necessary

=== PAGE 60 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Possible delays in project implementation due to major disasters, political unrest or a deteriorating security situation. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
UNDP manages a US$1 billion portfolio in Afghanistan with activities in every province. Over the past 15 years, 
UNDP has developed business continuity and contingency plans to respond to the eventuality of a worsening security 
environment. In selecting project sites for this intervention, the province-level security risk was one of the key 
selection criteria. Provinces with a ‘high’ security risk profile were not considered for project interventions. Security 
risk was mitigated through the site selection process for mini-grids where short-listed districts were screened through 
a security assessment on the basis of the UN Security Map and categorized as ‘high’ and ‘low’. Only sites with ‘low’ 
security risk profile are considered for mini-grid development. The project will also engage in coordinated planning 
with the local Government. The security situation in the selected districts will be monitored closely and if necessary, 
project activities will be shifted to more secure areas. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Mini-grid policies and regulations are not a priority for Government. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Rural energy access is a priority for the Government of Afghanistan. The Afghanistan National Development Strategy 
(ANDS) and the Rural Energy Roadmap 2032 85 emphasize that the overall policy focus for rural areas should be the 
expansion of rural energy and electricity services. Rural energy access is also a key focus of the Agriculture and 
Rural Development Cluster of the National Priority Programmes. Through its active engagement in the SE4ALL 
process, the Government has shown that it is committed to providing an enabling environment, including the required 
policies and regulations. Nonetheless, UNDP and the project management unit (PMU) will actively engage with 
MRRD and other Government agencies from the outset to create awareness, provide advice and facilitate legislation. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Commitment and participation by the private sector in energy service operations is weak. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will create the necessary conditions to incentivize and attract private sector interest and participation in 
mini-grid development and energy service operations. Experience from other countries has shown that this can lead 
to increased private sector confidence, which in turn can lead to increased investment and systems that can be 
replicated with the private sector contributing to capital investment. By creating this type of demand that can be met 
by local supply, the project provides the next critical link in transforming Afghanistan’s energy sector from grant-based 
 
85 Renewable Energy Roadmap 2032 (RER2032), March 2017

=== PAGE 61 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
models to private sector-led growth. At the same time, MRRD and the PMU will raise awareness about partnership 
opportunities and directly engage with prospective partners to strengthen policy, regulatory and financial support in 
order to mitigate operational and business risks.  
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Limited human resources and capacity in government at national and sub-national levels delay project activities. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Output 1 focuses on strengthening institutional and local capacity to design and implement RE mini- grid projects 
while Output 2 involves targeted capacity building of government institutions, energy and non-energy institutions at 
both the national and sub-national level including community development councils. With these measures, it is 
expected that the human resource capacity in Government ministries and agencies will be sufficient to ensure 
successful implementation of project activities. Efforts will also be made to ensure that the PMU is adequately 
resourced including the securing of positions to be recruited for key technical support, notably the Chief Technical 
Advisor. Furthermore, the governance arrangement for the project will include a Technical Advisory Team consisting 
of technical level staff from all Ministries, as well as the private sector and civil society. It will provide a platform to 
exchange information and discuss project outputs at a technical and working level. Finally, the project will closely 
monitor progress to identify any limitations or gaps in a timely manner and allow for alternative arrangements to be 
implemented.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Energy industry in Afghanistan unable to support project needs. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The targeted capacity building of mini-grid RESCOs and other energy sector stakeholders will build the capacity of 
the energy industry to support the high-tech, high quality equipment envisaged under the project for implementation 
of mini-grids after the project ends. In addition, a networking platform will be developed to share knowledge in order 
to create capacity at scale. Finally, the PMU will establish technical standards and implement a quality- and cost-
based procurement system and will employ a supplier rating system. 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Project interventions are not implemented in a gender- and culturally-sensitive manner. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Steps will be taken to ensure that the project team is sensitized to gender and cultural sensitivities. Project 
implementation will closely involve Civil Society, NGOs and traditional authority structures to ensure the gender and 
cultural sensitivity of project interventions. In addition, the project will implement the recommendations put forward in 
the gender action plan. It will involve women cooperatives, which provide income generation opportunities to its 
members, have a positive effect on the empowerment of women including a boosted role in household decision-
making as well as an elevation in social status. 
Selected Risk Factor 7

=== PAGE 62 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Project interventions are subject to fraud, corruption or money-laundering 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
UNDP uses the UNDP Policy against Fraud and other Corrupt Practices86 as a basis for all its interventions. The 
policy applies to all activities and operations of UNDP, including UNDP-funded programmes and projects, services 
provided by UNDP to other organisations and management service agreements. The policy is based on the principle 
of zero-tolerance for fraud or corruption. meaning that UNDP staff members, non-staff personnel, vendors, 
implementing partners and responsible parties are not to engage in fraud or corruption. In case of any suspected 
event of fraud and corruption, this will be reported, assessed and, as appropriate, investigated in accordance with the 
Investigation Guidelines of the UNDP Office of Audit and Investigations (OAI) and the UNDP Legal Framework for 
Addressing Non-compliance with UN Standards of Conduct (“UNDP Legal Framework”), when applicable. UNDP will 
pursue rigorously disciplinary and other actions against perpetrators of fraud, including recovery of financial loss 
suffered by UNDP. In conducting due diligence in selecting project partners, UNDP makes use of the Harmonised 
Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) mechanism, which dictates policies and procedures for capacity assessment, 
cash transfer modality, audit, assurance and monitoring. HACT applies to government and civil society 
organization/non-governmental organization (CSO/NGO) participation in UNDP projects and is performed 
before an entity can be engaged as an Implementing Partner (IP) or Responsible Party (RP) on a UNDP 
project, The results of the HACT assessment determine the selection of the cash transfer modality used for 
each IP or RP and the level of assurance activities used, which is why in the case of MRRD the Direct 
Payment Modality was chosen where no funds are transferred to the Implementing Partner and all payments 
will be done by UNDP to vendors directly. The UNDP Policy against Fraud and other Corrupt Practices and 
the HACT assessment ensure that the probability of project interventions being subject to fraud or corruption 
will be low.  
Selected Risk Factor 8 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Risk of Escrow mechanism not being adhered to; use of funds in escrow account for purposes other than battery 
replacement / reinvestment as stated in FP 
Mitigation Measures 
UNDP will ensure that the escrow account will be set up  as part of the project implementation to ensure that 
withdrawals from the fund can only take place at the occasion of a “trigger event”, in this case at first instance the 
payment for battery replacement in year 15. Trigger events will be defined and can only consist of investments 
related to battery replacement for the 3 mini-grids in the project until year 15. After year 15, trigger events can be the 
development of new mini-grids designs (e.g. funding technical studies), updated handbook for mini-grid development 
or further support to the knowledge sharing platform and materials87.The escrow account will be set up such that it 
cannot contribute to capital investment in additional mini-grids but can only be spent on investments in the public 
goods domain.  
 
86 UNDP policy against Fraud and other Corrupt Practices: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/documents/about/transparencydocs/UNDP_Anti-fraud_Policy_English_FINAL.pdf  
87 Given that the financial analysis shows a net cash flow from year 15 to 25 of 2.93 mln$ (see Annex IIIb), this can be 
attributed for 14 additional mini-grid designs (200 k$ each) and development of an updated mini-grid handbook.

=== PAGE 63 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
156. 
An Environmental and Social Safeguards Screening (SESP) was conducted (See Annex) which categorized 
the project as Medium Risk due to potential risks related to land use for mini-grids, potential waste resulting 
from mini-grids and potentially adverse impacts on gender equality. 
157. 
This project has completed an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), resulting in an 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (see Environmental and Social Assessment Report, 
including ESIA and ESMP, attached as Annex VI (b)). This assessment was undertaken to ensure that the 
proposed project complies with UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards. UNDP’s Social and 
Environmental Standards were reviewed by the GCF accreditation panel and deemed sufficient to accredit 
UNDP to submit low and medium risk projects. Based on the ESIA, the overall social and environmental risk 
category for this project is Medium. It is unlikely that the project will have any medium to long term and/or 
irreversible impacts, and potentially moderate risks associated with the proposed construction of mini-grid 
structures can be sufficiently managed. There are several key factors that determine that this project is 
classified as a Category B (or Moderate Risk) project:  
• 
Two of the three PV systems proposed for implementation will be located on public land with bare soil or 
marginal rangeland vegetation. One of the sites is on irrigated arable land, which is privately used and will 
be acquired by MRRD with respective compensation paid to the current owner/user. 
• 
Land clearing for the construction of solar mini-grids is considered minimal by area and intensity of impact 
and will not cause significant permanent loss of vegetation. None of the project sites are located in 
proximity to important archaeological or other type of cultural heritage site. 
• 
The electricity distribution lines in the currently planned design would cause a high risk of electrocution of 
birds including of globally threatened species. This risk has to be mitigated by constructing all distribution 
lines in a bird-safe design, which would also become part of the technical standards and designs 
developed under Activity 1.2 and will also be the standard for the 5 mini-grid investment designs under 
Activity 3.2.  
• 
There is a risk of hazardous waste during operation from used batteries of photovoltaic systems, 
including lead carbon batteries. This risk will be mitigated by maintenance contracts for future 
replacement of system parts to include the safe removal, disposal and recycling of changed elements in 
accordance to environmental standards and regulations. 
158. 
Appropriate and relevant avoidance and mitigation options are required following the ESAR, which will 
significantly reduce the potential impacts of the project to an acceptable level. Moreover, the project will have 
significant environmental and social benefits that will be achieved more generally. Neither individual nor 
community livelihoods will be negatively altered by the project, but the access to electricity from alternative 
sources will improve the livelihoods of the target groups, while future expansion and replication will benefit 
more people. There are no indigenous peoples located within the project areas. 
159. 
The end result will be that there will be avoided negative impacts on environment (in particular on bird 
populations and from hazardous waste) and stronger and improved resilience to the impacts of climate 
change, healthy ecosystems, more knowledgeable communities and overall improvement in the quality of life 
of the population as an investment in the future of the people of rural areas of Afghanistan. The project has a 
high replication potential and the avoidance and mitigation activities proposed in this ESAR and ESMP can 
be implemented in similar situations. The required design changes for making medium voltage (MV) 
distribution lines bird-safe should be used for the revision of the standards on such lines to mitigate this 
substantial threat to bird populations, including migratory bird populations and endangered species, all over 
the country. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
160. 
The gender analysis undertaken at the onset and design of this project acts as an entry point for gender 
mainstreaming throughout implementation. It is important to note that in order to create transformational 
change, women are not just seen as climate change victims or beneficiaries. Women are imperative to 
climate change adaptation efforts. They practice adaptive measures as a part of daily life – through farming 
and in the face of increasing risks – through disaster recovery and preparation. By utilizing these existing 
skills into project design and implementation and by providing a platform in which to empower women

=== PAGE 64 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 60 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
enables women’s influence to rise from a household to a community and national level. Leadership and 
decision‐making capacities and opportunities increase. Women from the poorest households often pay the 
most, sacrifice the most, are the most disadvantaged and the least resilient. 
161. 
 Women are impacted differently by climate change in the following ways: 
• 
Women rely more on natural resources for their livelihoods, with staple crops providing up to 90 percent 
of food in farming districts of some countries and 60–80 percent of food in most developing countries. 
Women struggle to fulfill their key responsibility for the production of food, in spite of the detrimental 
impacts of climate change on agriculture. 
• 
Women and children are often responsible for gathering water and fuel in traditional agrarian societies, 
tasks that are laborious, challenging and time consuming. These tasks become more time intensive due 
to the impact of climate change; 
• 
Climate change is linked to increased incidences of tropical diseases such as cholera and malaria, 
which have severe impacts on women because of their limited access to medical services and their 
responsibility to care for the sick; 
• 
In some societies more women are dying during natural disasters because men receive preferential 
treatment in rescue and relief efforts; 
• 
Women are disproportionately affected due to vulnerability and the capacity to adapt to the process of 
climate change are affected by various factors, including age, education, social status, wealth, access to 
resources, sex, gender and many other social dimensions; 
• 
In addition, at the time of crisis, women’s needs are not considered priority in recovery programs. 
 
162. 
The project is designed to enhance the development of women. Access to energy is an intervention that has 
proven to contribute to economic empowerment of women. This proposal identifies and integrates 
interventions to provide gender responsive and transformative results. The project will take into consideration 
the following gender implications: 
• 
Women’s access to, and control over, natural resources and the goods and services that they provide 
(Increasing women’s access to and control over resources, improves the effectiveness of such projects); 
• 
Possibilities and potential of women participation in Rural Energy Service Companies (RESCOs);  
• 
Identification of gaps in equality through the use of sex‐disaggregated data enabling development of 
gender action plan to close those gaps, devoting resources and expertise for implementing such 
strategies, monitoring the results of implementation, and holding individuals and institutions accountable 
for outcomes that promote gender equality; 
• 
Assess how gender is currently mainstreaming in the energy sector, to develop need assessments, 
enable planning, and be effective in monitoring and evaluation; 
• 
Involve women and men both at macro and micro level in climate resilience process; 
• 
Evaluation of women’s work time, both as paid and unpaid; 
• 
Gather data on the time women spent collecting biomass fuel;  
• 
 Identify specific strategies to include / target female‐headed households; and 
• 
Promote advocacy and awareness adjusted to most effectively reflect gender‐specific differences. 
Strategies used in the project are tailored, taking into account such differences; 
• 
Division of labor on small farms, taking into consideration gender specific views on management; 
• 
Inclusion of a Gender Specialist position within the project to implement gender related activities; 
• 
Inclusion of all stakeholders involved in the project to develop awareness raising / training aimed at 
drawing attention to the implication of climate resilience adaptation and gender equality; 
• 
Targeting women agricultural cooperatives; and 
• 
Undertaking community discussions and dialogue in relation to gender and climate resilience and 
adaptation strategies with the inclusion of indigenous knowledge. 
163. 
A gender assessment was undertaken to provide an overview of the gender situation in Afghanistan, with a 
specific focus on climate change resilience, and identify gender issues that are relevant to the proposed 
‘Afghanistan rural energy market transformation initiative - Strengthening resilience of livelihoods through 
sustainable energy access’ project, while examining potential gender mainstreaming opportunities. On the 
basis of analysis of the gender dimension along political, social and cultural domains in Afghanistan, gender 
mainstreaming activities for the project are described in the gender action plan (Annex VIII).  
164. 
On the basis of the Gender Action Plan, the project is aiming to achieve the following results in advancing 
gender equality and women’s empowerment: 
 - Increased entrepreneurship opportunities for women among the communities in the three sites for solar

=== PAGE 65 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 61 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
mini-grid implementation, resulting from capacity building on productive use of energy 
 - Improved understanding and best practices in delivering gender responsive renewable energy services and 
rural mini-grid development in the target areas 
 - Increased women’s technical expertise in the area of renewable energy in general, and mini-grid 
development specifically, at national level as a result of capacity building activities 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
165. 
The financial management and procurement of this project will be subject to UNDP financial rules and 
regulations available online88. Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of 
the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP), also available from UNDP’s 
website89 UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and 
Procurement’ section of UNDP’s POPP. The policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelines 
across each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP90.  
166. 
The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following publicly-
available NIM guidelines91.  UNDP has ascertained the national capacities of the implementing partner, 
MRRD, by undertaking an evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to 
Implementing Partners (part of the Harmonised Approach to Cash Transfers - HACT) and has determined 
that they are sufficient to implement the project. All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules 
and regulations noted above and applicable audit guidelines and policies.   
167. 
The NIM Guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures, as set out in the UNDP 
Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP) which are also publicly available online92. The 
NIM Guidelines were corporately developed and adopted by UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s 
procurement and financial management rules and regulations.  
168. 
The national executing entity Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) - also referred to as 
the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology - is required to implement the project in compliance 
with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures (including the NIM Guidelines). In legal terms, this 
is ensured through the national Government’s signature of the UNDP Standard Technical Assistance 
Agreement (STAA), together with a UNDP project document which will be signed by the Implementing 
Partner to govern the use of the funds. Both of these documents require compliance. Prior to signature of the 
project document, all national Implementing Partners need to have undergone a HACT assessment by UNDP 
to assess capacities to implement the project. During implementation, UNDP will provide oversight and 
quality assurance in accordance with its policies and procedures, and any specific requirements in the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed with the GCF. This may 
include, but not limited to, monitoring missions, spot checks, facilitation and participation in Project Board 
meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, and audits at project level on the resources 
received from UNDP. 
169. 
The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) framework consists of four processes: (1) macro 
assessments; (2) micro assessments; (3) cash transfers and disbursements; and (4) assurance activities. 
Assurance activities include planning, periodic on-site reviews (spot checks), programmatic monitoring, 
scheduled audits and special audits. During micro-assessment, there can be weaknesses identified for which 
actions are required to addresses the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addressed it will 
mean that the level of assurance activities will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that 
implementing partner will have to be reviewed if necessary.93 
170. 
On the basis of the HACT assessment conducted for MRRD, showing that the area of Procurement activities 
has significant risk, the Direct Payment Modality has been chosen as a key risk mitigation measure. Direct 
payment refers to the arrangement where payments are made directly by UNDP to vendors and other third 
parties providing goods or services for agreed upon programme activities on behalf of the implementing 
partner upon request and following completion of the activities. Under this modality, the Executing Entity 
(/Implementing Partner (IP)) is responsible/accountable for the project expenses and carries out the 
 
88 http://web.undp.org/execbrd/pdf/UNDPFinRegsRules.pdf 
89 https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPRoot.aspx  
90 https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPBSUnit.aspx?TermID=254a9f96-b883-476a-8ef8-e81f93a2b38d&Menu=BusinessUnit  
91 http://www.rw.undp.org/content/dam/rwanda/img/pubcovers/UNDP_RW_NIM_for_GoR.pdf  
92 https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPRoot.aspx  
93 https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=167&Menu=BusinessUnit

=== PAGE 66 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 62 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
procurement actions for procurement activities up to 500,000 Af (~ 7,000 US$), but requests UNDP to make 
the payments to vendors. For procurement activities higher than 500,000 Af (~ 7,000 US$), UNDP will also 
conduct procurement activities as well as payment to vendors. UNDP provides accounting services and 
banking services to the EE/IP. The UNDP and the Government of Afghanistan acknowledge and agree that 
those services are not mandatory and will be provided upon Government request and specified in the Letter 
of Agreement. 
171. 
In the selection of partners, the PCAT/HACT tools assess the capacity of the partner, which includes the 
assessment of whether an organisation is listed on the Consolidated United Nations Security Council 
Sanctions List, the UNDP vendor sanctions list or the UN Global Marketplace. At the level of our procurement 
processes, restrictions are built into the policy on vendor sanctions94. 
172. 
The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and 
together with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA. According to the current audit policies, UNDP will 
be appointing the auditors. UNDP scheduled audits are performed during the project cycle as per UNDP 
assurance/audit plans, on the basis of UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to determine whether 
the funds were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit 
can consist of a financial audit or an internal control audit.  
 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
  
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information. 
 
94 The vendor sanctions policy can be found here.

=== PAGE 67 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 63 OF 64 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☐ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s)  
☐ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study  
☐  Annex 3a 
Financial and Economic Analysis 
☐ 
Annex 3b 
Financial and Economic Model 
☐ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan  
☐ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones   
☐ 
Annex 6a 
Social and Environmental Screening Procedure 
☐ 
Annex 6b 
Environmental and Social Assessment Report  
☐ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☐ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and action plan 
☐ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☐ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan  
☐ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan 
☐ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request  
☐ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letters 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet  
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information  
☐ 
Annex 18a 
Appraisal Report   
☐ 
Annex 18b 
Evaluation Report of the Baseline Project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20a 
Partner Capacity Assessment Tool 
☐ 
Annex 20b 
HACT Assessments 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☐ 
Annex 22 
Responses to GCF comments on FP 
☐ 
Annex 23 
Cost Data 
☐ 
Annex 24 
Mitigation Model 
☐ 
Annex 25 
Co-financing 
☐ 
Annex 26 
AE Track Record 
☐ 
Annex 27 
Sanctions Letter

=== PAGE 68 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 64 OF 64 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
☐ 
Annex 28 
Annex Disclosure form

=== PAGE 69 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 70 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme 
title 
Afghanistan rural energy market transformation initiative - 
Strengthening resilience of livelihoods through sustainable 
energy access 
Existence of 
subproject(s) to be 
identified after GCF 
Board approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or 
location(s) of programme 
Afghanistan 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Sunday, May 3, 2020 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Dari 
Explanation on language 
Dari is an official language of Afghanistan and spoken by the 
beneficiary communities. 
Link to disclosure 
English:*  
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/afghanistan/docs/EnvEn
ergy/Environment%20and%20Social%20Assessment%20Rep
ort.pdf 
 
Dari:* 
https://www.af.undp.org/content/dam/afghanistan/docs/Env
Energy/Environment%20and%20Social%20Assessment%20R
eport%20Translation.pdf  
Other link(s) 
UNDP Afghanistan website: 
https://www.af.undp.org/content/afghanistan/en/home/libra
ry/environment_energy/Environment-and-Social-Assessment-
Report.html 
 
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) 
website: 
English: 
https://mrrd.gov.af/reports-0  
 
Dari: 
https://mrrd.gov.af/dr/%DA%AF%D8%B2%D8%A7%D8%B1
%D8%B4%E2%80%8C%D9%87%D8%A7 
 
Additional UNDP website: 
https://www.gcfprojects-undp.org/tp/project/6485

=== PAGE 71 ===
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Assessment Report (ESAR). 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Monday, May 4, 2020 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Dari 
Explanation on language 
Dari is an official language of Afghanistan and spoken by the 
beneficiary communities 
Link to disclosure 
English:*  
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/afghanistan/docs/EnvEn
ergy/Environment%20and%20Social%20Assessment%20Rep
ort.pdf 
 
Dari:* 
https://www.af.undp.org/content/dam/afghanistan/docs/Env
Energy/Environment%20and%20Social%20Assessment%20R
eport%20Translation.pdf  
Other link(s) 
UNDP Afghanistan website: 
https://www.af.undp.org/content/afghanistan/en/home/libra
ry/environment_energy/Environment-and-Social-Assessment-
Report.html 
 
MRRD website: 
English: 
https://mrrd.gov.af/reports-0  
 
Dari: 
https://mrrd.gov.af/dr/%DA%AF%D8%B2%D8%A7%D8%B1
%D8%B4%E2%80%8C%D9%87%D8%A7  
 
Additional UNDP website: 
https://www.gcfprojects-undp.org/tp/project/6485 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in Chapter 6 of the ESAR.  
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A

=== PAGE 72 ===
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Monday, May 4, 2020 
Place 
Hardcopies of the ESAR and ESMP made available at: 
UNDP Afghanistan Country Office 
P.O Box # 05
Jalalabad Road, UNOCA Complex
Kabul, Afghanistan
MRRD 
Neela bagh road, Darul Aman 
Kabul, Afghanistan 
Parwan Rural Rehabilitation and Development Directorate, 
Mostofiat street, Charikar city,  
Parwan Province 
Khost Rural Rehabilitation and Development Directorate, 
Da Ghondi Shata, Da Projee Baq street, Gardiz city,  
Khost Province 
Kandahar Rural Rehabilitation and Development Directorate, 
Aino Mina, Kandahar City,  
Kandahar Province 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board 
meeting 
Tuesday, June 23, 2020 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
*Subsequent to the disclosure of this form to the Board and active observers on 22 May 2020,
the following update has been made to the ESAR contained in these links: Annex 4 titled
“Livelihood Action Plan Framework” was added.

=== PAGE 73 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 73 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP129 
Proposal name: 
Afghanistan Rural Energy Market Transformation Initiative -  
Strengthening Resilience of Livelihoods Through Sustainable 
Energy Access 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Country/(ies): 
Afghanistan  
Project/programme size:  
Small 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The project will lay the necessary 
groundwork and pilots for the development 
of a rural mini-grid sector in Afghanistan by 
addressing key barriers for uptake through 
implementing policy strengthening and 
capacity-building activities, which include 
investment structuring and developing mini-
grid design reports to scale up renewable 
energy mini-grid development, and 
implementing three solar mini-grids to 
demonstrate potential for scaling up 
Implementation of solar mini-grids and their 
operation and maintenance will be carried 
out by public and private actors. An 
operations manual will be put in place to lay 
out responsibilities and procedures for 
sustainable operations of the mini-grids. An 
escrow account will be established to ensure 
transparency and sustainability of 
investment operations 
The project will encourage private sector 
engagement by improving enabling 
conditions and making available mini-grid 
investment design reports ready for 
implementation and scaling up 
 
The green procurement guidelines for the 
mini-grids to be developed under the project 
will ensure that future and long-term mini-
grid development in Afghanistan 
incorporates social and environmental 
considerations 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XVIII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment

=== PAGE 74 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 74 
 
 
2.1 
Project background 
3. 
Afghanistan faces severe energy shortages owing to an ailing energy infrastructure, high 
dependency on diesel and kerosene fuels, and weak power sector policy and regulatory 
frameworks. Renewable energy mini-grids are expected to play an important role in bridging 
the electricity access deficit in Afghanistan in a timely manner, while at the same time offering 
clean, low-emission energy services.  
4. 
The objective of the project is to kick-start market transformation of the rural renewable 
energy sector in Afghanistan and to create the conditions for upscaling and long-term 
sustainability of the sector through a combination of (1) policy and regulatory design, 
facilitating public and private sector financing; (2) capacity-building and awareness-raising of 
the public and private sectors and end users; and (3) investment in setting up three greenfield 
solar mini-grids and creating an “upscaling platform” to facilitate additional solar mini-grid 
investments. The upscaling platform will consist of (1) a knowledge platform, including a solar 
mini-grid practical development manual, online evidence and data sharing tools, and full 
technical studies for five additional mini-grids; (2) development and mainstreaming of green 
procurement policies for solar mini-grids; and (3) development and mainstreaming of 
environmental and social governance policies for solar mini-grids. 
5. 
The project addresses the short-, medium- and long-term vision of the Afghanistan 
renewable energy mini-grid market. It clarifies how the project will contribute to kick-start the 
market through viable demonstration pilots and by creating case studies of lessons learned in 
the country, including strengthened institutional and regulatory systems. The theory of change 
describes the foreseen medium- and long-term development, including anticipated electricity 
use for increased resilience to climate change. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Output 1: Energy Market Risk de-risked by Policy, regulatory and institutional development for 
improved renewable energy services in rural areas (total cost: USD 2.33 million; GCF cost: USD 
1.53 million, or 66 per cent) 
6. 
This output will address the development of a mini-grid policy that will institutionalize 
and support the development of renewable energy mini-grids in the country for the purpose of 
rural electrification. The mini-grid policy developed under this output will signal the 
Government of Afghanistan’s intention to encourage renewable energy in rural energy markets 
and will provide a direction for private sector participation. This will set the foundation for 
market transformation for rural renewable energy systems. The mini-grid policy will be 
developed through a consultative process by involving public sector players (namely, the 
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD), the Ministry of Energy and Water 
and Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS), the government-owned national vertically 
integrated power generation utility), beneficiaries and the private sector. 
7. 
A baseline market study analysing energy systems, actors, productive use potential, 
impacts on beneficiaries and business models, together with a DREI analysis feasibility study 
(simulation)1 on the renewable energy investment, will inform the development of the mini-
grid policy. Economic sustainability of mini-grids encompasses affordable tariffs for consumers 
while ensuring the financial viability of the project over the long term. Further analysis on 
willingness to pay for energy in rural areas, and the creditworthiness of end users, will inform 
the development of regulations that will balance financial viability and a fair tariff structure for 
mini-grids.  
 
1 A de-risking renewable energy investment (DREI) analysis.

=== PAGE 75 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 75 
Output 2: Social Acceptance Risk and Labour Risk de-risked by enhanced awareness and 
knowledge of government entities, beneficiaries and market actors in RE mini-grids (total cost: 
USD 2.27 million; GCF cost: USD 1.67 million, or 73 per cent) 
8.
The second output of the project will undertake capacity-building of institutions on the
demand side and of energy systems and services on the supply side.
9.
Regarding the supply side, this will include the ability of relevant ministries and
government institutions to extend their expertise to cover rural renewable energy mini-grids
with specific professional staff to be further trained in technical, managerial and financial
aspects of renewable energy mini-grids, thus creating capacity at scale.
10.
Regarding the demand side, this will include enhancing capacity in agricultural
cooperatives, self-help groups, community development councils, non-governmental
organizations, research organizations and public institutions to enable them to understand and
accept renewable energy systems as a means to provide energy to enhance their incomes and
other benefits.
11.
Capacity-building is particularly important for this market sector because the intention
of the project is to build the capacity private sector entities to become fully fledged actors in the
second, scale-up phase of mini-grid development immediately after this project ends. To meet
this need, private sector capacities will be built in the areas of design, installation, operations
and building maintenance skills, but also in tariff design and revenue collection mechanisms, as
well as increasing their knowledge about how to promote productive uses of energy using a
mini-grid system.
Output 3: Construction of three greenfield solar mini-grids and set-up of an “upscaling platform” to 
facilitate additional mini-grid investments (total cost: USD 15.98 million; GCF cost: USD 13.38 
million or 84 per cent) 
12.
This output will set up three greenfield solar mini-grids in the Kandahar, Parwan and
Khost provinces, resulting in a combined capacity of 2.6 MW, providing electricity to
approximately 7,800 households (49,000 people) and 1,050 small businesses. The construction
of the mini-grids will cost USD 12.4 million and will be funded by GCF with a small amount of
co-finance from MRRD and the accredited entity (AE), United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP).
13.
In addition, this output will establish an upscaling platform to facilitate the
implementation of additional mini-grids, leveraging on the knowledge and best practices
developed from the initial three mini-grids. This will consisting of (1) a knowledge platform,
including a solar mini-grid practical development manual, online evidence and data sharing
tools, and full technical studies for five additional mini-grids; (2) development and
mainstreaming of green procurement policies for solar mini-grids; and (3) development and
mainstreaming of environmental and social governance policies for solar mini-grids. Ultimately,
the project aims to contribute, in a phased approach, to a large volume of solar mini-grid
development in Afghanistan and – with the long-term improvement in macroeconomic and
security conditions – the eventual involvement of private investment in the sector.
Project management (total cost: USD 806,719; GCF cost: USD 606,719 or 75 per cent) 
14. 
The project will be implemented by UNDP through its national implementation modality 
(NIM), and UNDP will provide oversight and quality assurance of project deliverables through 
its headquarters, regional and country offices. UNDP will hire dedicated project staff at the sites 
to deliver outputs and administrative, operational and financial support. Direct payments to 
vendors and other third parties will be made by UNDP for goods and services procured under 
the project.

=== PAGE 76 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 76 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria
3.1 
Impact potential 
Scale: Medium–high 
15.
Given the relatively nascent stage of the rural energy market in Afghanistan, the
proposed three solar mini-grids will, when implemented, deliver a mitigation potential of
173,179 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) over their 25-year lifespan. The project
will therefore contribute to a lower greenhouse gas emission trajectory, fostering a pioneering
spirit in the country that struggles with access to reliable and cost-effective renewable sources
of energy for its dispersed rural population. The needs of 49,000 beneficiaries (of which 23,500
are women) will be addressed alongside 12 schools and approximately 1,050 small businesses.
In most cases the renewably sourced electricity will replace and/or avoid usage of diesel fuel
and in some cases kerosene.
16.
The project will also prepare designs for five additional mini-grids as part of Activity 3.2,
which are expected to be implemented after the GCF project is complete and have additional
mitigation potential of 379,746 tCO2eq (these estimates are not included in the specific CO2
emission reductions calculation for this funding proposal).
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential   
 Scale: High 
17.
The project is specifically designed to act as a catalyst in the nascent enabling
environment for the rural energy sector in Afghanistan; in particular, for replication and scaling
up by (1) providing policy de-risking for mainstreaming mini-grids; (2) providing a platform for
private sector engagement through training and supporting private sector renewable energy
services companies and a Rural Electrification Department; (3) supporting technical and
commercial packages of interventions; (4) developing a track record of mini-grid designs ready
for procurement or tendering; (5) implementing three proof-of-concept solar mini-grids; and
(6) necessary capacity-building among public, private and community groups for effective
management of technology. Taken together, these factors will enable a transformational shift to
clean energy delivery in rural areas explicitly linked to improving climate resilience and
establishing a low-carbon model of economic development.
3.3 
Sustainable development potential 
Scale: High 
18.
Economic co-benefits. The three solar mini-grids, once implemented, will result in the
employment of 29 staff hired by the mini-grid operators during the 25-year project lifespan.
Importantly, the mini-grids will provide reliable electricity to over 1,050 small enterprises,
contributing to business continuity and local economic growth. Livelihoods will also be
catalysed in agriculture, farm-based and off-farm livelihood options across rural communities
targeted by the project intervention.
19.
Social and environmental benefits. The introduction of cleaner energy sources
replacing diesel- and kerosene-generated electricity/light and heating sources will contribute to
a reduction of exposure to air pollution. Electrification of health clinics allows the provision of
medical services at night and allows, inter alia, local clinics to use cooling facilities, including
cold storage for medical supplies. An environmental and social safeguards screening exercise
categorized the project as medium risk because of the potential risks related to land use for
mini-grids, potential waste resulting from mini-grids and potentially adverse impacts on gender
equality.
20.
Gender-sensitive development. Women represent 47 per cent of direct beneficiaries
for the three mini-grids implemented by the project and a similar percentage can be expected in

=== PAGE 77 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 77 
 
 
the follow up for the five mini-grids beyond the scope of this GCF project, as designed under 
Activity 3.2. The current project intervention is designed to enhance the development of 
women. Access to energy is an intervention that is proven to contribute to the economic 
empowerment of women.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
21. 
Afghanistan is a high-risk profile country according to the National Risk and 
Vulnerability Assessment (2012). The Global Adaptation Index ranked it as one of the most 
vulnerable countries in the world in 2012, taking into account the country's exposure, 
sensitivity and ability to cope with climate-related hazards, worsened by the socio-political 
conflicts and security. Coping with the impact of climate change is a major challenge for 
development in Afghanistan, given that the negative effects of climate change are likely to be 
most severely felt by the poor and marginalized because of their high dependence on 
subsistence agriculture and limited capacity to cope with the impacts of climate variability and 
extremes. 
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
             
        Scale: High 
22. 
Development of renewable energy is one of the priority areas for low-emission 
development for Afghanistan, particularly in the context of energy access for rural communities. 
The Afghanistan CCSAP (2015) strengthens the legal and institutional framework for taking 
action on climate change in Afghanistan by adopting a balanced mix of adaptation and 
mitigation measures.  
23. 
Afghanistan submitted its intended nationally determined contribution (NDC) in 
September 2015 and converted it to an NDC in November 2016, covering energy, natural 
resources management, agriculture, waste management and mining as focus areas. The NDC 
targets a 13.6 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030; energy production using 
hydropower, solar, wind and biomass, clean cooking-cum-heating devices and clean fuels 
feature as prominent mitigation contributors. 
24. 
MRRD will be the national executing partner (implementing partner of the UNDP under 
its direct implementation modality structure). DABS, the government-owned power generation 
utility, provides electricity primarily in urban and peri-urban areas, and will take responsibility 
as the initial owner of the mini-grids up until MRRD (under DABS) has been established. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium 
25. 
The project structure combines a series of public-good activities, necessary to de-risk 
and facilitate scaling up of renewable energy mini-grids in Afghanistan. Concessionality will be 
minimized by calibrating the GCF grant for the construction of the three mini-grids to a level 
that is just about sufficient to turn an otherwise negative financial internal rate of return (IRR) 
into a positive IRR. Reflows will be managed by a dedicated committee chaired by the AE, UNDP, 
and all proceeds will be reinvested to pay for O&M and opex of the three solar mini-grids. It is 
important to note that, other than the grant contributions from GCF, MRDD and UNDP, no other 
sources of public and private finance are currently available, as verified by the AE by 
interviewing a range of potential donors and capital providers. The risk of crowding out is 
therefore absent from this project. 
26. 
In terms of efficiency and effectiveness, the GCF cost is USD 99 per tCO2eq avoided, on 
the basis of emission reductions attributed to the three solar mini-grids when fully 
implemented (173,179 tCO2eq).

=== PAGE 78 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 78 
 
 
27. 
From a financial perspective, Outputs 1 and 2 are public goods, which are appropriate 
for grant financing. Output 3 will generate financial reflows, but current conditions in 
Afghanistan preclude financing from other sources. 
28. 
From an economic perspective, the project is cost-effective, with an economic IRR of 11 
per cent, which is slightly above the social discount rate of 10 per cent. The largest benefit 
streams result from (1) additional time resulting from higher quality and more reliable energy 
supply and (2) cost savings compared with fossil energy sources, so the economic IRR could 
drop below the hurdle if energy consumption is lower than expected. 
29. 
The financial and economic analysis speak directly to GCF core indicators, theory of 
change and logical framework. Financial and technical assumptions provided in the model 
appear realistic, comprehensive and consistent across the three mini-grids. IRRs and net 
present values have been properly computed, as have the levelized cost of electricity values for 
each mini-grid, with and without concessionality. A comprehensive set of sensitivity analyses on 
both the financial and economic IRRs has been correctly articulated. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
30. 
The AE has screened the project using its Social and Environmental Screening Procedure 
(SESP) and has assessed the project to be of moderate risk equivalent to Category B. The 
Secretariat confirms the classification given the project would only involve targeted de-risking 
activities to address key mini-grid investment risks, creation of an upscaling platform to enable 
the government to manage implementation of additional solar mini-grids and investment in the 
implementation of three solar mini-grids with a combined capacity of 2.6 MW in the provinces 
of Kandahar, Parwan and Khost. 
31. 
The project has prepared an Environmental and Social Assessment Report (ESAR) which 
is consistent with the requirements for a Category B project and is disclosed both in English and 
in Dari which is an official language in Afghanistan and spoken by the beneficiary communities. 
32. 
The following summarizes the assessment of the project’s consistency to GCF’s 
environmental and social safeguards (ESS) standards and requirements: 
33. 
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts. The project has assessed the potential risks and impacts of the project, including its 
physical, biological and social aspects. The project has likewise developed the avoidance and 
mitigating measures and identified the responsible parties that will implement them. It has also 
provided for the performance criteria that needs to be monitored and reported and has 
estimated a budget to implement them. 
34. 
ESS 2: Labour and Working Conditions. The ESAR ensures compliance with 
Afghanistan labour and occupational health and safety laws consistent with the International 
Labour Organisation’s principles and standards ensuring no forms of child labour will be 
tolerated and where possible, employing local residents for all construction-related activities. 
The project will also ensure protection of the workers’ health and safety including being trained 
in occupational health and safety. 
35. 
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention. The ESAR provided for 
adequate measures for resource use efficiency and the prevention of pollution during project 
construction and operation. It has assessed the potential impacts and proposed mitigation 
measures on various environmental and social issues including impacts related to excavation 
works such as on vegetation removal and disposal of excavated soil, construction material 
storage and solid waste generation, and occupational health and safety risks. Operation of the

=== PAGE 79 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 79 
 
 
mini-grids also require management of damaged and/or used solar panels including batteries 
which may be considered hazardous. 
36. 
ESS 4: Community Health, Safety and Security. The ESAR indicated that the solar 
mini-grids will engage guards from among the local communities to ensure there is no 
unauthorized entry into the facilities that will pose risks to the community members. 
Community consultation on the purpose and benefits of planned activities will also be 
undertaken and grievance redress mechanism will be put in place to address any concerns. 
37. 
ESS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement. The project will require 26 
kilometres (km) of medium voltage (MV) and 51 km of low voltage (LV) distribution lines with 
an estimated total of almost 1,800 poles in the distribution system but with no requirements for 
private lands to be acquired as most poles will be installed on government owned, community 
used lands. The distribution poles needed for delivery to individual households may also be 
installed on lands of the neighbouring households. Current design has also not identified the 
need for widening of access roads. Nevertheless, the land user or users of the irrigated land 
needed for the PV installation in Parwan are expected to be affected economically as a result of 
land use changes caused by the project. Hence an Economic Displacement and Livelihood 
Restoration Plan (EDLRP) will be necessary for the affected households in Parwan and will have 
to be developed at the start of project implementation. 
38. 
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources. While the proposed project sites are not within or adjacent to environmentally 
sensitive areas, the ESAR indicated a high risk of electrocution for birds that would perch on the 
poles which are at risk of being affected. The ESMP has recommended interventions on the 
design of the distribution lines to consider bird safety. The ESAR further noted that “Before any 
tendering, the PMU will have to agree with Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS) on a bird-
safe design of power lines as specified above. Bird safe power lines will be a condition in the 
tendering documents for the solar mini grids”. The report also indicated that a flora and fauna 
management program will be implemented and monitored. 
39. 
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples. The AE identifies that there are no indigenous peoples in 
the project areas. While there are nomadic pastoralists in Afghanistan, the ESAR states that all 
people living permanently or seasonally (nomadic people) in the project areas, independent of 
their ethnical, religious or social affiliation, are equally involved and benefit from the project as 
far as technically possible.  
40. 
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage. The ESAR ruled out any project activities that would impact 
on cultural heritage. None of the mini-grid sites are determined to be located in areas known to 
have archaeological and/or cultural heritage values. 
41. 
Institutional arrangements and capacity building. The three solar mini grids will be 
owned by the government through the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development 
(MRRD) but will be operated and maintained by private sector developers. MRRD is responsible 
for overall oversight of the implementation of the ESMP by the Project Management Unit (PMU) 
and the contractors. The project intends to engage national consultants to provide capacity 
building to project staff and contractors and include among its training module, topics on 
environmental and social governance. Further, the project should ensure that environmental 
and social management systems are adopted by the developers to serve as framework on 
environmental and social issues during the construction and operation of the facilities. 
42. 
Stakeholder Engagement. The project has conducted intensive consultations with the 
local communities during the design of all the three mini-grids including with the Community 
Development Councils (CDCs) as well as with community members to inform them of the issues 
and potentials challenges in the development of the mini-grids. Various ministries and 
government authorities were also consulted including relevant international agencies, non-
government organizations, private sector representatives and national level and sub-regional

=== PAGE 80 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 80 
 
 
level development councils. The project also intends to conduct more detailed mapping of 
potential local beneficiaries and stakeholders to be informed of the potential environmental and 
social risks of the project and offer opportunity to raise issues and concerns that may require 
establishing appropriate management measures. 
43. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism. The AE’s entity level Grievance Redress Mechanism 
(GRM) will be implemented by the project. At the AE level, grievances shall be acted upon by the 
AE‘s focal points at country, regional and headquarters levels who will work in coordination 
with the concerned stakeholders and partners to address and resolve the concerns. At the 
activity level, the ESMP of the project further provides for a project level Grievance Redress 
Mechanism for potentially affected people and stakeholders. A safeguards officer at the PMU 
will be in charge of the GRM at the project level and ensure that local communities and other 
interested stakeholders can raise grievances at all times. In line with the GCF Indigenous 
Peoples Policy, the GCF independent Redress Mechanism and the Secretariat’s indigenous 
peoples focal point are also available for affected local communities. 
4.2 
Gender policy 
44. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the Gender Policy of the GCF. 
45. 
The gender assessment provided by the AE has described the existing enabling 
environment and conditions that support gender equality and women’s empowerment. This 
includes the ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women (CEDAW), articles in Afghanistan’s constitution guaranteeing equal rights to 
man and women, and the abolishment of the harmful practices that inhibit the well-being of 
Afghan women. Likewise, many other articles of the constitution make specific reference to 
women’s needs in education, health and political participation, including targets for women’s 
representation in parliament. Further international laws also provide a legal framework for 
protecting women. Another key national document is the National Action Plan for the Women of 
Afghanistan, a ten-year plan towards addressing gaps in gender equality and women’s rights 
and empowerment in Afghanistan; and the 2010 National Priority Programmes include 
women’s empowerment as one of the national priority programmes. 
46. 
The assessment also provides insights into the root causes and challenges that women 
face in Afghanistan. Although the policies, plans and frameworks exist to potentially improve 
the conditions of women throughout Afghanistan, implementation is a challenge. Gender 
inequality is driven by political, social and cultural dimensions. It is closely linked to poverty 
and other development challenges which are deeply rooted in sociocultural norms. Violence 
against women is a serious and widespread crisis across Afghanistan. Gender-based violence 
also intersects with issues around access to and control over natural resources. Research has 
shown that gender-differentiated roles related to land and resources can put women in a more 
vulnerable position to suffer gender-based violence while carrying out daily responsibilities, 
such as collecting fuel, firewood and water. When attempting to enter into agricultural markets, 
women can experience intimate partner violence as their partners seek to control finances and 
maintain economic dependencies. The Taliban regime had rendered women with very little to 
no freedoms and, post fall of the regime, very few or no girls were in schools, there are deficits 
of women professionals such as teachers and doctors, limited women’s participation in the 
labour force, women are missing from political activities and decision-making at all levels, 
resulting in a near complete removal of women from public life.  
47. 
The assessment indicates that women face challenges in accessing electricity and 
financing for small and medium-sized businesses. In 2014, only 17 per cent of Afghan women 
reported that their household always has access to electricity. Only 2 per cent of Afghan women 
are connected to the Internet for obtaining information, although 88 per cent of the population

=== PAGE 81 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 81 
 
 
lives within the combined network of the four largest mobile network organizations. Although 
80 per cent of women have some access to a mobile phone, six out of ten Afghan women still do 
not use mobile phones for accessing information. Small and medium-sized enterprises face 
challenges and obstacles with regard to access to finance, while women-led businesses in 
particular have difficulties acquiring loans. Commercial banks and microfinance institutions do 
offer loans, but the insurance for those loans largely relies on property or land ownership, 
which is limited for Afghan women. Historically, properties are registered by male household 
members. 
48. 
The benefits of access to electricity can dramatically cut the amount of time spent on 
household work, and considerably impact women’s time use. This frees up time for women and 
girls to participate in things like education, capacity-building and income-generating activities. 
When women became directly involved in electricity supply, they gain a new type of skill, as 
well as higher status in their households and in their communities.  
49. 
The AE has provided a gender action plan in fulfilment of the requirements of the 
Gender Policy of the GCF. The gender action plan recognizes the importance of gender 
mainstreaming throughout project interventions. The gender action plan provides details of 
activities, indicators, targets, responsible parties and timelines for completion of activities. It 
includes activities linked to the findings of the gender assessments and includes further data 
collection to establish baselines and ensure that the impact of the project on women is more 
fully understood. The project incorporates renewable energy technologies that would benefit 
women by giving them access to cleaner energy, better health and education facilities, and also 
involves and benefits women-led enterprises on the supply side of renewable energy 
development by involving women agricultural cooperatives and tailoring shops at the 
community level. Additionally, the project interventions will build the capacity of women in the 
area of renewable energy at the national level. The activities in the project are targeted towards 
increasing entrepreneurship opportunities for women and technical expertise in the area of 
renewable energy in general, and mini-grid development in particular. The project will also 
work with the religious leaders and Mullahs that are active in the three locations where solar 
mini-grids are being implemented, to raise awareness on women’s rights and opportunities that 
energy access may offer in strengthening women’s rights. Although not a direct topic in this 
project, the issue of gender-based violence may also be raised during such consultations. 
Stakeholder consultations were carried out during the development of the gender assessment 
and gender action plan and more consultations are planned during the implementation of the 
project that include women and women-based organizations. The AE will put in place a gender 
expert to support the implementation of the gender action plan.  
4.3 
Risks 
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium scale)  
50. 
The funding proposal is for grant financing of USD 17.2 million towards total project 
cost of 21.4 million. The project includes policy, regulatory and institutional development for 
improved renewable energy in rural areas; capacity development of government entities; and 
construction of three greenfield solar mini-grids. Some 70 per cent of GCF financing is towards 
the cost of three mini-grids construction.  
51. 
The mitigation impact of the project is estimated at 173,179 tCO2eq of emission 
reductions over the 25-year lifespan of the mini-grids. Achieving this impact requires a certain 
amount of capital expenditure for 15 years after the construction of the mini-grids. However, 
the AE will oversee the project only during the implementation period of five years. In the logic 
framework, the final target for GCF-level mitigation impact is 20,607 tCO2eq of emission 
reductions.

=== PAGE 82 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 82 
 
 
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current 
programme(medium scale)  
52. 
UNDP will act as AE of the project and provide co-finance amounting to USD 1 million. 
MRRD will be the executing entity (EE) for the project. The EE will co-finance USD 3.2 million 
(USD 2.2 million in-kind contribution) towards the project cost. The EE has been a partner of 
UNDP for more than a decade, since early 2002 in the country, and has implemented other 
projects with UNDP including cross-border projects. The mini-grids will be owned by MRRD and 
operated by private sector companies under simple outsourcing contracts to be selected on the 
basis of a competitive tendering process. The exact minimum eligibility criteria for the 
renewable energy services companies to be selected for the operation and maintenance aspects 
on the basis of a competitive tendering process will be determined as part of project 
implementation. 
4.3.3. 
Programme specific execution risks (high risk) 
53. 
Mini-grid operations and AE oversight. The three mini-grids will have a 25-year 
lifespan. The mini-grids will charge a residential tariff of USD 0.10/kWh and a commercial tariff 
of USD 0.20/kWh. Both tariff levels have been determined through ability-to-pay surveys 
already conducted in the target communities and are sufficient to cover the operation, 
maintenance and management costs of the mini-grids. During the operations period the mini-
grids will require further capital expenditure towards battery replacement at the end of 15 
years, which will be financed through the surplus generated by the projects. The surplus will be 
kept in an escrow account until such battery replacement expenditure is incurred. As per the 
term sheet, the AE will submit to GCF, before the second disbursement, an operational manual 
that shall outline the modalities for the management of an escrow account to be set up by the EE 
within five years from the effectiveness of the funded activity agreement. The AE has explained 
that it can only assume the responsibility of oversight over the project implementation for the 
duration of the project as indicated in the funding proposal (five years). As the actual 
withdrawal from escrow will happen after 15 years, it will not be overseen by the AE. Also, the 
AE will not report to GCF the actual capital expenditure incurred for battery replacement or the 
mitigation impact achieved beyond five years. The project may benefit if the AE does a prudent 
check on the costs of battery replacement (in year 15) and also provides oversight beyond the 
implementation period of five years.  
54. 
The project includes a component which will be generating revenue for MRRD, the 
owner of the mini-grids. However, considering the macroeconomic and fiscal situation of the 
country, the AE has proposed that the entire grant financing of the project be by grants. The 
surplus revenue generated from the operation of the mini-grids during the initial 15-year 
period will be used to pay for battery replacement, and the surplus over the life of the project 
will be used for developing new mini-grid designs, updating the handbook for mini-grid 
development or for providing further support to the knowledge-sharing platform and materials. 
The need for such investments to be financed through grants depends on the macroeconomic 
situation of the country. The AE is of the opinion that the investments to be financed through 
the surplus can be considered investments in public goods and therefore not subject to 
discussion of concessionality. 
55. 
The surplus as projected by the AE’s model is 28 per cent of the GCF capital expenditure 
grant. However, the actual surplus could be more, because of further reductions in battery costs 
over the next 15 years (e.g. the cost has reduced by 79 per cent since 2010). Thus, the project 
structure as proposed by the AE may offer concessionality in excess of that required for the 
viability of the project. GCF may mitigate this risk by offering financing through a reimbursable 
grant wherein the surplus to the extent not required by the country can flow back to GCF; and at 
the same time the country does not bear any additional debt burden.

=== PAGE 83 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 83 
 
 
4.3.4. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
56. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.5. 
Compliance risk (medium risk)  
  
57. 
The AE has conducted a harmonized approach to cash transfers assessment, which 
identifies the weaknesses and strengths of its counterparties. The AE has indicated that it has 
policies and procedures in place to handle and address any risks identified by the assessment 
and, by its own estimate, determines the relative risks to be in the lower range area. The AE has 
also confirmed that there are no issues regarding United Nations Security Council financial 
sanctions that would be of concern in this project. While generally, the Secretariat recognizes 
the AE’s efforts to evaluate, assess and mitigate the compliance risks in this project, given the 
challenges in working in a remote environment and the capacity challenges in working with 
local and provincial communities, Compliance would retain a medium compliance risk 
assessment for this project. 
4.3.6. 
Summary risk assessment and recommendation  
Summary risk assessment 
Overall programme 
Medium 
Accredited entity/ 
executing entity capability 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
High 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
58. 
The GCF grant will be administered by UNDP following its NIM.  
59. 
The overall role of UNDP as an AE is to provide oversight and quality assurance through 
its headquarters, regional and country office units. A UNDP programme officer, or monitoring 
and evaluation officer, will hold the project assurance role on behalf of UNDP at the country 
level, with support from the Global Environmental Finance Unit (responsible for managing GCF 
resources) at the UNDP headquarters and at the regional level. 
60. 
The (national) EE for this project is MRRD, which is accountable to UNDP for managing 
the project, including the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, and achieving 
project outcomes, as well as for the effective use of resources made available by UNDP. Using 
practices established under NIM, the Government of Afghanistan will designate a national 
project director who will be the Deputy Minister of MRRD. 
61. 
The macro capacity assessment of the EE was conducted by UNDP through a third party 
audit firm (KPMG) in 2016, in accordance with the relevant UNDP guidelines. The overall 
assessment rating for MRRD (EE) is “moderate risk”. Because this assessment risk rating is 
substantial, the direct payment modality has been chosen as a key risk-mitigation measure for 
this project: the AE will manage the funds from GCF and will disburse them based on the direct 
payment modality instead of providing a quarterly cash advance to EE. Since the KPMG

=== PAGE 84 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 84 
 
 
assessment report identified that the EE procurement area has significant risk, UNDP will 
conduct procurement activities as well as executing payments to vendors and project staff and 
consultants. The financial management and procurement activities of this project will be subject 
to UNDP financial rules and regulations. 
62. 
The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, 
informed by and together with any specific requirements agreed in the accreditation master 
agreement (AMA). According to the current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
63. 
The arrangements for monitoring, evaluation and reporting (Section E.7) are adequate. 
A detailed monitoring and evaluation budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be 
included in the AE project document which will be signed by the EE, MRRD, to govern the use of 
the funds during year 1.  
64. 
Clear linkages between project results/outputs, outcomes and impacts (including long-
term impacts) have been provided, and there is a clear articulation of barriers. The theory of 
change and the logical framework follows this rational and the funding proposal provides useful 
results monitoring and reporting.  
65. 
The implementation period covers only five years, and it is likely that the expected 
climate impacts will mostly occur later. However, the Secretariat recommends that the AE 
consider including more elaborate monitoring of adaptation through ex-post verification at the 
fund level. For example, in addition to monitoring the number of beneficiaries with access to 
electricity, it could be relevant to monitor beneficiaries’ opportunities to aim for more climate-
resilient livelihoods by using electricity for productive uses, since such data are likely to be part 
of the mini-grids’ operational log. 
66. 
The logical framework has been designed with relevant details including reporting on 
core indicators for mitigation and adaptation, and the respective impact, outcome and output 
indicators for the results area and the project targets as per the results management framework 
and performance management framework of the GCF.  
67. 
There are three clear results areas and they in turn are given appropriate monitoring 
indicators.  
68. 
Fund-level outcomes and impacts are specified in line with the GCF pre-set result area 
guidelines. They are given quantitative as well as qualitative indicators. Regarding the 
qualitative indicators, a change process is explained with anticipated, gradual levels of progress 
towards the final target.  
69. 
The funding proposal implementation timetable has been completed appropriately. It 
shows all activities and key milestones associated with each phase of the project and they are 
consistent with the logical framework. The Operations Manual, as well as the completed 
installation of the three mini-grids, has been included as an essential deliverable, as requested 
by the Secretariat.  
4.6 
Legal assessment 
70. 
The AMA was signed with the AE on 5 August 2016, and it became effective on 
23 November 2016. 
71. 
The AE has provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all internal approvals 
and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 85 
 
 
72. 
The proposed project will be implemented in Afghanistan, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileged and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further 
assessed. Currently, the GCF and the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan are at the stage of informal 
discussions on GCF privileges and immunities. 
73. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are 
made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
74. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions: 
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and 
(b) 
Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 86 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP129 
Proposal name: 
Afghanistan Rural Energy Market Transformation Initiative -  
Strengthening Resilience of Livelihoods Through Sustainable 
Energy Access 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Country/(ies): 
Afghanistan  
Project/programme size:  
Small 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium/High  
1. 
Afghanistan is a landlocked country located in South-Central Asia with total population 
of 35 million. About 70 per cent of the Afghan population live in rural areas and are largely 
dependent on agriculture. While the country has been making efforts to rebuild the economy 
since the advent of democracy, it still remains one of the poorest countries in the world with a 
gross domestic product (GDP) and GDP per capita of USD 19.363 billion and USD 520.9, 
respectively (2018). 
2. 
The country is suffering a severe infrastructure deficit as a result of a long period of 
neglect and underinvestment due to decades of instability and war. Disparity in infrastructure 
service between urban and rural areas is also high. According to the Afghanistan Living 
Conditions Survey 2016–2017, only 31 per cent of the population is connected to the electric 
grid. While 92 per cent of the population in urban areas have access to electricity, the 
penetration is far below in rural areas (only 13 per cent). In terms of electrification rate, the 
country is in the lowest 5 per cent in per capita energy consumption in the world.  
3. 
The country’s electricity supply depends heavily on imported electricity. Currently, the 
country has a total available generation capacity of 1,504.6 megawatts (MW), of which 900 MW, 
or 60 per cent, is imported.  
4. 
Domestic power supplies are largely dependent on electricity generation from diesel 
generators, which is costly and environmentally unsustainable. Of the total domestic capacity of 
604.6 MW, 56 per cent is thermal (diesel and furnace oil) with a generation cost of USD 0.25–
0.35 per kilowatt-hour (kWh), which is four times higher than that of imported electricity. The 
remaining 44 per cent (254 MW) is from hydropower, which is seasonal and has a capacity 
factor of less than 40 per cent.  
5. 
With no connection to the electricity grid, most communities in rural areas are 
dependent on traditional biomass (such as firewood, dung cakes and crop residues) for cooking 
and heating, which aggravate indoor air pollution and accelerate deforestation. As per the 
United Nations Environment Programme, forests in Afghanistan will disappear within 30 years 
if the current rate of wood consumption and deforestation continues. According to the World 
Bank, Afghanistan is among the top 10 countries worst affected by indoor air pollution. 
6. 
The country is richly endowed with renewable energy resources. Solar energy resources 
are plentiful with over 300 sunny days per year, with annual average insolation levels of 4.7–5.4 
kWh/square metre (m2). The country also has rich wind resources with annual average wind

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 87 
 
 
speeds of 4.3 to 5.6 metres/second at 10 metre heights, which is suitable for wind power 
generation. Its hydropower potential is estimated at 25,000 MW, including 800 MW of micro-
hydro and mini-hydro.  
7. 
Renewable energy mini-grids are considered sufficient for Afghanistan to establish 
additional, clean and low-emission generation capacity critical, especially, for communities in 
rural areas, where grid extension remains sluggish. However, the traditional power sector 
policy and regulatory frameworks in Afghanistan focus on the national grid and centralized 
generation. Therefore, the regulatory frameworks require further development to promote and 
scale up renewable energy mini-grids and commercial investment in Afghanistan. 
8. 
The proposed mitigation project supports the groundwork for rural renewable energy 
market transformation in Afghanistan to mitigate policy and regulatory risks of private 
investment in mini-grids. The project includes (1) policy and regulatory design, setting the 
groundwork for public and private sector financing; (2) capacity-building and awareness-
raising for both the public/private sectors and end users; and (3) the implementation of three 
greenfield solar mini-grids of a combined capacity of 2.6 MW, together with the creation of an 
up scaling platform to enable the Government of Afghanistan to lead the future implementation 
of additional renewable energy mini-grids.  
9. 
The United Nations Development Programme is the accredited entity (AE) of the project. 
The Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) of Afghanistan is the executing 
entity. 
10. 
The project has three components (outputs 1, 2 and 3). The first component (output 1) 
aims to address and mitigate the energy market risk associated with renewable energy services 
in rural areas through policy, regulations and institutional development. Regulations and tariff 
mechanisms as well as technical standards and guidelines for mini-grids will be developed. 
Policies to promote institutional reform and coordination among responsible institutions will be 
prepared. 
11. 
The second component (output 2) will enhance the capacity and engagement of public 
and private sector stakeholders in developing renewable energy mini-grids. It includes capacity 
strengthening activities for government entities on the technical, managerial, administrative 
and financing aspects for renewable energy mini-grids. It also includes activities to promote 
community commitment and local business interests relating to the implementation of the three 
solar mini-grids. The private sector capacity critical for designing, operating and maintaining 
mini-grids will be promoted. Productive use of electricity will be incentivized to increase 
resilience. 
12. 
The third component (output 3) includes the construction of three solar mini-grids and 
the setup of an up scaling platform to facilitate additional mini-grid investments. Three 
greenfield solar mini-grids, with a total capacity of 2.6 MW, will be constructed in the Kandhar, 
Khost and Parwan regions. The mini-grids will be owned by MRRD but operated by private 
sector entities to be selected competitively. Construction contracts will be tendered 
competitively as well. 
13. 
In addition, the component will establish a knowledge platform to support MRRD to 
further promote the development of renewable mini-grids with private sector investments in 
the future. It will prepare a mini-grid implementation handbook for MRRD, which includes 
industry best practices as well as knowledge gained through the implementation of three solar 
mini-grids. A green procurement policy will be prepared to facilitate the use and purchase of the 
most environmentally friendly services and products for mini-grids, and a social and 
environmental safeguard policy for mini-grids will be developed. 
14. 
The total project cost is estimated to be USD 21.4 million. The GCF is requested to 
provide USD 17.2 million in a form of grant. MRRD and AE will each provide a USD 1 million

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 88 
 
 
grant. In addition, MRRD will contribute in-kind support equivalent to USD 2.2 million. The 
project will be implemented in five years. 
15. 
The AE estimates that the project will achieve a greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction of 
6,923 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) per annum from the implementation of the 
three solar mini-grids, resulting a total GHG reduction of 173,082 tCO2eq during the project life 
of 25 years. If an additional five mini-grids (three solar and two mini-hydro) are implemented 
after the project ends, the AE further estimates that an additional GHG reduction of 15,189 
tCO2eq will be achieved per annum. 
16. 
The methodology and assumptions used to calculate emission reductions are 
appropriate and reasonable. The emission reductions are estimated based on emission factors 
of different energy consumer groups (households and commercial facilities). Annual emission 
reductions (in tCO2eq) are calculated over the 25-year lifetime of the mini-grids. The 
assumptions take into account the annual degradation of the solar photovoltaic panels and the 
replacement of battery energy storage systems during the project life. 
17. 
The implementation of three solar mini-grids will benefit 49,000 people (of which 
23,500 are women) as users of electricity in homesteads for agriculture and enterprise 
development. Approx. 12 schools, 3 health centres and 1,050 small businesses will have access 
to electricity from the three solar mini-grids resulting from this project.  
18. 
The impact potential is considered moderate given the small amount of renewable 
energy to be generated by the three solar mini-grids. However, energy consumption per capita 
in Afghanistan remains low. As a result, the number of beneficiaries is expected to be notable. 
19. 
Accordingly, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) views the impact 
potential of the proposed project as medium/high. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential  
 
 
 
Scale: Medium/High 
1.2.1 
Potential for scaling up and replication 
20. 
The proposed project aims to establish a policy and regulatory environment favourable 
to the development of rural renewable energy mini-grids with private sector participation in 
Afghanistan. Mini-grids have the potential to play a significant role in providing access to 
reliable and affordable electricity in rural areas. Dedicated policies on mini-grids are therefore 
critical in promoting their development. Institutional setup and support, in combination with 
technical, economic and social agendas, is also essential; otherwise the project may result in 
ineffective or unsustainable mini-grid systems.  
21. 
The project includes technical assistance to enhance policy and regulatory frameworks 
and to provide a platform to promote private sector engagement through training. The project 
further includes the implementation of three solar mini-grids with private sector participation. 
Experiences and lessons learned from the implementation will be incorporated into capacity-
building for public, private and community stakeholders on the effective management of the 
technology, including for the development of five renewable energy mini-grids in the future. 
1.2.2 
Potential for knowledge-sharing and learning 
22. 
The project proposes setting up a knowledge platform that formalizes and mainstreams 
technical and operational data, best practices, and procurement and safeguard policies 
developed by the project and through the implementation of the three solar mini-grids. The 
knowledge platform will include a step-by-step mini-grid implementation manual, an online 
data and information service and designs for five renewable mini-grids for implementation.

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 89 
 
 
1.2.3 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
23. 
The project aims to promote renewable energy development in rural areas in 
Afghanistan, where grid extension is limited and the predominant electricity generation source 
is diesel, by implementing renewable minigrids with private sector investment and operation. 
The project will provide technical assistance to mitigate legal and regulatory risks, provide 
training to promote business interest in renewable mini-grids and implement three solar mini-
grids to demonstrate the technical and operational viability for private sector participation. A 
knowledge platform will be established, where technical and operational data of the three solar 
mini-grids, together with lessons learned through their implementation, are formalized and 
shared.  
1.2.4 
Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
24. 
The project’s technical assistance will contribute to improving legislation and 
regulations as well as procurement and environment, social and corporate governance 
processes. The policy and regulatory framework for mini-grids will be developed in 
consultation with governmental agencies and private sector entities. The framework includes 
standards and guidelines for mini-grids and approvals and licenses required for effective mini-
grid development. The project will further support the establishment of a separate office under 
Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS) to promote rural electrification projects mainly based 
on renewable energy technologies in accordance with the Renewable Energy Roadmap for 
Afghanistan (2032). A green procurement policy will be developed for mini-grid procurement to 
facilitate the purchase and use of the most environmentally-friendly services and products for 
mini-grids. 
25. 
The project contains technical and financial assistance to address challenges identified 
in Afghanistan for private sector investment in renewable energy mini-grids. The assistance is 
structured to ensure it is comprehensive enough to enhance the awareness of public, private 
and community stakeholders of the benefits brought by renewable energy mini-grids and 
mitigate policy and regulatory risks for private sector investors. The implementation of the 
three solar energy mini-grids will serve as examples, and information and experience gathered 
through the implementation will be formalized and applied to the development of renewable 
energy mini-grids in the future. The development of an additional five renewable energy mini-
grids as part of the project will be effective in further advancing the project objectives in the 
sector in Afghanistan by attracting private sector investment. Nevertheless, the sustainability of 
the project initiative after the project has ended will remain dependent on the availability of 
concessional funding. 
26. 
Accordingly, the independent TAP considers the paradigm shift potential of the project 
as medium/high. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
Scale: High 
1.3.1 
Economic co-benefits  
27. 
Dependence on diesel generators for rural energy access hampers the productivity of 
rural economies. The three solar mini-grids implemented in the project will supply renewable 
and reliable electricity to over 1,050 small enterprises, contributing to business continuity and 
growth. It will create 29 jobs for its operations during the 25-year project life. Additional job 
opportunities would be generated during construction.  
28. 
The project contributes to private sector development in Afghanistan. It will heighten 
private sector awareness of the technical and financial viability of renewable mini-grids through 
technical assistance and the implementation of the three solar mini-grids. Private sector

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 90 
 
 
constructors and operators (renewable energy service companies) will participate in the 
implementation. The project will also prepare investment design reports to implement five 
additional mini-grids with private sector finance and operation.  
1.3.2 
Social and environmental co-benefits 
29. 
The three solar mini-grids will provide reliable electricity in the areas where the 12 
schools, 3 health centres and 230 public centres are located. It is estimated that 49,000 people 
(of which 23,500 are women) will benefit as users of electricity in homesteads for agriculture 
and enterprise development. Afghanistan is among the top 10 countries worst affected by 
indoor air pollution. 
30. 
The provision of cleaner energy supplies to replace diesel-generated electricity will 
result in a reduction of exposure to air pollution.  
1.3.3 
Gender-sensitive development  
31. 
Women represent 47 per cent of direct beneficiaries of the three mini-grids 
implemented by the project. Access to energy has proven to contribute to the economic 
empowerment of women through employment. 
32. 
The independent TAP considers the sustainable development potential of the proposed 
project as high. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
Scale: High 
1.4.1 
Vulnerability of the country  
33. 
According to the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index, Afghanistan is the 11th most 
vulnerable country to climate change and the 14th least ready country for climate change in the 
world. The Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (CCSAP) for Afghanistan identified high 
levels of exposure and vulnerability to climate change in most parts of Afghanistan.  
34. 
Afghanistan is experiencing an increase in extreme climate events with floods almost an 
annual occurrence in spring, as well as dry years. The country’s economy is largely dependent 
on the agriculture sector. About 70 per cent of population lives and works in rural areas, mostly 
on farms, and 61 per cent of all households derive their income from agriculture as per the 
World Bank. The CCSAP indicates that agriculture is the sector that is most seriously vulnerable 
to climate change impacts, together with the water resources, forest and soil conservation, and 
health sectors. 
35. 
Afghanistan’s nationally determined contributions to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) indicates that climate change impacts could further 
exacerbate extreme hunger and poverty, the fundamental challenges of the country, by reducing 
livelihood opportunities, agricultural production, and the availability of energy, water and other 
natural resources. 
1.4.2 
Absence of alternative sources of financing  
36. 
Afghanistan has the lowest per capita GDP in the world. As a recipient of an 
International Monetary Fund Extended Credit Facility, the Government of Afghanistan operates

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 91 
 
 
under severe financial constraints with restricted borrowing capacity. The IMF expressly 
recommends that any external financing be in the form of grants or concessional funding.1 
37. 
The domestic financial sector in Afghanistan remains ineffective. Ninety per cent of 
investments needed by businesses were financed by own/internal sources, and only 3.4 per 
cent of businesses had a bank loan/credit.  
38. 
International commercial borrowing, especially for the long term, is limited due to the 
country risk profile. Currently, most of the development activities are funded by development 
partners with a primary focus on security, peace, governance, women’s empowerment and 
health. The independent TAP observed assistance in energy sector, though it was limited and 
with a different focus. 
39. 
Given the present situation, the independent TAP believes that there are no sources of 
financing alternative to GCF for the project. 
1.4.3 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity  
40. 
The current power sector policy and regulatory frameworks in Afghanistan focus on the 
national grid and centralized generation. Therefore, the regulatory framework requires further 
development to promote and scale up renewable energy mini-grids and commercial investment 
in Afghanistan. 
41. 
The project will enhance government policy and regulatory framework as well as the 
capacities of the government, beneficiaries and private sector through various technical and 
advisory supports and the implementation of the three solar mini-grids. With respect to the 
government, a team of 100 MRRD and DABS staff will benefit from extensive capacity-building, 
including hands-on involvement in the implementation of the three solar mini-grids of the 
project. The project will mitigate the political, regulatory and operational risks of installing rural 
renewable energy mini-grids in Afghanistan to the extent necessary to promote private sector 
investment and funding. 
42. 
Electricity consumption per capita in Afghanistan ranks among the lowest in the world. 
The majority of the population lives in rural areas, which the existing transmission network 
does not cover. Only 9 per cent of the rural population and 30 per cent of the whole country’s 
population has access to electricity. Presently, most communities in rural areas are dependent 
on traditional biomass (such as firewood, dung cakes and crop residues) for cooking and 
heating, and kerosene for lighting. The need for reliable and clean electricity among the rural 
population is high.  
43. 
Consequently, the independent TAP views that the needs of the recipient for the 
proposed project is high. 
 
 
1.5 
Country ownership  
 
 
 
 
 
Scale: High 
1.5.1 
Coherence with existing policies  
44. 
Afghanistan submitted its NDC to the UNFCCC Secretariat in November 2016, outlining 
its intended contribution of reducing its GHG emissions by 13.6 per cent below the 2030 
business-as-usual scenario with a condition of the receipt of international support. 
 
1 International Monetary Fund Country Report 19/157 (June 2019): 
<https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2019/06/07/Islamic-Republic-of-Afghanistan-Fifth-Review-
Under-the-Extended-Credit-Facility-Arrangement-46973>.

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 92 
 
 
45. 
According to its nationally appropriate mitigation action (2015), the promotion of 
renewable energy systems for enhancing energy access in rural areas with an objective of 
enterprise development is one of the focus areas.  
46. 
One of the four targets in the CCSAP (2015) is to increase the share of renewable energy 
in the overall energy mix. The other targets are to protect the population from climate change-
related extremes, improve rural livelihood security and prevent land degradation. 
47. 
The Renewable Energy Roadmap for Afghanistan (2032) includes the Government of 
Afghanistan’s target to establish a renewable energy capacity of 5,000 MW by 2032.  
48. 
The proposed project is in alignment with the existing government policies. 
1.5.2 
Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver  
49. 
The AE presently operates 140 energy projects in close to 100 countries with more than 
USD 550 million in grant funding channelled via the AE. The project portfolio includes mini-grid 
projects in 26 developing countries. The portfolio includes mini-grid projects in 22 developing 
countries and multi-country mini-grid programmes in 11 African countries. 
50. 
The technical support from the AE into energy projects typically supports the 
government in designing and implementing a suitable policy and regulatory framework to 
create an enabling environment to attract private sector investment.  
51. 
The AE has implemented the Afghanistan Sustainable Energy for Rural Development 
(ASERD) project with the MRRD. ASERD, which developed feasibility studies for five mini-grids 
in rural areas in Afghanistan, is considered as the foundation of the proposed project. The 
implementation of ASERD also provided the AE and government stakeholders such as DABS (a 
national government-owned vertically integrated electricity utility), the Ministry of Energy and 
Water (MEW) and MRRD with the relevant experience required to implement the project.  
52. 
The AE mobilizes a team for the implementation that includes experts with backgrounds 
and experience suitable for the project. 
53. 
The AE is considered to have sufficient capacity to implement the project. 
1.5.3 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
54. 
Six workshops were organized in six different regions as a part of consultations on 
climate change and GCF, the energy deficits in the region, the benefits of renewable energy and 
finally the project design, including discussions on possible mini-grid sites and the theory of 
change of the project. Participants in the workshops include representatives from the 
Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock, 
MEW, MRRD, the National Environmental Protection Agency, international agencies, non-
governmental organizations and community development councils. Subsequently, a stakeholder 
engagement plan was developed that identifies relevant stakeholders for each of the project 
activities.  
55. 
A non-objection letter issued by National Environmental Protection Agency (the 
national designated authority of Afghanistan) is attached to the funding proposal. The 
independent TAP also notes the that the commitment of MRRD to the project is demonstrated 
through its USD 1.0 million financial and USD 2.2 million in-kind contribution. 
56. 
Accordingly, the independent TAP regards the country ownership of the proposal as 
high. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness   
 
 
 
Scale: Medium

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 93 
 
 
1.6.1 
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency regarding financial and non-financial aspects  
57. 
The project is expected to achieve GHG reductions of 6,923 tCO2eq per annum from the 
implementation of the three solar mini-grids, resulting the total GHG reduction of 173,082 
tCO2eq during the project lifetime of 25 years. Against a total cost of USD 21.4 million, the 
project’s cost of GHG reduction is estimated to be USD 123.6 per tCO2eq. With respect to the GCF 
grant amount of USD 17.2 million, it will be USD99 per tCO2eq. 
58. 
The GCF grant will finance the construction of the three solar mini-grids to be owned by 
MRRD. With the GCF grant, the financial return of the solar mini-grids is estimated to increase 
from between –4.4 and –13.5 per cent to between +18.9 and 22.0 per cent. As per the AE, the 
return should satisfy the MRRD cost of capital of 15 per cent. In principle, the independent TAP 
does not consider it appropriate to use the GCF grant to subsidize or increase project financial 
return beyond a reasonable threshold. Given that the solar mini-grid projects are public sector 
undertaking, the target financial return could be reduced with a lower GCF grant. The 
independent does not share the presumption of the AE that a higher financial return is required 
to demonstrate the commercial feasibility of mini-grids to attract private sector capital in the 
subsequent transactions. The subsequent transactions with greater private sector involvement, 
if they take place, will have a different capital structure and hurdle rate. 
59. 
The independent TAP nevertheless supports the proposed grant amount given the 
commitment from the MRRD that any excess cash flow from the solar mini-grids will be utilized 
for the purpose of their operations. Given the risk associated with their implementation and 
operation, it would be prudent to ensure an adequate financial buffer is maintained for the 
projects Otherwise, MRRD would need to look for another source of funding to satisfy 
unexpected needs for cash for the solar mini-grids in the future. 
1.6.2 
Amount of co-financing  
60. 
The GCF grant contribution of USD 17.2 million will be co-financed with a USD 1.0 
million grant each from the AE and MRRD. In addition, MRRD will provide a USD 2.2 million in-
kind contribution to the project. The co-financing ratio against the GCF grant is therefore 0.24. 
1.6.3 
Programme/project financial viability and other financial indicators  
61. 
The financial internal rate of return of the three solar mini-grids is estimated to be in the 
range of 18.9 per cent to 22.0 per cent, above a hurdle rate of 15 per cent of the estimated cost 
of capital of MRRD. Without the GCF grant, the return would be between –4.4 per cent and –13.5 
per cent. The financial viability of the three solar mini-grids can be established with GCF grant 
support. 
1.6.4 
Industry best practices  
62. 
The project is expected to promote international standards in the design, 
implementation and operation of renewable mini-grids in Afghanistan. Experience gained and 
lessons learned during the implementation of the three solar mini-grids by the project will be 
disseminated through a knowledge platform to be established by the project for the additional 
development of renewable mini-grids in Afghanistan. 
63. 
The project offers a comprehensive and organized approach to mitigate investment risk 
and promote private sector participation in mini-grid development through public–private 
partnerships in Afghanistan.  
64. 
The independent TAP notes that the cost-effectiveness of the project with respect to its 
GHG emission reductions is rather low. That is considered justifiable, however, given that the

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 94 
 
 
number and capacity of solar mini-grids implemented in the project is limited only to three and 
2.6 MW, respectively.  
65. 
The independent TAP considers the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project 
as medium. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
66. 
The independent TAP recommends that the Board support the project as proposed.  
67. 
The project proposes to take a structured and holistic approach to promoting renewable 
energy mini-grid development with private sector investment in rural Afghanistan, where 
communities heavily rely on electricity supply from diesel generation.

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.01 
Page 95 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP129) 
Proposal name: 
Afghanistan Rural Energy Market Transformation Initiative -  
Strengthening Resilience of Livelihoods Through Sustainable 
Energy Access 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Country/(ies): 
Afghanistan  
Project/programme size:  
Small 
 
Impact potential 
The medium/high rating is noted. 
Paradigm shift potential 
The medium/high rating is noted. 
Sustainable development potential 
The high rating is noted. 
Needs of the recipient 
The high rating is noted. 
Country ownership 
The high rating is noted. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
The medium rating is noted. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
The ITAP recommends that the Board support the project as proposed.  
UNDP acknowledges the iTAP assessment and is pleased to see the funding proposal being rated 
overall positively, as the project constitutes an important market building milestone for 
minigrids in Afghanistan.

=== PAGE 96 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
1
H 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
Afghanistan Rural Energy Market Transformation Initiative – 
Strengthening Resilience of Livelihoods Through Sustainable 
Energy Access 
Gender documentation for FP129

=== PAGE 97 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
2
H 
 
Table of Contents 
I. 
Introduction .................................................................................................................. 3 
II. 
Resilience of smallholder farmers in Afghanistan to climate variability and extreme 
events 3 
III. 
Existing Gender Inequality in Afghanistan ............................................................... 5 
a. 
Poverty, food-security and labor force ..................................................................................5 
b. 
Health ...................................................................................................................................8 
c. 
Education .............................................................................................................................9 
d. 
Political Participation ......................................................................................................... 11 
e. 
Gender-based violence ........................................................................................................ 11 
f. 
Gender Inequality Index ..................................................................................................... 12 
IV. 
Legal and Administrative Framework Protecting Women and Protecting Gender 
Equality .............................................................................................................................. 13 
V. 
Gender issues in response to the impact of climate change ......................................... 15 
VI. 
Recommendations ................................................................................................... 18 
a. 
Gender analysis .................................................................................................................. 18 
b. 
Project design and implementation ..................................................................................... 19 
c. 
Stakeholder engagement ..................................................................................................... 20 
d. 
Monitoring and evaluation ................................................................................................... 22 
VII. 
Proposed Gender Action Plan ................................................................................. 23

=== PAGE 98 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
3
H 
I. 
Introduction 
This gender assessment aims to provide an overview of the gender situation in Afghanistan, with 
a specific focus on climate change resilience, and identify gender issues that are relevant to the 
proposed ‘Afghanistan rural energy market transformation initiative -  Strengthening resilience of 
livelihoods through sustainable energy access’ project, and to examine potential gender 
mainstreaming opportunities. The assessment was based upon available data from studies 
conducted by the government of Afghanistan, donor agencies, and multilateral development banks; 
and includes:  
1) Undertaking a desktop review and aligning approaches in this proposal with the national 
priorities of Afghanistan.  
2) Incorporating information and lessons learned from past studies and assessments on gender in 
Afghanistan from the government, the United Nations, civil society organizations, and 
multilateral development banks.  
3) Conducting stakeholder consultations and engaging women affected by the project and 
incorporating all points raised; and  
4) Integrating gender considerations in the project indicators, targets and activities, identifying 
women as leaders and decision-makers.  
II. 
Resilience of smallholder farmers in Afghanistan to climate variability and extreme 
events  
Afghanistan is one of the most vulnerable countries to the impacts of climate change. A complex 
mix of social, political and ecological factors – low levels of development, high dependence on 
climate sensitive sectors, pervasive conflict and the fragility of dry mountain ecosystem- limit the 
adaptive capacities of communities to climate chance impacts. The Climate Change Strategy and 
Action Plan (CCSAP) for Afghanistan identified high levels of exposure and vulnerability, to 
climate change for most parts of Afghanistan. There are evidences of extreme events, with floods 
almost an annual occurrence in spring (every year between 2012 and 2015). There also were dry 
years in the country between 1996-2003, while the drought of 2008 was particularly severe. The 
CCSAP indicates that several key sectors are seriously vulnerable to climate change impacts 
including agriculture, water resources, forest and soil conservation, health and others. 
Afghanistan is predominantly an agrarian society. Seven out of ten people rely on climate sensitive 
farming and herding for their livelihoods. Agriculture, which is the mainstay of rural economy, is 
primarily dependent on precipitation (rain and snow), as the climate is generally arid, and 40% of 
the rural households relying on agriculture do not receive any income during winter months. (With 
over 3000 HDDs/year the country experiences severe winter conditions). In terms of livelihood 
means, irrigated agriculture, livestock herders and dryland farmers are considered the most 
susceptible to the impacts of the various climatic hazards. The most likely adverse impacts of 
climate change in Afghanistan are drought related, including associated dynamics of

=== PAGE 99 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
4
H 
desertification and land degradation. Floods due to untimely rainfall and a general increase in 
temperature are of secondary importance. However, their impacts may by amplified due to more 
rapid spring snow melt as a result of higher temperatures, combined with the downstream effects 
of land degradation, loss of vegetative cover and land mismanagement.  
In its Fourth Assessment Report, the IPCC indicated that the severity of climate change impacts 
depends not only on changes in temperature and precipitation patterns but on a host of other factors 
related to the various dimensions of poverty. Human development impacts are generally 
exaggerated where climate patterns interact with pre-existing social and economic vulnerabilities. 
The poor are most vulnerable to the effects of climate change in Afghanistan. According to the 
2014 National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (NRVA), 39.1% of population lives below the 
poverty line, with majority working in the agricultural sector. The Initial National 
Communications (INC) of the Afghanistan government to the UNFCCC mentions that climate 
change impacts could deepen hunger and poverty by reducing livelihood opportunities, 
agricultural production, and the availability of energy, water and other natural resources.   
The distributional effects are more likely to fall upon women and children, and upon those involved 
in subsistence agriculture or pastoralism. Gender inequality is an important characteristic of 
poverty in Afghanistan. The vast majority of women do not participate in paid economic activities 
making them highly dependable on their husbands or families. Literacy rates are much lower than 
for men. During periods of drought, young women and children may be sold into marriage so that 
their families can afford to eat. Children are also highly vulnerable to climate change, given that 
they are responsible for small scale livestock herding and wood collection. 
It is widely recognized that access to energy is a prerequisite for human development, overcome 
poverty, promote economic growth and employment opportunities, support the provision of social 
services, and essential for meeting basic and productive needs in households, enterprises and 
community institutions1. Access to energy improves people’s general physical and economic well-
being which in turn provides the prerequisites for resilience adaptation. Access to energy allows 
rural population for diversification of livelihoods away from vulnerable activities which is a key 
factor in building resilience to adverse events, including the impacts of climate change.  
In Afghanistan, only around a third of the population has access to modern and clean energy while 
in the rural areas most communities are not connected to the electricity grid. The share of energy 
in the total spending of rural households is high, up to 30% of income2 which is a heavy burden 
 
1 Energy and Adaptation: Exploring how energy access can enable climate change adaptation.  
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/57a08a19ed915d3cfd0005b8/Energy-Adaptation-Paper.pdf 
Energy, Poverty, and Development.  
http://www.iiasa.ac.at/web/home/research/Flagship-Projects/Global-Energy-
Assessment/GEA_Chapter2_development_hires.pdf 
2 Socio-Economic Impacts of Climate Change in Afghanistan: A Report to the Department for International 
Development

=== PAGE 100 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
5
H 
on the already tied budget of the rural population. The lack of access to energy, especially for 
agriculture and enterprise development, has considerably reduced rural livelihood options at the 
community level in Afghanistan. The Women Economic Empowerment- Rural Development 
Program (WEE-RDP) which supports rural enterprises, has identified specific instances where 
productivity and viability of rural industries such as agro-processing, food- processing and 
apiculture have been constrained due to lack of energy supply. 
The proposed ‘Afghanistan rural energy market transformation initiative -  Strengthening 
resilience of livelihoods through sustainable energy access’ is aimed at building the adaptive 
capacity of rural population. Services derived from energy, including lighting, cooking, and water 
heating, would enable development and help rural poor to meet basic needs. Support to 
cooperatives will result in higher economic productivity and increase in income. Electrification of 
community institutions, such as schools, health clinics and mosques will help in attracting greater 
provision and efficiency of support, adding to the quality of life and livelihoods.    
III. 
Existing Gender Inequality in Afghanistan 
Gender inequality is one of the main indicators of inequality and is played out along political, 
social and cultural dimensions. It is closely linked to poverty and other development challenges 
which is deeply‐rooted in social norms and economic conditions with a greater impact on the poor, 
particularly women and young people. 
a. Root causes for inequality 
As a consequence of the Taliban rule in Afghanistan, the situation of women in Afghanistan is 
one of concern. During the Taliban regime, women had very little to no freedom, specifically in 
terms of civil liberties. The Taliban declared that women were forbidden to go to work and they 
were not to leave their homes unless accompanied by a male family member. When they did go 
out it was required that they had to wear an all-covering burqa. Under these restrictions, women 
were denied formal education while women were usually forced to stay at home.  
After the fall of the Taliban regime, Afghanistan faced daunting challenges in terms of gender 
equality after years of abuse and oppression that left very few or no girls in school, a deficit of 
women professionals such as teachers and doctors, limited women’s participation in the labor 
force, women missing from political activities and decision making at all levels, and a near 
complete removal of women from public life.  
There have been a number of areas of progress as well as setbacks for women in Afghanistan and 
gender equality since 2001. While there are no areas where the government has failed, there are 
also no areas where women perceived that they have met their commitments, according to the 
countries’ Gender Equality Report Card3. 
 
https://www.weadapt.org/sites/weadapt.org/files/legacy-new/placemarks/files/5345354491559sei-dfid-afghanistan-
report-1-.pdf 
3 https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/GERC-English.pdf

=== PAGE 101 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
6
H 
b. Poverty, food-security and labor force  
Afghanistan is a Least Developed Country (LDC). With a population of around 30 million plus, 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) was USD 19.36 billion in 2018. The GDP per capita is USD 521.  
Agriculture is the main economic source for majority of the population. 40% of labor force is 
engaged in agricultural sector. However, the sector only accounts for 22% of GDP. Due to low 
agricultural production rate, 46.3% of households engaged in agricultural sector live below poverty 
line (National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment).    
The Human Development Index (HDI) value for Afghanistan 2017 is 0.465 which put the country 
in the low human development category—positioning it at 168 out of 189 countries and territories.  
As per the multidimensional poverty index (MPI) developed by the Oxford Poverty & Human 
Development Initiative (OPHI), 66.2% of the population lives in multidimensional poverty where 
intensity of deprivation is 53.4%. Among the poor, 39.1% face sever multidimensional poverty. 
According to the OPHI, 72% of rural population lives in multidimensional poverty where intensity 
is 54.1%.4  
Data on food security provides a better picture of poverty profile in Afghanistan. Based on the 
food consumption score and food-based coping strategies, food insecurity is estimated at 33% of 
total population, where 12% are severely food insecure, and 21% moderately food insecure. The 
proportion of the food insecure is significantly higher in rural areas, with 36 percent of the rural 
population being food insecure, compared to 30 percent of the urban population (ibid).  
While poverty is a widespread phenomenon in Afghanistan, it has strong gender dimension too. 
Female headed household are much more vulnerable to food insecurity. According to the NRVA 
data, 67.1% of food-insecure households are headed by women while food-insecurity rate of male-
headed household is 34.%. Low dietary diversity (consumption of non-diversified, unbalanced and 
unhealthy diet) is also much higher in female-headed households (63.2%) compare to male headed 
households (36.2%).  
Women participation in labor force is significantly lower than men. While men’s labor force 
participation rate is at 89%, the rate for women is low, at 29% of the working age population. Of 
total population of women that participate in the labor force, 73% are unpaid family workers while 
the rate of unpaid family workers among men is only 19%. Majority of the unpaid family female 
workers live in the rural area and are engaged in the agricultural sector.  Women make up for 70% 
 
4 oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative. “Afghanistan Country Briefing”, Multidimensional Poverty 
Index Data Bank. OPHI, University of Oxford.

=== PAGE 102 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
7
H 
and 44% of the labor forces of homestead based craft industries and agricultural & livestock sectors 
respectively  
In recent years’ participation of women in the labor force has increased. In urban areas, women 
mainly work in small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and a growing number of female 
entrepreneurs have established SMEs. Women businesses association is now an active body in the 
Afghanistan Chamber of Commerce and Industries (ACCI). According to the Afghanistan 
Women’s Business Federation (AWBF), women’s entrepreneurship and economic activity 
participation in the past decade has changed such that, for example, women who formerly traded 
individually have gradually started forming groups.  
In rural areas too, women are becoming more economically active. Through number of 
government and donor agency development programs, there has been a surge in establishment of 
women cooperatives. These cooperatives work in different areas, such as horticulture, livestock, 
poultry and food processing. Research on women cooperatives shows significant increase in 
income of members of cooperatives which in turn has has positive effect on empowerment of 
women including boosted role in household decision-making as well as having better social status. 
The final evaluation of the UNDP Afghanistan Gender Equality Program (GEP II) found that 
women’s income on average has increased by 200% where cooperatives were supported by the 
program. Aliabad Cooperative- women owned- quadrupled its sell of processed food after 
receiving food processing machines and solar panels for operating them.  The GEP intervention 
also created additional 40 jobs in the Aliabad area.  
In sum, despite widespread poverty and lower female labor participation, the country has also 
witnessed number of success cases in the recent years. Afghan women entrepreneurs are slowly 
increasing their share of the local market and rural women are coming together in the form of 
cooperatives to reap higher benefits from working together. While economic participation of 
women is still at infancy, the potential for growth and maturity is enormous particularly if specific 
development intervention targets them.   
Access to energy is one such intervention that has proven to contribute to economic empowerment 
of women. A study in South Africa found that electrification of rural communities resulted in a 
9% increase in female employment (Dinkelman).  Another study conducted in Guatemala also 
shows similar result where electrification increases women employment (Grogan & Sadanand 
2009). Both studies attribute the increase in employment to the fact that electricity frees up 
women’s time by increasing their efficiency of domestic chores, such as cooking, and reducing the 
time they spent on collecting woods, thus allowing them to spend more time on education and 
other skill building activities.

=== PAGE 103 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
8
H 
c. Health 
Over the past decade Afghanistan has made notable progress in increasing access to health services 
through construction of hospitals and health clinics, trainings of medical doctors and professionals 
and development of institutional framework governing the health sector. Life expectancy has 
increased from 44 to 60 years and maternal mortality has decreased from 1600 to 324 per 100,000 
births. Despite recent progress, overall health condition of Afghanistan is still far from optimal. 
Per capita total expenditure on health is USD 55, one of the lowest in the world, and availability 
of physician per 10,000 people is only 2.7 (WHO). According to the estimates of the Ministry of 
Public Health, around 40% of population, all in rural areas, lives more than 2 hours of walking 
distance from nearest health facility.  
Similar to poverty, health also has strong gender dimension. While majority of both Afghan men 
and women do not have access to high quality health services, women relatively suffer more. The 
current maternal mortality rate is one of the highest in the world. In 2011, Save the Children 
declared Afghanistan “the worst place in the world to be a mother." According to UNICEF, around 
41 per cent of deaths occur during pregnancy, 40 per cent during delivery, and 19 per cent in the 
two months after delivery. High fertility rate (5.3), poor antenatal care, low rates of skilled 
attendance at birth, adolescent pregnancies, maternal malnutrition, unequally distributed health 
care services and lack of obstetric care in rural areas are the major underlying causes of maternal 
deaths. 
With 95% of rural households using traditional biomass fuels (dung, crop residues, wood, 
charcoal) for daily cooking, exposure (particularly for women and children) to indoor air pollutants 
is very high in Afghanistan. This has direct impact on health by increasing the risk of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, worsening lung function and contributing to childhood pneumonia 
and lung cancer. Indoor air pollution is the biggest cause of premature deaths in Afghanistan 
estimated at 54,000 per year (WHO, 2009, country profile of environmental burden of disease in 
Afghanistan).  
Climate change will have significant impact on health condition of majority of population. IPCC 
states that “climate change is projected to increase threats to human health”. Impacts of climate 
changes will have a negative effect on women’s health, if gender equality is not addressed in 
congruence with adaptation measures. Women are more vulnerable to effects of climate change in 
rural areas where they shoulder the major responsibility for household water supply, firewood 
fetching collection for cooking and heating. Women are more exposed to water borne diseases due 
to the nature of their roles in the community.  During incidents of natural disaster, food prices 
increase and leads to a reduction in the quality or quantity of the food rural poor families are able 
to purchase. Afghan women that are already more food-insecure than men will have even less 
nutrient diet available to them.

=== PAGE 104 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
9
H 
Introduction of cleaner energy sources provide alternatives to fuel wood for cooking and heating 
resulting in significantly reduction of exposure of women and children to indoor air pollution. The 
use of renewable energy also reduces the overall reliance of communities on timber which in turn 
slows down deforestation and landslides thus reducing damaging force of natural disasters. Access 
to modern and affordable forms of energy can also play an important role in improving access to 
safe water for domestic use.   Electrification of health clinics allows the provision of medical 
services at night, greater use of more advanced medical equipment, helps retain qualified staff in 
rural health centers, and allows local clinics to keep needed medicines on hand among other 
benefits.  
d. Education 
Education has been the epicenter of development efforts since 2002. School enrollment has jumped 
from 0.8 million in 2001 to over 9 million in 2015, of which more than 3 million are female 
students. Number of schools has also tripled within on decade reaching to 15,510 school in 2012 
from 6039 in 2002. Literacy rate has also increased but with significant gender and rural-urban 
gaps:  62 % of urban men and 33 % of urban women are literate, compared with only 35 % of rural 
men and 7 % of rural women.  
The government of Afghanistan and donor agencies have made significant achievement in 
increasing female school enrollment. Currently more than 3 million girls go to school while the 
number in 2001 was almost zero. However still the ratio of male/female student is eschewed 
towards male students where for every two male students there is one female student. The 
male/female student ratio increases in higher grades; in other words, the number of female students 
decreases in secondary and higher secondary grades as shown in the following chart: 
 
59.40%
63.59%
64.44%
60.74%
40.60%
36.41%
35.56%
39.26%
PRIMARY (GRADE 1-6)
SECONDARY (GRADE 7-9)
HIGHER SECONDARY 
(GRADE 10-12)
TOTAL 
Male Students
Female Students

=== PAGE 105 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
10 
H 
School enrollment gender gap is wider in rural areas. As the following charts illustrates, female 
students comprise 41% of students in urban areas while the figure for rural area is 37%. Lack of 
availability of secondary and higher secondary schools in a village is one of the reason that overall 
enrollment of girls is lower than boys as Afghan families not often allow their girls to walk a long 
distance to attend school.  
 
School enrollment gender gap also varies among the provinces of Afghanistan. Female school 
enrollment is lower in Eastern and Southern provinces while it is relatively higher in Central, 
Northern and Western provinces. The following table shows school enrollment in provinces to be 
covered under the ‘Strengthening Resilience of Rural Livelihoods to Climate Risk through 
Sustainable Energy Access’ program. The male/female student enrollment ration is much higher 
in Bamiyan (Central), Herat (Western) and Sar-e-Pul (Northern) provinces while the gap 
significantly increases in Kandahar & Uruzgan (Southern) and Paktika (Eastern) provinces.   
Province 
Urban 
Rural 
Male 
Students 
Female  
Students 
Male  
Students 
Female  
Students 
Bamyan 
61% 
39% 
53% 
47% 
Daikundi 
53% 
47% 
55% 
45% 
Laghman 
63% 
37% 
57% 
43% 
Parwan 
61% 
39% 
65% 
35% 
Khost 
67% 
33% 
66% 
34% 
Kandahar 
69% 
31% 
79% 
21% 
Paktika 
86% 
14% 
79% 
21% 
Uruzgan 
87% 
13% 
85% 
15% 
59%
63%
41%
37%
URBAN
RURAL 
Male Students
Female Female

=== PAGE 106 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
11 
H 
e. Political Participation 
Women have the same rights to vote and stand for electoral seats as men. The Constitution of 
Afghanistan ensures that for each province, there is at least one seat for a woman in the national 
Parliament. Due to this affirmative action, 25% of members of the parliament are women. Women 
participation has also been guaranteed at the provincial, district and community level. Similar to 
the parliament, women have reserved seats in the provincial councils which has the main 
responsibility of monitoring of government programs and projects and service delivery. Members 
of the parliament and the provincial councils are directly elected through votes where both men 
and women of age 18 and higher can vote. 
In addition to the electoral bodies, international development organizations in a coordination with 
the government of Afghanistan have also established councils and committees at the district and 
community level to have direct decision making and oversight role in implementation of 
development programs. For example, Community Development Councils (CDS) is elected rural 
institution actively involved in implementation and oversight of the Citizen Charter funded by the 
World Bank and implemented by the MRRD. CDCs play much wider role in decision making and 
conflict resolution at the community level than only being involved with the implementation of 
the mentioned development programmes. Recognized as representative bodies at the district and 
community level, CDCs are also involved in development of the provincial development plans and 
lobby for their communities at the provincial and national level.       
The role of women in government leadership positions has also increased over the last decade. 
Women have been holding ministerial positions since 2001. Currently, four out of twenty-five 
ministers are women. Women are also appointed as deputy ministers, governors, mayors, and 
directors.  
Although there has been progress in advancing women’s political participation, more needs to be 
done in this direction. Overall political participation and involvement in decision-making and 
government leadership positions is still much lower compare to men. However, over the last 
decade a strong civil society advocating for women’s right has emerged which constantly works 
towards greater representation of women in Afghanistan’s policymaking.  The country is in the 
right path of advancing women’s rights and representation in political arena, but achieving 
complete equality will take much longer time.  
f. Gender-based violence  
Afghanistan is one of the worst countries in the world to be born female. It ranks 168 out of 185 
on the UNDP’s 2017 Gender Inequality Index.  Often the news of brutal cases of violence against 
women in Afghanistan makes international headlines.  
The report published by the Afghanistan’s Independent Human Rights Commission indicates that

=== PAGE 107 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
12 
H 
the total number of incidences of violence against women obtained from the incidences registered 
by the complainants in 2017 amounts to 4873 incidences.  The most widespread and common type 
of violence against women is physical violence, especially beating. Out of the registered figures 
of violence against women in 2017 almost 1468 incidences which make up 30.1 percent of the 
registered incidence of violence against women are related to physical violence. A total of 412 
other incidences which cover 8.5 percent of all the incidences of violence against women occurred 
during this period are related to different types of sexual violence while 1482 incidences which 
make up 30.4 percent of all the registered incidences of violence against women are related to 
verbal and psychological violence. Similarly, 1024 incidences which make up 21 percent of all 
incidences of violence against women are related to economic violence against women. The 
remaining 487 incidences which included 10 percent of the registered incidences are related to 
other types of violence against women. (AIHRC Report on Violence Against Women). 
The Government has taken a number of initiatives to facilitate prosecution of perpetrators. These 
measures include establishment of special courts for the cases of violence against women in 26 
provinces and this is expected to increase to 34 provinces, national coverage. Also a decision has 
been made to establish a special branch within the Supreme Court to specifically rule on the cases 
of violence against women, juvenile and family disputes. 
Child marriage, a form of gender-based violence (GBV), is illegal but widespread in Afghanistan. 
Afghanistan’s minimum age of marriage for girls is 16 or 15 years old, which is well below the 
internationally recommended standard of 18.  Child marriages mainly happen in rural areas, 
especially along the borders with Pakistan (UNFPA Afghanistan5). 
Gender-based violence also intersects with issues around access to and control over natural 
resources.  For example, research has shown that gender-differentiated roles related to land and 
resources can put women in a more vulnerable position to suffer GBV while carrying out daily 
responsibilities, such as fuel, firewood and water collection activities. When attempting to enter 
into agricultural markets, women can experience intimate partner violence as their partners seek 
to control finances and maintain economic dependencies (IUCN6).  
g. Gender Inequality Index  
Through the years, several indices have been developed to quantify the concept of gender 
inequality. The United Nations Development Programme uses the Gender Inequality Index (GII) 
and Gender Development Index (GDI). The GII is a composite measure that shows inequality in 
achievement between women and men in reproductive health, empowerment and the labor market 
while measuring achievement in human development in three areas: health, education, and 
command over economic resources. The GDI considers the gender gaps on human development 
between men and women.  
 
5 UNFPA Afghanistan: https://afghanistan.unfpa.org/en/node/15233 
6 IUCN Gender-based violence and environment linkages: https://portals.iucn.org/library/node/48969

=== PAGE 108 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
13 
H 
Afghanistan has a GII of 0.653 as of 2017. The GDI value as of 2017 is 0.625, which has ranked 
Afghanistan as 168 out 185. Afghans ranks lower in both GDI and GII compare to its neighboring 
countries as shown in the following table.   
 
 
Gender 
Development Index 
Gender 
Inequality Index 
Afghanistan 
0.625 
0.653 
Pakistan 
0.750 
0.541 
India 
0.841 
0.524 
Iran 
0.871 
0.461 
Tajikistan  
0.933 
0.317 
Uzbekistan  
0.945 
0.274 
IV. 
Legal and Administrative Framework Protecting Women and Protecting Gender 
Equality 
With the UN-convened Bonn agreement of 2001 signaling a different phase in Afghan history, 
significant achievement for women’s rights have been seen in Afghanistan. Nationally, the 
processes for these include: 
• the 2001 Brussels Afghan Women’s Summit for Democracy;  
• the 2001 creation of the first Ministry of Women’s Affairs; 
• the 2002 Declaration of the Essential Rights of Afghan Women; the 2002 National Area 
Based Development Program;  
• the establishment of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission in 2002;  
• the 2003 National Solidarity Program (NSP);  
• Twenty percent female representation in the Constitutional Loya Jirga;  
• the establishment of a 27 percent baseline quota for women’s political representation in 
the Wolesi Jirga (House of People);  
• a baseline 17 percent quota in the Meshrano Jirga (House of Elders);  
• a statutory requirement of female representation in 25 percent of Provincial Council 
seats;  
• the successful passage of the 2004 Afghan Constitution;  
• the 2005 Interim Afghanistan National Development Strategy;  
• the 2005 Afghanistan Millennium Development Goals;  
• the 2008 Afghanistan National Development Strategy (2008-13);  
• the 2006 Action Plan on Peace, Reconciliation, and Justice in Afghanistan; 
• the 2007 National Action Plan for Women of Afghanistan (2007-17) 
• The 2009 Law on the Elimination of Violence against women

=== PAGE 109 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
14 
H 
• the 2010 National Priority Programs with Women empowerment being one of the 
national priority programs. 
Article 22 of the constitution guarantees equal rights to man and women; it reads: “Any kind of 
discrimination and distinction between citizens of Afghanistan shall be forbidden. The citizens of 
Afghanistan, man and woman, have equal rights and duties before the law.” This article guarantees 
the application of the principles of equality in implementation of all articles of the constitution. 
Recognizing the fact that the women of Afghanistan do not benefit from the same means and 
opportunities to impact development and benefit from development in the country, the need for 
affirmative action, where necessary, is also justified in alignment with application of Article 22 of 
the constitution. 
Article 54 of the Constitution also calls for abolishment of the harmful practices that inhibit the 
wellbeing of the Afghan women.  Likewise, many other articles of the constitution make specific 
reference to women’s needs in education, health, political participation etc.   Articles 83 and 84 of 
the Constitution guarantees election of at least two women from province to the Lower House of 
the Parliament and selection of 50% women members by the President for the Upper House of the 
Parliament. 
In addition to the constitution, international laws also provide legal framework for protecting 
women. The government of Afghanistan ratified the Convention on the Elimination of all forms 
of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), without any reservations, in March 2003, which 
obligates governments to: 
 Incorporate the principle of equality of men and women and non-discrimination in its legal 
system and abolish all discriminatory laws; 
 Take all appropriate measures, including legislation and temporary special measures, so that 
women can enjoy all their human rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination, 
systematic or otherwise, by persons, organizations or enterprises. 
 Establish tribunals and other public institutions to ensure the effective protection of women 
against discrimination; 
Countries that have ratified or acceded to the Convention are legally bound to put its provisions 
into practice. They are also committed to submit national reports, at least every four years, on 
measures they have taken to comply with their treaty obligations.  Afghanistan submitted its 
combined periodic and interim report on CEDAW in 2011. 
Another key national document is the National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan 
(NAPWA) with the timeframe of 2008-2018, a ten-year plan towards addressing gaps in gender 
equality and women’s rights and empowerment in Afghanistan.  As the central instrument for 
women’s rights and empowerment, the plan envisions creation of “a condition where women take

=== PAGE 110 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
15 
H 
control and determine the direction of their lives, develop their full potential, make enlightened 
decisions, and exert positive influence over processes, mechanisms, and decisions that affect their 
well-being.” 
The broad strategy towards implementation of NAPWA focuses on the three following areas: 
 Elimination of discrimination against women 
 Development of women’s human capital 
 Promotion of women’s leadership 
In general, the three board areas above, will address the needs of women for conducive 
environments, their access to opportunities, resources and services as well as their share of power. 
The government of Afghanistan also endorsed its National Action Plan on implementation of 
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security in 2015. The 
Resolution stresses the importance of women’s participation in conflict resolution and post 
recovery development, as well as their protection during and after conflicts. Strategic priorities 
and objectives of the NAP 1325, fall into the four categories of; participation of women at all levels 
of decision making in political and peace processes as well in civil service; protection of women 
from the vulnerabilities during and after conflict; prevention of sexual and other kinds of violence 
against women; relief and recovery of women by providing them with access to resources and 
opportunities and providing a space for their involvement in the post conflict development 
processes. 
While above mentioned key regulatory documents provide the overall legal framework for 
protecting women’s right and guarantees gender equality, the government of Afghanistan has also 
put in place administrative system for working towards gender equality and protection of women’s 
rights. Established in 2002, the Ministry of Women Affairs (MoWA) has policymaking role to 
promote women’s rights and monitoring and evaluation responsibility to monitor development and 
administrative work of other ministries in relation to women’s rights. In recent years all line 
ministries have also established designated gender units responsible for all gender related issues 
of the ministry. The gender units are part of the planning and budgeting committees of the ministry 
and have the right to formally push for gender considerations in planning and budgeting process. 
The current administration has also established the high level gender subcommittee of the cabinet 
chaired by the Second Vice President.  All ministers are members of the gender subcommittee of 
the cabinet where they report on activities related to gender. Through technical support of UNDP 
and UN-Women, the Ministry of Finance has also introduced gender budgeting. The initiative is 
currently being piloted in 6 line ministries with plan to be rolled over to all budgetary units of the 
government.  
V. 
Gender issues in response to the impact of climate change  
It is important to note that in order to create transformational change, women are not just seen as

=== PAGE 111 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
16 
H 
climate change victims or beneficiaries. Women are imperative to climate change adaptation 
efforts. They practice adaptive measures as a part of daily life – through farming and in the face 
of increasing risks – through disaster recovery and preparation7. By utilizing these existing skills 
into project design and implementation and by providing a platform in which to empower women 
enables women’s influence to rise from a household to a community and national level. Leadership 
and decision‐making capacities and opportunities increase.  
Women from the poorest households often pay the most, sacrifice the most, are the most 
disadvantaged and the least resilient. 
Women are impacted differently by climate change in the following ways: 
• Women rely more on natural resources for their livelihoods, with staple crops providing up 
to 90 percent of food in farming districts of some countries and 60–80 percent of food in 
most developing countries. Women struggle to fulfill their key responsibility for the 
production of food, in spite of the detrimental impacts of climate change on agriculture. 
• Women and children are often responsible for gathering water and fuel in traditional 
agrarian societies, tasks that are laborious, challenging and time consuming. These tasks 
become more time intensive due to the impact of climate change; 
• Climate change is linked to increased incidences of tropical diseases such as cholera and 
malaria, which have severe impacts on women because of their limited access to medical 
services and their responsibility to care for the sick; 
• In some societies more women are dying during natural disasters because men receive 
preferential treatment in rescue and relief efforts; 
• Women are disproportionately affected due to vulnerability and the capacity to adapt to the 
process of climate change are affected by various factors, including age, education, social 
status, wealth, access to resources, sex, gender and many other social dimensions; 
• In addition, at the time of crisis, women’s needs are not considered priority in recovery 
programmes. 
 
Gender issues in relation to the project 
The Afghanistan Gender Equality Report Card illustrates the level of gender inequality in 
Afghanistan in related to energy access8. While access to water and electricity has improved, in 
2014, only 17% of Afghan women reported that their household always has access to electricity, 
compared to 18% who reported they only sometimes have access, 14% whom rarely have access, 
and 34% who never have access to electricity. 64% of women were somewhat or very 
dissatisfied with electricity in their area. Related to electricity access is connection to the 
 
7 http://asiapacificadapt.net/gender‐sourcebook/wp‐content/themes/iges/pdf/integrating‐gender‐sourcebook.pdf 
8 Equality for Pease and Democracy, 2015, Gender Equality Report Card

=== PAGE 112 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
17 
H 
internet. Only 2% of Afghan women are connected to the Internet for obtaining information, and 
though 88% of the population lives within the combined network of the four largest mobile 
network organizations and 80% have some access to a mobile phone, six out of ten Afghan 
women still do not use mobile phones for accessing information. Access to electricity is a crucial 
issue for gender equality. Access to electricity can dramatically cut the amount of time spent on 
household work, and access to electricity can considerably impact women’s time use. This 
furthermore frees up time for women and girls to participate in things like education, which has 
long-term implications for gender equality. 
 
Electricity may increase women’s knowledge in important ways. In contexts where women 
became directly involved in electricity supply, they gained a new type of skills as well as higher 
status9. This exemplifies how the gendered organisation of supply may affect women’s human 
resources and their wider empowerment. In Afghanistan, women’s access to television and radio 
programmes provided them with information about women’s rights, which they believed had 
enhanced their role in family decision-making (ibid.). 
 
Studies on gender-sensitive electricity interventions have documented that women’s direct 
involvement in supply increased their decision-making power and that this positively affected 
gender norms and women’s social position in the communities10. This occurred through an 
expansion in the type of roles considered possible and appropriate for women. In Afghanistan, 
training women to install and maintain SHS was reported to change some men’s perceptions of a 
woman’s possible roles. As expressed by a man, himself being a mullah, in the aftermath of the 
project: ‘I saw that women and men are equal in this and that women have capabilities’11. Also 
contributing to women’s higher esteem was the trained women’s ability to endure the hardship 
experienced when parting from their family during the 6 months’ training period. Their 
‘sacrifice’ of leaving behind what is seen as the most important institution in life; family and 
community, in order to help bring development, was often mentioned by both women and men 
as warranting much respect and reflecting the women´s strength (ibid.). 
 
Stakeholder consultations took place at the Gender Focal Team Meetings consisting of 
government agencies, NGOs, CSOs and UN agencies which resulted in several observations 
regarding gender related challenges as well as opportunities: 
 
Access to funding/lack of funding 
According to the Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, 85% of the private sector consists 
of Small and Medium Enterprises. SMEs, however, face challenges and obstacles with regard to 
access to finance while women-led businesses in particular have difficulties acquiring loans. 
Access to finance for women-led businesses is more complicated than for male-led businesses. 
While commercial banks and microfinance institutions offer loans, the insurance for those loans 
 
9 Winther et al, Women’s empowerment through electricity access: scoping study and proposal for a framework of analysis, Journal of 
Development Effectiveness, Vol 9, no. 3, 389-417 
10 Winther et al, Women’s empowerment through electricity access: scoping study and proposal for a framework of analysis, Journal of 
Development Effectiveness, Vol 9, no. 3, 389-417 
11 Standal, K. 2008. “Giving light and hope in Rural Afghanistan: Enlightening women’s lives with solar energy.” Master Thesis, University of 
Oslo, Norway

=== PAGE 113 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
18 
H 
largely relies on property or land ownership, which is limited for Afghan women12. Historically, 
properties are registered by male household members. Involvement of women in capacity 
building activities targeting private sector (RESCO) development, should therefore ensure 
sufficient female participation (addressed in Activity 2.3).  
 
Female under-representation in senior level (decision-making) positions 
Current challenges in Afghanistan include high maternal mortality rates and unequal pay for 
women for similar work as compared to men. With fewer women elected to office, women have 
a weaker voice and influence than men in politics. Female representation in legislator, senior 
official and manager roles and Afghanistan’s political atmosphere is still very low. Involvement 
of women in government targeted capacity building is therefore crucial (addressed in Activity 
1.1, Activity 1.2, Activity 1.3, Activity 3.3 and Activity 3.4).  
 
Limitation in the technology field 
As described previously, the ratio of male/female student is still eschewed towards male students 
where for every two male students there is one female student. It also has been observed that the 
number of female professionals in the technology field is limited. Skills and access to technology 
of rural women and girls are also quite low. Skilled technicians for off-grid electrification still 
are in shortage. It is essential to build capacity in the energy sector with a limited quantity of 
female participants. Women participation and capacity building should be encouraged through 
various stages of the project life-cycle (addressed in Activity 2.1, Activity 2.2 and Activity 2.3). 
 
VI. 
Recommendations 
a. Gender analysis 
The gender analysis undertaken at the onset and design of this project acts as an entry point for 
gender mainstreaming throughout implementation. Stakeholder consultations took place at the 
Gender Focal Team Meetings consist of government agencies, NGOs, CSOs and UN agencies.  
Results from the consultations are detailed below in the Stakeholder engagement section further 
below. 
The gender analysis, through stakeholder engagement and consultation enabled: 
• Assessment of the gender‐related activities in responding to the expanding threat of climate 
change, including gender roles and responsibilities, resource use and management, and 
decision making raised by the project; 
• Engagement, development and input into the design of responding to the expanding threat 
of climate change and building the resilience of the most vulnerable communities through 
sustainable energy access; 
• Demonstration of the need for gender‐disaggregated data and indicators to establish a 
 
12 Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, 2014, Small and Medium Enterprises Development and Regional Trade in Afghanistan

=== PAGE 114 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
19 
H 
baseline in which to measure improvements and identify areas of focus; and 
• Establishment of recommendations to incorporate into the Gender Assessment Action 
Plan. 
Through the stakeholder engagement and consultations, the gender related activities resulting from 
the assessment and the recommendations for design of project activities, e.g. related to 
encouraging productive use aimed at higher agricultural productivity through decreased post-
harvest losses and decreased loss of livestock due to extreme weather, have been included in the 
project design. Gender disaggregated data has been included in the Logical Framework for the 
project. 
 
b. Project design and implementation 
Addressing gender dimensions within the project design and implementation, this proposal 
identifies and integrates interventions to provide gender responsive and transformative results.  
The project design will take into consideration the following gender implications: 
• Women’s role in agricultural production; analysis of gender division of labor (e.g. gender‐
differentiated roles, responsibilities, and needs); 
• Women’s access to, and control over, natural resources and the goods and services that 
they provide (Increasing women’s access to and control over resources, improves the 
effectiveness of such projects); 
• Possibilities and potential of women participation in Rural Energy Service Companies 
(RESCOs);  
• Identification of gaps in equality through the use of sex‐disaggregated data enabling 
development of gender action plan to close those gaps, devoting resources and expertise 
for implementing such strategies, monitoring the results of implementation, and holding 
individuals and institutions accountable for outcomes that promote gender equality; 
• Assess how gender is currently mainstreaming in the energy sector, to develop need 
assessments, enable planning, and be effective in monitoring and evaluation; 
• Involve women and men both at macro and micro level in climate resilience process; 
• Evaluation of women’s work time, both as paid and unpaid; 
• Gather data on the time women spent collecting biomass fuel;  
•  Identify specific strategies to include / target female‐headed households; and 
• Promote advocacy and awareness adjusted to most effectively reflect gender‐specific 
differences. Strategies used in the project are tailored, taking into account such differences; 
The project implementation will take into consideration the following gender implications:

=== PAGE 115 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
20 
H 
• Division of labor on small farms, taking into consideration gender specific views on 
management; 
• Inclusion of a Gender Specialist position within the project to implement gender related 
activities; 
• Inclusion of all stakeholders involved in the project to develop awareness raising / training 
aimed at drawing attention to the implication of climate resilience adaptation and gender 
equality; 
• Targeting women agricultural cooperatives; and 
• Undertaking community discussions and dialogue in relation to gender and climate 
resilience and adaptation strategies with the inclusion of indigenous knowledge. 
During project implementation, qualitative assessments will be conducted on the gender‐specific 
benefits that can be directly associated to the project. This will be incorporated in the annual 
Project Implementation Report, Mid‐Term Report, and Terminal Evaluation. Indicators to quantify 
the achievement of project objectives in relation to gender equality will include men and women 
who had access to affordable solutions, number of men and women employed from the jobs created 
by the project, training opportunities, knowledge management and information dissemination. 
c. Stakeholder engagement 
The stakeholder consultations and engagement of women’s organizations promote gender equality 
at the local as well as at national level. The involvement of women’s organizations in the project 
design will assist in the identification of relevant gender issues within the country’s social context, 
and implementation and monitoring of gender aspects of the project. 
Number of consultations with the Gender Focal Team (GFT) took place during project design. The 
target populations were women and men as representatives of all stakeholder groups affected by 
this proposal. 
The stakeholder engagement component of this annex, captures the specific issues and difficulties 
that women face in responding to the impacts of climate change and building the resilience of the 
most vulnerable communities through sustainable energy access.   
The results captured as are follows: 
• 
Overall knowledge about climate change issues is little; 
• 
There is a gap in capacity (finance, human, knowledge and skill) to mainstream 
climate issues in relation to gender; 
• 
There is a gap in capacity for women led business to access finance, which relates 
to RESCO development; 
• 
There is underrepresentation of women in governmental decision making

=== PAGE 116 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
21 
H 
positions; 
• 
There is a limited number of female professionals in technology 
• 
There is no work integration between the Ministry of Women Affairs, Ministry of 
Energy and Water and the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development on 
issues related to gender and access to energy; and 
• 
Lack of sex‐disaggregated data in all sectors (e.g. livelihoods, disasters’ 
preparedness, protection of environment, health and well‐being) often leads to an 
underestimation of women’s role and contribution. 
 The recommendations by the Gender Focal Team include: 
• 
Community level awareness raising at all levels; 
• 
(Government) staff capacity building on gender and climate change analysis, 
planning, budgeting and mainstreaming; 
• 
Identification of the issues and challenges that hinder men, women in accessing 
all levels of policy and decision‐making processes; 
• 
Engagement of women in order to play a leadership role promoting access to 
sustainable energy, including in RESCOs; 
• 
Engagement of civic associations; 
• 
Identification and analysis of traditional versus modern community structure in 
relation to climate resilience and coping mechanisms. Here ‘traditional structure’ 
refers to indigenous institution and their auxiliary functions while modern 
community structure refers to Government and NGOs backed community 
organizations such as Community Development Councils (CDCs), and District 
Development Assemblies (DDAs); and 
• 
Engagement of women in encouraging income generating activities in relation to 
productive use potential from energy access. 
 
Stakeholder consultations at the sites of the 3 solar mini-grids to be constructed in the project 
also identified opportunities for productive use of energy whereby women can have an important 
role to play as women are usually interested to generate additional income for their households. 
The consultations indicated a high level of entrepreneurship among the communities in the sites. 
At the same time, power access seems to be the principal hurdle in the way of greater enterprise 
development. With a strong horticulture sector, a prominent ramp-up business model could 
include cold storages for agricultural products and fruits. Given the strong focus on animal 
husbandry, dairy and milk-product development is another significant area where the project can 
support enterprise development. Finally, electricity powered, mechanical shearing and 
slaughterhouses are promising activities with good returns on an investment. Productive use of 
energy with a strong focus on productive use potential that leads to higher agricultural 
productivity (decreased post-harvest losses and decreased loss of livestock due to extreme 
weather) should therefore be a prominent element in capacity building of community 
beneficiaries and should have a specific focus on women.

=== PAGE 117 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
22 
H 
 
d. Monitoring and evaluation 
Through onset analysis, data has been collated to establish a baseline. This data shall be 
monitored against throughout implementation and evaluation. 
The analysis identified the differences between men and women within at‐risk 
populations. In order to monitor and evaluate progress of the project, the following 
indicators can be measured: 
Quantitative Outcomes: 
• Women and men as beneficiaries of project activities related to workshops for policy 
development and setting-up and training of RESCOs; 
• Female/male‐headed households as beneficiaries in relation to development of 
investment design reports for mini-grids; 
 
Qualitative outcomes: 
• Opportunities to generate additional income as a result of energy access. Women 
are more likely to respond to incentives that address their family’s basic needs, 
such as better health and nutrition, linking agriculture and food security 
improvements; 
• Contribution to self‐esteem raised and empowerment of women in the 
community, e.g. as a result of RESCO training; 
• Effectiveness of awareness increasing; and 
• Ability of women and men to identify their environmental changes and risks 
based on their different roles and access to resources. 
.

=== PAGE 118 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
23 
H 
VII. 
Proposed Gender Action Plan  
The project recognizes the importance of gender inclusion in the project interventions. Hence, 
the project not only incorporates renewable energy technologies that would benefit women by 
giving them access to cleaner energy, better health and education facilities; but also involves and 
benefits women enterprises on the supply side of renewable energy development by involving 
women agricultural cooperatives and tailoring shops at community level. Additionally, the 
project interventions will build capacity of women in the area of renewable energy at national 
level.  
 
The project will also work with the religious leaders and Mullahs that are active in the three 
locations where solar mini-grids are being implemented, to raise awareness on women’s rights 
and opportunities that energy access may offer in strengthening women’s rights. Although not a 
direct topic in this project, the issue of gender-based violence may also be raised during such 
consultations.  
 
The project is expected to achieve the following results in advancing gender equality and 
women’s empowerment: 
• Increased entrepreneurship opportunities for women among the communities in the three 
sites for solar mini-grid implementation, resulting from capacity building on productive 
use of energy 
• Improved understanding and best practices in delivering gender responsive renewable 
energy services and rural mini-grid development in the target areas. 
• Increased women’s technical expertise in the area of renewable energy in general, and 
mini-grid development specifically, at national level as a result of capacity building 
activities 
 
This Gender Action plan provides suggested entry points for gender‐responsive actions to be 
taken under each of the Activity areas of the project. In addition, specific indicators are also 
proposed to measure and track progress on these actions at the activity level. This can be 
incorporated into the detailed M&E plan which will be developed at the start of implementation, 
and provides concrete recommendations on how to ensure gender (including disaggregated data) 
continues to be collected and measured throughout implementation.

=== PAGE 119 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
24 
H 
 
Activities 
Targets and Indicators 
Timeline 
Partner Institutions 
Budget (USD) 
Output 1: Energy Market De-risking by policy, regulatory and institutional development for improved renewable energy (RE) services in rural areas 
• Ensure involvement of women in government 
targeted capacity building 
• Support women’s professional development and 
decision-making roles in the renewable energy 
sector, including government and the private 
sector 
• Conduct training for MRRD, MEW and DABS 
government staff on gender sensitization of energy 
sector policies and strategies. 
• Ensure involvement of women in government 
targeted capacity building, including training 
technical standards for design & operation of mini-
grids to project beneficiaries including both men 
and women. If deemed necessary, organize 
separate training 
• 
Assess if the intervention has the potential to 
promote gender equality and/or women’s 
empowerment or is likely to have an adverse 
gender impact or increases women’s exposure to 
risk.  
• Baseline: 0 
• 160 female government and non- government 
officials trained with enhanced capacity in mini-
grid policy, technical standards for design & 
operation of mini-grids; at least 75% assesses 
applicability in daily work to be “useful” for 
assignment tasks 
• Indicator: nr of female staff trained; % of 
participants assessing training as “useful” for 
assignment tasks 
 
• Baseline: 0 
• Target: 500 Government and non- Government 
officials trained (of which 100 women): 80% 
indicate to have better understanding of 
gender impact and opportunities for gender 
inclusiveness of rural mini-grid development 
• Indicator: Government and non-Government 
officials (20% females) with enhanced 
understanding of gender impact and 
opportunities for gender inclusiveness of rural 
mini-grid development 
 
 
 
 
 
Q4 2020 –  
Q3 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
Q4 2020 -  
Q4 2023 
 
 
• 
Project Management 
Office (PMO), 
Gender Specialist 
 
 
 
 
• 
PMO and Ministry of 
Rural Rehabilitation 
and Development 
(MRRD) 
 
 
Included in 
training 
budget 
 
 
 
 
Included in 
training 
budget 
 
 
Activities 
Targets and Indicators 
Timeline 
Partner Institutions 
Budget 
(USD) 
Output 2: Social Acceptance Risk and Labour Risk de-risked by enhanced awareness and knowledge of government entities, beneficiaries and market actors on RE mini-grids

=== PAGE 120 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
25 
H 
• Provide technical training to project beneficiaries 
including both men and women. If deemed 
necessary, organize separate training classes for 
male and female participants. Ensure that training 
and coaching program includes how to use mini-
grids to increase family income benefit.  
• Work with the religious leaders and Mullahs to raise 
awareness on women’s rights during the Friday 
prayers. 
• Ensure mini-grid implementation addresses 
productive use issues priorities by women 
• 
Ensure that training activities are gender inclusive 
and participatory  
• 
Increase awareness on the gender-related issues on 
RE productive use and demand-side issues, 
particularly those areas prioritized by women 
 
• Baseline: 0 
• Target: 400 women involved in capacity 
building on productive use potential trained in 
rural RE mini-grid systems planning 
• Indicator: # of women in communities trained 
 
• 
Baseline = Level 1 
• 
Target = Level 4 
• 
Indicator: Level of capability13 of community 
and local business representatives in Khost, 
Parwan and Kandahar in identifying 
productive use opportunities 
 
 
 
Q1 2021 –  
Q1 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q3 2021 –  
Q3 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
PMO, Gender 
Specialist and 
Ministry of Rural 
Rehabilitation and 
Development 
(MRRD) 
 
• 
PMO, Gender 
Specialist and 
Ministry of Rural 
Rehabilitation and 
Development 
(MRRD) 
 
 
 
Included in 
training budget 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Included in 
training budget 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activities 
Targets and Indicators 
Timeline 
Partner Institutions 
Budget 
(USD) 
Output 3. Construction of three solar mini-grids and set-up of upscaling platform 
• Assess if the construction of 3 solar mini-grids -
mini-grid in Kandahar, Khost and Parwan has 
the potential to promote gender equality 
and/or women’s empowerment or is likely to 
have an adverse gender impact or increases 
women’s exposure to risk.  
• Develop gender responsive standards for social 
and environmental safeguards regulations for 
RE mini-grid development  
 
• Baseline: 0 
• Target: Implementation Assessments of 3 
Solar Mini-grids mini-grids in Kandahar, 
Khost and Parwan include substantive 
analysis of gender considerations, 
including women’s priorities for productive 
use and demand side issues. 
 
 
Q1 2020 –  
Q4 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
PMO, Gender 
Specialist and 
Ministry of Rural 
Rehabilitation and 
Development 
(MRRD) 
 
 
 
Included in  
budget 
development 3 
solar mini-grids 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 “Capable of identifying productive use opportunities” is based on a scale where 1 = limited to no knowledge on productive use; Level 2 = households and businesses aware of renewable energy and know how/where to get 
related information; Level 3 = households and businesses engaged with support activities and requesting additional information on productive use for their specific situation; Level 4 = households and business knowledgeable 
about productive energy use and identified concrete opportunities by means of expanding business or introducing new business

=== PAGE 121 ===
Annex XIII – Gender assessment and action plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
26 
H 
•
Collect sex-disaggregated data and gender
specific information related to the 5 mini-grid 
locations for which investment design reports
will be developed.
•
Assess if the design packages of-mini-grids have
the potential to promote gender equality and/or
women’s empowerment or is likely to have an 
adverse gender impact or increases women’s
exposure to risk.
•
Indicator: # of Implementation 
Assessments with substantive analysis of
gender considerations
•
Baseline: 0
•
Target: 5 detailed investment design reports
developed for RE mini-grids in pre-identified 
areas in line with gender responsive green 
procurement guidelines and social and 
environmental safeguards regulations,
including women’s priorities for productive 
use and demand side issues
•
Indicator: # of investment design reports with 
gender responsive green procurement
guidelines and safeguards regulations
including women’s priorities for productive 
use and demand side issues
Q1 2020 – 
Q4 2023 
•
PMO, Gender
Specialist and 
Ministry of Rural
Rehabilitation and 
Development
(MRRD) 
Included in 
budget 
development 5 
mini-grid design 
reports 
____________________
