=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.6.20034
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.6.20034
creationDate: D:20200217173806+09'00'
modDate: D:20200218095505+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum V 
Funding proposal package for FP128 
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
18 February 2020 
Meeting of the Board 
10 – 12 March 2020 
Geneva, Switzerland 
Provisional Agenda Item 17 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Arbaro Fund – Sustainable Forestry Fund” submitted by 
MUFG Bank, Ltd.; 
b) No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure; 
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment; 
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s 
assessment; and  
f) 
Gender documentation of the funding proposal. 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “Arbaro Fund – Sustainable Forestry Fund” submitted 
by MUFG Bank, Ltd. is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and 
Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or 
commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                               1 
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)             62 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure                                                                                         70 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                             73 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                 88 
assessment 
Gender documentation                                                                                                                                      89

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Arbaro Fund – Sustainable Forestry Fund. 
Country(ies): 
Sub-Saharan African and Latin American countries as 
follows: Ethiopia, Ghana, Sierra Leone, Uganda 
Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru 
Accredited Entity: 
MUFG Bank.  
Date of first submission: 
(2019/06/26)  
Date of current submission  
(2020/02/17)  
Version number 
[V.019 FINAL]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 0 OF 61 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-MUFG]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 1 OF 61 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or private 
sector 
Private 
 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
Mobilizing Funds at Scale (MFS) 
 
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it. 
The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation:   
 
☐ 
Low-emission transport:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:  
 
☒ 
Forestry and land use:   
 
 
 
 
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☐ 
Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
 
  
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security: 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment:  
 
 
 
☐ 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution:  
0% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
 
 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  
20 million tCO2 
A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  
 
 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  
Up to 200 million  USD  
A.9. Project size 
Medium (Upto USD 250 
million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
25 million USD 
For multi-country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17. 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☐ Grant 
  
 
☐ Loan 
  
☐ Guarantee 
  
☒ Equity  
 
25 million USD 
☐ Results-based  
 
     payment 
 
  
A.11. Implementation 
period 
13 + 1 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
15 + 1 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/ 
programme, if available.  
Click or tap to enter a date. 
A.14. ESS category  
Refer to the AE’s safeguard 
policy and  GCF ESS 
Standards to assess your FP 
category. 
A  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme? 
Yes ☐       No ☒

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 2 OF 61 
 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1. 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
The Fund Manager FiM Asset Management S.à r.l. – AIFM, registered in Luxembourg 
(“AIFM” or the “Manager”) and 
Arbaro Fund SLP, registered in Luxembourg as a special limited partnership (“Arbaro 
Fund” or “Arbaro”) and 
Arbaro I GP S.à r.l (“General Partner”) 
 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
Arbaro Fund is ranked top 30 for the request for proposal (RFP) – mobilizing funds at scale (MFS) out of 350 funding 
proposals. Arbaro Fund will provide effective climate change mitigation outcome through investing in sustainable 
plantation forestry projects in emerging forestry markets of Latin America and Sub Saharan Africa, while also bringing 
adaptation co-benefits. This investment approach provides developing countries and their rural communities with a 
solution to increase carbon sinks by producing wood in a sustainable manner and conserving natural forests, whilst 
contributing to reduction of illegal logging. Besides direct mitigation achieved in forest plantations, Arbaro operations 
will lead to additional GHG emission reduction benefits: the protection of natural forests in project areas, as well as 
the provision of alternative wood resources, will support efforts to combat deforestation and degradation of natural 
forests in project regions, and part of the carbon contained in harvested trees will be stored in wood products. These 
additional benefits are, however, not claimed by the Arbaro Fund. 
The Arbaro Fund will identify and execute projects, focused on sustainable timber production based on the 
establishment of Greenfield projects and on the expansion, upscaling and technical improvement of Brownfield 
projects. Arbaro’s average investment size will be between USD 10 to 25 million per project, with a final portfolio of 8 
to 12 underlying investments / portfolio companies. In Latin America, initially Arbaro contemplates investments in 
Ecuador, Paraguay and Peru; in Sub-Saharan Africa in Ethiopia, Ghana, Sierra Leone and Uganda. 
The key objectives of the Arbaro Fund are: 
1) 
Provide effective climate change mitigation 
When trees are planted on non-forested land, they capture and store additional carbon dioxide from the 
atmosphere. During the lifetime of Arbaro, through its activities in its projects Arbaro is estimated to sequester 
up to 20 million tonnes of CO2 (net effect). 
2) 
Close the sustainable timber supply gap 
Most of the Arbaro’s target countries face or will in the near future face a significant supply gap in sustainably 
produced industrial roundwood. The local industries utilising this raw material will face severe problems unless 
the prevailing development can be turned around. Arbaro’s projects will seek to start closing this supply gap, 
and provide locally produced and sustainably produced timber, increasingly replacing imports and improving 
the country’s trade balance. 
3) 
Support conservation efforts 
All plantation developments of Arbaro will be Forest Stewardship Council (“FSC”) certified1, which is still rare in 
the targeted regions (See page 6 – Climate Eligibility Criteria and Additionality). The approach includes an 
element of conservation of existing adjacent natural forest, wetland or other such vulnerable habitats. On 
average these FSC certified plantation forest project will set aside 20% of its total land area for conservation 
purposes. Hence it is expected that for every 1 000 planted hectares 200 hectares will be actively conserved. 
By providing sustainably produced raw material to the local processing industries and forest product markets, 
Arbaro through its investments reduces the pressure to further increase utilisation of natural forest resources. 
In addition, and following its investment strategy which requires provision of positive social impact in addition to 
economic and positive environmental impact, the Arbaro Fund contributes the following co-benefits 
1) 
Provide climate change adaptation co-benefits 
Improving resilience: By adaptive management practises (e.g. correct species and rotation choices) plantations 
can contribute to reduced vulnerability of near-by natural forests and other natural ecosystems by soil 
conservation, improved watersheds and by providing ecological corridors. 
 
1 For details please refer to B1 on Permanence and Annex 23

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 61 
 
Providing alternative livelihoods: Smallholder farming is an important source of employment and income for 
rural populations. Providing alternative livelihoods through formal employment opportunities improves the 
resilience of the rural communities and decreases dependence on climate sensitive subsistence practices. Up 
to 200 000 rural people are expected to benefit from the investments. 
2) 
Empower local communities and enhance capacities 
Arbaro aims to promote out-grower schemes, where communities in the proximity of a forest plantations will be 
trained to apply modern silviculture to their own land, thus providing several benefits such as additional and 
diversified income, economic empowerment and improving rural capacities. Out-grower schemes are 
envisaged to be supported as a combination of technical assistance provided by Arbaro’s investee projects and 
by grant funding programmes. 
3) 
Provide formal employment opportunities 
Arbaro, through its investments, is estimated to provide direct employment to ca 5 000 people. In addition, it is 
assumed that indirectly Arbaro’s investee projects will employ another 15 000 people and provide improved 
livelihoods for up to 200 000 people.

=== PAGE 8 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 61 
 
 
 
2 Please refer to Annex 23 on sustainable forest plantations 
3 Please refer to Annex 22 on carbon methodologies 
4 Cut off of 1994 
5 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change - the United Nations body for assessing the science related to 
climate change 
6 Forest inventories, which provide the first step in the mitigation impact calculation are based on scientifically 
approved methodologies and protocols and procedures accepted and globally used in the forestry sector. 
These consist of the physical, on the ground measurement of trees in representative forest samples, which 
allows to calculate the estimated existing volume in the plantations and growth over time. These data must be 
kept in the portfolio company records and, in the case of FSC be available for FSC to study, and in the case of 
Arbaro, be available for Arbaro fund to access and monitor.  
Arbaro fund monitors these annually, and these are used in the calculation of the carbon sequestration. 
The carbon sequestration results (among other items) are reported to the GCF as part of the annual reporting 
cycle. 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate rationale and context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Climate rationale: Effective climate mitigation through development of new permanent carbon sinks  
When trees are planted on non-forested land, they capture and store additional carbon dioxide (CO2) from the 
atmosphere. In sustainable forest plantations2 the forest is created over time and once the first planted trees reach 
their harvesting age, they are harvested but new trees are planted to replace them. This cycle is continued 
perpetually. With such forest management a permanent carbon stock is created3, whilst providing raw material to the 
markets. 
Arbaro Fund targets creating 75 000 hectares of new forest areas which will sequester up to 20 million tonnes of CO2 
during the lifetime of the programme. Arbaro Fund follows the Forest Stewardship Council (“FSC”) for forest 
management, which requires, among other things, that new forests are planted in non-forest areas or areas which 
have been deforested long time ago4 and therefore Arbaro Fund will never replace or convert existing natural forest 
or other vulnerable ecosystem with forest plantation.  
Methodological approach 
To estimate the carbon sequestration resulting from the implementation of the programme, Arbaro has developed a 
robust methodology that builds on internationally recognized approaches. First and foremost, Arbaro follows the 
general guidance of the IPCC5 as described in the 2006 Guidelines for national GHG inventories and the 2003 Good 
Practice Guidance for LULUCF that provides sector-specific recommendations. The 2006 Guidelines are applied by 
more and more countries in their national inventories and reports to the UNFCCC and supplemented by the 2013 
Good Practices Guidance as well as the 2019 Refinement, it will continue to become the standard approach to be 
used by all parties under the Paris Agreement. Following this guidance, the carbon stock changes in the project areas 
since the beginning of implementation of each project are monitored annually. Only those carbon pools that are 
changing considerably due to the implementation of the project are selected. In a forest plantation most of the carbon 
changes happen in the tree biomass, mainly in the stem but also in the branches, leaves and roots, however carbon 
is also stored in dead organic matter and the soil. To estimate the sequestration of carbon in a project, the timber 
volume in the plantations is measured first hand through forest inventories annually6. Stem volumes are thereafter 
converted into tCO2 based on approved conservative conversion factors. 
Arbaro only claims net carbon sequestered in forest plantations that is additional and permanent. To do this Arbaro 
uses approaches from the methodologies of the CDM, as well as the VCS and the Gold Standard, the most widely 
recognized standards for voluntary carbon certification of projects. The baseline scenario (= without Arbaro project 
scenario) is assessed and any potential sequestration in the baseline and sequestration achieved before the 
programme activities is deduced from the sequestration achieved through programme activities. Any emissions that 
may result from the implementation of the programme is accounted and deducted from the programme sequestration. 
All harvested wood is assumed as a loss and no carbon stored in harvested wood products is claimed. To account for 
losses due to harvest a maximum sequestration that can be claimed is the long-term average, which is set using the 
recognized methodology:

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 5 OF 61 
 
 
 
7 Please refer to Annex 23, or www.fsc.org 
 
Source: Gold standard 
Permanence 
Permanence is a concern in reforestation projects. Arbaro follows the approach of the VCS and Gold Standard. 
These certification methods issue permanent carbon credits and thus need to ensure that GHG benefits are 
permanent. For this they give great importance to the long-term sustainability of the projects: projects which are 
economically viable, socially beneficial and environmentally sound can continue operations in the long term. Both 
standards consider FSC certification as a proof of sustainability. Following this approach, all of Arbaro’ s projects 
must achieve FSC certification. 
FSC was founded in 1993 through joint effort of environmental and social NGOs as well as producers and retailers of 
wood products. The FSC is a global multi-stakeholder membership scheme with a strong emphasis on NGO 
participation. FSC requires adherence to principles and criteria which need to be followed in a manner appropriate to 
the scale, intensity and risk of the project. FSC certification does not automatically last forever. The certified projects 
go through annual audits by external auditors and in addition, the certification has to be renewed every five years.  
The FSC principles7 are: 
• 
Principle #1: Compliance with laws - The certified entity shall comply with all applicable laws, regulations and 
nationally-ratified international treaties, conventions and agreements.  
• 
Principle #2: Workers' rights and employment conditions - The certified entity shall maintain or enhance the 
social and economic well-being of workers.  
• 
Principle #3: Indigenous peoples’ rights - The certified entity shall identify and uphold indigenous peoples’ 
legal and customary rights of ownership, use and management of land, territories and resources affected by 
management activities. 
• 
Principle #4: Community relations - The certified entity shall contribute to maintaining or enhancing the social 
and economic well-being of local communities.  
• 
Principle #5: Benefits from the forest - The certified entity shall efficiently manage the range of multiple 
products and services of the Management Unit (=certified area) to maintain or enhance long term economic 
viability and the range of environmental and social benefits.  
• 
Principle #6: Environmental values and impact- The certified entity shall maintain, conserve and/or restore 
ecosystem services and environmental values of the Management Unit, and shall avoid, repair or mitigate 
negative environmental impacts.  
• 
Principle #7: Management planning - The certified entity shall have a management plan consistent with its 
policies and objectives and proportionate to scale, intensity and risks of its management activities. The 
management plan shall be implemented and kept up to date based on monitoring information in order to 
promote adaptive management. The associated planning and procedural documentation shall be sufficient to 
guide staff, inform affected stakeholders and interested stakeholders and to justify management decisions.  
• 
Principle #8: Monitoring and assessment - The certified entity shall demonstrate that progress towards 
achieving the management objectives, the impacts of management activities and the condition of the

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 6 OF 61 
 
 
 
8 Climate eligibility criteria of the Arbaro Fund 
Management Unit, are monitored and evaluated proportionate to the scale, intensity and risk of management 
activities, in order to implement adaptive management.  
• 
Principle #9: High conservation values - The certified entity shall maintain and/or enhance the high 
conservation values in the Management Unit through applying the precautionary approach.  
• 
Principle #10: Implementation of management activities- Management activities conducted by or for the 
certified entity for the Management Unit shall be selected and implemented consistent with the certified 
entity’s economic, environmental and social policies and objectives, and in compliance with the Principles 
and Criteria collectively. 
In addition, there are country specific adaptations of these principles and criteria. Today, FSC is the most recognized 
environmental and social certification scheme for forest management and known for its stringent requirements 
including annual external audits for certified projects. 
Additional mitigation benefits through conservation and land use 
Creating sustainable forest plantations also means that any existing natural forests or areas with otherwise high 
conservation value, such as wetlands, which are part of the overall project area, are conserved. On average this 
means that between 20% of the overall project area is conserved, with the responsibility of maintaining the integrity of 
these areas being placed on the project entity. These conservation areas provide further mitigation benefits, which 
however are not claimed as part of the programme. Together the plantation area and the conserved natural areas 
increase the resilience of the overall landscape against climate change impacts. Finally, in case of Arbaro Fund’s 
projects, majority of the foreseen products produced from the wood will be mechanical forest products such as panels 
or sawn timber for e.g. furniture manufacturing or construction. In these products the carbon stock continues 
throughout the lifecycle of the product, i.e. significantly beyond harvesting of the tree. This additional sequestration is 
not claimed by the Arbaro Fund. 
Arbaro Fund, by afforesting or reforesting oftentimes degraded land and protecting attached conservation areas of 
natural forest, will both establish new carbon sinks and contribute to reduced emissions from deforestation and land 
use change. This will make an important contribution to enable the target countries to achieve their climate targets, as 
forestry is one of the few sectors that allows sequestration of carbon dioxide and is reflected in many INDCs to the 
Paris Agreement and the national climate strategies. For detailed analysis of the target countries’ climate policies and 
regional circumstances, please refer to Section D5 and Annex 23, Climate rationale, country context. 
Climate eligibility criteria and additionality 
Arbaro Fund is governed by its investment strategy, climate eligibility criteria and its ESMS. Three key building blocks 
of the investment strategy are: 
1) Climate mitigation benefits of the projects and their ability to provide effective carbon sequestration 
2) Long term financial viability of the projects and their ability to provide returns to the investors; and 
3) Social co-benefits of the projects and their ability to provide formal employment in their areas of operation. 
As part of the climate eligibility, Arbaro assesses the baseline, barriers, investment case, funding mobilization 
potential as well as mitigation benefits (net sequestration impact) of the proposed project together with co-benefit 
creation potential. These together with the framework of conditions derived from the investment strategy and ESMS 
determine whether the proposed project will proceed in Arbaro’s investment process8. 
In Arbaro’s target countries, FSC certified forests are still rare. The forest area with FSC certification represents a 
share of 5% in Latin America and 2% in Africa. These numbers include all production forests, also natural forests 
which tend to be much larger scale than forest plantations. Forest production under FSC standards is not a common 
practice in Arbaro countries, but an innovative approach that needs substantial support to become the industry 
standard and contribute to the shift towards sustainable production in the sector.

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 7 OF 61 
 
 
 
9 WWF 2012 
10 Kharas 2017 
11 WWF 2012 
 
 
Figure 1 FSC certified forests in Arbaro’s target countries in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa 
 
Responding to increased demand through sustainable production 
Demand for wood-based products will grow to unprecedented levels over the coming decades9. By 2050, the world’s 
population is projected to reach 9.7 billion. Rising numbers of people are only part of the story. At the same time, 
economic growth, urbanization and increasing prosperity are driving greater consumption10. Meeting these growing 
demands will increase the already huge pressure on the world’s natural resources, forests and wood being no 
exception. WWF’s Living Forests Model projects that wood harvesting will more than double by 2030, and almost 
quadruple by 2050: from 3.4 million m3 in 2010, to 7.6 million m3 in 2030 and 13.1 million m3 by mid-century11.  There 
are various measures that societies could, and should, employ to reduce the need to harvest trees – including more 
efficient saw mills and pulp mills, greater recycling, less wasteful consumption in rich countries and energy-efficient 
improved wood stoves in developing ones. But these will have only a limited impact. The bottom line is that we will be 
using more wood than ever before and there are limits to how much wood can be harvested from natural forests. 
Currently, planted forests make up only around 7% of forest cover worldwide, but supply a third of the total global 
production of industrial roundwood. Sustainable forest plantations can therefore provide an effective tool to produce 
the wood in smaller land areas efficiently. 
In addition to having excellent bio-physical and general climatic conditions for growing forests, Arbaro’s target 
countries are characterized by the macroeconomic drivers that fuel consumption: 
2019-2024 
Ethiopia 
Ghana 
Sierra 
Leone 
Uganda 
Ecuador 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Population growth 
2.49% 
2.09% 
2.03% 
2.86% 
1.30% 
1.19% 
1.04% 
Economic growth 
6.89% 
4.90% 
4.69% 
7.25% 
1.97% 
4.05% 
3.85% 
Compound annual growth rates projected by the UN (population) and the IMF (real GDP) 
Barriers and gaps  
As an asset class, sustainable forest plantation investments in emerging markets and developing countries is 
unknown to most investors and particularly private investors have so far not been very active in the sector. DFIs/IFIs 
are typically among the frontrunners for new asset classes in less developed markets and can, as anchor investors, 
demonstrate confidence in new asset classes. However, in the case of plantation investments even the DFIs

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 8 OF 61 
 
 
 
12 ILO 2016; Working in Rural Areas in 21st century 
involvement has been limited so far. Patient capital and risk-taking capital – both public and private – is necessary to 
create evidence and catalyze bigger investments into the sector in developing countries. Hence, a successful launch 
of the Arbaro Fund has the potential to prove the environmental, social and economic concept of commercial 
sustainable forestry plantations and stimulate further – urgently needed – investment into the sector. It can contribute 
to bringing climate change mitigation through forestry from a broad concept on paper to scalable and replicable on-
the-ground climate action. 
In climate change mitigation and adaptation, sustainable plantation forestry programmes have not been widely used 
with Renewable energy and REDD and REDD + programmes having taken a more significant role receiving more 
attention from public and private investors. The underinvestment in Arbaro’s target countries in this sector can be 
clearly seen in the reforestation rates these countries suffer but also in the proportion of sustainably produced 
plantation grown raw materials being available (see Table 3). Sustainable plantations contribute to the overall shift 
towards truly sustainable production of wood and wood-based materials with significantly smaller land area 
requirements than natural forest logging whilst providing significant additional sequestration benefits and contributing 
to keeping the existing forest carbon stocks of natural forests untouched. 
Adaptation co- benefits  
Providing positive social impact is in the core of Arbaro Fund’s investment strategy, and one of the three key target 
deliverables that Arbaro has. It is also emphasized in the investment guidelines and in the ESMS of Arbaro. All of 
these are part of the binding legal documentation of Arbaro. Arbaro fund’s projects always have to achieve FSC 
certification, which also requires the certified organization to maintain or enhance the social and economic well-being 
of local communities as well as employees.  
In addition to provision of formal employment, the type of other co-benefits varies from project to project and depends 
on the local conditions and the needs of the local communities and other stakeholders. The overall social co-benefits 
of the Arbaro Fund are discussed in more detail in section D3, however below is a short summary. 
Many economies in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa still strongly depend on agriculture. The national 
development plans and climate strategies of the target countries aim to reduce the vulnerability of the most exposed 
communities. Currently, about 40% of the world’s working age population lives in rural areas. The rural economy, 
which includes nearly 80% of the world’s poor workers, is characterized by serious decent work deficits. Labour 
market, organizational and representative institutions tend to be weak. Underemployment is widespread, incomes are 
low and access to social protection is limited12.The distinctive characteristics of rural areas make them uniquely 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change because of greater dependence on agriculture and natural resources 
makes them highly sensitive to climate variability, extreme climate events, and climate change (IPCC). Furthermore, 
low income base and lower than average education level increases this sensitivity as there is limited capacity to wait 
and limited alternatives. 
By providing alternative livelihoods in rural areas through formal employment opportunities, sustainable forest 
plantations are key to increasing the resilience of both ecosystems and vulnerable populations facing the threats of 
climate change. Arbaro’s projects will grow longer rotation logs for e.g. sawlogs and veneers logs, for panels and 
constructions material, ILO statistics show that longer-rotation solid wood plantation industry makes significant job 
contributions in contrast to short-rotation pulp and paper productions. Formal employment opportunities also 
decrease pressure to migrate to urban areas. Finally, formal employment creates economic activity, which in turn 
creates further alternative livelihood options and decreases dependence on subsistence practices such as 
subsistence agriculture or charcoal production and the vulnerability of the communities. 
Profit sharing  
Arbaro prefers land lease structures to land ownership, where possible, in order to allocate more funding to 
afforestation rather than purchasing land. When such land lease structures are applied, benefit sharing mechanisms 
are put in place to assure long term alignment between the stakeholders (e.g. landowners, communities). These 
structures vary from project to project but can include, in addition to annual land lease being paid, a royalty payment 
on volumes harvested or other such profit share mechanisms.

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 9 OF 61 
 
 
Community programmes 
In addition to provision of formal employment, the forestry projects that Arbaro supports, provide multiple benefits to 
the local communities. The form of these benefits varies between the projects and depends on the needs of the 
communities. These projects can include helping the communities with water sources (bore holes), building of school 
rooms, providing scholarships to local children, providing technical assistance to agriculture projects to improve food 
production, outgrower schemes to grow community forests, or building or repairing of roads or bridges. Below we 
provide a short case example of Arbaro’s first investment, to highlight the social impact that the company has 
undertaken. 
Case example 
Arbaro’s first investment project, for which Arbaro provides expansion capital, works closely with the local 
communities in its areas of operation in Sierra Leone and Ghana. The company provides direct employment to 1 600 
people of which 17% are female.  All employees have access to medical cover, maternity leave, compassionate leave 
and sick pay. The company pays salaries that are 30 % higher than the national minimum wage, and employees 
receive regular training and skills development. Employees are hired locally unless individuals with the required 
skillset are not available. The additional jobs in the region reduce the strain of communities on subsistence agriculture 
and land pressure. In many cases where subsistence agriculture fails (from e.g. climate related reasons) there are no 
other income sources, making the employment provided by this project crucial. 
All employees and stakeholders can easily report possible compliance violations through an accessible grievance 
mechanism and confidential whistleblowing policy. 
Training and knowledge sharing programmes reach beyond the immediate employees and cover also the 
communities in the proximity of the company’s operations and other stakeholders. In 2018 the company’s health 
awareness program reached more than 3000 people in the communities. The company also regularly arranges 
community safety campaigns in e.g. road safety and fire prevention.  
The company contributes to improving the local infrastructure, and has to date upgraded, built or repaired 
approximately 2 000 kilometers of roads or rural trails.  
The company supports community projects, which are chosen based on the communities’ needs. The projects 
completed so far include construction of six school blocks in the communities, education support to children, through 
scholarships and provision of school materials - 2,000 children have benefited from such programs, reparation and 
construction of wells to facilitate access to clean water and agriculture projects, with ten communities per year, where 
the company provides inputs and technical support, as well as capacity building in agricultural activities and saving 
profits for future planting seasons. 
 
Figure 2 Pictures from community meeting and work place training exercise

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 10 OF 61 
 
 
 
13 Annual industrial roundwood demand being met from unsustainable sources 
14 See Annex 22 Carbon methodologies 
 
 
Figure 3 School building built by the company as part of their community programme 
 
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) 
Arbaro’s target countries face or will face a significant supply gap in sustainably produced industrial roundwood in the 
near future. The wood products produced from this raw material include panels, sawn wood, as well as various 
applications of these such as furniture, pallets and various construction materials such as doors, window frames and 
roof trusses. This means, that these products either need to be sourced from unsustainable (and often illegal) 
sources, imported or replaced by less sustainable products (e.g. using aluminium roof trusses instead of wooden 
ones). In these markets, which from biophysical perspective, could produce these products locally, such 
developments are particularly worrying. 
This gap is expected to further widen in the coming years as these economies are rapidly growing. This coupled with 
population growth, the two being the key drivers for wood product demand, will lead to expanding gap and increased 
pressure towards the already vulnerable remaining natural forests.  
Table 1 – Country data 
 
Ethiopia 
Ghana 
Sierra Leone 
Uganda 
Ecuador 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Sustainable 
supply gap13 
4-5 million m³ 
2-3 million m3 
1 million m3 
3 million m3 
1.0 million m3 
1 million m3 
2-3 million m3 
Population 
growth (2019-
2024) 
2.49% 
2.09% 
2.03% 
2.86% 
1.30% 
1.19% 
1.04% 
Economic 
growth (2019-
2024) 
6.89% 
4.90% 
4.69% 
7.25% 
1.97% 
4.05% 
3.85% 
Compound annual growth rates projected by the UN (population) and the IMF (real GDP); sustainable supply gap estimated by Arbaro Advisors 
Arbaro’s projects will make a significant contribution to CO2 sequestration: When trees are planted on non-forested 
land, they capture and store additional carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Since the focus of Arbaro is on 
sustainable timber production from planted forests, Arbaro conservatively only claims additional and permanent 
carbon sequestration achieved through afforestation / reforestation and carbon stock enhancement in planted forests 
through improved forest management14.

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 11 OF 61 
 
 
At the same time, Arbaro’s projects will see to start closing the supply gap, and provide locally sourced and 
sustainably produced timber, contributing to moving the local forestry sector towards sustainable sourcing. The wood 
produced in Arbaro’s projects will replace unsustainable and informal sources of natural forest wood or imports and 
improving the country’s trade balance. Arbaro’s projects will also serve as an example for further similar 
developments in these countries. 
The local industries utilising the wood raw material will face severe problems unless the prevailing development can 
be turned around. At the same time, unsustainable harvesting of remaining natural forests deteriorates landscapes 
and reduces carbon sinks thus accelerating climate change. Also, unsustainable harvesting of natural forests tends to 
be done on an informal basis without adhering to legality requirements, paying taxes, duties or royalties and 
legislation and best practises on labour, health and safety. This contributes to reduced economic resilience of the 
rural regions and increased vulnerability of its people.  
Arbaro’s projects will also in most cases include value adding processing, leaving higher value of the production in 
the region / country and providing locally made products into the markets (rather than e.g. selling squared logs to 
exports to be then produced as final products). As an example, Arbaro’s first project is currently producing veneer 
from its wood, soon entering the next step in value addition and starting to produce plywood. Plywood is a versatile 
product capturing a price per cubic meter of manifold to veneer. There is significant demand in the countries and 
nearby region for plywood, and with no sustainable supply currently available, this product is currently mainly 
imported or produced from unsustainable natural forest resource.  
Arbaro’s activities can provide the mitigation impact (sequestration) and the co-benefits (supply of sustainably 
produced timber, provision of formal rural employment, increased economic activity) when done in scale. Arbaro 
reached its first closing after being shortlisted in the RFP (Mobilizing Funds at Scale), with some investors taking the 
view that Arbaro will grow to scale. But the 60 million USD of the first closing is too small, and it is essential that the 
Arbaro Fund grows to a beyond 120 million level. That will provide long term sustainability of the Arbaro Fund 
management team, adequate diversification of projects and through these the example effect to these markets. GCF 
plays a crucial role in this scaling up. It is expected that with GCF investment of 25 million, the Arbaro Fund size will 
reach ca 140 million USD dollars, and potentially attract further investors to reach its full size of 200 million. 
With this and the leveraging effect that Arbaro’s equity investment will have on the project level, the overall 
multiplying effect of GCF investment would reach to 15x. 
GCF funding is sought with matching terms with the other Arbaro Fund investors and with same ranking. 
Arbaro’s Theory of change diagram

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 12 OF 61

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 13 OF 61 
 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) 
Introduction  
Arbaro will make investments in sustainable plantation forestry projects / companies which will expand, upscale and 
technically improve brownfield projects and / or establish new plantations in selected countries in Latin America and 
Sub-Saharan Africa, in which the Arbaro team has a demonstrated track record and long term on the ground 
experience, as well as solid networks. The team’s network has allowed Arbaro to build a strong investment pipeline. 
Total number of investee projects will be 8-12.  Arbaro investments will be equity investments, or investment in 
equity-like instruments including but not limited to shareholder loans or mezzanine facilities. Final country allocation, 
exact location of the projects as well as number and scale of the project is yet unknown as the projects will be 
implemented over the investment period of the Arbaro Fund, which ends in July 2022. It is however expected that the 
Fund will allocate a minimum of 5% of its total volume to each target country (please refer to Annex 17).  
Arbaro Fund activities: 
1) 
Pipeline development  
The Arbaro Fund investment advisors will identify potential pipeline projects and screen those based on 
Arbaro’s investment strategy, climate eligibility criteria and ESMS. 
Projects that based on initial assessment fulfill the criteria move forward in the investment process to full 
formal due diligence.  
2) 
Assessment of project opportunities following Arbaro’s investment strategy and ESMS 
The Investment Committee of the Arbaro Fund is involved in the various stages of the investment 
process. Investment Committee approval is required before the proposed project can move to the 
execution stage. 
As part of the execution of an investment, the investment documentation is negotiated and entered into, 
after which the investment can be made. 
3) 
Investments in project level operations 
Arbaro invests in Portfolio companies and as part of the investment it is determined for what purposes 
the investment proceeds may be used. These include i.a. land rental or purchase, development of new 
plantation areas, management of forest areas, establishment of conservation areas, nursery operations, 
harvesting, transport and processing as well as other such portfolio company operations as approved by 
Arbaro. 
4) 
Arbaro Fund investment monitoring   
At the Arbaro Fund level, after the investment execution the main function of Arbaro is to monitor the 
portfolio company operations through reporting from the companies as well as active dialogue, 
participation in the boards of the companies as well as doing regular on-site visits to the production sites. 
This is to ensure that the investment conditions, including the ESMS is adhered to, and the impacts and 
returns are delivered. 
For this, the performance of the portfolio companies is reviewed to assess performance against the 
targets, including financial, climate, environmental as well as social return and impact targets. 
5) 
Reporting throughout the Arbaro Fund lifetime 
The investors of the Arbaro Fund will receive quarterly updates on the performance of the portfolio 
companies as well as an annual E&S and Impact report. 
6) 
Exit from investments 
The Arbaro Fund has a limited lifetime of 15 years. Towards the end of this period the Arbaro Fund 
needs to start assessment of potential exit channels for each of the projects. This is done following the 
exit strategy of the Arbaro Fund (see section B.6.). 
After Investment Committee approval the exit process continues to negotiation and execution of all exit 
documentation. 
After execution, the exit proceed are received by the Arbaro Fund and subsequently distributed to the 
investors. 
Investment Strategy of the Arbaro Fund 
Investee projects may be new greenfield developments where the institutional structures need to be set up or existing 
enterprises in need of expansion capital. In each case however, there needs to be an element of increasing the forest

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 14 OF 61 
 
 
 
15 Principle 6: Environmental Values and Impacts. Criterion 6.7 The Organization shall protect or restore natural 
water courses, water bodies, riparian zones and their connectivity. The Organization shall avoid negative 
impacts on water quality and quantity and mitigate and remedy those that occur. 
Principle 9: High Conservation Values. Criterion 9.1 The Organization, through engagement with affected 
stakeholders, interested stakeholders and other means and sources, shall assess and record the presence and 
status of the following High Conservation Values in the Management Unit, proportionate to the scale, intensity 
and risk of impacts of management activities, and likelihood of the occurrence of the High Conservation Values: 
HCV 4 - Critical ecosystem services. Basic ecosystem services in critical situations, including protection of 
water catchments and control of erosion of vulnerable soils and slopes. 
Principle 10: Implementation of Management Activities. Criterion 10.2 The Organization shall use species for 
regeneration that are ecologically well adapted to the site and to the management objective. The Organization 
shall use native species and local genotypes for regeneration, unless there is clear and convincing justification 
for using others. Criterion 10.5 The Organization shall use silvicultural practices that are ecologically 
appropriate for the vegetation, species, sites and management objectives. Criterion 10.10 The Organization 
shall manage infrastructural development, transport activities and silviculture so that water resources and soils 
are protected, and disturbance of and damage to rare and threatened species, habitats, ecosystems and 
landscape values are prevented, mitigated and/or repaired. 
 
cover and in the case of existing enterprises improving of forest management practices to provide the sequestration 
benefits.   
In addition, Arbaro will invest a minor share of its capital in selected value enhancing downstream activities such as 
wood processing. These investments will not be made on a stand-alone basis, but always integrated with a plantation 
investment. 
Arbaro will always cooperate with local partners. These may be for example: 
• 
local landowners;  
• 
local existing forestry businesses seeking to expand their operations or needing a raw material source but not 
having financial resources or knowhow to grow it;  
• 
other off-takers needing the material (e.g. further value adding processors);  
• 
local investors. 
Therefore, Arbaro’s projects are developed taking into account the local needs and the local markets. 
Arbaro’s target regions and the initial target countries have ideal biological growing conditions and a growing 
domestic demand for timber products. The strict application of the “Site-Species-Market” approach for all investments 
will ensure that Arbaro’s projects have access to various markets and different types of off-takers. This approach 
involves careful site and species selection, the use of up-to-date silvicultural practices and thorough considerations of 
market access and marketing strategy. The availability of water will be particularly relevant for site - species matching 
in regard to annual rainfall and distribution, as well as potential changes resulting from climate change. This 
consideration, together with measures such as erosion control, proper land preparation techniques, and protection of 
riparian vegetation will minimize any potential adverse impacts on water resources. The consideration of these water 
matters is specifically required by several criteria of the FSC standard15. 
Arbaro prefers land lease models instead of land acquisition, which allows for optimal capital deployment to achieve a 
balanced investment portfolio with an optimized risk-return profile. A mix of mix of different rotations, as well as 
different species and age classes allows for more evenly spread out cash flows, interim capital redemptions and early 
as well as later exits. 
All of Arbaro’s investments will be FSC certified. Investments in social and environmental aspects are considered to 
be an integral part of each project to de-risk the projects to potential E&S issues and increase the quality and quantity 
of the production as well as its long-term sustainability. 
Arbaro will actively manage the projects with its deep expertise in plantation management, with an aim to create 
strong companies and to realize the full potential of the identified plantations. Arbaro will inject management expertise 
in terms of planning, coordination and monitoring. Strong corporate governance systems will be implemented, as well 
as state-of-the-art forestry management systems.

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 15 OF 61 
 
 
Financial and return aspects 
Arbaro’s portfolio companies will derive their financial returns mainly from the sale of timber. Income for Arbaro is 
either derived from timber sales (dividends from portfolio companies) or through the sale of ownership stakes in the 
portfolio companies. By selecting the right investments, actively managing the projects, and ensuring an attractive 
exit, Arbaro targets an IRR of 12% p.a. for its investors. The implied gross return at project level is ca 15 %.  
The three key return drivers in plantation forestry are the prices of end products, biological growth rates, and 
operational costs (see figure below). Arbaro will mainly target holding project land via lease agreements and therefore 
land prices also matter, but in most cases the impact on returns is smaller. Please note that each project is different 
and specific return drivers can vary widely. Before investment, Arbaro will always carry out a rigorous due diligence, 
financial modelling and benchmarking exercise to determine a wider array of value drivers as well as suitability of 
investment. 
Initial target countries and markets 
Arbaro focuses on emerging forestry markets in two main regional clusters within which the team will focus on 
selected countries. In Latin America, Arbaro will initially concentrate on Ecuador, Paraguay and Peru. In Sub-Saharan 
Africa, Arbaro will initially focus on Ethiopia, Ghana, Sierra Leone and Uganda. 
Apart from strong macroeconomic drivers for increased wood products demand and good bio-physical growing 
conditions for forests, all of these countries are also characterized by deforestation which is partly driven by logging of 
natural forests: 
Table 2 Deforestation drivers 
 
Please note that deforestation statistics by driver are not readily available. In all of the target countries the bulk of primary 
deforestation is due to agriculture. Logging and wood fuel extraction have been identified as primary deforestation drivers, but at a 
lower scale. However, more importantly, unsustainable wood removals are typically a main cause of forest degradation, i.e. among the 
key secondary deforestation drivers, which over time leads to easier clearing of the land area for agriculture. 
In both regional clusters, the identified pipeline projects mainly produce timber for the domestic and regional markets. 
 
Competitive advantages of target regions 
Latin America is a more mature forestry region than Sub-Saharan Africa and has a higher share of timber exports. 
Land prices and labor costs are higher in Latin America than in Africa. However, the productivity of the land combined 
with a higher availability of skilled labor, up-to-date technology and professional service providers compensates for 
the higher costs. The major advantage of Sub-Saharan Africa is the in principle high availability of land, competitive 
land prices and very favorable domestic demand dynamics due to rapidly growing local populations and economies. 
In consequence, overall timber production costs differ more on project level than between the two target regions. 
Region
Country
Main deforestation 
driver
Logging a 
deforestation 
driver?
Share of primary 
deforestation attributable 
to logging
Ethiopia
Shifting agriculture
No*
<1%
Ghana
Shifting agriculture
Yes
<10%
Sierra Leone
Shifting agriculture
Yes
<10%
Uganda
Shifting agriculture
Yes
<10%
Ecuador
Shifting agriculture
Yes
<10%
Paraguay
Large-scale agriculture
Yes
<10%
Peru
Shifting agriculture
Yes
<10%
* Native forests of Ethiopia too degraded to allow for logging; however, wood fuel extraction is one of the most 
important drivers of forest degradation
Sub-
Saharan 
Africa
Latin 
America

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 16 OF 61 
 
 
Figure 4 – Competitiveness of regions
 
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
Description of Implementation Agreements and Funds Flow Structure 
MUFG Bank, as Accredited Entity will oversee the project administration, monitor the project implementation, and will 
insure project compliance with MUFG Bank’s own relevant policies. MUFG Bank will execute an agreement with 
Executing Entities, the AIFM and the Arbaro Fund, to make sure that Executing Entities will be responsible for the 
obligations which the Accredited Entity has under the Accredited Master Agreement. 
The GCF investment into the Arbaro Fund is and equity investment and the Arbaro Fund in turn will deploy funding in 
the form of equity or equity-like instruments (such as e.g. mezzanine or shareholder loans) to its investee projects 
(portfolio companies). 
 
Figure 5 -Flow of funds is described in the graph 
ARBARO’S FOCUS REGIONS
LAND AVAILABILITY
POPULATION
GROWTH
ECONOMIC
GROWTH
OUR EXPERIENCE
AND NETWORK
BIOPHYSCIAL
GROWING CONDIT.
NO CONFLICTS WITH
FOOD SECURITY
AVERAGE EXPECTED
PROJECT IRR
LOW POLITICAL RISK
EUROPE
USA
ASIA
LATIN AMERICA
SUB-SAHAR. AFRICA

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 17 OF 61 
 
 
 
MUFG Bank will review the execution of the projects, monitor the capability and performance of the Executing Entities, 
and assess any change in circumstances that may have a bearing on the plan in general and on the implementation 
and operation of the projects in particular.  
 
More specifically, MUFG Bank will: 
• 
conduct review missions, 
• 
monitor the Executing Entities’ compliance with equity effectiveness conditions, 
• 
monitor the procurement of goods, works, and consulting services, 
• 
monitor implementation and development performance, 
• 
analyse progress reports, 
• 
disburse GCF’s equity proceeds, and monitoring project cash flows, 
• 
review unaudited and audited project accounts and agency financial statements, 
• 
monitor the Executing Entities’ compliance with applicable MUFG Bank’s policies as set out in relevant 
agreements, 
• 
monitor the project compliance with environmental and social safeguards, social dimensions and gender 
development, 
• 
monitor Executing Entities’ compliance with covenants, 
• 
strengthening the Executing Entities’ financial management and developing their capacity, 
• 
prepare project completion reports, and 
• 
assess the achievement of the project outcome and outputs, and the contribution to achieving the development 
impact. 
 
Description of Grievance Mechanism   
Firstly, MUFG Bank has set means to receive claims by phone calls and emails which are set out in the webpages 
below.  
https://www.mufgamericas.com/contact-us

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 18 OF 61 
 
 
http://www.bk.mufg.jp/voice/index.html 
 
Also, Japanese Bankers Association (“JBA”), which MUFG Bank is a member of, provides alternative dispute resolution 
(“ADR”). Japanese Bankers Association concluded the agreement on “Strengthening its support for resolving 
complaints/disputes.” This agreement was made in conjunction with the Mediation Committee, the support organization 
for dispute resolution. The aim is to strengthen support for resolving complaints/disputes and facilitate use of the support 
system for dispute resolution. The following is an outline of the agreement: 
 
1. Strengthening financial alternative dispute resolution (ADR) is a means to enhance customer confidence in 
banks. The banking industry has taken the step to provide a fair and neutral dispute resolution vehicle that can 
provide prompt and transparent dispute resolution and has established measures to ensure its effectiveness 
for customers. Member banks are committed to endeavouring to listen earnestly to the voices of customers 
and to prevent troubles from occurring. 
2. Member banks engaged in transactions of derivatives and specified deposits, etc. shall agree to becoming the 
“target business operators” of JBA as a certified investor protection organization, unless reasonable reasons 
for not doing so exist. 
3. When the resolution of a complaint forwarded to each bank or consumer relations office appears difficult, the 
member bank shall refer the subject to the Mediation Committee with the consent of the customer, and 
endeavour to promptly resolve the complaints in accordance with the mediation proposals. When a customer 
wants to utilize the Mediation Committee, etc., priority should be given to using the support organization for the 
dispute resolution that the customer wants to make use of. 
4. Member banks shall observe the “Rules for Facilitating Complaint Resolution and Mediation,” and sincerely 
handle the claims to resolve them smoothly. 
5. JBA shall proactively conduct public relations by means of leaflets and posters concerning consumer relations 
offices and the Mediation Committee. 
 
In addition to above, MUFG Bank set out a dedicated page on MUFG Bank’s website to receive comments, feedbacks 
or complains for GCF-funded projects. The proposed grievance mechanism has been agreed by GCF Accreditation 
Panel and is implemented on MUFG Bank’s webpage. As for any complain for MUFG Bank and/or Executing Entities, 
before pursuing legal action, MUFG Bank’s GCF Focal Point will receive dispute resolution requests by emails or 
regular mails. Please see MUFG Bank’s Procurement Guidelines draft for details.  
(Please visit : https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/corpandinvest/gcf.html  ) 
 
Description of MUFG Bank’s Compliance Policy 
MUFG Bank has clarified our group mission, long-term vision and shared values in the Corporate Vision and expressed 
our commitment to meeting the expectations of customers and society as a whole. Furthermore, we have established 
the Principles of Ethics and Conduct as the guidelines for how the group’s directors and employees act to realize the 
Corporate Vision. This expresses our commitment to complying with laws and regulations globally, to acting with 
honesty and integrity, and to behaving in a manner that supports and strengthens the trust and confidence of society. 
 
In addition, as MUFG Bank expands our business globally, we are committed to keeping abreast with developments in 
the laws and regulations of the jurisdictions in which we operate, including those targeting money laundering and 
bribery, as well as competition laws, while paying attention to trends in financial crimes. 
 
Compliance management divisions have been established at the holding company Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, 
and at MUFG Bank, Mitsubishi UFJ Trust and Banking, and Mitsubishi UFJ Securities Holdings. Each compliance 
management division formulates compliance programs and organizes training courses to promote compliance, and 
regularly reports to each company’s board of directors and Executive Committee on the status of compliance activities. 
The holding company has the Group Compliance Committee while the three companies have Compliance Committees 
which deliberate important matters related to compliance. Additionally, the holding company has the Group Chief 
Compliance Officer (CCO) Committee composed of the CCO of the holding company and CCOs of the three 
companies. This committee deliberates important matters related to compliance and compliance-related issues for 
which the Group should share a common understanding.

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 19 OF 61 
 
 
 
MUFG Bank’s Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorist Financing (AML/CTF) Program 
To be included in Confidential version 
Arbaro Fund 
Arbaro Fund, SLP is established as a Luxembourg special limited partnership (société en commandite spéciale) among 
the General Partner (Arbaro I GP S.à r.l), the Special General Partner ( Arbaro I Special GP GmbH & co KG), and the 
investors as limited partners. 
Please find below the structure for Arbaro Fund and its governing entities. 
Arbaro Fund functions as a traditional private equity investment fund.

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 20 OF 61 
 
 
Arbaro Advisors GmbH acts as the Investment Advisor to the AIFM/Arbaro Fund and employs the investment team 
which is dedicated to Arbaro. The sole purpose of the company is advising the AIFM/Arbaro Fund on investment 
origination, evaluation, execution and monitoring. An Investment Advisor Agreement entered into between Arbaro 
Advisors and AIFM / Arbaro Fund governs this relationship. AIFM (the Manager), the General Partner and the Arbaro 
Fund SCS are the Executing Entities of the programme. 
The General Partner (GP) is owned by the Investment Advisor and has no other purpose than acting as the General 
Partner for the Arbaro Fund. The GP appoints the AIFM and the Investment Advisor.  
FiM Asset Management S.à r.l. acts as the AIFM of the Arbaro Fund. As the manager of the Arbaro Fund, the AIFM 
among other things will review the investment proposal of the Investment Advisor. The management of the Arbaro Fund 
shall be vested exclusively in the AIFM. The AIFM is regulated by the Alternative Investment Fund Manager Directive 
of the EU. The AIFM is 100% owned by Finance in Motion GmbH. 
Finance in Motion GmbH and UNIQUE Forest Investment GmbH are the shareholders of Arbaro Advisors GmbH. Their 
relationship is governed by a shareholders’ agreement. Finance in Motion hosts Arbaro Advisors in its offices and 
provide back office support on two levels: (1) on the company level it will provide accounting, HR, IT and communication 
support and (2) on the advisory level it will give transaction support, particularly in terms of legal advice, FX 
management, country and sovereign analysis. UNIQUE will provide technical back office support to Arbaro in the area 
of FSC certification, forest inventory, geographic information system (GIS), market intelligence, as well as 
environmental and social governance. 
Finance in Motion GmbH as owner of the AIFM is supervised by the German financial sector regulator BaFin.  
Each investor will enter into the Limited Partnership Agreement (LPA) with the AIFM / Arbaro Fund which governs the 
relationship and the rights and obligations of each party. 
The Limited Partners shall have no part in the conduct of business of the Arbaro Fund or in the management or control 
of the Fund and shall have no authority or right to act on behalf of the Arbaro Fund. 
Special General Partner (Arbaro I Special GP GmbH & co KG) is the entity receiving the carried interest. 
Arbaro I Team LP GmbH & Co KG, is a German partnership created to channel the investment of the Investment 
Advisor (partners, managers, team members or other employees of the Investment Advisor, the Manager or any of 
their Affiliates and the members of the Investment Committee) in the Arbaro Fund as Limited Partners. Its commitment 
shall be equal to the higher of (i) two million US Dollars (USD 2,000,000) or (ii) in aggregate at least 2% of the Total 
Commitments as from the Initial Closing Date (the “Advisor Commitment”). 
Advisory Committee of the Arbaro Fund 
The advisory committee of Arbaro is composed of representatives of the limited partners (i.e. investors). The LPA 
outlines the functions of the Advisory Committee and the procedures to be followed. 
Auditor 
The Arbaro Fund is audited by EY Luxembourg. 
Project level 
Arbaro only invests in projects that meet all the investment requirements of the Arbaro Fund as defined in the legal 
documentation of the Arbaro Fund. The most important criteria include: 
• 
Investment strategy, guidelines and restrictions (please refer to Annex 26) 
• 
Environmental and social safeguards, as defined in the ESMS of the Arbaro Fund (please refer to Annex 6) 
• 
Climate eligibility criteria (please refer to Annex 25) 
• 
FSC certification (please refer to Annex 23) 
Arbaro projects are chosen as part of a stringent investment process that consists of five steps, from early project 
identification to investment completion (corresponding to activities 1 and 2 presented in section B3). The investment 
process can be illustrated as follows:

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 21 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
Projects identified by the team as potential investments must successfully complete all the phases of the investment 
process: as a result only the few projects that comply will all Arbaro requirements will become investees. The investment 
process involves multiple assessments, that become more detailed as the process moves forward, and requires 
approval of the Investment committee of the Arbaro Fund. This investment committee consists of four external members 
who each have expertise in fields important to Arbaro:forestry, developing countries, impact investments, private equity. 
At the end of the process and prior to an investment decision, a project will have been subject to detailed due diligence 
of all relevant dimensions: climate, environmental, social, technical, economic, financial, organisational and legal 
aspects. The investment process is supported by detailed guidance and assessment templates. Please refer to Annex 
6 for detailed information. 
At the end of the investment process, in the execution phase, the investment terms are negotiated between Arbaro and 
the investee. Foreseen operations, Arbaro requirements and standards, as well as any necessary measures to address 
weaknesses identified in the due diligence process, are included in the investment documentation. Adherence to these 
is part of the legal obligations of the investee, and penalties will apply in cases of non-compliance. 
Once Arbaro is invested in a project, the investee starts the implementation of operations as foreseen in the 
investment documentation. In this phase and over the lifetime of the investment, Arbaro provides oversight and 
controls the investees (corresponding to activities 3 to 5 in section B3). Main activities include monitoring and 
reporting of the company performance and compliance with contractual commitments, active support and 
backstopping for strategic planning and in face of challenges, and exercising voting rights (please refer to section 
E7). 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
New asset class in emerging markets with limited access to finance 
As an asset class, forestry investments in emerging markets and developing countries is unknown to most investors 
and particularly private investors have so far not been very active in the sector. DFIs/IFIs are typically among the 
frontrunners for new asset classes in less developed markets and can, as anchor investors, demonstrate confidence 
in new asset classes. However, in the case of plantation investments even the DFIs involvement has been limited so 
far and mainly debt has been provided.   
In Arbaro’s target countries there have been limited international investments in sustainable forest plantations despite 
the strong needs to increase the supply to the market. During Arbaro’s development phase several other African 
forestry initiatives have failed to successfully complete their fundraising with private investors. GCF has a vital role in 
bringing scale to the Arbaro Fund and thus multiplying the impact that Arbaro is seeking to deliver. In addition to the 
funding provided and the associated impact delivered, a larger fund size will secure long term feasibility of the Arbaro 
Fund management. An investment by GCF, with a matching size to that of Arbaro’s anchor investor would unlock the 
whole amount of the anchor investor and is expected to bring the commitments beyond 120 million US dollars, which 
is the size required to sustain the team needed to deliver the intended investment strategy and impact. 
Arbaro is innovative as it will be able to mobilize new types of investors into the sustainable plantation forestry sector 
in the target countries. This is important in order for the sector to attract funding in scale. An investment by GCF will 
play a major role in mobilizing private sector capital into the Arbaro and ensuring Arbaro will reach significant scale.

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 22 OF 61 
 
 
The following chart shows the average experience level in forest investment of different types of investors:
 
 
 
Diversified projects to combat climate change 
In climate change mitigation and adaptation, sustainable plantation forestry programmes have not been widely used, 
with Renewable energy and REDD and REDD + programmes having taken a more significant role and receiving 
more attention from both private and public investors. However sustainable plantation forestry when implemented 
with high environmental and social standards, including careful land tenure considerations and following principles of 
true participation, provide significant mitigation and adaptation benefits. In addition, these programmes contribute to 
the overall shift towards truly sustainable production of wood and wood-based materials with significantly lower land 
requirements than natural forest utilisation. GCF’s involvement in this sector is critical in bringing it to the forefront of 
battle against climate change. GCF’s involvement will also provide Arbaro with further credibility, which is likely to 
accelerate the fundraising efforts. A GCF contribution is considered a stamp of approval and ensures adherence to 
highest ecological and social standards as well as clear climate targets. From the fund-raising activities with private 
institutional investors GCFs participation in Arbaro will significantly improve the positioning of the Arbaro, particularly 
among private investors who do not yet have a history in climate and land use investing and hence rely on GCF’s and 
the AE’s experience. 
Barriers of entry 
Sustainable plantation forestry achieves its highest mitigation and adaptation impact when new forest plantations are 
established, e.g. on degraded land. However, the cash flow profile of such greenfield investments creates barriers to 
significant investment in the sector. Greenfield plantations require large upfront investments (ca. 3 000-4 000 
USD/ha), but only start generating positive cash flows after several years, sometimes decades after the first 
investment. Even fast-growing species such as acacia or eucalyptus will need 10-12 years under favorable growth 
conditions to reach a sufficient height and diameter for high value end uses. 
This stretched-out cash flow profile – especially of long (wood growth) rotation projects with a high mitigation potential 
– puts the financing structure of a greenfield project under strain, as not only initial establishment costs but also 
maintenance costs in the early years of operation have to be financed up front until operational costs can be covered 
by cash inflows. Hence, greenfield plantation projects are not bankable for conventional debt financing and thus in 
dire need for flexible and patient equity financing, such as the equity contributed by Arbaro.  
Crowding in / Example effect  
Plantation forestry in many of the countries in Arbaro’s target regions has seen only little investment to date. Despite 
offering attractive risk-adjusted returns and significant impact potential, especially private investors have largely 
shunned plantation forestry in the target regions for different reasons, incl. the sector being at a nascent development 
stage and high perceived operational or country risks. The proposed financing structure foresees GCF to invest 
following the same terms as other investors into the Arbaro Fund, i.e. the GCF investment will not be concessional. 
Nonetheless, it is expected that GCF’s investment will catalyse further co-investments into the Arbaro Fund and into 
plantation forestry in the target regions over the medium term. This is because the GCF investment will help Arbaro to 
realize more projects in more countries and thereby create additional track record to attract future investors. Similarly, 
the GCF investment will support Arbaro in reaching a critical scale to ensure an efficient fund structure and sufficient

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 23 OF 61 
 
 
project diversification. As the Arbaro Fund foresees to reach an ultimate size of USD 200 million, there is plenty of 
room for further co-investments, meaning GCF’s investment is not expected to crowd out, but rather to encourage 
other private and public investors to follow suit. 
Multiplying effect of GCF investment 
A GCF investment of USD 25 million would contribute to 12.5% of the ultimate fund size of USD 200 million targeted 
for Arbaro. Hence, every USD invested by GCF is expected to catalyse seven USD of further capital mobilised from 
other private and DFI investors directly into the Arbaro Fund. In addition, further capital can be mobilized indirectly on 
project level. Arbaro will typically not be the sole investor in the investee forestry companies, but provide financing 
alongside equity co-investors, such as the project developers, high net worth individuals or shareholders of the 
Arbaro Fund seeking direct exposure to certain projects, and mezzanine investors such as DFIs. On average, Arbaro 
assumes to contribute 50% of the funding needs of a project; 20-35% are expected to be financed with debt or 
mezzanine and the rest to be provided by other equity co-investors. Hence, GCF’s investment into Arbaro is likely to 
be multiplied by a factor of 15x, potentially more depending on the financing structure of Arbaro’s investments. 
Finally, Arbaro would be one of the first private equity funds to solely invest into sustainable forestry in the target 
regions and thus has the potential to spark follow-on investments by creating more track record for sustainable 
forestry as an asset class and by reducing perceived risks. 
Technical innovation through FSC 
In Arbaro target countries, the forest area with FSC certification represents a very small share of production forests: 
5% in Latin America and 2% in Africa. Forest production under FSC standards is not a common practice in Arbaro 
countries, but an innovative approach that needs substantial support to become the industry standard and contribute 
to the shift towards sustainable production in the sector. 
Figure 6 – FSC certified forests Arbaro’s target countries in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa 
 
When restricted to forest plantation operations, there is only a small number of companies that operate with FSC 
certificate in Arbaro target countries. This low number even includes international companies focused on export 
markets (e.g. pulp and paper producers), which usually manage large areas. With its investments Arbaro will support 
current and new companies to achieve FSC certification, which will improve their economic, environmental and social 
performance, access to finance and market position. 
Table 3 FSC certified forest plantations in target countries 
Country 
Certified area 
Number of companies 
Ethiopia 
0 ha 
0 
Ghana 
21 430 ha 
2 
Sierra Leone 
6 281 ha 
1 
Uganda 
42 784 ha 
4 
Ecuador 
37 138 ha 
5

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 24 OF 61 
 
 
Paraguay 
30 528 ha 
4 
Peru 
1 100 ha 
1 
Note: certified area includes both plantation and protection areas 
 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Arbaro investors (including the GCF) 
Arbaro Fund has a limited lifetime of 15 years. This can be extended by one year with the approval of Arbaro’s 
advisory committee. An extension of this maximum lifetime beyond 16 years requires a decision by a qualified 
majority of the investors (including approval of the GCF). What this means is that Arbaro will gradually start exiting 
the projects in later years of its term and return the capital and the profit made to the investors. 
Arbaro investments - General  
Arbaro takes a country-by-country approach to market liquidity and exiting its investments. A credible exit strategy 
with multiple options is a prerequisite for Arbaro’s investment since the Arbaro has a limited lifetime. Arbaro’s general 
goal is to establish or upgrade portfolio companies and their plantations to a stage where they can be considered 
high quality and well-developed brownfield investments by potential buyers. The Arbaro Fund will seek a project-
specific exit strategy that maximizes the IRR while ensuring the long-term sustainability of the project beyond 
Arbaro’s involvement. 
Data availability on African and Latin American deals in our target countries is limited, but high-quality plantations and 
processing facilities are sought after assets in our region given how scarce they are. 
Arbaro exit will be different for each project and depend on the project specific conditions. For example, in projects 
where Arbaro’s local partner has a significant stake in the project, they may wish to gradually take over the project 
thus providing the Arbaro an exit. However, in each case the exit considerations will be done based on continuing the 
project as a going concern. 
1. Economic arguments – rational investor 
Good assets attract good buyers: a FSC certified asset is more interesting to a buyer whose own policies and 
regulations require certification or who otherwise has interest in sustainability than to one without such 
requirements / interest – our project will all be FSC certified. 
FSC certification is likely to add a premium to the selling price of the asset; a buyer who is not interested in 
carrying on sustainable forest management practices would lose the certification and therefore it would be 
irrational to pay the premium. 
Unsustainable forest management practises (in extreme case clear cut / no replanting) would only make sense 
if the asset can be bought very cheap and the raw material can be quickly sold at high price, however: 
a. Selling with a high price is not possible because clear cut would mean flooding the market with excess 
quantities of the raw material, which would depress prices 
b. A rational buyer would therefore continue to maintain and harvest slower  
Hence, a rational investor would continue sustainable forest management practices out of economic self-
interest. 
2. Regulatory dimensions 
Various licences and approvals are needed in order to operate a plantation business. Often these would 
include sustainability requirements and unsustainable practises could result to losing official licence to 
operate. 
3. Social dimension: social licence to operate – rational investor 
The over-time developed positive relations with different stakeholders and the social licence to operate 
provide an economic value but also significantly reduce the risks related to the project.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 25 OF 61 
 
 
Benefits include:  
• 
stable and motivated work force 
• 
no litigation 
• 
no arson 
• 
stable off-take agreements 
• 
stable supply agreements (out-growers), etc. 
A rational investor would seek to maintain these. 
4. Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements 
Arbaro follows strict KYC guidelines and always has to identify the beneficial owner the parties it deals with 
as well as assess the profile of its shareholders and management. For this exercise Arbaro consults negative 
lists which are part of the World-Check database. In addition, it shall review that no contracts are entered into 
or partnerships formed with, or to the benefit of, any individual or institution named on the list of sanctioned 
persons promulgated by the United Nations Security Council or by the Council of the EU in connection with 
financing of terrorism.  
5. Contractual obligations 
Arbaro can include sustainability obligations in the (exit) sales agreements, although these will be difficult to 
enforce if breached. 
 
6. Exit options 
 
7. Mitigation of non-permanence risks 
The reversal of achieved carbon sequestration is a risk inherent to afforestation / reforestation operations. 
This can happen due to losses of achieved stocks (e.g. storms or fires) or due to the interruption of 
management practices (e.g. when the production cycle is not completed, or harvested trees are not replanted 
afterwards). 
To address this risk in an effective manner, Arbaro follows an approach similar to the carbon certification 
standards VCS and Gold Standard. Since these standards issue permanent carbon certificates, addressing 
the risks of non-permanence is a crucial aspect for them. 
TYPE OF INVESTOR
MOTIVES
INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS
(pension/sovereign 
wealth/private equity funds, 
insurance companies, 
foundations etc.)
TIMOS AND TIMBER FUNDS
LOCAL/REGIONAL
INDUSTRIAL FORESTRY
COMPANIES
OTHER (INTERNATIONAL) 
INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES
MULTINATIONAL INDUSTRIAL
FORESTRY COMPANIES
• Steady income and portfolio stabilization
• Diversification benefits
• Attractive financial returns
• Market penetration or expansion of market share
• Realize synergies
• Diversification into markets/products
• Dividend income
• Vertical integration
• Secure wood supply (from sustainable sources)
• Reduce operational expenses
• Learning effects
• Secure access to resources
• Geographical diversification
• Expand business portfolio (industry diversification)
• Market penetration
• Secure high-timber-growth locations for own wood supply
• Geographical diversification
• Strategic expansion of business portfolio
Note: Other potential exit routes include sale to management/other shareholders, sale to IFIs/DFIs or 
impact investors, as well as IPOs

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 26 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
Above all both standards give great importance to the sustainability of projects: projects that are economically 
viable, socially beneficial and environmentally sound can continue operations in the long term. In addition, 
both standards consider that FSC certification ensures the sustainability of the project and a strong 
commitment to continue operations in the long run. This view is shared by Arbaro. 
Based on a tool developed by VCS to assess non-permanence risks of projects, the following table provides 
an overview of non-permanence risk factors and a description of how Arbaro implements mitigation 
measures for all of them. 
 
Table 4 – Non-permanence risk factors 
Non-permanence risk factors 
Arbaro mitigation approach 
Project management: species not proved or not 
adapted to the site, encroachment, unprofessional 
or non-local teams 
• Best silvicultural practices and strict site 
species match 
• Partnership with local teams and highly 
professional management 
Financial viability: long time until breakeven or 
funds needed until breakeven not secured 
• Companies have reached or are close to 
breakeven at exit 
Opportunity costs: more profitable alternative land 
uses 
• Focus on degraded land, areas designated for 
forestry and areas with limited suitability for 
agriculture 
Project longevity: poor commitment to continue 
management practices 
• Long-term operational and financial planning 
• FSC certification 
Land tenure: resources owned by other parties, 
disputes over land tenure / access to resources 
• Clear land tenure 
• No projects on land with unresolvable disputes 
Community engagement: poor consultation of local 
communities 
• Continuous engagement with communities 
since project start 
Governance: low governance score 
• Proactive cooperation with institutions 
Natural risks: high likelihood and significance of 
fires, pests and diseases, extreme weather, 
geological and other natural risks 
• Prevention measures and emergency plans in 
place  
Based on the approaches followed by recognized carbon certification standards, the investment strategy of 
Arbaro, its commitment to achieve FSC certification in all projects, as well as the high environmental and 
social standards applied, ensure that risks of non-permanence are properly mitigated in all the projects and 
provide sufficient assurance on the sustainability and continuation of management practices in the long run.

=== PAGE 31 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 27 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
25 million  
million USD ($)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) 
Subordinated loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) 
Equity 
25 million 
 
 
12 % equity 
return 
 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) 
Grants 
Enter amount  
 
 
 
(vii) 
Result-based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing information 
Total amount 
Currency 
175 
million USD ($) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
European Investment Bank 
Equity 
 
25 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
Private Investors 
Equity 
 
100 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
Other development finance 
institutions 
Equity 
 
46 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
Arbaro team 
Equity 
 
4,0 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
200 million 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page) 
The Arbaro Fund achieved its First closing in  July 2018, second / subsequent 
closings are expected by July 2020 with the following investors / commitments: 
Investor 
1st Closing Amount 
(USD million) 
2nd Closing Amount 
(USD million) 
DFI 
15.0 
10.0 
Private 
12.0 
 
DFI 
10.0 
 
Private 
7.5 
 
Private 
6.0 
6.0 
Private 
5.0 
 
Arbaro team  
2.0 
 
Private 
1.2

=== PAGE 32 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 28 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
Private 
1.5 
 
New investors 
 
 
GCF 
 
25.0 
DFI 
 
15.0 
DFI 
 
10.0 
Other private investors 
 
19.0 
Total 
60.2 
85.0 
Grand total 
 
145.2 
Further private sector investors / DFIs with commitments amounting to ca USD 60 
million are expected to commit following GCF’s commitment, and the final closing is 
expected to meet Arbaro’s target size of USD 200 million. 
Further financing will be attracted at the project level either in the form of equity from 
project co-investors or as mezzanine or debt. Whilst the final exact amounts of this 
funding vary project to project, it is expected that up to a similar amount to that of 
Arbaro’s funding will be attracted at project level from other sources.  
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
Options 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Investment into 
plantation 
establishment 
and operations 
Activity 3)  
New 
plantations 
created and 
company 
operations 
133.2 million 
16.7 million 
Equity 
116.5 
Equity 
Arbaro Fund 
investors, 
see section 
C1 
Land is 
purchased or 
leased 
34.8 million 
4.2 million 
Equity 
30.6 million 
Equity 
Arbaro Fund 
investors, 
see section 
C1 
Fund 
management, 
transaction, 
custody costs 
Activities 1), 2), 
4), 5), 6)  
Fund 
management 
fees 
26.7 million 
3.3 million 
Equity 
23.4 million 
Equity 
Arbaro Fund 
investors, 
see section 
C1 
Fund costs 
5.4 million 
0.8 million 
Equity 
4.6 million 
Equity 
Arbaro Fund 
investors, 
see section 
C1 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
200.1 million  
25 million 
175.1 million 
Please see the attached budget calculation for details. Please note that the calculations assume that in the later years 
portion of the fees and costs are paid from dividends and exit proceeds, with the overall amount therefore exceeding 
the 200 million USD. 
Country per country allocation is not available at this stage as the final project locations are only decided during the 
implementation period (investment period of the Arbaro Fund).

=== PAGE 33 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 29 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
Arbaro’s projects will apply or develop towards applying best practices. This means that the projects implement state 
of the art silviculture in terms of modern nursery technologies, appropriate site-species matching, and growth and yield 
oriented thinning and pruning regimes. Particular consideration is given to work health and safety as forestry is exposed 
to a relatively high risk of working accidents. To ensure highest social and environmental standards Arbaro’s 
investments will be guided by FSC Principles and Criteria and the IFC Performance Standards. 
Arbaro’s investments contribute to learning at individual and organizational level. The different levels of our knowledge 
management and capacity building is illustrated in the graph below. 
 
Training of employees and service providers: Arbaro invests in pioneer markets for plantation forestry. Therefore, 
intensive training of our employees at different levels and of our service providers is a must and a permanent challenge. 
The training takes place in formalized courses and on-the-job.  
Research & Development: Forestry is a R&D intensive business, for example in terms of matching different tree species 
with local site conditions or monitoring, selection / improvement of planting materials controlling pest and diseases, or 
optimizing operations in terms of work safety and efficiency. Arbaro will contribute to the widening of the local and 
regional knowledge base of forestry, as commercial plantation forestry in several countries is either at a nascent stage 
or largely untested. Hence Arbaro will increase the R&D potential of local enterprises or research institutions in forestry 
(and potentially agriculture) in the target regions. Investees’ R&D departments will cooperate closely with national and 
international research institutions. This helps Arbaro to ensure state of the art knowledge at company level. In return, 
the research institutions get prove of suitability of daily use of their concepts. 
Inter-company benchmarking: Arbaro will be invested in 8 to 12 forest companies in different geographies. An inter-
company benchmarking allows Arbaro to learn from the best. Exchange programs between Arbaro’s invested 
companies are part of its interregional learning approach. 
Community engagement: Through community engagement programmes, Arbaro will directly invest into rural 
development in various topics (health, education, gender, climate smart agriculture). Additionally, Arbaro will support 
outgrower schemes to promote small scale forestry as an important land use for a diversified and sustainable livelihood 
strategy.

=== PAGE 34 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 30 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
Interacting with forestry sector relevant authorities: Forestry has to deal and to comply with sensitive land and 
environment related questions. By doing forestry following international standards and best practices, Arbaro seeks to 
help formalizing a sector that often suffers from informality. Arbaro works closely with all forestry relevant local and 
national authorities.

=== PAGE 35 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Mitigation impact 
Arbaro will contribute to the improvement of the management of land and forest areas in its target countries through 
its forest plantation projects. 
CO2 sequestration: When trees are planted on non-forested land, they capture and store additional carbon dioxide 
from the atmosphere. To estimate the carbon sequestered by Arbaro, the overall guidance of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) as well as methodologies from the Verified Carbon Standard (VCS) have been 
considered. The carbon sequestered by Arbaro projects corresponds to the net CO2 sequestration as follows:  
The net CO2 sequestration is estimated by applying the following equation: 
Net CO2 sequestration (tCO2) 
= 
CO2 sequestration in the project – Baseline – Leakage – Other project emissions 
Using this estimation methodology (for detailed methodology please see Annex 22), Arbaro projects are estimated to 
sequester 20 million tCO2 during Arbaro’s lifetime (15 years).  
Some of Arbaro’s portfolio companies may explore opportunities in voluntary carbon markets. Should any of the 
companies decide to proceed with issuing carbon credits (e.g. VCS or Gold standard), such credits would be 
deducted from the mitigation impact in the mitigation impact reporting. 
It is foreseen, that such impact would be limited; assuming 200 MUSD fund, Arbaro’s projects could be able to issue 
up to 4 million tCO2 in credits. This only represents a small share of our 20 million tCO2 total direct sequestration 
objective. The revenues obtained by companies from the sale of credits would be reinvested in the expansion of 
plantations, and thus result in the sequestration of additional carbon. Potentially this could also attract other investors 
due to better risk / return profile, diversified revenues or investors interested in carbon projects. 
To account for this, the impact of the additional sequestration would be: 
• 
Price of 5 USD per credit > 20 MUSD of additional funds for company 
• 
Investment of 3,000 USD to establish one hectare of new plantations > 6,666 new ha 
• 
Long term sequestration of 200 tCO2 per ha > 1.3 million tCO2 of additional sequestration  
Therefore, the overall impact to the assumed net sequestration effect would be -2,7 million tonnes. Given the 
companies would only access voluntary markets, this may be over-estimation, but best estimation we can provide 
right now. 
This means that the overall positive net sequestration would end up at 17.3 million tCO2. 
In addition, Arbaro projects will conserve (through direct conservation effort) up to 15 000 hectares of natural forest or 
otherwise vulnerable landscape, e.g. wetlands or habitats of endangers species. This will provide further mitigation 
impact during the lifetime of the programme, depending on the degradation level and rehabilitation needs of the 
conserved areas. 
Further on, majority of the products produced from the wood will be mechanical forest products such as panels or 
sawn timber for products to e.g. construction. In these products the carbon stock continues throughout the lifecycle of 
the product, i.e. significantly beyond harvesting of the tree (in Arbaro’s climate mitigation assumption this positive 
impact has not been accounted for).  
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Climate action through forestry is underdeveloped and the potential untapped 
The adoption of the Paris Agreement during the COP21 lifted the importance of forests in climate change mitigation 
and adaptation on the global political agenda. The adoption document writes in Article 5: 
“Parties are encouraged to take action to implement and support, including through results-based payments, the 
existing framework as set out in related guidance and decisions already agreed under the Convention for: policy

=== PAGE 36 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
approaches and positive incentives for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation, and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon 
stocks in developing countries; and alternative policy approaches, such as joint mitigation and adaptation approaches 
for the integral and sustainable management of forests, while reaffirming the importance of incentivizing, as 
appropriate, non-carbon benefits associated with such approaches.” 
Global mitigation and adaptation efforts in the forest sector are still in their infancy and global climate action is 
centered around energy; moving to renewables or increasing efficiency. Whilst changes in the energy sector are 
important in reaching the Paris targets, forestry has potential to significantly exceed these effects. In forestry carbon 
is sequestered, i.e. negative emissions are achieved. Thereby forestry has the potential to make a major contribution 
to climate change mitigation. This potential is particularly powerful in regions where the biophysical growth conditions 
are good and adequate land with low competition is available and remaining natural forests are in jeopardy due to 
increased product demand. Together with the significant mitigation benefits, forestry provides significant adaptation 
co-benefits through improved livelihoods and hence increase resilience of the rural communities but also by 
contribution to improved resilience of the surrounding landscapes.  
Patient capital and risk-taking capital – both public and private – is necessary to create evidence and catalyze bigger 
investments into the sector. The sector is yet to reach these in the emerging markets. Hence, a successful launch of 
the Arbaro Fund has the potential to prove the environmental, social and economic concept of commercial forestry 
plantations and stimulate further – urgently needed – investment into the sector. It can contribute to bringing climate 
change mitigation and adaptation through forestry from a broad concept on paper to scalable and replicable on-the-
ground climate action. 
From depleting natural forests to establishing profitable carbon sinks that reduce the vulnerability of communities 
Arbaro’s target regions are home to many low-income countries that are focused on achieving growth and 
development to reduce poverty and raise standards of living. Given the significance of natural resources in these 
countries, there is a danger of achieving short-term growth through over-utilizing resources and under-estimating the 
need of being prepared for future demand. This trend is evident in the rapid depletion of indigenous forest resources 
in the target regions and a lack of investment in sustainable forestry. 
Ca. 24 million ha of forests have been lost in Sub-Saharan Africa (ca. 14 million ha) and Latin America (ca. 
10 million ha) between 2010 and 2015 alone, making the two regions the deforestation hotspots globally. 
Deforestation and forest degradation is mainly driven by conversion pressure from the agricultural sector and 
unsustainable wood extraction. While doing so helps to spur economic growth today and meet the basic needs of 
current generations, continuing on such a path not only reduces options for future generations but could counter 
economic progress made because of the important contribution that forests make to people’s livelihoods, several 
economic sectors and climate change. 
The detrimental effects of over-utilizing natural forest resources are already felt in several countries in the target 
regions, e.g. Paraguay or Ghana, once had flourishing wood processing industries that are now suffering. The low 
level of investment in the forest sector, both in processing technology and in securing long term sustainable raw 
material supply is paralyzing the industry. Despite outstanding biophysical growth conditions, many of such countries 
have slipped from significant export proceeds from these products to importing a significant share of their forest 
product demand. Paraguay for example went from being a net exporter of forest products to becoming a net import in 
the last decade. This development is expected to continue unless the sector receives significant investment in new 
forest plantations, improved knowledge and technology. 
In addition, these developments tend to result in the market operating largely on an informal basis which in turn 
means less formal employment opportunities, unsustainable production, low technical and knowledge capacity as 
well as lost revenue in the form of license fees, taxes and tax-like payments to the local authorities. Finally, if these 
developments continue, the industry will further deteriorate and after some years it may be that the local supply will 
completely rely on imports and the informal sector, neither of which will support the long-term sustainable 
development goals.  
Arbaro aims to work in partnerships with the local industry players, both public and private to spur and revitalize local 
forest industries. By investing in sustainable forestry, Arbaro will contribute as a first mover and example setter on 
building an industry around a renewable and reliable sustainably managed resource. 
Market innovation through forest plantations 
Forest plantations have existed globally for decades but in many of the Arbaro target countries, they are not an 
integral part of the industry and developments have been slow and few. For example, Sierra Leone has just seen its 
first private investment in commercial plantation forestry a few years ago. In other countries, where more investments 
have already been made, e.g. in Peru, silvicultural management practices are oftentimes poor and internationally

=== PAGE 37 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
recognized sustainability criteria such as the FSC are not followed. By investing in forest plantations that will be 
managed to the highest economic, technical, environmental and social standards, Arbaro will contribute to innovation 
in the local forest industries. In addition, global timber markets have already started moving away from forest 
products such as sawnwood from large diameter native species logs to more engineered products (e.g. finger 
jointing) from smaller diameter plantation logs from species like pine and eucalyptus. By providing the necessary raw 
materials and actively developing markets for its products, Arbaro will contribute to the necessary innovation in 
developing countries in the target regions to catch up with such global trends and become firstly self-sufficient in 
these products but going forward also export competitive. 
Removing of barriers, scalability 
Arbaro will contribute to scaling up the scope and impact of plantation forestry in the target regions. Commercial 
plantation forestry is largely at an infant stage in many of the target countries, forest industries tend to be 
underdeveloped and governments are just starting to appreciate the economic and climate benefits of plantation 
forestry, with public frameworks (e.g. regarding forest classifications, land tenure systems, community engagement, 
infrastructure, taxation) having significant potential to become more conducive. All this creates barriers for early 
movers such as Arbaro who have to invest significant time in understanding oftentimes large opaque markets and 
educating different local stakeholders such as policymakers, permitting agencies, financial institutions, communities 
or buyers about the dynamics of plantation forestry. In particular, being able to sell plantation grown timber in local 
markets that are both largely informal, oftentimes supplied with illegally source timber and used to native species, 
takes great efforts and patience. 
Investments made after Arbaro’s will benefit from removal of barriers and easier entry to this sector. Similarly, as 
forestry becomes more significant in a country, the more interest it will attract from ambitious individuals, more 
knowledge will grow around it and high-quality human capital will be more widely available locally. 
Replicability 
Similar programmes can subsequently be established in other regions or be further scaled up with additional funding. 
However, it is crucial to provide the example and scale it up to a level where it can be financially, ecologically and 
socially sustainable. 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Arbaro is highly committed to inducing sustainable development in developing countries, as evidenced by the 
sponsors’ previous activities and track record. Every investment decision will be made based upon a triple bottom line 
approach that takes into account the economic, environmental and social sustainability of a project as measured 
against quantitative and qualitative performance criteria. Next to its mitigation potential, the sustainable development 
impact of every project will be an integral component of the investment decision making process. Arbaro will always 
seek to cooperate with local project partners (e.g. forestry companies or NGOs), whose values – as demonstrated by 
tangible evidence – are aligned with Arbaro. 
Social co-benefits including adaptation co-benefits from project level operations  
Providing alternative livelihoods 
Smallholder farming is an important source of employment and income for rural people in most of Arbaro’s target 
countries but in particular in those located in the Sub-Saharan African countries. The distinctive characteristics of 
rural areas make them uniquely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change because of greater dependence on 
agriculture and natural resources makes them highly sensitive to climate variability, extreme climate events, and 
climate change (IPCC). Shifting cultivation remains a dominant form of agriculture across these countries. Given 
these practices the rural population is especially vulnerable to climate change impacts; and for example, changing 
rainfall patterns (prolonged dry conditions) can have a devastating impact to the livelihoods of these people. This is 
further exacerbated by the low financial capacity and no or limited options for provision of income. Providing 
alternative livelihoods through formal employment opportunities in the forestry projects or supporting services 
improves the resilience of the rural communities and decreases dependence on the climate sensitive subsistence 
practices such as shifting agriculture. 
Passing best practices, incl. employment formalization 
The programme will establish and pass on best practices through its operations and thereby contribute to sustainable 
development. For example, a large contribution will be made through the formalization of labour, which especially in 
rural areas is widely unknown in several of the initial target countries. If applicable, this will allow people employed 
under the programme to benefit from wider social services like public social security or health insurances, which they 
would miss if informal employment standards continued to prevail. Similarly, best practices regarding working hours,

=== PAGE 38 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
health and safety standards, vacation, etc. will be followed, which will benefit people employed under the programme 
beyond the monetary value of their salaries. 
Contributing to developing local communities (incl. infrastructure, health and education) 
Every project realised under the programme will have a community development/engagement component where 
investments are made into e.g. local infrastructure (e.g. wells, roads or bridges), health services (e.g. community 
clinics, nurses, malaria/HIV prevention) or education (e.g. school buildings, learning materials or scholarships) for the 
direct betterment of the livelihoods of local communities beyond the other wider benefits described in the sections 
above. Regarding infrastructure, it needs to be noted that oftentimes communities will also directly benefit from 
infrastructure developed by the project companies for commercial purposes such the expansion and improvement of 
road networks or building of bridges. 
Reducing the vulnerability of local communities through improved agricultural practices 
Rural areas in developing countries are characterized by dependence on agriculture and natural resources; high 
prevalence of poverty; isolation and marginality; neglect by policymakers and lower human development. The 
distinctive characteristics of rural areas make them uniquely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and existing 
vulnerabilities caused by poverty, lower levels of education and isolation can all aggravate climate change impacts in 
many ways. The livelihoods of rural communities in the target regions of the programme rely on subsistence 
agriculture with no or only limited alternative employment opportunities, making them particularly vulnerable. Projects 
realised under the programme might involve outgrower schemes or community development programmes that will 
improve agricultural practices and hence reduce the vulnerability of local communities to climate change. Outgrower 
schemes will allow local farmers to use their land more efficiently and diversify their income base. In addition, certain 
tree species can be more resilient to climatic fluctuations that certain agricultural crops. Outgrower schemes will 
support such farmers to select crops that are suitable for their land, thereby reducing climatic risks. Similar outcomes 
can be achieved through community development programmes (see above) that improve agricultural practices e.g. 
through education or the provision of improved planting materials. 
Mitigating the causes of urbanization 
By establishing forest plantations in the countryside, the programme will generate labour in rural areas with no or only 
limited alternative employment opportunities – with subsistence agriculture oftentimes being the only form of 
economic activity. Doing so, the programme will help to mitigate the causes of urbanization, as particularly young 
people tend to migrate to cities to find employment and overcome economic disparities. Retaining such talent in rural 
areas will support the betterment of local communities and their well-being in the long run. 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
The projects realised under the programme will seek to offer employment opportunities or other benefits following a 
gender responsive approach. This means that Arbaro will use its best endeavours to ensure that the social and 
economic benefits that its stakeholder groups derive from the operations of its portfolio companies will be distributed 
in an equal basis taking into account the needs of the various groups and noting that such needs may vary between 
the groups. 
From the sponsoring entities’ previous experience, it is clear that forestry projects generally have certain areas of 
operation which are well suited and liked by female employees. Female planting teams have been successful in other 
projects for example in East Africa. Also, nursery operations typically attract female employees. It is therefore 
estimated that between 15 -30 % of the workforce will be female. This is seen as both reducing gender inequalities in 
the target regions and the vulnerability of local communities to climate change. Firstly, women living in rural areas of 
the target regions are oftentimes left with no employment opportunities other than – at most – subsistence agriculture, 
charcoal production or gathering non-wood forest products. Secondly, providing employment to women diversifies the 
income streams of families away from subsistence agriculture and employment of working men and thus reduces the 
vulnerability of their livelihoods. 
Environmental co-benefits 
Conserving natural forests and other natural ecosystems 
The design and layout of FSC certified plantations is required to protect and conserve natural ecosystems, 
particularly natural forests. Wildlife corridors, streamside zones and a mosaic of stands of different ages and rotation 
periods must be taken into account in the layout of the plantation. FSC requires that in each certified operation multi-
stakeholder processes take place to identify high conservation value areas. Hence, when developed and managed in 
a sustainable manner and following best practises, a plantation project will always in itself include an element of 
direct conservation. FSC requires that at least 10% of the project area is set aside for conservation. However, in 
Arbaro’s projects, on average 20% of the total land area of a project will be conserved, in an active manner, i.e. such

=== PAGE 39 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
that the project is truly responsible for it. Through these practises, Arbaro envisages, through its projects to actively 
conserve approximately 200 ha for every 1 000 ha planted. Hence the overall direct and active conservation target of 
the Arbaro Fund is 15 000 ha, assuming a total investment volume of USD 200 million and depending on the final 
target project selection.. 
Enhancing degraded landscapes and improving resilience 
All projects realised under the programme will seek to become FSC certified and hence follow strict environmental 
requirements. The environmental impact of forest plantations depends on the baseline. The programme will under no 
circumstances support the conversion of natural forests into forest plantations. In contrast, the programme will seek 
to afforest or reforested degraded landscapes for the commercial, yet sustainable production of timber resources. 
Besides creating additional carbon sinks, establishing forest plantations on degraded land helps to regulate soils and 
water flows. For example, by preventing soil erosion and water run offs, forest plantations contribute to halt the 
detrimental effects of land degradation. Furthermore, when forest plantations are established in between mosaics of 
still existing natural forests (e.g. in areas where deforestation is still on-going, but did not yet fully unfold) coupled with 
conservation efforts, they can provide migratory corridors to insects and other animals, hence contributing to 
preserving the biodiversity in such areas. 
Reducing pressure on natural forests 
One of the key drivers of natural forest degradation and ultimately deforestation in the target regions, especially in 
Sub-Saharan Africa, is informal and unsustainable timber extraction for multiple end uses such as charcoal, 
sawnwood or plywood production – oftentimes driven the high demand of a growing domestic population. By 
generating a sustainable timber resource, the programme will provide an alternative to natural forests as a source of 
raw material and thereby indirectly contribute to wider conservation efforts by reducing extractive pressures on 
natural forests over time. 
Raising environmental awareness among local communities 
Each project realized under the programme will actively raise the environmental awareness of local communities 
partly through operational risk mitigation practices and partly through community development activities. For example, 
raising awareness among local communities about the causes and detrimental effects of fires, landscape degradation 
through anthropogenic forest fires will be reduced. Similarly, the planting and conservation efforts of the different 
projects will raise the appreciation of local communities for the environmental value of forests as such and transfer 
knowledge of best practices in efficiently and sustainably utilising land. For example, outgrower schemes and 
community development programmes – if applicable – will educate subsistence farmers about improved agricultural 
practices and support them in increasing the biodiversity on their land and improve in selecting fit species for their 
sites. 
Economic co-benefits 
Generating employment 
Arbaro’s projects are estimated to provide direct employment to more than 5 000 people. In addition, it is assumed 
that each direct job will create another 2-4 jobs along the value chain, i.e. that another 10 000-20 000 jobs will be 
created indirectly. Further on, it is estimated that 8-10 people per each employee are supported as part of employee’s 
extended family or through increased economic affluence and activity. This results in improved livelihoods for 
200 000 people in rural communities. Importantly, generating employment especially in rural areas is key to providing 
alternative livelihoods to subsistence agriculture and thus to reducing the vulnerability of local communities to climate 
change. 
Widening the local tax base 
The programme will widen the local tax base in several ways. Among many other things, the plantation investments 
will generate profits, create employment, and fuel further investment in the resource starved processing sector. The 
forest sector in many of the initial target countries is dwindling due to a shortage in raw materials and the forest sector 
tends to be highly informal, i.e. taxes, both at individual employee level and at company level, as well as other 
payments such as licence fees, royalties etc. are not paid. This informality also leads to low participation in social 
welfare structures such as healthcare plans and pension schemes. Further growth and formalization in the forestry 
industry will create significant tax income for local governments, both directly through corporate income taxes and 
tax-like payments such as licensing fees or harvesting royalties paid by the project companies and indirectly through 
personal income taxes of employees and payments of other companies that benefit from the programme indirectly 
(e.g. contracted service providers or processing companies). This increase in tax and tax-like revenues for local 
governments has the potential to free up public finances that can be used elsewhere to spur sustainable economic 
development or climate action. While the positive impact on public finances is definite, particularly spillover effects are

=== PAGE 40 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
difficult to quantify. The below table gives an indication of the potential improvements of public finances that the 
Arbaro Fund is expected to induce based on broad simplified average assumptions for both target regions. 
Table 5 – Approximate tax revenues 
Approximate tax revenues 
USD million 
per annum 
Corporate income taxes - plantations 
3 
Corporate income taxes - processors 
4 
Corporate income taxes - contractors 
0.2 
Individual income taxes - direct employment 
7 
Individual income taxes - indirect employment 
6 
Total 
20 
In total, the Arbaro Fund is foreseen to generate some USD 20 million of annual tax income for local governments 
once the plantations mature. The biggest contribution will be made through individual income taxes paid by direct 
employees of the project companies (ca. USD 7 million per annum), followed by individual income taxes from 
employment generated indirectly along the value chain (ca. USD 6 million per annum). For the sake of estimating tax 
revenues for the government, the calculations above conservatively assume one formal tax paying job to be 
generated indirectly per direct job in the project companies (5 000 in total), whereas the multiplier can actually be 
expected to be in the range of two to four (see previous parts of the proposal). While every project will take some time 
to reach full scale, individual income taxes can be collected relatively early, i.e. will generate immediate tax revenues 
for local governments. Once the plantations start harvesting trees and reach sustainable harvesting cycle (i.e. a 
balanced age structure), additional direct corporate income taxes of ca. USD 3 million per annum are foreseen to be 
generated through the project companies. In addition, the project companies are expected to hire local contractors 
(e.g. for planting, maintenance and harvesting operations) and supply local wood processors such as sawmills that 
will generate further tax revenues of ca. USD 4 million per annum. In addition, further public revenue can be expected 
from tax-like payments such as licensing or land lease fees and harvesting royalties as well as formalization spillover 
effects along the value chain, i.e. wider positive effects on the capability and willingness of individuals and companies 
to pay taxes in the countries of operation (e.g. through improvements in labour standards, invoicing or electronic 
payments). Similarly, the above estimates do not account for the increase in tax revenues for local governments from 
wider positive economic spillover effects of the Arbaro Fund, for example from attracting further investments into the 
forestry sector by contribution to market creation and a reduction in perceived country risks. 
Substituting costly imports and thereby improving the current account balance 
According to FAO statistics, Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa imported forest products worth on average 
USD 17 billion per year from 2011-2015; forest product imports are likely to increase in the future with on-going 
economic and population growth in the target regions. While some countries like Brazil, Chile, Uruguay or South 
Africa have advanced forest sectors that generate significant forest product trade surpluses and other countries 
especially in Sub-Saharan Africa like Ghana or Mozambique export basic products like sawnwood or unprocessed 
logs on large scale e.g. to Asia, many developing countries in the target regions rely on importing several key, mostly 
higher value processed forest products, such as higher grade lumber, plywood, structural/engineered timber or 
treated utility poles, at high costs from overseas. For example, several African countries import utility poles from 
destinations as far as Chile, Finland or Australia due to a lack of domestic resources. Such dynamics put the already 
strained current account balances and local currencies of many countries in the target regions under additional 
pressure. By generating sustainable domestic timber resources, Arbaro will foster the development of local forest 
industries and thus contribute to improving the forest trade balance of such countries. Thereby it can ultimately 
support the betterment of their current account balances and foreign currency reserves. 
Increasing economic diversification and reducing vulnerability to external shocks 
Several countries in the target regions of the programme are highly reliant on a few export products and economic 
growth thus very sensitive to price swings in such products. For example, Paraguay’s real GDP grew by 13% in 2010, 
followed by a slowdown to 4% in 2011 and a contraction of -1% in 2012, only to surge again to 14% in 2013. 
Paraguay’s economy is highly dependent on soy and beef exports (almost 50% of exports) and thus vulnerable to 
external price shocks and extreme weather phenomena like “El Nino”. This is seen in the economic contraction of 
2012 that was mainly driven by country-wide drought coupled with a slump in global prices for agricultural products. 
By contribution to the development of a significant local forest sector, the programme can support countries like 
Paraguay in diversifying their economies and becoming less vulnerable to external shocks. In fact, in the case of

=== PAGE 41 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
Paraguay, its economy used to be more diversified because the country was home to a flourishing forest sector that 
however relied heavily on supply from natural forests and now crumbles due to depleting natural resources. 
Transferring knowledge and building capacities 
Arbaro will invest in projects that will be guided by international best practices such as the FSC Principles and Criteria 
and the IFC Performance Standards. The projects will be managed towards economic sustainability by becoming 
inherently profitable and worthwhile economic ventures. At the same time, the projects will seek to utilize local labour 
to the highest extent possible and invest in training employees. Coupled with the on-the-job experience, this will lead 
to a transfer of knowledge and best practices as well as capacity building in the target regions, hence ultimately 
contributing to long-term economic growth and sustainable development. 
Contributing to R&D potential in developing countries 
Forestry is a R&D intensive business, for example in terms of matching different tree species with local site conditions 
or monitoring and controlling pest and diseases and development trials or programmes on native species and their 
suitability for plantation purposes. As an example, in Arbaro’s second investment in Paraguay, an R&D trial has been 
commenced. This trial will establish plantation lots with native species under different silvicultural set-ups co-
operating with a local research project for the production of high quality planting materials. The programme will 
contribute to the widening of the local and regional knowledge base of forestry, as commercial plantation forestry in 
several countries is either at a nascent stage or largely untested. Hence, the programme will increase the R&D 
potential of local enterprises or research institutions in forestry (and potentially agriculture) in the target regions. 
Supporting local SMEs along the value chain 
The programme is expected to have significant spillover effects to local forest industries and related economic 
sectors. First and foremost, the well-being and survival of local wood processing industries such as furniture highly 
depends on the availability of affordable raw materials, i.e. timber. Many companies in the wood processing industries 
of the initial target countries are small or medium sized enterprises, e.g. carpentry businesses employing a handful of 
workers. Such enterprises still are or used to be significant in several of the initial target countries, but are suffering 
from surging raw material costs due to dwindling timber resources, low quality roundwood supply and ultimately 
import competition as a result of increasing prices. Such dynamics with more and more enterprises going out of 
business can be observed in both countries that mainly rely on natural forests as source of raw material (e.g. Ghana 
or Paraguay) and countries where processors mainly source timber from (constrained) plantations Arbaro will 
contribute to reversing such trends by establishing sustainable local timber resources in the target regions. 
Secondly, the projects realised under the programme – where available and suitable – will contract local service 
providers, e.g. for tree maintenance or transport activities. Many such contractors in the target regions are SMEs, 
meaning the programme is expected to spur their local business activity. Finally, if such enterprises are contracted, 
they will be required to ultimately abide by the same business practices like the project companies, e.g. in terms of 
health and safety. This way the programme will contribute to passing best practices along the value chain and create 
wider economic (e.g. increased productivity) or social (e.g. increased safety standards) benefits. 
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Countries in Arbaro’s target regions are to a large extent recipients of development assistance and classified as such 
in the OECD DAC listing. In these countries rural population is largely dependent on subsistence agriculture and 
natural resources for their livelihoods; formal employment being scarce. Large proportion of households are below 
the poverty line, with rural poverty being much higher than urban poverty. Since large proportion of natural resources 
are effectively subject to open access, these resources act as safety nets to households that have little or no other 
means of income, and as a means of reducing risks and smoothing income by providing the option for deriving food 
and income from multiple sources. With population growth, increase in population density in rural areas, as well as 
the general overutilization of the resources, in many areas the resources around villages have been depleted so that 
households are finding it more difficult to access these benefits further increasing the vulnerability of these 
communities.  
Arbaro will make a significant contribution to improving the position of the rural communities located within the its 
project areas primarily by providing formal employment opportunities. It is estimated that livelihoods of up to 200 000 
people will be improved through the Arbaro’s activities.  
In addition to providing employment and source of income, the formal employment also shifts these people to the 
reach of healthcare and vocation education services as well as pension and social security system.

=== PAGE 42 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Table 6 Country policies 
 
The Arbaro Fund’s mission is aligned with the political strategy of every target country. The Arbaro Fund will 
contribute to climate change mitigation, and provide adaptation co-benefits to climate change and to social 
development in the target countries. This mission is aligned with the political strategy of each target country as 
evidenced in various national policies, incl. national development plans, national climate policies and INDCs 
submitted under the Paris Agreement. When a policy refers explicitly to reforestation/afforestation or sustainable 
forestry as a challenge or target for climate change mitigation/adaptation or social development, the Arbaro Fund’s 
mission is considered aligned with the policy, i.e. a “X” was assigned in the table above. If only indirect evidence 
exists, e.g. because a national climate policy does not yet exist, but documentation for its preparation (Sierra Leone) 
or only general targets for the LULUCF exist (Ecuador) do, the Arbaro Fund’s mission is considered indirectly aligned 
with the policy, i.e. a “(X)” was assigned in the table above. Blank fields do not indicate a conflict between the Arbaro 
Fund’s mission and the respective country policy, but either the lack of such a policy or the absence of a reference to 
reforestation/afforestation or sustainable forestry in that policy. No conflict between any reviewed national strategic 
policy and the Arbaro Fund’s mission was identified. 
Every target country except for Sierra Leone explicitly intends to promote sustainable forest plantations. The main 
quoted motives are carbon sequestration and income generation. Sierra Leone identifies “reforestation, afforestation 
and agroforestry” as a mitigation opportunity in its third national communication to the UNFCC and forestry is 
considered a key pillar of addressing vulnerabilities and building resilience in the medium-term national development 
plan. Several countries formulate forest plantation strategies, incl. Chile, Ecuador, Ghana and Paraguay. The INDCs 
of every target country except for Sierra Leone list reforestation/afforestation or sustainable forestry as important 
mitigation options, typically emphasizing the contribution of reforestation/afforestation to carbon sequestration. Only 
few target countries have already developed NAMAs or NAPAs, but the existing action plans oftentimes cover 
reforestation/afforestation or sustainable forestry. All countries except for Sierra Leone have drafted or passed 
national REDD+ strategies, all of which consider sustainable forest plantations as a strategic option. While most of 
the target countries link reforestation/afforestation or sustainable forestry with social or rural development, several 
countries consider reforestation/afforestation or sustainable forestry ways to adapt to climate change, incl. Ethiopia, 
Paraguay, Sierra Leone and Uganda. Please refer to annex 23 for country-specific summaries of the alignment of the 
Arbaro Fund’s mission with the national political strategies. 
Capacity of AE and Executing Entities to deliver 
 
MUFG Bank (Accredited Entity) 
Building on over 350 years of financial expertise, Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group (“MUFG”) has grown to become one 
of the largest comprehensive financial groups in the world. Today MUFG’s global network spans over 50 countries and 
regions, and employs 150,000 financial professionals in over approximately 2,300 offices, providing customers with a 
deep and diverse range of services and resources, to meet their local, regional and global financial needs.

=== PAGE 43 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
The project finance practice within MUFG provides clients access to its global lending and capital markets businesses. 
MUFG has been Global No.1 in MLA League Table of Project Finance International (PFI)16 for seven years in a row 
from 2012. MUFG was also ranked Global No.1 for the third straight year since 2016 in Clean Energy & Energy Smart 
Technology under Bloomberg New Energy Finance Asset Finance Lead Arrangers League Table. 
 
MUFG Bank plays an active role in the Project, will channel the resources to the Project as a private accredited entity 
and monitor the Project’s compliance with the Arbaro Fund’s standards (social, environmental, fiduciary and gender). 
MUFG Bank’s supervision of the Project will be based on a periodic review of the Project provided by the Executing 
Entities. 
 
Arbaro level 
The Executing Entities needs to succeed in the following aspects for the Programme / Arbaro Fund to be successful: 
1) 
Attract additional capital first to first closing and secondly to scale the Fund to USD 200 million 
2) 
Set up the Arbaro Fund structures 
3) 
Originate and execute the Arbaro Fund investments in a timely manner and in accordance with the fund target 
impact and financial returns 
4) 
Run the investment such that they will increase in value and provide the desired impact 
5) 
Exit the investments 
Arbaro Advisors GmbH is the Investment Advisor of the Arbaro Fund. Arbaro Advisors is owned by the Fund promoters, 
Finance in Motion GmbH (“FiM”) and Unique Works AG (“Unique”). The Arbaro Fund promoters have a strong track 
record in emerging markets, working with a wide range of investors as well as in (in case of Finance in Motion) fund 
structuring and developments. 
Arbaro Advisors will employ the investment team which will be dedicated to the Arbaro Fund. The key members of the 
Investment team have significant experience in the target countries and sectors as follows: 
• 
Dr Markus Grulke, previous head of the forest investment team at Unique. Dr Grulke has experience in deal 
sourcing, due diligence and structuring of investments in Africa and Latin America. He has been involved in the 
development and co-management of different forest companies. He has also explored investment opportunities 
in Latin America and Africa (Paraguay, Uruguay, Chile, Peru, Nicaragua, Ecuador, Argentina, Mozambique, 
Tanzania, Uganda), accumulating long-standing experience in conducting forestry, economic, environmental 
and social due diligence missions and feasibility studies and pre-structuring of forest investments in these 
regions.  
• 
Hanna Skelly has sourced, executed and managed a portfolio of approximately EUR 170 mm, focusing on 
forestry investments and development finance in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America, specifically in several 
of the main target countries of the Arbaro Fund (Ghana, Sierra Leone, and Uganda ) among others. 
• 
Marco Kaiser, with experience in product and strategy development and planning of FiM, overseeing FiM’s 
Asset and Liability Management. Lead several transactions of FiM and the advised funds, with the latest 
investment in an African SME holding. He has broad experience in emerging countries, mainly focused on 
Western Balkan, South East Europe, Caucasus, Middle East, North Africa and Latin America.  
• 
Thomas Ruf, who has developed and managed forest and timber industries in South America. He has 
experience in preparation of business plans for future investment projects, timber market research, valuation 
of forest based on natural and economic criteria, financial and legal due diligence and in forest management 
and production. 
• 
Patricia del Valle, with experience in economic modelling of forestry projects, development of monitoring and 
forest information systems, E&S issues and assessments of forest investments in Paraguay, Argentina, Brazil, 
Nicaragua, Ethiopia, Mozambique, among others.  
• 
Francisco Gomes, an investment professional with 5 years of experience in private equity deals, focusing in 
financial modelling, due diligence and deal execution. 
• 
Mikko Reinikkala, a finance professional with 3 years of experience in support functions in asset management 
industry.  
 
The following map highlights the countries where Arbaro team has direct experience: 
 
16 http://www.pfie.com/Journals/2018/01/23/m/i/k/PFILeagueTables2017.pdf

=== PAGE 44 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 
Arbaro Advisors’ owners 
FiM is an investment advisor specialized in triple bottom line investments that advises development finance funds in 
achieving significant economic, social and environmental impact in emerging markets and developing countries. FiM is 
invested in 25 countries advising funds with currently outstanding assets under management of USD 1.8 bln. 
Cumulatively, FiM has advised more than USD 3 bln assets since its inception in 2009. The company is particularly 
strong and known as a leading advisor to public-private partnership funds leveraging donor contributions (e.g. BMZ, 
EC) and DFI investments (e.g. KfW, IFC, EBRD, EIB, FMO, OeEB) with private institutional investors. In addition to the 
investment funds FiM is operating technical assistance facilities for several donors with average annual approvals of 
ca USD 6m (400+ projects approved in last 5 years). FiM has an office network of 18 offices in three continents, 
including Latin America and Africa. 
UNIQUE is and independent land use, timber advisory and forest management company, with experience in forest 
management planning, structuring forest investments, investment scoping and feasibility studies, technical, economic 
environmental and social due diligence of forestry projects and companies, development of forest investment projects 
in compliance with FSC; forest planning and operational management, process optimization and coaching of local forest 
company managers, market intelligence and value chain integration, forest product commercialization, forest 
information systems, forest valuation as well as monitoring and evaluation of productions, costs and E&S impact, FSC 
certification. UNIQUE has subsidiaries in Kampala (Uganda) and in Asunción (Paraguay). Also, it has regional and 
project offices in Uruguay, Kenia, Serbia, Vietnam, Kyrgyzstan, Ethiopia and Argentina.  
Since its foundation, UNIQUE has carried out over 650 assignments in more than 75 countries. 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Adequacy of the financing structure 
Sustainable plantation forestry achieves its highest mitigation and adaptation impact when new forest plantations are 
established, e.g. on degraded land. However, the cash flow profile of such greenfield investments creates barriers to 
significant investment in the sector. Greenfield plantations require large upfront investments (ca. 3 000-
4 000 USD/ha), but only start generating positive cash flows several years, sometimes decades after the first 
investment depending on several factors. For example, if eucalyptus trees are mainly produced for biomass or 
pulpwood under favourable growth conditions, they can be harvested 5-8 years after planting. If, however the target is 
to produce higher value timber e.g. for the construction or furniture industry, trees can take more than 20 years to 
mature depending on species selection and growth conditions. Even fast-growing species like eucalyptus will need 
10-12 years under favourable growth conditions to reach a sufficient height and diameter for high value end uses. 
The stretched-out cash flow profile – especially of long rotation projects with a high mitigation potential – puts the 
financing structure of a greenfield project under strain, as not only initial establishment costs but also maintenance 
costs in the early years of operation have to be financed up front until operational costs can (at least partially) be 
covered by cash inflows from commercial thinnings. Hence, greenfield plantation projects are not bankable for 
conventional debt financing and thus in dire need for flexible and patient equity financing. In fact, domestic debt

=== PAGE 45 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
financing e.g. through commercial banks in the target regions is largely non-existent and only some DFIs have 
provided mezzanine debt to greenfield plantation companies – although typically with equity like features. 
Plantation forestry in many of the countries in Arbaro’s target regions has seen only little investment to date. Despite 
offering attractive risk-adjusted returns and significant impact potential, especially private investors have largely 
shunned plantation forestry in the target regions for different reasons, incl. the sector being at a nascent development 
stage and high perceived operational or country risks. The proposed financing structure foresees GCF to invest at the 
same terms like other investors into the Arbaro Fund, i.e. the GCF investment will not be concessional. Nonetheless, 
it is expected that GCF’s investment will catalyse further co-investments into the Arbaro Fund and into plantation 
forestry in the target regions over the long run. This is because the GCF investment will help Arbaro to realize more 
projects in more countries and thereby create additional track record to attract future investors. Similarly, the GCF 
investment will support Arbaro in reaching a critical scale to ensure an efficient fund structure and sufficient project 
diversification. As the Arbaro Fund foresees to reach an ultimate size of USD 200 million, there is plenty of room for 
further co-investments, meaning GCF’s investment is not expected to crowd out, but rather to encourage other 
private and public investors to follow suit. 
Cost effectiveness and efficiency 
Capital mobilisation 
A GCF investment of USD 25 million would contribute to 12.5% of the ultimate fund size of USD 200 million targeted 
for Arbaro. Hence, every USD invested by GCF is expected to catalyse seven USD of further capital mobilised from 
other private and DFI investors direct into the Arbaro Fund. In addition, further capital can be mobilized indirectly on 
project level. Arbaro will typically not be the sole investor in the investee forestry companies, but provide financing 
alongside equity co-investors, such as the project developers, high net worth individuals or shareholders of the 
Arbaro Fund seeking direct exposure to certain projects, and mezzanine investors such as DFIs; in certain cases, 
Arbaro will also become a minority shareholder. On average, Arbaro assumes to contribute 50% of the funding needs 
of a project; 20-35% are expected to be financed with debt or mezzanine and the rest to be provided by other equity 
co-investors. Hence, GCF’s investment into Arbaro is likely to be multiplied by a factor of 15x, potentially more 
depending on the financing structure of Arbaro’s investments. Please refer to section E.6.2 for more details on the co-
financing ratio. Finally, Arbaro would be one of the first private equity funds to solely invest into sustainable forestry in 
the target regions and thus has the potential to spark follow-up investments by creating more track record for 
sustainable forestry as an asset class and by reducing perceived risks; however, the resulting indirect capital 
mobilisation potential is difficult to estimate. 
CO2 sequestration 
Based on a total fund size of USD 200 million, it is estimated that a total of ca. 20 million tons of CO2 will be 
sequestered directly over Arbaro’s lifetime. Hence, every 10 USD invested will contribute to the sequestration of 
approximately 1 ton of CO2. This estimate is deemed conservative because it does not account for (i) emission 
reductions from indirectly preventing natural forest degradation and deforestation (see section E.3) and (ii) emission 
reductions after Arbaro’s exit. GCF has not funded plantation forestry proposals before, meaning there are no directly 
comparable benchmarks. Nonetheless, the estimated mitigation costs of 10 USD/tCO2 are competitive when 
compared to other – although less comparable – GCF funded projects. While landscape/REDD proposals report 
mitigation costs of 6-8 USD/tCO2, renewable energy proposals project mitigation costs as low as 6 USD/tCO2 up to of 
ca. 70 USD/tCO2. Experience from other (non GCF funded) renewable energy projects in developing countries 
confirms that mitigation costs strongly depend on the technology and scale of a project, but can be significantly higher 
than what is estimated for the Arbaro Fund.

=== PAGE 46 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance 
Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes 
as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both. 
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development 
 
 
E.2. Core indicator targets 
Provide specific numerical values for the GCF core indicators to be achieved by the project/programme. 
Methodologies for the calculations should be provided. This should be consistent with the information provided in 
section A. 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
and cross-cutting only) 
Annual 
1,333,333 t CO2 eq 
Lifetime 
20,000,000 t CO2 eq 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) 
(a) Total project financing 
200 million   USD    
(b) Requested GCF amount  
25 million  USD 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions  
20 million  t CO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
10   USD / t CO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed 
(e = b / c) 
1.25   USD / t CO2eq 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project/programme as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation and 
cross-cutting only) 
Post GCF participation (excluding 1st closing and public investors already 
engaged prior to GCF interest): 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
205 million   USD 
(g) Public source co-financed 
10 million   USD 
(h) Private source finance leveraged  
195   USD 
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
8.2   
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
0.4  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
7.8  
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
14 000 men / 6 000 women 
Indirect 
100 000 men / 100 000 women 
For a multi-country proposal, indicate the aggregate amount here and provide the data 
per country in annex 17. 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
 
Indirect 
 
For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.

=== PAGE 47 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
E.3. Fund-level impacts 
Select the appropriate impact(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key result areas and corresponding 
indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be selected per expected 
impact result. The result areas indicated in this section should match those selected in section A.4 above. Add rows 
as needed.  
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Basel
ine 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-
term 
Final 
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from land use, 
reforestation, reduced 
deforestation, and 
through sustainable 
forest management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks 
M4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) reduced or 
avoided (including 
increased removals) - 
forest and land use 
Portfolio 
company 
data using 
agreed 
methodology 
of Arbaro 
0 
7 million 
tCO2eq 
sequest
ered 
20 million 
tCO2eq 
sequestered
. 
Arbaro Fund 
reaches its target 
size of 200M USD 
and deploys 
funding in 8-12 
projects in its 
target regions. 
Targets may be 
adjusted following 
guidance by the 
COP related to 
GHG emission 
level assessments 
under the NDCs. 
An additional 
indicator related to 
contribution to 
NDCs might be 
added following 
future changes in 
the GCF result 
management 
framework. 
E.4. Fund-level outcomes 
Select the appropriate outcome(s) to be reported for the project/programme. Select key expected outcomes and 
corresponding indicators from GCF RMF and PMFs as appropriate. Note that more than one indicator may be 
selected per expected outcome. Add rows as needed. 
 
Expected Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term) 
Final 
  
Number of technologies 
and innovative solutions 
transferred or licensed to 
promote low-emission 
development as a result of 
Arbaro Fund support.
 
 
Portfolio 
company 
data 
0 
1 
1 
The portfolio 
companies use 
and further 
develop 
sustainable forest 
management 
practices leading 
to CO2 
sequestration. 
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
M5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
low-emission planning 
and development and 
their effective 
implementation  
FAO data 
 
Public data 
of the 
associations 
and other 
such 
institutions 
 
Regulatory: 
Regulation 
exists but it 
is outdated 
 
Enforcemen
t is lacking 
 
Sectoral: 
No 
association
Regulatory 
Changes 
in 
regulation 
 
Enforceme
nt is 
improved 
but not 
consistent 
 
Regulat
ory: 
New 
regulati
on is in 
place 
 
Enforce
ment is 
consiste
nt 
Target levels will 
be reassessed as 
part of the due 
diligence process 
of the 
investments.

=== PAGE 48 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Portfolio 
company 
data  
s exist or 
the have 
weak 
capacity 
Sectoral: 
1 new 
associatio
n or 
improved 
capacity of 
2 
associatio
ns 
 
Sectoral
2 new 
associat
ions, or 
improve
d 
capacity 
of 5 
existing 
associat
ions: 
Qualitative 
indicator with two 
aspects: 
 
Regulatory: 
The forestry 
sector moves 
towards 
formalization and 
sector regulation 
is improved and 
enforced more 
efficiently 
 
Sector 
associations and 
other such 
institutions: 
Portfolio 
companies are 
active in sector 
associations and 
other such 
institutions in 
lobbying for more 
formalization. 
 
M9.0 Improved 
management of land or 
forest areas contributing 
to emissions reductions 
M9.1 Hectares of land 
or forests under 
improved and effective 
management that 
contributes to CO2 
emission reductions  
Portfolio 
company 
data  
FSC 
certification 
report 
FAO country 
data 
0 
25,000 
ha of 
new 
forest 
area 
5,000 ha 
of 
conserva
tion area 
75,000 
ha of 
new 
forest 
area 
15,000 
ha of 
conser
vation 
area 
Arbaro Fund 
reaches its target 
size of 200M USD 
and invests in 8-
12 portfolio 
companies. 
Each portfolio 
company 
develops between 
6,000-9,000 
hectares of new 
forests. 
Each portfolio 
company achieves 
FSC certification 
In each project, on 
average 20% of 
the total land area 
is conserved. 
Targets are 
reassessed as 
part of the due 
diligence process 
of the 
investments.

=== PAGE 49 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators 
Arbaro will choose its investment projects during the investment period of the Arbaro Fund. As of today, the Arbaro 
Fund has made two investments. For details please refer to section [xx]. 
 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-
term 
Final 
Sustainable supply of wood 
products increases in 
target markets 
Volume in m3 of 
sustainably produced 
wood products entering 
the market or in forest 
stock 
Portfolio 
company 
data  
 
FSC 
certification 
reports 
on 
portfolio 
companies’ 
assets 
 
0 
5 
millio
n  m3 
20 million  
m3 
Arbaro Fund has a 
limited lifetime of 
15 years. Arbaro 
will seek a project-
specific exits that 
ensure the long-
term sustainability 
of the projects 
beyond Arbaro’s 
involvement. 
Therefore, it can 
be reasonably 
assumed that the 
positive impacts 
that the Arbaro 
Fund’s projects 
provide, will 
continue beyond 
the Fund’s 
involvement in the 
portfolio 
companies. 
However, the 
result assessment 
in this proposal is 
limited to the 
Arbaro Fund 
lifetime. 
Arbaro Fund 
reaches its target 
size of 200M USD 
and invests in 8-
12 portfolio 
companies. 
Each portfolio 
company 
develops between 
6,000- 9,000 
hectares of new 
forests. 
Each portfolio 
company achieves 
FSC certification 
In each project, on 
average 20% of 
the total land area 
is conserved. 
Targets are 
reassessed as

=== PAGE 50 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
part of the due 
diligence process 
of the 
investments. 
 
New forested areas are 
created and managed 
under sustainable 
management practices 
Number of hectares 
planted and sustainably 
managed 
Portfolio 
company 
data  
FSC 
certification 
reports 
0 
25,00
0 
hectar
es 
75,000 
hectares  
Fund size of 200M 
USD 
Each fund project 
will plant 
approximately      
6,000-9,000 ha of 
new forest area. 
Each portfolio 
company achieves 
FSC certification 
Targets are 
reassessed as 
part of the due 
diligence process 
of the 
investments. 
 
New areas are placed 
under conservation 
Number of hectares 
conserved 
Portfolio 
company 
data 
FSC 
certification 
reports 
on 
portfolio 
companies’ 
assets 
 
0 
5,000 
hectar
es 
15,000 
hectares 
Fund size of 200M 
USD 
Each portfolio 
company 
develops between 
6,000-9,000 
hectares of new 
forests. 
Each portfolio 
company achieves 
FSC certification 
In each project, on 
average 20% of 
the total land area 
is conserved. 
Targets are 
reassessed as 
part of the due 
diligence process 
of the 
investments. 
 
Formal jobs are created in 
rural areas providing 
alternative livelihoods to 
subsistence agriculture and 
unsustainable practices 
such as charcoal 
production 
Number of formal jobs 
 
Number of people with 
improved livelihoods 
Portfolio 
company 
data 
0 
 
0 
2,500 
 
100,0
00 
5,000 
 
200,000 
Arbaro Fund 
reaches its target 
size of 200M USD 
and deploys 
funding in 8-12 
projects. 
Against each 
formal direct job 
another 3 jobs are 
created in the 
value chain or

=== PAGE 51 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
service sectors 
supporting the 
value chain.  
Each employed 
person contributes 
to improved 
livelihoods of 8-10 
persons. 
Increased 
economic activity 
in the rural areas 
provide alternative 
income sources. 
Targets are 
reassessed as 
part of the due 
diligence process 
of the 
investments. 
 
New SMEs are created in 
the sustainable plantation 
forestry value chain or in 
supporting service 
industries 
Number of new entities 
 
Portfolio 
company 
data 
Baseline is 
assessed as 
part of the 
environment
al and social 
due 
diligence 
0 
20 
100 
Arbaro Fund 
reaches its target 
size of 200M USD 
and deploys 
funding in 8-12 
projects. 
Increased 
economic activity 
in the rural areas 
provide alternative 
income sources. 
Targets are 
reassessed as 
part of the due 
diligence process 
of the 
investments. 
Local communities’ 
capacities are enchanced 
through community 
programmes such as 
outgrower schemes 
Number of community 
programmes (e.g. 
outgrower schemes)  
 
 
Number of people 
reached by these 
programmes. 
 
Portfolio 
company 
data 
 
 
 
Portfolio 
company 
data 
0 
 
 
 
0 
15  
 
 
 
1,500 
30 
 
 
 
5,000 
Arbaro Fund 
reaches its target 
size of 200M USD 
and deploys 
funding in 8-12 
projects. 
Increased 
economic activity 
in the rural areas 
provide alternative 
income sources. 
Portfolio 
companies roll out  
out-grower 
schemes and 
other community 
programmes (e.g. 
training on 
sustainable

=== PAGE 52 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
agriculture)  where 
communities in 
the proximity of 
the portfolio 
company 
operations will be 
trained to apply 
modern 
silviculture to their 
own land, thus 
providing several 
benefits such as 
additional and 
diversified income, 
economic 
empowerment and 
improving rural 
capacities. 
Targets are 
reassessed as 
part of the due 
diligence process 
of the investments 
 
E.6. Activities  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be 
reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed. 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
1) 
Pipeline development  
2) 
Assessment of project 
opportunities following 
Arbaro’s investment 
strategy and ESMS 
Arbaro continues to develop 
pipeline in the target countries 
and invests in 8-12 projects. 
1.1) Project identification and 
screening 
based 
on 
Arbaro’s 
investment 
strategy climate eligibility 
criteria and ESMS 
1.2) Due 
diligence 
on 
the 
potential investee projects 
2.1) Approval of the proposed 
investments by the Arbaro 
Investment Committee 
2.2) Execution 
of 
the 
investments 
 
Funding is deployed. 
Project 
level 
operations 
commence. 
  
3) 
Investments in project 
level operations 
 
The investee companies 
commence the Arbaro funded 
operations. 
Arbaro 
ensures 
that 
investment proceeds are used 
for 
the 
Arbaro 
approved 
operations such as: 
4.1) Planting and forest 
management activities 
4.2) Nursery operations 
4.3) Harvesting, processing 
and wood sales as well 
as other portfolio 
company operations 
4.4) Conservation activities 
 
Carbon 
sequestration 
increases through the project 
activities. 
 
Employment is created

=== PAGE 53 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
4) 
Arbaro Fund investment 
monitoring   
Arbaro monitors the portfolio 
companies’ 
operations 
to 
insure adherence to Arbaro’ s 
investment 
strategy 
and 
ESMS. 
 
  
Fund level: 
3.1) Monitoring of portfolio 
company 
operations 
through reporting from the 
companies as well as 
active dialogue, including 
on-site visits, with the 
portfolio companies 
3.2) Performance reviews to 
assess 
performance 
against targets 
 
 
Annual reports to Arbaro fund 
investors on Arbaro fund’s 
activities. 
5) 
Reporting throughout 
the Arbaro Fund lifetime 
Arbaro reviews the portfolio 
companies’ performance 
against the set targets 
Reporting: 
5.1) Quarterly reports on the 
performance of the 
portfolio companies 
5.2) Annual E&S and impact 
report 
 
Annual reports to Arbaro Fund 
investors on Arbaro Fund’s 
activities 
Annual Sustainability report   
6) 
Exit from investments 
Arbaro negotiates and 
executes the exit 
documentation. 
The exit proceeds are 
received. 
6.1) Assessment of potential 
exit channels 
6.2) Decision on final exit  
6.3) Negotiation and 
execution of all exit 
documentation 
6.4) Receipt and subsequent 
distribution of the exit 
proceeds 
Final fund lifecycle target 
achievement on carbon 
sequestration, job creation, 
livelihood support and 
financial returns are realized 
and can be reported. 
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Arbaro’s reporting obligations are stipulated in the limited partnership agreement which is entered into between the 
Arbaro Fund and its investors. There may also be further reporting requirements under the accreditation master 
agreement which will be incorporated into the Arbaro Fund legal documentation, namely the side letter of the AE / 
GCF.  
In addition, Arbaro provides comprehensive impact reporting. 
The key reports that Arbaro prepares for its investors will include: 
Quarterly reports (unaudited) which will be delivered no later than 60 calendar days after the end of each quarter and 
include: 
• 
a summary of the key terms of the Arbaro Fund; 
• 
a balance sheet of the Arbaro Fund, as of the end of such quarter; 
• 
a year-to-date income statement of the Arbaro Fund; 
• 
the amount of the manager remuneration (whether accrued and owing but not paid, or actually paid) paid by 
the Arbaro Fund to its manager (Arbaro Advisors) during the applicable quarter and fiscal year-to-date; 
• 
a summary of the key developments in the preceding quarter (e.g. Drawdowns, new fund investments, 
investment pipeline, new investors, etc.); 
• 
an overview of the Arbaro Fund investments, (i.e. commitments, stakes in the projects, drawdowns, IRR, 
valuation, compliance with the investment strategy) as well as a portfolio breakdown by country, counterparty 
and investment type; and 
• 
a statement of changes in the relevant investor’s capital account for the preceding quarter

=== PAGE 54 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
Annual report (audited) which will be delivered four months after the end of each fiscal year and include a report 
audited by the Auditor setting forth: 
• 
a balance sheet of Arbaro Fund as of the end of such fiscal year; 
• 
a year-to-date income statement of Arbaro Fund for such fiscal year; 
• 
a year-to-date statement of changes in the relevant investor’s capital account for such fiscal year. 
E&S and Impact reporting 
The fund management team will report regularly and in a transparent manner about activities, results, and challenges 
of its business operations in line with its vision and mission. ESG issues shall be reported in depth to investors at 
least once a year, mainly through the publications of the Arbaro Sustainability Report. Furthermore, ESG key 
performance indicators will also be reported regularly. In years 5, 10 and 15 the report will include an assessment on 
whether similar initiatives have been developed in the regions of intervention, which would reflect the replicability of 
Arbaro activities. 
 
Arbaro’s Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) will be monitored and reported as follows: 
• 
Financial: Arbaro follows the accounting standards of Lux GAAP. Net Asset Value calculation is performed 
quarterly and reported to the investors as part of the quarterly reporting 
• 
CO2 sequestration: Arbaro follows the overall guidance of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) as well as methodologies from the Verified Carbon Standard (VCS). The carbon sequestered by 
Arbaro’s projects corresponds to the net CO2 sequestration as follows:  
The net CO2 sequestration is estimated by applying the following equation: 
Net CO2 sequestration (tCO2) =  
CO2 sequestration in the project – Baseline – Leakage – Other project emissions 
• 
Job creation: Employment generation is measured as full-time equivalent. More detailed breakdowns of the 
employment generation will be available as well. 
In addition, the annual sustainability report will provide details on the impact, final methodologies used will partly 
depend on each case and impacts thereof. 
The Arbaro Fund performance will be compared to the Arbaro fund targets in mid-term and final assessment report 
based on Arbaro’s KPIs.

=== PAGE 55 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Investments made into the Arbaro Fund are subject to market fluctuations and to the risks inherent in all investments. 
Accordingly, no assurance can be given that the investment objective of Arbaro will be achieved. The risk factors 
related to Arbaro can be categorized as fund risks and as risks related to investing in emerging markets and in the 
forestry sector. No exhaustive list of these risks can be given, and the risks may result in substantial net asset value 
volatility and depreciation or not achieving the impact targets of the fund.  
General fund risks include risks related to individual investors, the fund structure and how it operates, and external 
environment related to both, e.g.: 
• 
Currency risk (be it between individual investor’s home currency and the fund currency; or the target project 
currencies) 
• 
Changes is applicable law 
• 
Reliance on the investment committee and investment managers 
• 
Risk of non-payment by investors 
• 
Use of leverage 
• 
Dependency of key personnel 
The risk mitigation strategy of the Arbaro Fund is pursued at both project and Fund level: 
• 
Cautious and highly professional project planning and implementation, in strict compliance with FSC and IFC 
standards, allows for risk mitigation at project level 
• 
Balanced project portfolio in terms of investment types (Greenfield, Brownfield, downstream), regions and 
products, allows for risk diversification at Fund level 
Specific risk factors are continuously assessed throughout the entire investment process and are strictly monitored. 
Appropriate mitigation strategies are analyzed and implemented proactively from the earliest stage possible. 
In the below section the key risk factors related to the investee projects, the investment operations in emerging 
markets and forestry sector and the mitigation measures to those are discussed in more detail. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
Biotic Risks 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
High 
Low 
Description 
In plantation investments, inadequate planning and implementation of silvicultural measures, as well as the 
occurrence of pests and diseases, can result in poor growth and quality of wood products. Since wood products are 
the major source of revenues for these investments, the underperformance of plantations will have a direct negative 
impact on the financial performance of the investment 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Plantation investments will be conducted according to best silvicultural practices. This starts in the planning phase, 
with proper selection of species for the given site conditions, definition of silvicultural operations for selected species 
and production targets, and acquisition of high-quality planting materials; and continues throughout the production 
cycle through the timely implementation of silvicultural operations, conducted by skilled staff under close supervision. 
Proper planning and implementation of operations will minimize deviations from the plan of plantation performance 
and will reduce the vulnerability of plantations against any pests and diseases. In addition, pest and disease 
management programs will be put in place, including preventive measures such as species diversification. Finally, 
plantation investments will be strictly monitored to ensure early detection of pests, diseases and performance 
deviations, making it possible to take prompt measures whenever necessary.

=== PAGE 56 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
Abiotic Risks 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
In addition to biotic factors described above, abiotic calamities, such as floods, storms, and fire events, can have a 
negative impact on the performance of plantations, and thereby on the financial performance of the investments. 
Such events can weaken plantations, making them more vulnerable against future events, pests and diseases, and 
even result in the loss of part of the planted area. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Plantation investments will be managed in a way that they improve landscape resilience. Management practices such 
as species diversification and high-quality silvicultural management will reduce the vulnerability of plantations against 
extreme climate events that might occur in the region, thus reducing any negative impacts on their performance. 
Fire events need special consideration in plantation investments. Forest fires can cause the loss of significant planted 
areas and in some cases, they are the result of social conflicts and agricultural practices in surrounding areas, since 
fire a common practice used to prepare agricultural and pasture land. Proper fire management strategies will be put 
in place, focusing on preventive measures and contingency plans. Fire prevention measures are integrated in 
technical operations, by ensuring an adequate level of diversification and avoiding large areas of homogenous 
vegetation, as well as conducting maintenance operations in a timely manner. Other measures include the 
construction and maintenance of the firebreak network, providing regular training and equipment for firefighting to 
employees, implementation of procedures for early detection and emergency plans, monitoring of fire events and 
record of statistics. Sufficient resources for fire management must be planned in annual budgets. The risk of fire 
events will be managed as well through proactive social strategies, targeting cooperation and aligning interests with 
local communities, through employment generation, enhancement of livelihoods and promotion of out-grower 
schemes, as well as fire awareness campaigns. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Global market risks 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Unfavorable changes in forest product markets, namely a decrease in demand and product prices, can compromise 
the financial performance of plantation investments. 
Global trends indicate that the probability of such events is low. Population growth and economic development, 
together with increasing wood supply gaps, suggest that favorable market conditions will persist. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Arbaro will mainly target countries that face a significant gap in sustainably produced industrial roundwood. Forecasts 
on population growth and economic development in target regions anticipate increasing product demand. Along with 
this, deforestation pressures and insufficient reforestation efforts suggest that this situation will become more critical 
in the future, resulting in severe problems for domestic forest industries. Furthermore, forest investments will be 
developed in regions with good growing conditions, ensuring the cost competitiveness of the wood produced. 
Arbaro will seek an adequate level of diversification in its portfolio in terms of species, forest products and domestic / 
export markets, as well as a balance between emerging / semi-mature forest markets. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Market risks at project level 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
High 
Medium

=== PAGE 57 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
Description 
Beyond global forest product market trends, the decrease in demand or wood prices in the target market of a specific 
plantation investment will directly damage its financial performance. Also, operational issues with service providers, 
on which the timely and proper implementation of operations depends, and with clients, that ensure successful 
marketing of products, will have an impact on the long-term viability of the investment. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Plantation investments will be planned and implemented following a strict site-species-market approach. Market 
intelligence will be an essential part of the planning process, through species selection according to target products 
and markets, assessment of market access and deep understanding of forest industries and competitive landscape. 
Market development will be strictly monitored. Alternative market options will be assessed in all investments, ensuring 
a certain level of flexibility in case of unexpected market changes. 
Arbaro pursues long-term sustainable business, for which a high level of satisfaction among employees and 
customers is crucial. For this, investments will be managed by highly professional teams, will generate formal 
employment and will create high-standard working conditions. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Social and Environmental Risks 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Pests and diseases 
Many pest and disease problems in plantations arise from the nature of forest operations, and not directly from 
growing trees in plantations. Planting of one species, whether indigenous or exotic, inevitably results in some areas 
where trees are ill suited to the site and suffer stress. This sometimes occurs in large-scale planting programmes 
where insufficient attention is paid to sites or where exotics are used extensively before sufficient experience has 
been gained. Also poor establishment and maintenance of plantations will increase their susceptibility to pests and 
diseases.  
Fire and Storms 
Plantation uniformity possibly increases risk from hurricane and storm damage if only because trees may be planted 
in locations that increases their susceptibility. This is particularly true at young ages and when plantations are not 
properly managed. These risks are best mitigated by careful planning and site species matching and by applying best 
silviculture practises. Finally, depending on location these risks can sometimes be insured. 
Most forest fires in plantations are caused by arson; only a few by lightning or encroachment of fires from 
neighbouring land. While there are a few examples of frequent fires preventing plantation development, it is more 
often due to poor community relationships than any inherent shortcoming with forest plantations.  Fire risk is 
considered as one of the most important risks due to its potentially devastating impact. 
Poor stakeholder relations 
Poor stakeholder relations often develop from misinterpreting who the stakeholder groups are, poor communication 
and practises that are not transparent. At its worst, poor relations may lead to significantly increased fire risk in 
plantations due to arson or the project losing its social license to operate.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
General 
Arbaro will select and manage investments according to its ESG policy and guidelines. IFC performance standards 
will be strictly applied in all projects to assess and effectively address potential social and environmental risks. All 
investments will be FSC certified. Arbaro will apply a rigorous internal red flag system and will involve communities to

=== PAGE 58 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
support development and reduce risks. Environmental and social risk mitigation strategies will be applied in all 
projects and they include: 
• 
No establishment of plantations in natural forests 
• 
Strict site-species matching ensures planting only in suited areas (suited biophysics, particularly annual 
precipitation > 1,000 – 1,200 mm; no competition with other land uses) 
• 
Professional planning and site selection, including demarcation and management of conservation areas 
• 
Professional application of best practices in forest operations, minimizing environmental impacts  
• 
Risk management strategy related to genetic variability and fire prevention 
• 
Transparent communication and participative relations with local communities and stakeholders  
• 
Monitoring and evaluation of plantation performance, social and environmental impacts 
• 
FSC certification, involving external audits and continuous improvement of applied practices  
Pests and diseases 
These risks are mitigated by careful planning of silvicultural management, site species matching and by applying best 
silviculture practises (e.g. diversifications of species, high-quality planting materials, timely execution of operations by 
well-trained staff). 
Fire and storm damage 
In all Arbaro’s projects fire prevention measures, such as firebreaks in the plantations, monitoring and early detection, 
training as well as pre-agreed action plans in case of such occurrence are applied. Arbaro projects will also maintain 
good relations with the surrounding communities, with transparent practises and open communication. In addition to 
providing significant employment opportunities in their area of operation, Arbaro’s projects will also actively educate 
the local communities of the benefits of forestry and promote out-grower and small-holder schemes where local 
communities can participate in the sector 
Poor stakeholder relations 
Arbaro projects will apply participatory approach to make sure that the local communities are well informed and 
involved in the project development. In identifying relevant stakeholders and assessing various approaches to be 
taken, Arbaro will follow the guidelines of the IFC Performance Standards, IFC’s Stakeholder Consultations -Good 
Practises Handbook as well as the recommendations of the FSC. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Political and FX risks 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Expropriation 
Expropriation or other such political risk event is considered extremely unlikely.  
Corruption 
Arbaro will implement an absolute zero tolerance to corruption. This may mean in the short term that e.g. licencing or 
approvals are delayed or other such administrative stumbling blocks will appear, however previous experience has 
evidenced that over medium term, zero tolerance policy will gradually remove these practises from the vicinity of zero-
tolerance projects / companies.  
Transfer restrictions / currency inconvertibility 
Due to long term nature of forestry investments these risks could materialise 
Legal risks 
Inadequacy of local regulatory environmental. 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 59 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
Political risks can to an extent be mitigated by making sure that the projects are implemented in a transparent manner 
and making sure that the local stakeholders (from grassroots level to local and national government level) are 
appropriately informed and heard of throughout the implementation process. In addition, the mitigation measures 
include local participation schemes, integration of neighbouring communities as well as good cooperation with the local 
administration. 
Risk related to transfer restrictions can be mitigated by timber sales in hard currency, possibility to speed up/reduce 
harvesting during challenging times as well as structuring investment via politically stable jurisdictions. 
Arbaro’s primary target countries are known to the management team from previous experience, and hence it is also 
known that the basic regulatory environment exists. Regardless of level of regulation, Arbaro’s projects will always be 
implemented following the highest industry standards, including those related to environmental and social aspects of 
the projects. However, it is possible that either with time there will be adverse developments in regulation or that other 
players, e.g. competitors take advantage of such lacking regulation and through this enjoy competitive advantages. 
This could, over time, put Arbaro’s project in adverse situation. To mitigate these Arbaro will work closely and 
transparently with local stakeholders including the local administration to communicate the benefits of the high 
standards followed. Arbaro’s projects will also participate in e.g. local lobby groups such as industry associations to 
influence regulatory development as well as educate the decision makers on the industry.

=== PAGE 60 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
Arbaro’s approach to E&S matters is governed by its ESMS. This is based on the International Finance Corporation 
(IFC) Policy and Performance Standards on Social and Environmental Sustainability (IFC PS), the related 
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHS Guidelines) and the European Investment Bank’s Environmental 
and Social Handbook. In addition, the Arbaro’s E&S guidelines are compatible with the United Nations Principles for 
Responsible Investment (PRI). 
General principles of these E&S guidelines are:  
• 
Finance only business operations that can comply with all applicable local and national laws, as well as 
international conventions and agreements ratified by the host country 
• 
Operate according to the mitigation hierarchy, seeking to avoid, and where this is not possible, minimize 
adverse impacts and enhance positive effects on the environment, workers and stakeholders 
• 
Actively seek for senior level endorsement of, and adherence to E&S guidelines of financed businesses, 
establishing formal commitments through appropriate E&S policies and practices, targets, budgets and 
timetables for implementation 
• 
Integrate its E&S principles early in the planning process of each investment project in order to establish 
management systems subject to continuous improvement which effectively address E&S risks and realize 
E&S opportunities 
• 
Set in place appropriate indicators and realize the follow-up of E&S measures throughout the investment 
process 
• 
Promote and work towards the implementation of relevant international best practice standards, particularly 
FSC certification 
 
Overview of Arbaro’s ESG framework: 
 
 
The E&S principles are a fundamental part of the Arbaro’s business operations and compliance will be achieved 
through the means of an appropriate E&S management system. An effective E&S management system requires E&S 
principles to be respected from the initial phase of the investment process throughout the entire project cycle as 
described in the below graph:

=== PAGE 61 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ESIAs, as well as assessments related to resettlement or indigenous peoples will be conducted when and if 
applicable on a project level. As the projects are only chose during the implementation period (the investment period 
of the fund) such documents and assessments are not yet available. However, attached are the relevant policies and 
fund level documents [see Annex 6]. 
 
The programme will develop 8-12 projects that may fall under different risk categories: 
• 
Category A: Potential significant adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts that are diverse, 
irreversible, or unprecedented 
• 
Category B: Potential limited adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts that are few in number, 
generally site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed through mitigation measures 
• 
Category C: Minimal or no adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts 
Given that projects are not defined at this stage, the overall programme is rated as Category A which is the highest 
possible risk category of projects. 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Gender equality is especially important factor to consider in forestry, as it has traditionally been male-dominated 
industry. Arbaro is committed to promoting gender equality and the basis for Arbaro’s Gender Policy is formed by the 
IFC’s Sustainability Framework and the Performance Standards as well as the FSC standards, both of which have 
specific sections on gender equality. The Fund seeks to promote gender equality throughout the whole investment 
process in four thematic areas: 
• 
True participation: Arbaro recognizes that minimum number of women represented is not always enough, but 
their actual participation and ability to influence is more relevant. 
• 
Equal benefits: Arbaro will use its best endeavors to ensure that the social and economic benefits that its 
stakeholder groups derive from its operations will be distributed in an equal basis considering the needs of 
the various groups and noting that such needs may vary between the groups. 
• 
Capacity development: Arbaro is committed to contribute to capacity development as part of its activities and 
will seek to understand the specific needs of the target groups of these activities to understand their 
usefulness, and where applicable organize trainings to empower women and strengthen their capacities. 
• 
Gender-disaggregated data: The Fund will seek to develop and apply transparent assessment and reporting 
methods that will include gender-disaggregated data. The objective of this data is to be able to provide 
meaningful information and regular feedback on the impact and effectiveness of the fund´s gender-
responsive approach. 
 
ELIGIBILITY
SCREENING
PRE-DUE-DILIGENCE
DUE DILIGENCE
EXECUTION
1
2
3
4
5
•Early identification of 
ESG deal breaking 
issues
•Desk review of ESG 
documents provided 
by the company and 
public information, 
such as news articles 
and black lists
•Preliminary 
benchmarking 
against ESG KPIs
•Preliminary 
assessment of 
potential ESG risks 
•Assessment of 
potential ESG risks
•Assessment of ESG 
management  
implemented by the 
company
•Gap analysis based on 
both IFC PS and FSC 
principles, and 
assessment of 
capacities to address 
them
•Identification of ESG 
deal breaking issues 
•Confirmatory DD 
with external 
support when 
necessary
•Binding commitments 
to Environmental and 
Social Action Plan 
(ESAP) and governance 
reforms in the 
investment contract
•Active support and 
monitoring of ESG 
performance
ESG due diligence by specialized ESG team

=== PAGE 62 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
Project level gender assessment can only be provided at a later stage and on a project to project basis as the target 
projects will only be chosen during the implementation period (the fund investment period). 
When assessing project opportunities Arbaro will seek to understand the prevailing socio-economic and cultural 
context as well as gender norms and perceptions related to the project area and all of its stakeholders. Where 
applicable, a gender-responsive social analysis as part of the overall social and environmental impact assessment 
will be undertaken to understand the underlying causes and drivers of gender inequalities.  
Where laws and regulations disadvantage one gender over the other (often women, but men can also be affected), 
the Arbaro will seek to ensure that disadvantaged populations are protected and not further disadvantaged. 
Where applicable, Arbaro will seek to address systemic and structural practices that create barriers to the realization 
of women’s rights and gender equality. 
Arbaro’s investee companies will be encouraged to provide and operate in an environment that aspires to creating 
equal opportunities for both women and men, which in some instances may result in going “beyond the law”. Investee 
companies will be required to have a gender policy, and a timetable and procedures for monitoring its 
implementation. Gender equality is included as a company performance indicator.  
For details please refer to Annex 8. 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The Fund Manager, FiM Asset Management S.à r.l. is registered with the Luxembourg financial sector regulator 
CSSF as an Alternative Investment Fund Manager (AIFM).  
EY Luxembourg has been chosen as the auditor of the Fund.  
Alter Domus is the selected as administrative and depositary agent for the Fund. Alter Domus is a leading provider of 
Fund and Corporate services. Established in 2003 its 1,100 employees serve most of the largest debt, real estate and 
private equity fund in the world. Alter Domus is certified according to SSAE AT Section 801 / ISAE 3402 SOC 1 Type 
II.  
The annual accounts of the Fund will be audited as of the end of each fiscal year by the Fund’s independent auditor. 
All annual accounts provided to the Limited Partners will be prepared in accordance with Lux GAAP. 
The valuation approach of the Fund follows the general principles of the International Private Equity and Venture 
Capital Valuation Guidelines dated December 2015 (as amended from time to time) published by Invest Europe 
Other procurement 
The major part of the investment process will be performed by the Arbaro Advisors team itself. Contrary to many 
other timber funds, the Arbaro team will also perform the technical due diligence internally. Arbaro will be supported 
by transaction support services provided by Finance in Motion and UNIQUE at no additional costs to the Fund, which 
is why the use of third-party external consultants and professional services firms will be limited. 
Any external services, such as the legal, tax, audit or technical service, will be procured in a professional and 
commercial manner based on well-defined terms of references, competitive rates, monitoring and control of service 
delivery, and evaluation for future assignments. Where possible, the Fund aims to efficiently work together with a 
recurring panel of external service providers. 
  
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure 
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and 
programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in 
confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the 
document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.  
 
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.

=== PAGE 63 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
  
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 64 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 60 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☐ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☐ 
 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☐ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☐ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Carbon Methodology 
☒ 
Annex 23  Sustainable Forestry 
☒ 
Annex 24  Country Context

=== PAGE 65 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 61 OF 61 
 
 
 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 25  Climate Eligibility 
☐ 
Annex 26  LPA

=== PAGE 66 ===
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía ● Código Postal: 170525 / Quito ● Ecuador . Teléfono: 593-2 398-7600
Oficio Nro. MAE-MAE-2019-1383-O
Quito, D.M., 10 de diciembre de 2019
Asunto: Funding proposal for the GCF by MUFG BANK (formerly, Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ,
Ltd.) regarding the programme Arbaro Fund- Sustainable Forestry Fund.
Señor
Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
GREEN CLIMATE FUND
En su Despacho 
Dear Mr. Glemarec, 
We refer to the project programme Arbaro Fund – Sustainable Forestry Fund in Ecuador as included in
the funding proposal submitted by MUFG Bank (formerly, Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd.) to us on
October 8, 2019. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of the Environment of Ecuador, the
National Designated Authority of Ecuador. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby
communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
1. The government of Ecuador has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal;
2. The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Ecuador’s national
priorities, strategies and plans;
3. In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as included in
the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as included in
the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the
scope of the programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Atentamente, 
Documento firmado electrónicamente
Abg. Raúl Clemente Ledesma Huerta
MINISTRO DEL AMBIENTE  
Copia: 
Señorita Bióloga
Karina Patricia Salinas Heredia
Subsecretaria de Cambio Climático, Subrogante
1/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux 
Page 62

=== PAGE 67 ===
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía ● Código Postal: 170525 / Quito ● Ecuador . Teléfono: 593-2 398-7600
Oficio Nro. MAE-MAE-2019-1383-O
Quito, D.M., 10 de diciembre de 2019
Señorita Ingeniera
Gabriela Jeanneth Vargas Luna
Directora Nacional de Adaptación al Cambio Climático, Subrogante
Señor Magíster
Jose Francisco Diaz Izurieta
Director Nacional de Mitigación al Cambio Climático
Señorita Economista
Janneth Cristina Garcia Sotomayor
Especialista de Mitigación del Cambio Climático 3
Señor Ingeniero
Ricardo Mauricio Proaño Cardenas
Especialista de Políticas de Cambio Climático
Señor Abogado
Steven Augusto Petersen Rojas
Subsecretario de Cambio Climático
Señor Magíster
Carlos Arturo Espinosa Gallegos Anda
Director Nacional de Adaptación al Cambio Climático
rp/gv/ks
2/2
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux 
Page 63
SIGN

=== PAGE 68 ===
Page 64

=== PAGE 69 ===
Page 65

=== PAGE 70 ===
Page 66

=== PAGE 71 ===
Page 67

=== PAGE 72 ===
Page 68

=== PAGE 73 ===
Page 69

=== PAGE 74 ===
Page 70 
 
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme 
title 
Arbaro Fund 
Existence of 
subproject(s) to be 
identified after GCF 
Board approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or 
private) 
Private 
Accredited entity 
MUFG Bank, Ltd. 
Environmental and 
social safeguards (ESS) 
category 
Category I-1 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or 
location(s) of 
programme 
Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. 
Specific countries have not been determined until a specific fund 
investment project appears. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Monday, September 9, 2019 (Except Amharic) 
Wednesday, November 6, 2019 (Amharic) 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Amharic, Portuguese, and Spanish  
Explanation on language 
The program will target countries with English, Amharic, Portuguese, or 
Spanish as official languages. 
Link to disclosure 
English:  
Environmental and Social Management System 
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/corpandinvest/gcf
/af/pdf/V2_ESMS.pdf

=== PAGE 75 ===
Page 71 
 
Amharic:  
የአካባቢ እና ማህበራዊ አስተዳደር ሥርዓት (Environmental and Social Management 
System Amharic translation) 
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/corpandinvest/gcf
/af/pdf/ESMS_Amharic.pdf 
 
Portugese:  
SISTEMA DE GESTÃO AMBIENTAL E SOCIAL (Environmental and Social 
Management System Portuguese translation) 
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/corpandinvest/gcf
/af/pdf/V2_ESMS_Portuguese.pdf 
 
Spanish:  
SISTEMA DE GESTION AMBIENTAL Y SOCIAL (Environmental and Social 
Management System Spanish translation) 
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/corpandinvest/gcf
/af/pdf/V2_ESMS_Spanish.pdf 
 
Other link(s) 
Arbaro Fund webpage 
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/corpandinvest/gcf
/af/index.html  
Remarks 
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-1 programme 
is contained in the ‘Environmental and Social Management System 
(ESMS)’. 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of the report  
N/A 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Monday, September 9, 2019 (For Mozambique) 
Wednesday, November 6, 2019 (For Ethiopia, Ghana, and Paraguay) 
Place 
Arbaro Fund c/o Professor Almeida A. Sitoe 
Center for Agriculture and Natural Resource Studies (CEAGRE) 
Faculty of Agronomy and Forestry 
Eduardo Mondlane University 
Main Campus 
3453 Julius Nyerere Ave. 
Maputo 
Mozambique 
 
Arbaro Fund c/o Kibebework Getachew, Directorate Director  
Ethiopian Forest and Climate Change Commission (EFCCC) 
Forest Ecosystem Service Valuation Carbon Measuring (MRV)

=== PAGE 76 ===
Page 72 
 
Around 4 killo, about 200 meters away from Tourist Hotel and neighbor 
to Danu bone treatment center 
Addis Ababa 
Ethiopia 
 
Arbaro Fund c/o Miro Forestry (Ghana) Limited 
The Grey House 
Pan Africa, Hwidiem 
Post Office Box 3 
Asante Akyem, Agogo 
The Republic of Ghana 
 
Arbaro Fund c/o UNIQUE WOOD Paraguay S.A. 
Teniente Rivarola 840 
Fernando de la Mora 
Asunción 
Paraguay 
 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
Tuesday, March 10, 2020 
Date of GCF’s Board 
meeting  
Tuesday, March 10, 2020 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
 
________

=== PAGE 77 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 73 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP128 
Proposal name: 
Arbaro Fund – Sustainable Forestry Fund 
Accredited entity: 
MUFG Bank, Ltd. 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
General background 
1. 
According to a recent World Wildlife Foundation (WWF) report,1 demand for wood-
based products is expected to increase globally in the coming decades. Economic growth, 
growing population, increasing urbanization and greater prosperity are expected to further 
drive up the consumption of wood-based products. Since forests provide the materials for these 
products, the increasing demand will exert greater pressure on already stressed forest 
resources, thus calling for greater supply of timber. To put this growing demand in perspective, 
the WWF Living Forests Model projects that wood harvesting will more than double by 2030, 
and almost quadruple by 2050: from 3.4 million cubic metres (m3) in 2010, to 7.6 million m3 in 
2030 and 13.1 million m3 by mid-century. Given these forecasts of wood harvesting and the fact 
that many forests are already stressed, there are clearly limits to the rate at which we can 
harvest from the natural forest resources of many countries.  
2. 
In order to mitigate the stress on natural forests as a result of the expected future 
increase in wood harvesting, options to optimize sourcing will include, among other 
interventions: more efficient saw mills and pulp mills; greater recycling; less wasteful 
consumption in rich countries; and energy-efficient improved wood stoves in developing ones. 
These will be inadequate if they are not implemented as complementary to the development of 
sustainable planted forest plantations. Unfortunately, planted forests to meet the increased 
demand for wood-based products are not common in many countries. To put this in very clear 
perspective, planted forests make up only around 7 per cent of forest cover worldwide, but 
supply a third of the total global production of industrial roundwood. Therefore, sustainable 
forest plantations can provide an effective tool to efficiently produce the wood in smaller land 
areas. 
3. 
Arbaro Fund is proposing to implement the development of sustainable forest 
plantations to produce wood logs for production purposes in selected countries in Latin 
America (LA) and sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). The selected countries in both of these regions are 
not only already seeing unsustainable stress in their natural forests, which is expected to be 
exacerbated by the increasing demand for wood-based products, but they also have very 
insignificant areas of sustainable planted forest. Also, in these countries, investments in 
sustainable forest plantations, particularly by private investors, have so far been very weak. 
Development financial institutions (DFIs) and international financial institutions (IFIs), which 
are usually frontrunners for new asset classes in less developed markets and can, as anchor 
investors, demonstrate confidence in new asset classes, have limited involvement in forest 
plantation investments in these nations. Therefore, in targeting these countries the Arbaro Fund 
 
1 WWF 2012

=== PAGE 78 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 74 
 
 
will be delivering substantive sustainable forestry that will result in real and measurable 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction benefits through: 
(a) 
Production of wood from planted forests in a sustainable manner; 
(b) 
Significant conservation of forests; 
(c) 
Reduction and/or complete elimination of illegal logging in the selected countries; 
(d) 
Providing an effective climate change mitigation outcome by investing in sustainable 
forest projects in the emerging forestry markets of LA countries and SSA countries; 
(e) 
Identifying and executing forestry projects focused on sustainable timber production 
such as greenfield projects, preferably on degraded lands, and the expansion and 
upscaling (with technical improvements that will enhance sustainable forestry) of 
existing brownfield forest plantations; and 
(f) 
Investing USD 10–25 million per project with a final portfolio of 8 to 12 underlying 
project investments per portfolio company. 
4. 
Key objectives of the project proposed by the Arbaro Fund can be summarized as 
follows:  
(a) 
In each of the selected countries and regions, close the timber supply gaps. Roundwood 
supply gaps exist or are forecast to exist in the near future in the countries targeted; 
(b) 
Include effective climate change mitigation strategies in the development of the forest 
plantations by planting trees on non-forested land, in order to capture and store 
additional carbon from the atmosphere. Such effective climate change mitigation 
strategies will also be implemented at existing brownfield forest plantations that have 
either not been planned, or do not operate, with sustainable forest conservation; 
(c) 
In each of the forest plantations developed under the project proposed by Arbaro Fund, 
forest conservation practices will be implemented. A key conservation practice that will 
be adopted in all Arbaro Fund forest plantations will be Forest Stewardship Council 
(FSC) certification; 
(d) 
According to an FSC key conservation strategy for certified plantations, on average, for 
each 1,000 ha of forest planted, 200 ha will be actively conserved; and 
(e) 
Apart from ensuring the delivery of sustainable climate change mitigation benefits, key 
investment strategies of Arbaro Fund will also be to promote positive social, economic 
and environmental impacts through delivery of the plantations.  
5. 
The project proposed by Arbaro Fund is also expected to deliver, in addition to the 
sustainable climate mitigation benefits, the following co-benefits: 
(a) 
Climate change adaptation co-benefits, which are expected to include: 
(i) 
Improved resilience, which is expected to be delivered in each target country by 
adaptive management practices (use of correct species in the afforestation 
process, practice of good rotation choices, etc.). The developed plantation under 
the proposed project can also contribute to reduced vulnerability of nearby 
natural forests and other natural ecosystems through soil conservation, 
improved watersheds and the provision of ecological corridors; and 
(ii) 
The proposed intervention is also expected to provide alternative livelihoods 
which will replace the more common climate-dependent smallholder farming. 
The alternative livelihoods will be formal employment opportunities either 
directly in the project or indirectly by provision of needed services to the 
project. The presence of alternative livelihoods is expected to improve resilience

=== PAGE 79 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 75 
 
 
of the rural communities and decrease dependence on climate-sensitive 
subsistence practices. It has been estimated that about 200,000 people will 
benefit from this project intervention in the two regions where it will be 
implemented; 
(b) 
The proposed projects will empower local communities and enhance their economic 
capacities through: 
(i) 
Engagement of the communities close to the forest plantation in out-grower 
(contract farming) schemes for the plantation. These communities will be 
trained to apply modern silviculture practices to their own land, where they will 
implement the out-grower schemes, thus diversifying their income base, 
providing them with economic empowerment and improving their rural 
capacities; and 
(ii) 
The out-grower schemes will be supported by technical assistance from the 
Arbaro Fund’s investee projects and by grant funding; and 
(c) 
The Arbaro Fund project will provide formal employment opportunities for people in 
the target countries and regions. It has been estimated that: 
(i) 
Direct employment will be provided to about 5,000 people through the 
investment; 
(ii) 
It is estimated that as a result of the investment, indirect employment 
opportunities will be available to 15,000 people; and 
(iii) 
About 200,000 people will benefit from livelihoods in the two regions. 
6. 
The climate rationale for the proposed project is focused on the delivery of climate 
mitigation through the development of new permanent carbon sinks. The ways in which climate 
mitigation benefits will be delivered by the project can be summarized as follows:  
(a) 
Trees will be planted on lands that are currently not forested; at existing plantations 
improved and more sustainable forestry management will be implemented. The planted 
trees will capture and store additional carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere; 
(b) 
In sustainable forest plantations, the forest is created over time; 
(c) 
Once the first planted trees reach their harvesting age, they are harvested but new ones 
are planted to replace them. This cycle is continued perpetually; 
(d) 
With such forest management, a permanent carbon stock is created, while also 
providing raw materials to the market; and 
(e) 
For the proposed project, Arbaro Fund will target a total of 75,000 ha of new forest 
areas with the following climate change mitigation benefits and management principles: 
(i) 
About a total of 20 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2eq) will be 
sequestered by the projects planned in all the countries targeted in the two 
regions; and 
(ii) 
To ensure that plantations are implemented sustainably, FSC forest management 
principles will guide plantation development. Key requirements of the FSC 
include: 
(1) 
New forests will be planted in non-forest areas; or 
(2) 
Planting will be in areas that have been deforested for a long time, for 
example degraded land; and

=== PAGE 80 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 76 
 
 
(3) 
Arbaro Fund will not replace or convert existing natural forests or other 
vulnerable ecosystems into forest plantation. 
7. 
The programme plans to implement this intervention in the following countries of the 
two geographical regions: 
(a) 
Region 1: SSA countries: 
(i) 
Ethiopia; 
(ii) 
Ghana; 
(iii) 
Sierra Leone; and 
(iv) 
Uganda. 
(b) 
Region 2: LA countries: 
(i) 
Ecuador; 
(ii) 
Paraguay; and 
(iii) 
Peru. 
8. 
The financial details and structure of the project described in the funding proposal and 
analysed by the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) cover the intervention in seven 
countries in two regions. No-objection letters (NOLs) from four of the countries (LA countries: 
Ecuador, Paraguay; and SSA countries: Ghana and Sierra Leone) have been obtained and 
included in the documents reviewed by the independent TAP. During TAP interactions with the 
Secretariat and project team members from MUFG Bank, Ltd. (MUFG)/Arbaro Fund, the 
independent TAP was informed that the remaining three NOLs, from Ethiopia, Uganda and Peru, 
will be delivered before finalized documents reach the Board. 
9. 
The financing structure for this programme can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
Total financing: USD 200 million; 
(b) 
Of which: 
(i) 
GCF equity contribution: USD 25 million; 
(ii) 
DFI investor(s) – equity: USD 25.00 million; 
(iii) 
Private investors – equity: USD 100 million; 
(iv) 
Other DFIs – equity: USD 46 million; and 
(v) 
Arbaro Fund Team – equity: USD 4 million; and 
(c) 
The project funds described in paragraph 9(b) above were designed to be raised in two 
financial closure stages. The first financial closure was reached in July 2018 with the 
raising of USD 60.2 million from several non-GCF sources. The second financial closure, 
which will include funds from GCF and others, was expected to be achieved by the end of 
2019 with the funding proposal reviewed having firm commitments for this stage. By 
the end of the second financial closure, it is expected that GCF funding (USD 25 million) 
will flow in as well as an additional amount of USD 60 million making a total of USD 
145.2 million raised by this closure. Furthermore, commitments from private sector 
investors/DFIs are expected to amount to around USD 60 million, leveraged by the GCF 
commitment, and thus meeting the Arbaro Fund’s target of USD 200 million; and 
(d) 
The total USD 200 million in funding raised will be appropriated according to the 
structure presented in the table below.

=== PAGE 81 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 77 
 
 
Table: Appropriation of funding* 
COMPONENT 
INDICATIVE COST 
(USD MILLION) 
FROM GCF 
(USD MILLION) 
FROM CO-FINANCING 
(USD MILLION 
Investment into 
plantation 
establishment and 
operations 
133.1 
16.6 
116.5 
Investment in land 
purchase/land lease 
34.9 
 4.4 
 30.5 
Fund management, 
transaction, custody 
costs 
32 
4 
28 
 
200 
25 
175 
* Confidential information in table has been redacted. 
1.2 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
10. 
GHG emissions reduction pathway and estimation:  
As the forest plantation is developed, the pathway to GHG emissions reduction by the project is 
through carbon sequetration by the forest and can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
As the plantation grows, carbon stock in the forest changes and is monitored on a 
regular basis, such as annually; 
(b) 
Only carbon pools occasioned by the changes in carbon stock, where these are 
considerable, are selected for the carbon sequestration calculations; 
(c) 
In a forest plantation, the following assumption is made in the calculation of carbon 
sequestered: 
(i) 
Most of the carbon changes happen in the tree biomass – mainly in the stems but 
also in the branches, leaves and roots; 
(ii) 
Carbon is also stored in dead organic matter and the soil; 
(iii) 
The timber volume in the plantations is measured first-hand through annual 
forest inventories;  
(iv) 
Stem volumes (and other pertinent parameters) are thereafter converted into 
tCO2eq based on approved conservative conversion factors; and 
(v) 
Arbaro Fund claims only net carbon sequestered in forest plantation that is 
additional and permanent;  
(d) 
The following general equation is utilized in the estimation of annual carbon 
sequestration achieved by the project: 
(i) 
NCO2s (t) = PCO2s (t) – BCO2s (t) – LCO2e (t) – OPCO2e (t) 
(ii) 
Where: 
(1) 
NCO2s (t) = Net CO2 sequestered in the forest plantation boundary in 
year t 
(2) 
PCO2s (t) = CO2 sequestered in the forest plantation boundary in year t

=== PAGE 82 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 78 
 
 
(3) 
BCO2s (t) = CO2 that would have been sequestered in the project 
boundary in the absence of the project in year t 
(4) 
LCO2e (t) = CO2 emissions outside the boundary of the project that would 
have occurred as a result of the project 
(5) 
OPCO2e (t) = other project CO2 emissions that would occur as a result of 
the project in year t; and  
(e) 
In using the analytical approach described above, Arbaro Fund uses the following 
considerations: 
(i) 
Approaches from clean development mechanism, verified carbon standard and 
gold standard methodologies are applied; 
(ii) 
Stored carbon in harvested wood from the forest plantation in a particular year 
is not included in the net sequestered CO2 calculation; and 
(iii) 
To account for losses due to harvesting, a maximum sequestration that can be 
claimed is the long-term average that is set using recognized approved 
methodologies.  
11. 
Mitigation impacts: 
The impacts of the proposed project as estimated using the methodology framework described 
above can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The proposed Arbaro Fund projects in the selected countries of the two target 
geographical regions are estimated to sequester 20 million tCO2 during the project’s 
lifetime of 15 years; 
(b) 
Even if several of the portfolio companies engaged to implement the project decide to 
register under the verified carbon standard, it has been estimated that this will only 
discount out about 2.7 million tCO2 from the sequestration impact stated above. The 
funding proposal argued that overall positive net sequestration cannot be less than 17.3 
million tCO2; and  
(c) 
As stated earlier in this report, while other adaptation co-benefits are expected to be 
delivered by this intervention, such benefits are not claimed by Arbaro Fund in this 
presentation. However, it is important to include the relevant impact of the project on 
people: 
(i) 
About 5,000 direct employment opportunities will be delivered by 
implementation of the forest plantation project in the two regions covered; 
(ii) 
About 15,000 indirect employment opportunities will also be created; and 
(iii) 
About 200,000 individual livelihoods will be positively impacted by the 
implementation of the project in the seven LA and SSA countries that will be 
targeted by the intervention. 
12. 
The project impacts (climate mitigation and human impacts) summarized above that 
will be delivered by this intervention are convincing evidence that the successful project will 
deliver robust GHG reduction benefits and deliver impacts for an appreciable number of people 
in the countries and regions. The necessary project monitoring parameters will be delivered by 
the FSC certification process which requires an in-depth monitoring protocol prior to the 
certification process, annual audits and a re-certification audit every five years. As such we are 
convinced that the various metrics mentioned in this section of the TAP report will be robustly 
monitored throughout the 15-year lifetime of the projects, hence ensuring the metrics are 
delivered.

=== PAGE 83 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 79 
 
 
13. 
The Technical Advisory Panel therefore decided to score the overall impact potential of 
this project as high. 
1.3 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
14. 
Paradigm shift potential measures the degree and the capability of the proposed activity 
(implementation of sustainable forest plantations) to catalyze impacts beyond a one-off project. 
The discussion in this section will centre around the extent to which the process and methods 
that have been proposed for the development, effective implementation and operationalization 
of sustainable forest plantations in the seven target countries can catalyze a paradigm shift in 
other countries in the LA and SSA regions and other regions after completion of this 
intervention. The paradigm shift potential of the proposed project will be dicussed and 
elucidated along the following lines: 
1.3.1. 
Potential for scaling up and replication 
15. 
Two key metrics that will facilitate scaling up and replication potentials of the proposed 
activities will include:  
(a) 
The successful development and implementation of forest plantations under the 
intervention proposed by Arbaro Fund will change the following baseline narratives: 
(i) 
In the two target regions and seven countries where Arbaro Fund is proposing to 
develop the project, mitigation and adaptation efforts in the forest sector are still 
in their infancy and climate action is centred around energy, especially 
renewables or increasing energy use efficiency. Successful implementation of the 
proposed project will enhance the potential for scaling up and replication of 
mitigation actions in forests in targeted countries and globally; and 
(ii) 
The requested funding from GCF is expected to crowd in more private and public 
funding to finance the proposed forest plantation investment. Public and private 
capital are needed to reach the kind of investment that will enable forest 
plantations to play a role in climate change mitigation. Hence, a successful 
launch of the Arbaro Fund has the potential to prove the environmental, social 
and economic concept of commercial forestry plantations and stimulate further 
– urgently needed – investment into the sector;  
(1) 
In many of the countries in the two regions targeted by Arbaro Fund, 
natural forests are depleting and therefore establishing profitable carbon 
sinks that reduce the vulnerability of communities, such as those 
planned in this intervention, if successful, will facilitate scaling up of such 
interventions in the two regions, and replication in other regions of the 
world. As natural forest depletion has been significant in LA and SSA in 
recent years it is important that high performance is achieved. For 
example, a total of about 24 million ha of natural forests have been lost in 
these regions between 2010 and 2015, (in SSA, ca. 14 million ha; in LA, 
ca. 10 million ha) making the two regions global deforestation hotspots; 
and 
(2) 
The detrimental effect of over utilizing natural forests in many of the 
countries targeted by the proposal is actually already evident in the 
downturn, and in some cases the complete paralysis, of the forest sector 
business; both in the processing technologies and long-term supply of 
sustainable raw materials are affected. Some countries that had been net 
exporters of wood products have gradually slipped to being significant

=== PAGE 84 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 80 
 
 
importers of logs and wood products. Paraguay, for example, went from 
being a net exporter of forest products to becoming a net importer in the 
last decade. The intervention proposed by Arbaro Fund will enable a 
paradigm shift from the baseline situation described above and its 
success will enhance scalability and replicability of the intervention.  
1.3.2. 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
16. 
Another potential paradigm shift is the extent to which the project structure is designed 
to enhance knowledge and learning. The project structure as presented in the funding proposal 
showed that the intervention will be carried out in parallel in the seven countries in the two 
target regions. Although Arbaro Fund is the overall project implementation agency, it will 
deliver activities on the ground through project portfolio companies. This strategy will offer a 
platform for knowledge-sharing and learning across countries and regions. Given the fact that 
all the forest plantation projects will be FSC certified, the large amount of data that will be 
generated from the initial FSC certification audits, the mandatory annual audits and the re-
certification audits will create a veritable database that can form the basis of learning and 
knowledge-sharing across regions.  
1.3.3. 
Contribution to enabling environment 
17. 
The creation of an enabling environment where forest plantations will be developed and 
will thrive by adding value to the countries’ climate mitigation activities will be made possible 
by successful implementation of the proposed Arbaro Fund intervention. Prior to submitting 
this proposal to the Board for funding approval, Arbaro Fund had been able to achieve a total of 
about USD 60 million at financial closure in 2018. This has partly been used to start the 
intervention in some of the countries targeted. Information provided by Arbaro Fund and the 
accredited entity (AE) during interactions indicated that the Ghanaian intervention is 
proceeding well and will be catalysed by approval of this proposal. It has also been stated that 
approval of the requested funding from GCF will crowd in more private and public sector funds 
for investment in forest plantation and other associated industries as a result of this project. 
Successful implementation of the projects, as well as the sustainable operation of the forest 
plantations, will not only encourage the development and implementation of activities in other 
countries in the targeted regions, but will also strengthen the enabling environment created 
within the two regions. 
18. 
Given these various sub-metrics of the paradigm shift potential of this present 
submission, the independent TAP scored the overall paradigm shift potential of this project as 
high. 
1.4 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
        Scale: High 
19. 
According to the information provided in the funding proposal, a cardinal focus of the 
Arbaro Fund investment in general, and in this intervention in particular, is the evaluation of the 
sustainable development performance of an investment. Every investment decision made by 
Arbaro Fund takes into account the economic, environmental and social sustainability of a 
project as measured against quantitative and qualitative performance criteria. We have utilized 
information contained in the funding proposal and its various annexes as submitted by MUFG to 
the Secretariat, as well as communications with the AE, to properly understand the potential for 
sustainable development. The following is the result of this review:

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 81 
 
 
1.4.4. 
Social co-benefits including adaptation co-benefits from project-level operations 
20. 
The social and adaptation co-benefits that are expected to be delivered by the Arbaro 
Fund intervention will include: 
(a) 
Providing alternative livelihoods. In the baseline, a significant percentage of people 
living near the project site are smallholder rural farmers. This is especially true for the 
target SSA countries. These rural farmers are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of 
climate change. Because of greater dependence on agriculture and natural resources, 
their livelihoods are highly sensitive to climate variability, extreme climate events, and 
climate change. For many of these farms, shifting cultivation remains a dominant form of 
agriculture across these countries, as well as in LA countries. Changing rainfall patterns 
(prolonged dry conditions) can have a devastating impact on the livelihoods of these 
rural farmers. This problem is compounded by their low financial capacity, which also 
limits their ability to look for alternative income generation outside rural farming. The 
proposed Arbaro Fund will directly employ about 5,000 people in the two regions in the 
forest plantation activities and provide indirect employment to a total of about 15,000 
people. It will also provide alternative livelihood activities whereby the farmers living 
close to the plantations are engaged in out-grower schemes in which they are trained to 
apply modern silviculture on their own land. This will provide diversified income, 
economic empowerment and improved capacity for these rural dwellers;  
(b) 
Passing on best practices, including employment formalization usually unknown 
in rural areas. Through the direct employment opportunities that will be provided to 
the rural inhabitants, labour best practices not usually known in such areas will be 
passed on to them. This will allow people employed under the programme to benefit 
from wider social services like public social security or health insurance, which is not 
available to them under the informal employment standards that prevail at baseline. 
Similarly, best practices regarding working hours, health and safety standards, 
vacations, etc. will be followed, benefiting people employed under the programme 
beyond the monetary value of their salaries; 
(c) 
Contributing to the development of local communities. Arbaro Fund’s proposed 
forest plantation projects in the target countries will also deliver some infrastructure, 
either as a component of the project or as a deliberate contribution to the social welfare 
of the community. As discussed in the funding proposal review, such infrastructure 
intervention will include: wells, roads or bridges; health services (e.g. community clinics, 
nurses, malaria/HIV prevention); and education (e.g. school buildings, learning 
materials, scholarships). These services and structures will directly improve the 
livelihoods of local communities; and 
(d) 
Mitigating the causes of urbanization. In many developing countries including the 
ones targeted by the proposed Arbaro Fund intervention, a key urbanization problem is 
the extensive migration of young people to urban centres in search of jobs and other 
opportunities. Such migration has caused an explosion of the population in urban areas 
thus putting undue pressure on the capacity of infrastructure in urban centres. The rural 
location of forest plantations proposed in the project can contribute to reducing 
migration of youths to urban areas in search of jobs and livelihoods. By so doing the 
project will deliver social cohesion benefits with young people remaining in rural areas 
and benefiting rural communities in the long run.  
1.4.5. 
Economic co-benefits 
21. 
Some of the economic co-benefits that will be delivered by the intervention proposed in 
this submission can be summarized as follows:

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 82 
 
 
(a) 
Generating employment. As stated earlier, the project intervention in the two target 
regions will create direct employment for about 5,000 people. It has also been estimated 
in the submission that each direct employment will create between two and four more 
jobs along the value chain. It has also been estimated by Arbaro Fund that each 
employee will support about eight to ten people in the extended family or through 
increased economic affluence and activity. The result is that improved livelihoods will 
be created for about 200,000 people in the rural areas of these target countries where 
the planted forest plantations will exist; 
(b) 
Widening the local tax base. In the absence of this project intervention, many of the 
sources of input wood for wood processing industries in the target countries are 
regulated informally. Also, in many of the target countries, activities of the forest sector 
are decreasing due to the increasing scarcity of raw materials from natural forests. The 
dwindling economic activity means a reduction in the payment of taxes; meanwhile, in 
those countries where timber logging is not, or is informally, regulated, no taxes are 
paid. The intervention by Arbaro Fund in the target countries will introduce 
formalization in the forestry industry, thus creating significant tax income for local 
governments. Such income will be achieved both directly through corporate income 
taxes and tax-like payments, such as licensing fees or harvesting royalties paid by the 
project companies, and indirectly through personal income taxes of employees and 
payments of other companies that benefit from the programme indirectly. This is a 
significant economic benefit that will enhance the viability of local government finances 
in the impact areas of each target country. It has been estimated (as presented in the 
funding proposal) that this intervention by Arbaro Fund will generate about USD 20 
million of annual tax income for local governments once the plantations mature; 
(c) 
Substituting costly imports and improving balance of trade. As presented in the 
funding proposal, LA and SSA imported forest products worth, on average, USD 17 
billion per year from 2011–2015 (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations Statistics). By generating sustainable domestic timber resources, Arbaro Fund 
will foster the development of local forest industries and thus contribute to improving 
the forest trade balance of these countries, with an eventual likely positive impact on the 
national balance of payment; and 
(d) 
Contributing to research and development potential in developing countries. 
Research and development activities are inherent components of the Arbaro Fund 
intervention. As clearly described in the funding proposal, such research and 
development activities will include: matching different tree species with local site 
conditions; monitoring and controlling pests and diseases; and development trials or 
programmes on native species and their suitability for plantation purposes. Arbaro 
Fund has already started some of these research and development activities in 
Paraguay, where trials are currently underway to establish plantation lots with native 
species under different silvicultural set-ups in cooperation with a local research project 
for production of high-quality planting materials. During a recent discussion between 
Arbaro Fund and the independent TAP, we were informed that research on the 
implications for water balance of planting some species in particular is also ongoing. 
Hence, it is expected that implementation of the Arbaro Fund programme will increase 
in the target countries as it benefits from close cooperation with the research and 
development activities (in forestry and potentially agriculture) of local enterprises or 
research institutions.  
1.4.6. 
Environmental co-benefits 
22. 
The following environmental co-benefits are expected to be delivered by the Arbaro 
Fund intervention:

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 83 
 
 
(a) 
Conserving natural forests and other natural ecosystems. A key component of the 
project delivery planned in each of its forest plantations is the mandatory FSC 
certification. The FSC certification requires that natural ecosystems, especially natural 
forest endowments located near the forest plantation, are conserved and protected. In 
addition, at and near an FSC certified forest plantation, wildlife corridors, streamside 
zones and a mosaic of stands of different ages and rotation periods must be taken into 
account in the layout of the plantation. Furthermore, it is a requirement for FSC certified 
forest plantations that very robust stakeholder interactions must be carried out during 
development of the plantation to ensure stakeholder inputs; in particular, high 
conservation value areas are to be identified and factored into the management of the 
plantation. The FSC certification also requires that direct conservation should be 
practiced at the forest plantation. FSC requires that at least 10 per cent of the project 
area is set aside for conservation. However, in the Arbaro Fund’s projects, on average 20 
per cent of the total land area of a project will be actively conserved with the project 
fully responsible for it. The Arbaro Fund envisages that through its projects it will 
actively conserve approximately 200 ha for every 1,000 ha planted; 
(b) 
Enhancing degraded landscapes and improving resilience. A key requirement of the 
FSC certification of forest plantations relates to the quality of environmental benefits 
delivered by the plantation. Since the environmental impact of forest plantations 
depends on the baseline, in order to deliver optimum environmental benefits FSC 
certification requires that under no circumstances should natural forests be converted 
into forest plantations. Instead, for a forest plantation to be FSC certified it must seek to 
afforest or reforest degraded landscapes for the commercial, yet sustainable, production 
of timber resources. Besides creating additional carbon sinks, establishing forest 
plantations on degraded land helps to regulate soils and water flows, thus halting the 
detrimental effects of land degradation; and  
(c) 
Reducing pressures on natural forests. By providing a more sustainable way to 
source logwood for the timber processing industry, this project intervention will reduce 
and eventually eliminate the sourcing of these products from natural forests. The 
unsustainable sourcing that is occurring in natural forests in many of the SSA countries 
and some of the countries in LA are key drivers of deforestation in these regions. The 
proposed Arbaro Fund project will therefore indirectly contribute to wider conservation 
efforts by reducing extractive pressures on natural forests over time. 
1.4.7. 
Gender sensitive development impact  
23. 
Key gender sensitive development co-benefits of this project were articulated in the 
funding proposal and the relevant annexes and can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The project to be realized by the Arbaro Fund will ensure that employment 
opportunities or other benefits that will be delivered will follow a gender responsive 
approach; and 
(b) 
From Arbaro Fund’s previous experiences it has been identified that forestry projects 
generally have specific areas of operation that are well suited to and appreciated by 
female employees, for example: 
(i) 
Female planting teams have been successful in other projects such as in 
Tanzania; and 
(ii) 
Nursery operations are typically well suited to female employees.  
24. 
It has therefore been estimated that between 15 and 30 per cent of the workforce will be 
female. This will be a positive development in countries where women, especially those living in

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 84 
 
 
rural areas, usually have great difficulty in finding employment. A robust gender assessment 
and action plan document was made available in the annex of this submission. 
25. 
The independent TAP therefore scored the gender sensitive development potential of 
this project as high.  
1.5 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
26. 
Rural populations in the target countries of the proposed interventions by Arbaro Fund 
are heavily dependent on subsistence agriculture and access to other natural resources near 
them to maintain their livelihood. These resources are inadequate to provide above poverty line 
living for many rural people, hence many rural dwellers in the target countries of this proposed 
intervention live below the poverty line. In these rural areas, formal employment is scarce and 
hence income generation is limited to subsistence agriculture and dependence on natural 
resources that are fast being negatively impacted by climate change and variability, deepening 
the level of poverty.  
27. 
The proposed intervention will develop and implement sustainable forest plantations 
near these rural communities, will provide direct employment to an estimated 5,000 people in 
the target countries, and will create improved livelihoods for over 200,000 people as a result of 
the proposed project. In addition to providing employment and a source of income, the formal 
employment of people who live in areas near to the forest plantations will provide them with 
access to healthcare and vocational education services, as well as the pension and social security 
system.  
28. 
Given the fact that the proposed Arbaro Fund intervention will address some crucial 
needs of people in rural areas of the targeted countries, the independent TAP scored the needs 
of the recipient as high.  
1.6 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
29. 
Some of the key considerations presented in the funding proposal and relevant annexes 
and reviewed by the independent TAP in consideration of potential for country ownership are 
summarized below: 
1.6.1. 
Alignment of the proposed project to country policies 
30. 
The mission of the Arbaro Fund is aligned with the political strategy of all the target 
countries. The Arbaro Fund will contribute to climate change mitigation and provide co-benefits 
to climate change adaptation and to social development in the target countries. Policy 
documents such as national development plans and intended nationally determined 
contributions, which were submitted by the target countries to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change under the Paris Agreement, are aligned with the objective of 
contributing to global climate change mitigation and adaptation, which the proposed Arbaro 
Fund interventions will help to fulfil. As stated in the funding proposal reviewed by the 
independent TAP, no conflict was found between any of the national strategic policies and the 
Arbaro Fund’s mission. As stated in the funding proposal, the target countries, with the 
exception of Sierra Leone, explicitly intend to promote sustainable forest plantations. In Sierra 
Leone too, afforestation, reforestation and agroforestry were identified as mitigation 
opportunities in the country’s third national communication submitted to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change. Forestry was also considered a key pillar of 
addressing climate change vulnerabilities and building resilience in the medium-term national

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 85 
 
 
development plan. We can therefore conclude that the project proposed for GCF funding 
support is aligned with policies of the target countries. 
1.6.2. 
Capacity of accredited entity and executing entities 
31. 
MUFG is the AE for this proposed project. The bank will bring to this project about 350 
years of financial expertise and has grown to become one of the largest comprehensive financial 
groups in the world. The bank is present in over 150 countries and employs about 150,000 
people worldwide. The AE will be responsible for channelling the resources to the Project as a 
private accredited entity and will monitor the project’s compliance with Arbaro Fund’s 
standards (social, environmental, fiduciary and gender). Supervision of the project by the MUFG 
will be based on a periodic review of the project provided by the executing entities (EEs). The 
capability of the AE in understanding financial structuring and implementation is very strong 
and its capacity for climate finance is also buttressed by its previous work in the energy sector, 
under which for three consecutive years since 2016 it has been ranked No. 1 Global Lead 
Arranger for Clean Energy and Energy Smart Technology under Bloomberg’s Annual New 
Energy Finance League Table. Since the energy climate finance activities of MUFG were focused 
on mitigation intervention, experiences from this will work perfectly with the financial 
capability of the Bank to deliver sound management and supervision for the proposed Arbaro 
Fund projects in the target countries. This will be strengthened by the effective and 
demonstrated climate change mitigation in forestry projects of Arbaro Fund who will work with 
MUFG. 
32. 
Arbaro Fund will be the lead EE for this proposed project. In each of the target countries 
it will identify entities with capabilities to develop and manage forest plantations and to execute 
the forest plantation projects in the target countries as project portfolio EEs under the close 
supervision of Arbaro Fund. The work that will be delivered by Arbaro Fund as lead EE will be 
supported technically by Arbaro Advisors GmbH as the investment advisor of the Arbaro Fund. 
The advisors have a very strong track record of success in emerging markets and will bring this 
to bear on the success of the proposed Arbaro Fund intervention in the target countries. The 
advisors will provide this technical support by making available an experienced investment 
team dedicated to this project and the Arbaro Fund. The impressive short write-up on the 
experiences of this team, provided in the funding proposal, showed that all the members of the 
team have relevant experiences in forest management and some of their previous experiences 
have been in projects in countries of the two targeted regions. 
1.6.3. 
Availability of no-objection letter 
33. 
A measure of country ownership is whether the country’s government has shown 
interest in the proposed project through issuing an NOL to the AE to go ahead with the 
commencement of project planning and possible implementation. The availability of an NOL can 
be interpreted to mean that the AE has presented the project ideas to the government of the 
country where the project is planned to be implemented, discussed the project with relevant 
stakeholders and obtained necessary buy-ins regarding the AE plans for the project. By the time 
the independent TAP reviews the project documents made available and discusses the project 
with the Secretariat and the AE and EE representatives, NOLs should have already been 
received from all participating countries.  
34. 
Given the discussions in (a) to (c) above, the independent TAP scored the country 
ownership potential of this project as high.

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 86 
 
 
1.7 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium 
35. 
Efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project have been assessed based on the 
following considerations. 
1.7.4. 
Adequacy of the financing structure 
36. 
Optimal mitigation and adaptation impacts of forest plantations are achieved when the 
plantation is established in land-use areas where little or no forest exists at baseline, for 
example in degraded lands. The low financial buoyancy of such greenfield projects, due 
especially to the high cost of development and typically slow revenue generation from forest 
investment in general, creates barriers to significant investment in the sector. For example, 
large upfront investment that can be as high as USD 3,000 to USD 4,000 per ha may be needed, 
with positive cash flows being generated decades after the first investment is made. The 
stretched cash flow profile – especially of long rotation projects with a high mitigation potential 
– puts the financing structure of a greenfield project under strain, as not only initial 
establishment costs but also maintenance costs in the early years of operation have to be 
financed up front until operational costs can (at least partially) be covered by cash inflows from 
commercial thinning.  
37. 
Hence, greenfield forest plantation investments are usually not bankable under 
traditional debt-based funding but require equity funding that is more suitable and does not 
rely on short-term positive cash flow. Domestic commercial debt financing is not available in 
many of the countries targeted by the Arbaro Fund intervention and only some DFIs have 
provided mezzanine debt to greenfield plantation companies – although typically with equity-
like features. Forest plantation in the countries in Arbaro Fund’s target regions has seen only 
little investment to date. The proposed financing structure foresees that GCF will invest at the 
same terms as other investors in the Arbaro Fund, namely the GCF investment will not be 
concessional. Nonetheless, it is expected that the GCF’s investment will catalyse further co-
investments into the Arbaro Fund and into plantation forestry in the target regions in the long 
term. 
1.7.5. 
Cost effectiveness and efficiency 
38. 
The cost effectiveness and efficiency metrics of the proposed Arbaro Fund intervention 
are evident in the following project characteristics: 
(a) 
Capital mobilization. This is a measure of how far GCF funding can crowd in more 
needed funding from other sources. According to the project plan, the GCF funding of 
USD 25 million will be 12.5 per cent of the USD 200 million required by Arbaro Fund. 
This implies that for every USD invested by GCF about seven USD of additional capital 
must be mobilised from other private and DFI investors for the Arbaro Fund. It is 
expected that further capital will be mobilized indirectly into the underlying projects. 
Arbaro Fund will typically not be the sole investor in the investee forestry companies, 
but provide financing alongside equity co-investors, such as the project developers, high 
net worth individuals or shareholders of the Arbaro Fund seeking direct exposure to 
certain projects, and mezzanine investors such as DFIs. It has been estimated that 
additional crowding in of funds will eventually multiply the GCF investment no less than 
15 times. It is stated in the funding programme that Arbaro Fund will be the first private 
equity fund to solely invest in sustainable forestry in the target regions and thus has the 
potential to spark follow-up investments by creating a good track record for sustainable 
forestry as an asset class and by reducing perceived risks. Thus, the multiplying effect of 
the GCF funding requested is likely to have a multiplying effect even greater than the 15-
fold increase mentioned above, representing a sound mobilization effect; and

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 87 
 
 
(b) 
CO2 sequestration effectiveness. The conservative estimate of CO2 sequestration that 
will be delivered by the project is 20 million tCO2 for the USD 200 million investment 
expected. This translates into the following: every USD 10 invested will contribute to the 
sequestration of approximately 1 ton of CO2. If the fund that will be made available as 
the equity contribution of GCF (USD 25 million) is assumed to deliver this amount of 
sequestration, the price of carbon sequestration that will be delivered by the GCF 
investment becomes USD 1.25/tCO2. Since this is the first time that GCF will fund forest 
plantation projects, there are no benchmarks to compare the efficacy of the investment. 
However, it is explained in the funding proposal that these prices are competitive when 
compared to other – although less comparable – GCF funded projects. 
1.7.6. 
Summary of project effectiveness 
39. 
The estimated delivery metrics of the intervention from the climate change mitigation 
perspective are summarized below: 
(a) 
Estimated project carbon sequestration = 20.0 MtCO2 
(b) 
Cost/tCO2 sequestered (for total investment) = 10.0 USD/tCO2  
(c) 
Cost/tCO2 sequestered (for GCF investment) = 1.25 USD/tCO2 
40. 
To ensure that these and other important project metrics are met during the lifetime of 
the project, there will be a need to monitor the GHG emissions achieved as well as the people 
impacted by the project throughout the project operations. In order to ensure replicability of 
the project beyond the targeted countries and regions not only must these monitoring protocol 
be in place, but effective reporting protocols and a well-articulated communication plan must 
also be in place. Forest inventories, which provide the first step in the mitigation impact 
calculation, are based on scientifically approved methodologies and protocols and procedures 
accepted and globally used in the forestry sector. These consist of the physical, on-the-ground 
measurement of trees in representative forest samples, which allows for the calculation of the 
estimated existing volume in the plantations and growth over time. This data must be kept in 
the portfolio company records and, in the case of FSC, be available for FSC to study, and, in the 
case of Arbaro Fund, be available for Arbaro Fund to access and monitor.  
41. 
Arbaro Fund will monitor this data annually, and it will be used in the calculation of the 
carbon sequestration. 
42. 
The carbon sequestration results (among other items) are reported to GCF as part of the 
annual reporting cycle. Similarly, the FSC certification process has in place protocols to 
communicate audit findings. 
43. 
The independent TAP therefore has ranked the efficiency and effectiveness of this 
funding proposal as “high”.  
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
44. 
The independent TAP recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal.

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.25/02/Add.05 
Page 88 
 
 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel assessment 
findings (FP128) 
Proposal name: 
Arbaro Fund – Sustainable Forestry Fund 
Accredited entity: 
MUFG Bank, Ltd. 
 
Impact potential 
MUFG has noted the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) assessment with 
appreciation. MUFG is pleased that the iTAP considers the project intervention to have a high 
impact potential. 
Paradigm shift potential 
MUFG has noted the independent iTAP assessment with appreciation. MUFG is pleased that the 
iTAP considers the project intervention to have a high paradigm shift potential. 
Sustainable development potential 
MUFG has noted the iTAP assessment with appreciation. MUFG is pleased that the iTAP 
considers the project intervention to have a high sustainable development potential. 
Needs of the recipient 
MUFG has noted the iTAP assessment with appreciation. MUFG is pleased that the iTAP 
considers the project intervention to have high scores on the needs of the recipient. 
Country ownership 
MUFG has noted the iTAP assessment with appreciation. MUFG is pleased that the iTAP 
considers the project intervention to have a high country ownership potential. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
MUFG has noted the iTAP assessment with appreciation. MUFG is pleased that the iTAP 
considers the project intervention to have a medium to high efficiency and effectiveness.  
As this is the first case for the GCF to fund forest plantation projects, MUFG believes that the 
project will set an exemplary benchmark for the GCF that will be utilised when considering 
investments in similar projects in the years to come. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
MUFG is very much grateful for the overall remarks made by the iTAP upon thoroughly 
reviewing the project, and its unconditional endorsement for the project.  
MUFG has no further comments on the iTAP’s overall assessment.

=== PAGE 93 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
1 
Annex to the GCF Funding Proposal 
Gender assessment and action plan 
1 Gender analysis/assessment 
1.1 
Methodology 
The gender analysis/assessment has been prepared based on the “Gender Analysis/Assessment 
and Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan Templates” and covers “Part I: Gender 
Analysis/Assessment: Template (Project/Program Level)” based on the guiding questions listed 
therein and the Gender Policy of the Arbaro Fund. The gender analysis/assessment is based on 
quantitative data and qualitative evidence derived from a desk review of existing literature and 
secondary databases, including: 
•
CIF (2017): Gender and sustainable forest management. Entry points for design and
implementation;
•
CIFOR (2012): Forests, trees and agroforests. A strategy for gender-responsive research and action;
•
CIFOR (2012): Women, men and forest research. A review of approaches, resources and methods
for addressing gender;
•
FAO Gender and Land Rights Database;
•
FAO (2007): Gender Mainstreaming in Forestry in Africa;
•
FAO (2011): Governing Land for Women and Men. Gender and Voluntary Guidelines on
Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land and Other Natural Resources;
•
FAO (2013): Forests, food security and gender: linkages, disparities and priorities for action;
•
FAO (2013): Governing Land for Women and Men. A Technical Guide to Support the Achievement
of Responsible Gender-Equitable Governance Land Tenure;
•
FAO (2014): State of the World’s Forests. Enhancing the socioeconomic benefits from forests;
•
FAO (2016): How to mainstream gender in forestry. A practical field guide; and
•
World Bank Development Indicators Database.
Specific analysis of gender issues in the forestry sectors of the target countries is largely not 
existing. Where available the conclusions do not differ significantly from the outcomes of more 
general gender analyses for the forestry sector in developing countries. Therefore, the gender 
analysis/assessment is separated into two broad sections. Section 1.2 analyses wide-spread 
gender issues in the forestry sector in developing countries that are relevant to the Arbaro 
Fund’s operations. Section 1.3 provides a gender analysis/assessment for each target country 
with a special emphasis on national gender strategies/policies and gender issues in land rights. 
Page 89

=== PAGE 94 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
2 
1.2 
Sector analysis: gender issues in forestry 
Methodology and overview 
While the forestry sector is clearly not gender-neutral, data is scarce – especially on country 
level. The presented gender issues (Table 1) were identified through a desk study of secondary 
literature and data mainly furnished by the FAO and CIFOR. Most reviewed studies analyse 
rather general gender issues in forestry. While the conclusions apply to the Arbaro Fund’s target 
regions and will very likely apply to most of the investments, country- and project-specific 
aspects will need to be considered, too. However, gender analyses for the forestry sectors in the 
Arbaro Fund’s target countries are largely not available – and where available do not provide 
significantly different insights compared to the meta studies. Moreover, most of the presented 
conclusions were derived from qualitative rather than quantitative evidence. In 2016, the FAO 
published a practical field guide about how to mainstream gender in forestry. The authors note: 
“There is a major lack of sex-disaggregated and socioeconomic data in the forestry sector – 
only some employment data exist for the formal forestry sector. Moreover, women’s 
activities in the forestry sector are often concentrated in the informal sector, particularly 
those related to wood energy, SMEs, and NWFP value chains. … The gap in sex-
disaggregated data has posed a significant challenge to policy planning.” 
TABLE 1: IDENTIFIED GENDER ISSUES IN FORESTRY RELEVANT TO THE ARBARO FUND 
Issue 
Data type 
Source 
Informal economies and markets are the dominant source of 
livelihoods in rural areas; the engagement in forestry value 
chains is often crucial for rural women’s livelihoods and the 
well-being of their household 
Qualitative 
FAO 
The share of formal female employment in forestry sector is 
low (9% in Africa, 17% in Latin America and the Caribbean) 
and significantly lower than in the overall economy (42% in 
Africa, 40% in Latin America and the Caribbean) 
Quantitative 
FAO 
Women employed in the forestry sector tend to earn lower 
wages and to suffer from bad working conditions 
Qualitative 
FAO 
Formal forestry management is dominated by men, 
particularly in Africa 
Qualitative 
FAO 
In Africa, female foresters have limited chances to advance 
in forestry organisation due to cultural constraints; women’s 
work is appreciated less than men’s 
Qualitative 
FAO 
Women tend to prefer flexible working conditions that do 
not clash with their day-to-day household responsibilities 
Qualitative 
FAO 
Women’s time poverty and physical safety concerns limit 
their access to and use of forest resources and related 
activities 
Qualitative 
CIF 
In Africa, forestry is influenced by patriarchal and socio-
cultural norms and the division of labour between the sexes, 
Qualitative 
FAO 
Page 90

=== PAGE 95 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
3 
which makes it difficult for some women to enter the 
forestry sector and remain in it 
In Africa, employment opportunities for women tend to be 
constrained to areas considered suitable for women such as 
tree nursing or planting 
Qualitative 
FAO 
In Africa, women working the forestry sector sometimes 
suffer from sexual harassment 
Qualitative 
FAO 
Women play a minor role in the formal forest sector and in 
informal activities that generate income; their role is 
confined to the collection of forest products for subsistence 
use; typically, rural women rely on forests for products such 
as firewood, fodder and non-timber items such as honey or 
medicinal herbs for household consumption, while men 
generally view forests as a source of timber for construction 
or trade 
Quantitative 
FAO 
Changes in tree cover and loss of community access to 
forests can have a disproportionately adverse impact on 
women, with indirect impacts on households and 
consequently on the livelihoods of five to ten times as many 
people 
Qualitative 
CIFOR 
Women’s access and property rights to forest, tree and land 
resources are insecure, e.g. by exclusion from decision 
making 
Qualitative 
CIFOR 
(Customary) law and socio-cultural norms prevent women 
from accessing resources and land, having control and 
ownership rights and restrict their participation in decision-
making processes; lack of tenure rights limits women’s 
access to financial resources and income-generating 
opportunities 
Qualitative 
CIF 
Customary law represents a challenge to women’s land 
ownership, which is of particular concern in forest 
restoration and plantation settings, and agroforestry 
systems; men remain the principal landowners, limiting 
women’s land and tree ownership 
Qualitative 
CIF 
In agroforestry systems, women only rare share ownership 
of trees and have little authority over high-value tree 
products; processing, marketing and many high-value woody 
goods are considered male domains; men tend to control 
the use of income generated from tree sales 
Qualitative 
FAO 
In Africa, due to wide-spread patriarchy, gender issues tend 
to be trivialised; women tend to have no property rights or 
access to land or forests and the benefits derived from them 
Qualitative 
FAO 
Women lack formal education, employment and personal 
networks 
Qualitative 
CIFOR 
Page 91

=== PAGE 96 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
4 
Sex-disaggregated employment statistics for the forestry 
sector are not always available 
Qualitative 
FAO 
Non-participatory approaches might not address the specific 
local constraints of women effectively 
Qualitative 
CIFOR 
Issues such as HIV/AIDS, prostitution and childbirth might be 
comfortable for managers to analyse and address 
Qualitative 
CIFOR 
Women often have highly specialized knowledge of trees 
and forests in terms of their species diversity, management 
and uses for various purposes, and conservation practices; 
women often have a strong body of knowledge and 
expertise that can be used in climate change mitigation, 
disaster reduction and adaptation 
Qualitative 
FAO 
High illiteracy rates among women limit their participation in 
capacity programmes; technical or written communication 
or the use of non-native languages can hinder women’s 
understanding 
Qualitative 
IUCN 
Inappropriate gender advocacy, such as confrontations, will 
hamper the support of men for gender mainstreaming 
Qualitative 
IUCN 
 
Synopsis 
Women rarely formally own land or trees. Women are generally underrepresented in forest user 
groups, such as village forest committees or community forest associations. Women’s 
participation in stakeholder consultations is often nominal (see country analysis) and women 
tend to be enlisted for decision making only when resources are degraded. 
In rural areas of the target countries women tend to mostly engage in subsistence activities such 
as cultivating food crops and collecting fuelwood and non-wood products from natural forests. 
Women tend to disproportionately bear the costs of subsistence tree and forest management – 
yet realise only a fraction of the benefits. Climate change, deforestation and loss of community 
access to forests can have a disproportionately adverse impact on women, with indirect impacts 
on female-headed households and their extended members. 
Gender equality is not only a social and moral imperative, but also an economic need. Women 
represent nearly 50% of the world’s population, yet they account for only about 41% of the 
formal workforce. In forestry, this share is much lower; forestry is often perceived as a male 
sector. Formal female employment in the forestry sector is low and comparable to other land 
use sectors such as agriculture or mining, ranging from 9% to 27%, with the lowest values in Sub-
Saharan Africa (9%) and Latin America (17%) (Figure 1).  
Page 92

=== PAGE 97 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
5 
FIGURE 1: FEMALE EMPLOYMENT IN THE FORESTRY AND SELECTED WOOD PROCESSING SECTORS (2011) 
 
Source: FAO 
Officially, the global forestry sector employs almost 14 million formal workers. However, 
especially in developing countries, the share of the informal workforce in the sector is significant 
and assumed to be many times higher than the formal workforce. In the forestry sector of the 
target regions women tend to participate in informal subsistence or non-cash activities 
significantly more than men, as seen in wood fuel and charcoal production statistics (Figure 2). 
FIGURE 2: WOOD FUEL AND CHARCOAL PRODUCTION BY GENDER AND ENGAGEMENT (2011) 
 
Source: FAO 
1.3 
Country analysis 
Methodology 
Despite its focus on natural forests, available sector level analysis illustrates key gender issues 
in forestry and subsistence activities in rural communities in developing countries. This section 
augments these considerations with quantitative and qualitative data related to general 
national gender issues in the Arbaro Fund’s target countries. Selected comparative gender 
related development indicators such as national employment rates disaggregated by sex will be 
presented. In addition, national gender strategies/polices, the legal framework and gender 
issues in land rights will be discussed separately for each target country. Gender in land tenure 
is of great relevance to the Arbaro Fund because the targeted reforestation/afforestation 
projects will require relatively large areas of land. In many cases, these areas will be rented or 
leased from local communities. Gender issues resulting from disparate land rights create one of 
the biggest gender challenges in rural communities in developing countries, as land use tends to 
be the main economic or subsistence activity, especially of women. However, women tend to 
Page 93

=== PAGE 98 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
6 
have less land rights than men. In addition, the Arbaro Fund will oftentimes consult community 
councils when leasing land, where women tend be have only limited decision-making power. 
National gender related development indicators 
Several national development indicators show significant gender inequality in the Arbaro Fund’s 
target countries (Figure 3). While women have a higher life expectancy than men in all target 
countries, the risk for pregnant women to die at birth is still elevated in the Sub-Saharan African 
target countries, especially in Sierra Leone with 1 120 deaths per 100 000 live births. Educational 
data is fragmented and not available for the Sub-Saharan African target countries. In the Latin 
American target countries, adult literacy is high and comparable between women and men, but 
the attainment of at least upper secondary education is low. Peruvian men achieve the highest 
value in the sample with ca. 60% compared to ca. 50% for Peruvian women. 
Gender inequality becomes most obvious in economic and political participation indicators. 
Labour force participation and employment rates are roughly equal only in Sierra Leone. 
Inequality is significantly higher in the Latin American than in the Sub-Saharan African target 
countries, where both the labour force participation and the employment rate of women is 
between 15 (Peru) and 27 (Paraguay) percentage points lower compared to men. Similarly, the 
unemployment rates of women in the Latin American target countries are significantly higher 
than the unemployment rates of men, however at a lower scale. Only in Sierra Leone, the 
unemployment rate of women (4%) is slightly lower than of men (5%). The share of seats held 
by women in the national parliament is less than half in all target countries, but the average of 
ca. a quarter compares with the world average. The countries with the highest political 
participation of women in the sample are Ethiopia (39%), Ecuador (38%) and Peru (28%), the 
countries with the lowest values are Sierra Leone (12%), Ghana (13%) and Paraguay (15%). 
FIGURE 3: SELECTED GENDER RELATED DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS FOR THE TARGET COUNTRIES 
 
0
20
40
60
80
World
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Ethiopia
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Uganda
Poverty headcount at USD 3.20 (2011 PPP)
(% of population)
0
20
40
60
80
World
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Ethiopia
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Uganda
Life expectancy
(years after birth of women and men)
Page 94

=== PAGE 99 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
7 
 
 
 
 
Source: World Bank 
0
400
800
1 200
World
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Ethiopia
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Uganda
Maternal mortality
(per 100,000 live births)
0
20
40
60
80
100
World
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Ethiopia
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Uganda
Infant mortality
(per 1,000 live births)
0
25
50
75
100
World
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Ethiopia
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Uganda
Adult literacy
(% of female and male)
0
20
40
60
80
World
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Ethiopia
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Uganda
Attainment of upper secondary education 
(% of female and male)
0
25
50
75
100
World
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Ethiopia
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Uganda
Labour force participation
(% of female and male)
0
25
50
75
100
World
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Ethiopia
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Uganda
Employment
(% of female and male)
0
2
4
6
8
World
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Ethiopia
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Uganda
Unemployment
(% of female and male)
0
10
20
30
40
World
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Ethiopia
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Uganda
Parliamentary seats held by women
(%)
Page 95

=== PAGE 100 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
8 
Ethiopia 
The constitution prohibits gender-based discrimination. Ethiopian government has set a 
National policy on Ethiopian women in 1993 with the goal of improving the conditions of women 
in political, social and economic life. In 2006 the Ministry of Women’s Affairs (MOWA) developed 
a National Action Plan for Gender Equality for the period from 2006 to 2010. Additionally, as 
part of Growth and Transformation Plan II (GTP II), one of the Major Targets is to “Develop 
Women empowerment, participation and ensure their benefits”. The National Forest Sector 
Development Programme mentions gender mainstreaming as a key component to be 
considered. Ethiopia’s National Adaptation Plan (NAP) identifies gender as a key consideration 
and recognizes women as particularly vulnerable to climate change due to socio-economic 
inequalities that hamper their adaptive capacity. 
The country is a federation of ethnically-based administrative states. Eighty-three% of the 
population lived in rural areas in 2005. Women accounted for 50% of the rural population in 
2004. Agriculture is the main source of livelihood for more than eight out of ten people. 
Agriculture accounted for 44% of GDP in 2009; industry and services accounted for 13% and 43% 
respectively. In 2005, the agricultural sector employed 85% of the economically active 
population. Although the country has a potential for agricultural development, only about 20% 
of the total arable land area is cultivated. 
Additionally, agricultural production is extremely vulnerable to climatic conditions and the 
disruptive impact of war and civil conflict, which have led to several policy reversals since 1990. 
Subsistence, rainfed farming system dominates agriculture. Almost 12 million smallholder 
farmers produce about 95% of agriculture’s share of GDP; more than half of the country’s 
smallholders have 1 ha or less of land. The main crops include coffee, cereals, maize, sorghum, 
wheat, barley and millet. Cereals account for about 70% of the agricultural GDP. In 2005, 
12 753 000 women were active in agriculture, accounting for 45% of the agricultural labour force 
and 77% of all economically active women.  
Land reform was implemented in 1998. As a result, systematic registration and user-right 
certification have taken place in four regions: in the Tigray region since 1998 and in the Amhara, 
Oromiya and Southern Nations, Nationalities and People’s Region since 2002. Since 1998, more 
than 5 million certificates have been delivered, which is the largest delivery of non-freehold 
rights in such a short time period in Sub-Saharan Africa. The new federal and regional land-use 
proclamations are the basis of the land reform and they include more detailed rules and 
regulations for improving tenure security for land users, promoting land conservation and 
facilitating investment. 
Land is state property and citizens have user rights. Inheritance of user rights is allowed, but 
land use rights may not be mortgaged. Foreign investors are permitted to mortgage leased land. 
Unlike the rest of the country, the Tigray regional state has a gender-progressive land 
proclamation and progressively implements it. Here, land registration took place very early and 
both husbands and wives have equal rights to land: land is registered under both of their names 
and upon separation and dissolution of marriage, they take away equal shares of the land. 
Nevertheless, despite the legal provisions of federal and regional laws envisaging joint land 
certification of husbands and wives, rural women still do not have effective access to land 
Page 96

=== PAGE 101 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
9 
resources. In certain areas, such as the southern part of the country, land reforms have not yet 
been fully endorsed because of traditional patriarchal practices or beliefs centred on male 
domination, where women’s access to land is not officially recognized. 
Women’s rights to land are sidelined despite the legal provisions that envisage joint ownership 
of husbands and wives. In practice, issues related to the rights of widows, divorced women and 
polygamous wives are ignored. Although the Constitution guarantees women’s rights upon 
dissolution of marriage, in reality the only way for widows or divorced women to secure their 
rights to land is to enter into marriage with one of their brothers-in-law. Indeed, if women return 
to their natal homes, they will not be provided for because traditional inheritance and marriage 
practices envisage that a woman’s right to land resides with her husband. 
Laws related to marriage, ownership and inheritance rights remain ineffective because they 
often conflict with predominant social practices. For example, although the Constitution 
prohibits bigamy, polygamous marriages are very common in the southern region. Only the first 
wife is given the right to place her name beside her husband’s on land registration and 
certification forms, while the right to land ownership for polygamous wives remains 
marginalized. 
In addition to being excluded from land and other natural resources, women have limited access 
to farm inputs. This is a special concern for women-headed households because their livelihoods 
and the sustainability of their land depend on such inputs. 
Although land reforms promoted an intensive process of decentralization and regionalization in 
order to improve tenure security for land users, land conservation and land distribution, the 
levels of confidence in local authorities vary across regions. Tenure insecurity is particularly 
influenced by issues such as land redistribution and land expropriation on the part of the 
government. Moreover, a user’s absence from land, for a period which varies from two to ten 
years depending on the regional area, results in the permanent loss of land rights. This causes 
greater tensions among de facto female-headed households. 
Even though land reforms have contributed to egalitarian land distribution, land rental markets 
are very active and are dominated by sharecropping arrangements. Moreover, land reforms in 
the form of registration and certification which aim to improve tenure security for women are 
not yet fully enshrined in practice; the traditional gender bias against women cultivating their 
own land leads single women to depend on male assistance or on renting and sharecropping 
their land. 
Ghana 
The constitution prohibits gender-based discrimination. The overarching goal of the national 
gender policy is “to mainstream gender equality and women’s empowerment concerns into the 
national development process; in order to improve the social, legal, civic, political, economic 
and cultural conditions of the people of Ghana, particularly women and men, boys and girls in 
an appreciable manner and as required by national and international frameworks”. In 
consequence, gender issues in climate change are a focus area of the national climate strategy 
and gender sensitivity a guiding principle of the national adaptation strategy. Ghana’s INDC 
identifies gender as a key adaptation challenge and an NDC support programme to gender 
Page 97

=== PAGE 102 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
10 
mainstream Ghana’s climate action is ongoing. Similarly, another ongoing project aims to gender 
mainstream the national REDD+ strategy. 
About half of the female workforce engages in agriculture, accounting for 44% of the agricultural 
labour force. Women produce around 70% of food crops, covering 40% of all the cultivable land. 
About 90% of women are self-employed or work as unpaid family labour in farming, agricultural 
enterprises or small-scale manufacturing in the informal sector; only a minority of women 
working in agriculture are independent farmers. 
The 1992 Constitution vested all public lands in the President in trust for the people of Ghana 
and divided land in to two broad categories held under public and customary tenure systems. 
Public land is vested in the President and managed by Central Land Commissions. Customary 
land is vested in the customary governments, called stools or skins, on behalf of and in trust for 
the subjects of the stool. It is estimated that 80% of the country’s lands are held under customary 
land tenure. The various forms of customary tenure cause widespread disputes over land as a 
result of the difficulty of traditional authorities in identifying the extent of land boundaries. 
The system that regulates customary land ownership and land security varies widely across 
regions, but it generally ascribes men the exclusive property right to land. Women have access 
to land mainly through the male members of the family, but they might be allocated plots or 
cultivate their husbands’ fields. Moreover, most women are not aware of the existence of the 
Intestate Succession Law that strengthens their land inheritance rights. Even when women are 
aware of the law, they often lack support in the process for claiming their rights. Women 
seldomly participate in lineage, clan or stool meetings where men take most decisions on land 
issues. If women do participate, they are generally listeners or resource people. 
The expansion of commercial agriculture has driven women out of crop production forcing them 
into petty trade in order to provide food for their family. Furthermore, women are more likely 
to be allocated less fertile customary land, where it is not possible to cultivate cash crops. 
Rural women have less access than men to training and technical information because extension 
services usually target men as heads of the household. Traditional biases limit women’s access 
to education and decision-making roles in the family and public life. Women’s limited 
participation in politics and public service does not allow their full integration into national 
decision-making. 
Sierra Leone 
The constitution prohibits gender-based discrimination. Empowering women belongs to the 
policy clusters of the national development strategy. In 2000 the National Policy on the 
Advancement of Women and the National Policy on Gender Mainstreaming were developed to 
implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action of 1995. The national forestry policy 
targets gender sensitive stakeholder education and the NAPA identifies raising public awareness 
and mainstreaming gender perspectives into climate change issues as priority activity “for 
urgent and immediate adaptation”. The G7-Sierra-Leone Partnership for the Implementation of 
the Volunatary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and 
Forests in the Context of National Food Security (VGGT) aims at “addressing issues of gender 
Page 98

=== PAGE 103 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
11 
inequality across all sectors and issues, including, but not limited to land ownership, inheritance, 
information, inclusive negotiations and security of tenure”. 
In 2010 the agricultural share of the economically active population was estimated at ca. 60%. 
The female share of the economically active population in agriculture was ca. 62%. Typically, 
women harvest cassava and process it while men manage rice and tree plantations for cash 
income. Farms managed by women usually rely on inter-cropping systems that aim to protect 
the household against crop failure, and vegetable gardens, which provide micro-nutrients, 
vitamins, minerals, fibre, and slow-release carbohydrates. Women are generally expected to 
carry the expenditures associated with school fees and medical costs. This makes them prone to 
entering exploitative debt relationships and being subject to labour exploitation. Traditionally, 
women are also the primary care-givers in the household. Domestic and farm work mean that 
there is little leisure time for women or opportunity for their participation in political processes, 
community activities and training. 
The government’s policy on agriculture provides that “there would be an increase and direct 
access to extension services to women farmers for institutional, information, financial, technical 
and advisory support”. However, due to the low levels of education, most rural women engage 
in agricultural activities with no active participation in extension services. Most rural women are 
self-employed in agricultural activity.  
Sierra Leone has a dual system of land tenure: the communal land system where land is vested 
in the Government and the customary land system where land belongs to a family in the 
community. The customary system of land tenure is remarkably complex and stems from the 
historical, cultural and political background of the various communities. In the Provinces, 
women’s access to land is determined by traditional and religious customs that remain deeply 
rooted in patriarchal values. 
The World Health Organization estimates that more than 90% of Sierra Leonean girls are 
initiated at puberty into “Bondo”. As part of the rite, a woman known as a “sowei” in the Mende 
language cuts the clitoris and prepares the girl for adulthood through singing, dancing and 
teaching domestic skills. This is followed by a three-month initiation in the bush where she is 
taught how to be a good wife and a good mother. Early marriages hamper the advancement of 
women and keeps subjugating girls by reinforcing women’s inferior position. Poverty and the 
premium put on virginity propel many parents into marrying their daughters early, shortly after 
the “Bondo” initiation rites at puberty. 
Uganda 
The constitution guarantees gender equality. Several chapters contain provisions that are 
directly related to women’s equal right to land and that specifically outlaw customs that are 
against the dignity of women or that undermine their status. Women’s equal right to inheritance 
has not yet been recognized in national legislation. Regarding the rights of widows, the 
Succession Act is in violation of the constitution and the country’s international obligations as 
signatory state to treaties prohibiting sex-based discrimination. 
Uganda developed a Gender Policy in 2007 and a roadmap to gender mainstream the REDD+ 
process. The INDC seeks to “mainstreaming gender into development policies, plans and 
Page 99

=== PAGE 104 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
12 
strategies as well as observance of human rights in all climate change adaptation and mitigation 
actions”. It is a key priority of the national climate strategy to “mainstream gender issues in 
climate change adaptation and mitigation approaches in order to reduce the vulnerability of 
women and children to the impacts of climate change and recognise their key role in tackling 
the issue” and gender is recognised as a cross-cutting issue. The policy further notes that 
“climate change response policies and activities must be gender sensitive, and the capacity of 
relevant stakeholders at national and local levels to promote gender-sensitive approaches to 
climate change adaptation must be strengthened”. Similarly the national forestry policy aims tat 
gender equity, stating: 
“The government will ensure that women, youth and poor people are particular 
beneficiaries in the development of the forest sector. It recognises that there are sections 
of society that are often marginalised in development processes, and that these groups are 
frequently the most dependent on forest resources for their livelihoods. The government 
will ensure the integration of gender concerns and issues into the development of the forest 
sector. Strategies for implementing the Forestry Policy will specifically account for gender 
differences in the perceptions and uses of forest products. This will include efforts to: 
- increase security of tenure over forest resources for women and youth;  
- encourage active participation of women and youth in decision-making, resource 
management and sharing of benefits; 
- promote changes in attitudes and organisational cultures, to break down gender barriers 
and to provide mutual respect and dignity for all people irrespective of social group, gender 
or background”. 
There is a traditional gendered division of labour in the household, with women being 
responsible for cooking, cleaning and taking care of children and other members of the 
household. In productive work, women and men have assigned traditional roles, particularly in 
agricultural production and marketing; men are considered mostly responsible for land clearing 
and women are responsible for weeding and post-harvest processing. Women also are often 
responsible for providing food for the household while men are responsible for providing other 
consumption goods. 
Some crops, particularly plantains and tubers, are considered women’s crops, while others – 
mostly cash crops – are considered men’s crops. However, the extent to which traditional 
gender divisions of labour are adhered to varies by region, socioeconomic status and rural/urban 
and household categories. For example, in households headed by women and in some 
polygamous households, women perform tasks normally done by men. Women are among the 
worst affected by poverty because they have scarce access to resources and little or no control 
over the food they produce. Nationwide, 72% of all employed women and 90% of all rural 
women work in agriculture. Women are responsible for the production of about 80% of food 
crops and more than 50% of cash crops. 
Customary tenure systems regulate 75% of the total land and are still the most common form 
of tenure in the country. Customary tenure applies to former public land that has not been 
registered. Cultural practices related to land dictate that women can access land through their 
male relatives, such as a father, husband or brother, but in most communities they cannot own 
land. They can plough the land to produce food crops, but they may not plant perennial crops, 
sell the land or use it as collateral without permission from men. They may be displaced from 
Page 100

=== PAGE 105 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
13 
their land or allocated small fragmented plots or marginal lands. Men are also primarily 
responsible for marketing agricultural products, even those primarily grown by women. 
Although legal constraints to women’s land ownership were eliminated in the new Constitution, 
women are not always aware of their rights and cultural practices inhibit their access to land. 
According to government data, 97% of women have access to land; however, in practice, only 
8% of women own land and 7% have property rights. Between 1991 and 1997, 29% of the total 
female population headed households. As a result of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, many female-
headed households are being created following the death of the husband. The country’s 
HIV/AIDS infection rate is 4% and for women it is 3%. Between 1998 and 2003, female-headed 
households reduced their landholdings by 11%, or 0.3 acres on average, because of the 
increasing number of distress sales following the death of a husband. 
Most women who were being threatened with eviction did not have the necessary 
documentation as rightful owners of the land upon the death of their husbands. In some cases, 
it was evident that although women were struggling to keep their land, they were not fully aware 
of the boundaries of the land for which they were struggling. As land becomes more of a 
commodity for sale, some women have been able to access user rights and ownership rights 
from purchasing land. However, this is true for very few women because the cost of land is so 
high that very few women can afford it. 
The consent clause of the Land Law demands that a person who wishes to use a land title as 
security should seek consent from the spouse and children if the land title in question is the one 
on which they live and from which they earn their living. However, some women feel that the 
consent clause would work only in a monogamous setting. In a polygamous setting where most 
of them lie, it would cause conflict. Agreeing or not agreeing to use the land titles could make 
the other woman or women unhappy, causing them to behave accordingly. Women also feel 
that the consent clause does not really empower women or protect their land rights. The fact 
that the woman does not own the land remains. If she consented and somehow the land was 
taken, she would be landless. If she did not consent, she would still be landless because the mere 
fact that she has not consented does not give her ownership. In any case, refusal to consent in 
a rural setting can expose women to violence. 
Ecuador 
The constitution prohibits gender-based discrimination. Ecuador has developed a national 
gender policy, the “Política para la Igualdad de Género”; its overarching goal is to gender 
mainstream policy making. One of the overarching goals of the national development plan is to 
tackle problems faced by women. The national climate strategy “Estrategia Nacional de Cambio 
Climático del Ecuador” recognises that women are particularly vulnerable to climate change. 
The INDC seeks a gender responsive approach to addressing climate change. The national REDD+ 
strategy targets to pay special attention to the role of women. 
In 2005 the participation rate of women in economic activity was 48% compared to 83% for men. 
An estimated 37% of the female labour force is active in rural agriculture, of which only 4% under 
formal employment. Employed women earn ca. 10% less than men under similar conditions. 
Page 101

=== PAGE 106 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
14 
Particularly young women tend to migrate from rural areas to the cities or to neighbouring 
countries due to a lack of employment opportunities. 
The agrarian reform initiated in 1964 awarded land in usufruct to cooperatives. The law gave 
priority to heads of household, typically men, whose main activity was agriculture and who did 
not own land or only had very small property. In 1973, another comprehensive agrarian reform 
maintained these provisions, which effectively excluded women from the allocation of land as a 
result of cultural impediments that did not recognize women as farmers or heads of households. 
In addition, then effective regulations exacerbated the situation by stipulating that the husband 
was the administrator of marital property. The agricultural development act “Ley de Fomento y 
Desarrollo Agropecuario” of 1979 limited these effects and prioritised smallholders. The 
mountains and the coast have very different property patterns. Women and couples own a 
higher share of land in the mountains than on the coast, where land ownership is dominated by 
men. This is partially explained by the higher share of indigenous people in the mountains. 
Paraguay 
The constitution prohibits gender-based discrimination. Paraguay developed a national gender 
in climate change strategy, the “Estrategia Nacional de Género ante el Cambio Climático”; its 
overarching goal is to promote the active and effective incorporation of gender issues in national 
climate policy making. Similarly, the national forest strategy aims to reduce gender imbalances 
in the forestry sector through tailored measures. The INDC intends to pay particular attention 
to women’s needs. 
In 2007 labour force was 2.9 million people, of which ca. 1.1 million (38%) women. Of the female 
labour force 22% is dedicated to agriculture, 69% to services and 9% to industry. Many women 
adopt leadership of rural households when men are forced to migrate to the cities for work. It 
is estimated that 1 of 5 rural households is lead by a woman. In rural areas women are typically 
active in subsistence agricultural and to some extent small agricultural trade. However, most of 
these activities are not part of the formal economy. Women in rural areas have only very limited 
access to education, credit and land. 
Almost 9 of 10 productive agricultural units are less than 5 ha large and a tenth of all farms own 
80% of the agricultural land. The rapid expansion of intensive agriculture, deforestation, the 
degradation of natural ecosystems as well as the limited income generation capacity of 
smallholder farmers are quoted as elevated threats to women in rural areas, as they tend to be 
relatively more dependent on subsistence agriculture than men. 
Peru 
The constitution prohibits gender-based discrimination. Peru has developed a national gender 
in climate change strategy, the “Plan de Acción en Género y Cambio Climático del Perú”; its 
overarching goal is to gender mainstream national climate change mitigation and adaptation 
efforts. The national forest and climate strategy “Estrategia Nacional sobre Bosques y Cambio 
Climático” identifies women as particularly vulnerable to deforestation and lists gender equity 
Page 102

=== PAGE 107 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
15 
as a strategic principle. The INDC recognises gender as a cross-cutting issue to effective climate 
change adaptation. 
In 2006 the labour force was estimated at ca. 13 million people, of which 43% female. The female 
labour force was distributed to 33% in agricultural, 8% in industry and 59% in services. On 
average, women in urban employment earn 30% less than men. The role of women in agriculture 
varies by region. For example, on the coast, women participate mainly in harvesting activities, 
while in mountain areas women participate in all agricultural work from livestock, land 
preparation to irrigation and harvest. In the Amazon region, women participate mainly in 
subsistence agriculture and in the production of household food. A common element in all 
regions are numerous household responsibilities of women. In some regions, women became 
heads of household due to the migration of men and armed conflicts. 
The agrarian reform of 1969 allocated almost half of all agricultural land and jungle to one third 
of rural households. Very few women in rural areas benefited directly from the agrarian reform 
because the selection criteria effectively favoured men as heads of household. The most recent 
public policies on access to land aims at supporting the land market. Among the goals are a 
clarification of rural property rights, modernizing the rural cadastre system and creating an 
automated system for registering rural property. 
Factors that hinder women's access to land are: 
• 
The forced displacement of many women, mainly female heads of household, resulting in 
marginalization and poverty; 
• 
The limited knowledge of communities and women of women’s rights and the limited 
information disaggregated by gender; 
• 
The strong illiteracy rate mainly of rural women; and 
• 
The absence of identity documentation preventing the exercise of citizenship and civil, 
political, economic, social and cultural rights, as well as access to numerous basic services. 
2 Gender and social inclusion action plan 
The Arbaro Fund seeks a gender responsive approach to its investments as described in its 
Gender Policy. Moreover, the Arbaro Fund is expected to contribute to gender mainstreaming 
as a co-benefit of its operations. This section describes the intended actions to gender 
responsiveness on fund level based on prevailing gender issues in the forestry sector and the 
target countries as identified in the gender analysis/assessment (section 1) as well as the 
approach at investment / project level. 
2.1 
Project specific Gender Assessment and Action plans 
As part of the investment process, gender issues, following the Arbaro Fund’s gender action 
plan, will be considered in the due diligence where the potential investment is assessed. This 
due diligence process, which is in detail described in the ESMS of the Arbaro Fund, includes an 
on-site and location specific due diligence, including stakeholder consultations on women’s and 
men’s views of the proposed project.  
Page 103

=== PAGE 108 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
16 
As a result of the due diligence, project specific requirements are developed using the fund level 
action plan as guidance. These may include requirements of further assessment or analysis in 
order to develop a project level action plan. 
The project level gender action plans are a requirement as part of the legal documentation with 
the investee companies. Gender action plans include clear timelines and responsibilities for 
achieving them as well as remedies in case of non-compliance.  
It is envisaged that the Arbaro Fund will make between 8-12 investments. A location specific, 
on-site gender assessment will be conducted for each of these, leading to a project specific 
gender action plan. Where necessary, Arbaro Advisors will provide support for the investee 
companies in developing the action plans and fulfilling the gender targets of the Arbaro Fund. 
The gender action plans of each investee company will feed into the overall gender action plan 
and meeting of gender targets of the Arbaro Fund. These will be reported as part of the Arbaro 
Fund impact reporting. 
2.2 
Budget and resources 
The Arbaro Fund allocates a due diligence budget for each potential investee project. The 
allocation for gender assessment is part of this due diligence budget. The budget varies from 
project to project but generally varies from 15-25% of the overall social due diligence budget, 
overlapping partly with the general stakeholder consultations. 
The gender action plan budgets are at the investee company level. Arbaro Fund supervises the 
appropriate level and allocation of such budgets. 
Arbaro will ensure that the necessary capacities are available either internally or with external 
expert support to conduct the assessment and implement the action plans. 
2.3 
Fund level action plan 
Specific gender issues and the degree to which the Arbaro Fund and its investee companies can 
mitigate these will differ based on the local context. For example, depending on ethnic, cultural 
or customary circumstances, organising separate women´s groups as means of participation 
may be more effective than setting representation targets. Particularly cultural and customary 
barriers belong to the strongest impediments to gender equality, but they tend to differ strongly 
on regional level, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa. Therefore, gender issues are analysed as 
part of the E&S due diligence of an investment opportunity to tailor the presented fund-level 
action plan (Table 3) to the local circumstances of the investee companies. 
Arbaro will use its best endeavours to ensure that the social and economic benefits that the 
stakeholder groups of its investee projects derive from their operations will be distributed on an 
equal basis considering the needs of the various groups and noting that such needs may vary 
between the groups. The Arbaro Fund commits to 
• Advance gender equality; 
• Advance women’s empowerment; 
• Minimize gender-related risks and safeguard women’s rights; and 
Page 104

=== PAGE 109 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
17 
• Promote a gender-responsive approach. 
The gender analysis/assessment shows that gender inequality and the disproportional exposure 
of women to climate change is particularly high in rural areas in the target countries. Women 
mostly engage in subsistence activities and have only limited access to benefits derived from 
assets such as land or trees. In addition, women rarely participate in decisions over such assets 
and earn only little to no cash income. Women’s formal employment in forestry is marginal and 
their knowledge and capacity to improve their situation is limited. 
The FAO identifies four pillars to mainstream gender in forestry: participation, capacity 
development, institutions and data collection. The Arbaro Fund can contribute to all areas 
except for institutions, as it is not involved in public policy making. The Arbaro Fund is expected 
to contribute most to gender mainstreaming through the four key action areas presented in 
Table 2. These action areas are mapped against the gender mainstreaming pillars identified by 
the FAO. 
TABLE 2: KEY GENDER ACTION AREAS OF THE ARBARO FUND MAPPED AGAINST THE FAO PILLARS TO 
MAINSTREAM GENDER IN FORESTRY 
Action areas 
FAO pillar 
Participation 
Capacity 
development Institutions 
Data 
collection 
Offer formal employment to 
women, respecting their specific 
needs, including on-the-job 
training opportunities 
X 
X 
 
 
Collect and report gender-
disaggregated data on the Arbaro 
Fund investments 
 
 
 
X 
In the context of Arbaro Fund’s 
investments promote women’s 
participation in decision making 
related to land and ensure that 
benefits derived from by the 
communities from the Arbaro 
Fund’s operations are distributed 
equitably 
X 
X 
 
 
Implement community 
programmes such as training or 
outgrower schemes in a gender 
responsive manner 
X 
X 
 
 
 
The highest impact of the Arbaro Fund is expected in participation and capacity development. 
Hence, the Arbaro Fund will support tackling several of the most fundamental gender issues in 
forestry as identified by the FAO: 
Page 105

=== PAGE 110 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
18 
“Increasing women’s participation in community forest management groups, small- and 
medium-scale enterprises (SMEs), NGOs, and village administration, as well as in the 
marketing and sale of non-wood forest products (NWFP) are often the principal entry points 
for empowering women in the forestry sector. However, aiming for a minimum number of 
women to be represented among stakeholder groups is not always enough. Women also 
need higher-level institutional decision-making powers, i.e. at the local and management 
levels. This will often require a socioeconomic shift that starts with women being 
empowered through education, training and support for income generation in order to have 
a say in dialogue and in transformative decisions.” 
Based on these considerations the gender and social inclusion action plan (GAP) presented in 
Table 3 has been developed for the Arbaro Fund. It will serve as a basis for the project specific 
GAPs of the different investee companies. 
Page 106

=== PAGE 111 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
19 
TABLE 3: FUND-LEVEL GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN 
Activities 
Indicators and targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Costs 
Impact statement: Provide effective climate mitigation through increased carbon sinks by creating sustainable forest plantations and conserving 
natural forests, which are part of the overall project areas. Together the plantation area and the conserved natural areas increase the resilience of 
the overall landscape against climate change impacts, and contribute to: 
1) 
Increased resilience of local communities, including women, against climate change through provision of formal employment opportunities in 
the sustainable forest plantations and related value chains and decreased dependence on climate sensitive subsistence practises (such as slash and 
burn agriculture or charcoal production); and  
2) 
Empowerment of local communities, including women, and enhanced capacities – promotion of out-grower schemes, where communities in 
the proximity of a forest plantations are trained to apply modern silviculture to their own land, thus providing several benefits such as additional 
and diversified income, economic empowerment and improving rural capacities. 
Outcome statement: 
• In the Arbaro Fund’s projects, communities, including female members, enjoy true participation in decisions making. 
• In the Arbaro Fund’s projects, the benefits derived from the land, including land lease payments, profit share payments and other such monetary 
benefits are distributed in an equitable manner. 
• Formal employment is provided in the Arbaro Fund’s investee projects to up to 5 000 people of which 20% are women. 
• The livelihoods of up to 200 000 people are improved, of which 50% are women and girls. 
• The Arbaro Fund’s projects produce investment specific data which is disaggregated based on gender (e.g. on employment, direct and indirect, 
communities and other stakeholders as well as benefit distribution and other impact). 
• Each investee project of the Arbaro Fund has implemented at least one community programme, such as an outgrower scheme, in a gender 
responsive manner. 
Fund level activities leading to outputs at portfolio company / project level: 
The output statements and the related actions and indicators form the framework of action plans that Arbaro fund portfolio companies will be 
required, as a minimum, to follow. Each detailed project level gender assessment may lead to further actions and indicators. 
• 
Arbaro Fund will make 8-12 investments during its investment period (July 2023) 
Page 107

=== PAGE 112 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
20 
• 
During the investment process, and as part of the investment analysis, prior to investment decision, a high -level gender assessment of each 
project takes place. This assessment takes into account the local context and conditions of the country and area of operation of the portfolio 
company / project as well as Arbaro’s gender action plan outputs and activities 
• 
As part of the investment execution a social and environmental action plan is agreed with the portfolio company, this plan includes the timelines 
and requirements for a more detailed gender assessment as a separate section, as well as timelines and responsibilities for a portfolio company 
/ project level gender action plan.  
• 
Each gender action plan, as a minimum, sets activity targets leading to outputs and following the timelines as based on Arbaro Fund’s gender 
action plan. Local special conditions or specific operations, such as outgrower programmes, may lead to additional requirements.  
• 
The activities in the gender action plans become an integral part of the operations of each of the portfolio companies 
• 
Each of the portfolio company is required to follow-up and report on the activities based on the indicators in their gender action plan (which, as 
a minimum, follow the indicators of Arbaro’s gender action plan) 
• 
The portfolio company level action plans are monitored by Arbaro and where relevant, Arbaro may engage external parties for such monitoring. 
This monitoring also includes assessment of appropriate budgeting to undertake the required actions. 
• 
Arbaro provides support and guidance to the portfolio companies in fulfilling the action plans and where necessary external experts will be 
engaged to provide technical support or capacity building. 
 
Output: gender assessment and action plans 
• Arbaro will ensure that gender assessments are 
conducted in each of its portfolio company and that 
appropriate action plans are put in place 
Indicator: number of gender 
assessments 
Indicator: number of gender 
action plans 
Target: 8-12 gender assessment 
and action plans 
3 years after 
investment of 
the Arbaro Fund 
Executing 
Agency and 
investee 
companies 
Budget is 
included in the 
investee 
company level 
Output statement: suitable and fair livelihood options for local communities, including women 
• Provide formal employment in investee companies 
Indicator: Number of people 
employed / Target: 15 % of staff 
of investee companies is female 
3 years after 
investment of 
the Arbaro Fund 
Executing 
Agency and 
investee 
companies 
Budget is 
included in the 
investee 
Page 108

=== PAGE 113 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
21 
• Safeguard that investee companies respect specific 
working needs of stakeholder groups, incl. women 
(e.g. working hours or health and safety) 
• Ensure equal pay in investee companies 
• Promote participation of all stakeholders in 
outgrower schemes and to the extent possible 
safeguard the fair sharing of tree tenure and cash 
income 
Indicator: Average salary of 
women and men by position in 
investee companies / Target: no 
difference in average salary per 
position based on gender 
Indicator: Number of community 
programmes (e.g. outgrower 
schemes) / Number of people 
reached by these programmes  
Target: 30 % of outgrowers are 
women 
company level, 
not fund level 
Output statement: improved access of all stakeholders, incl. women, to benefits derived from leased community land 
• Support investee companies in institutionalising the 
equal participation of all stakeholders, incl. women, 
in decisions related to land in the context of the 
Arbaro Fund’s projects 
• Safeguard that all stakeholders, incl. women, 
receive their fair share of benefits (e.g. lease or 
profit share payments) derived from land in the 
context of Arbaro Fund’s projects 
Indicator: Number of community 
members participating in 
consultations / Target: at least 
30% of community members 
present at consultations are 
women 
Qualitative indicator: Benefit 
sharing mechanisms effectively 
include measures to involve 
women 
During the first 
half of the 
implementation 
period 
Executing 
Agency and 
investee 
companies 
On Fund level 
this is part of 
the due 
diligence 
budget which 
varies across 
projects; 
otherwise 
included in the 
investee 
company 
budget 
Output statement: knowledge and skills of direct stakeholders, incl. women, fostered 
• Request investee companies to engage with local 
stakeholder groups to identify the most urgent 
capacity gaps of women that can be addressed as 
Indicator: Number of community 
development programmes / 
Target: at least one community 
development programme of each 
3 years after 
investment of 
the Arbaro Fund 
Executing 
Agency and 
Depending on 
project and 
Page 109

=== PAGE 114 ===
Confidential 
Annex to GCF Funding Proposal: Gender assessment and action plan 
22 
part of the investments and potential barriers (e.g. 
literacy or language) 
• Support investee companies in implementing 
gender 
responsive 
community 
development 
programmes (e.g. direct trainings or scholarships) 
• Safeguard the equal participation of all relevant 
employees, including female ones, in suitable on-
the-job training opportunities  
investee company is implemented 
in gender-responsive manner 
Indicator: Number of attendees at 
on-the-job trainings in investee 
companies / Target: at least 15 % 
or where the overall share of 
attendees at on-the-job trainings 
in investee companies are female 
investee 
companies 
investee 
company 
Output statement: increased awareness of gender issues among direct stakeholders of the Arbaro Fund and the investee companies 
• Request investee companies to collect relevant 
gender-disaggregated data 
• Include gender statistics in the sustainability reports 
for investments 
• Distribute the collected information among relevant 
stakeholders in a suitable manner to highlight 
importance of gender mainstreaming 
All relevant Arbaro fund reporting 
and investee company reporting 
includes gender disaggregated 
data 
1 year after GCF 
investment in to 
the Arbaro Fund 
Executing 
Agency and 
investee 
companies 
This is part of 
the Executing 
Agency’s 
reporting 
budget and 
investee 
companies’ 
budgets 
 
 
Page 110
