=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: Microsoft Word - 0) B.24_02_Add.04_Funding_proposal_package_for_FP118.docm
author: hahn
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20040
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20040
creationDate: D:20191017171226+09'00'
modDate: D:20191018101613+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
12 – 14 November 2019 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 14 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
22 October 2019 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum IV 
Funding proposal package for FP118 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled “Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN)”; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
122 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
123 
Secretariat’s assessment 
125 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
138 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
147 
Gender documentation 
148

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN) 
Country/Region: Nepal 
Accredited Entity: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Date of Submission: 13 February 2019

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES

=== PAGE 5 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 117 
 
 
 
A 
A 
A.1. Brief Project/Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN) 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     
Nepal 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
Ministry of Finance 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
A.1.5.a.Access modality 
☐  Direct 
☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entities: 
Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE) 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
 
Beneficiaries: 
o 
Direct beneficiaries – At least 200,681 households with approx. 
963,268 people will directly benefit from the project. At least 
50% of beneficiaries will consist of women with proportional 
representation of indigenous peoples (31%), Dalits (13%) and 
other marginalized groups. 
o 
Indirect beneficiaries – In total 3,216,248 people will indirectly 
and directly benefit from the project. 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, 
million USD) 
☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  
☒  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐  Mitigation 
☐  Adaptation ☒  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
13 February 2019 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Daniel Gustafson, Deputy Director-General 
Organization 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Email address 
DDG-P@fao.org; FAO-GCF-Team@fao.org 
Telephone number 
+39 0657056320 
Mailing address 
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla00153 Rome, Italy 
 
 
 
A.1.11. Results areas(mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ 
Low emission transport 
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☒ 
Forestry and land use

=== PAGE 6 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 117 
 
 
 
A 
A 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
 
Increased resilience of: 
☐ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
☒ 
 
 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
1. 
The Churia hills are the southernmost range of the Himalayan foothills, running east-west through Nepal and into 
India. They provide vital ecosystem functions to the heavily-populated Terai plains downstream, including 
groundwater regulation, prevention of siltation, flood control, and livelihood services, including fuelwood, fodder and 
construction materials, among others. In addition, the Terai-Madhesh area of Nepal is responsible for the majority 
of the country´s agricultural production. 1 Together, the Terai and Churia are home to about 50% of Nepal’s 
population.2 
2. 
Climate change is already having a significant impact on the Churia’s ecosystems and inhabitants. These impacts 
are projected to intensify in the coming decades. Increasing temperatures and changing precipitation patterns are 
expected to undermine the viability of baseline (mostly agricultural) livelihoods, and significantly increase the 
frequency and intensity of hazards such as floods. Communities in the Churia region are extremely exposed to such 
climate-induced hazards due to the region’s geological features, while their livelihoods are very sensitive to changes 
in climatic conditions. This vulnerability has been exacerbated by decades of unsustainable natural resource 
management, including deforestation and forest degradation. Failure to address these challenges could have severe 
consequences for the Churia region, downstream communities (including in northern India), and broader food 
security in Nepal.  
3. 
The Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN) project aims to confront these challenges by enhancing 
the resilience of ecosystems and vulnerable communities in Nepal’s Churia region. It will promote widespread 
adoption of climate-resilient land use practices, confront the challenges of deforestation and forest degradation, 
better maintain the forest ecosystem in the Churia hills, and build resilience to climate-induced hazards. It will also 
build the capacities of governments, communities and other stakeholders to better understand and respond to 
climate risks and scale up much needed support after project closure. The project is conceived as a direct 
contribution to Nepal´s nationally determined contribution (NDC). It will intervene at three levels to catalyze change 
in the way land, forests and other natural resources are managed and set in motion a sectoral transformation from 
a climate-vulnerable to a climate-resilient, lower-emissions and sustainable development pathway for the Churia 
region: 
a) support integrated river system-level planning among sub-national government, community-based 
organizations (CBOs) and other partners, and strengthen their capacities to monitor natural resources and 
climate change impacts to inform future planning and investment decisions;  
b) support CBOs to directly adopt and invest in climate-resilient sustainable natural resource management 
approaches by providing the training, expert guidance and inputs, materials, tools and equipment needed to 
overcome barriers to adoption; and 
c) strengthen extension services and awareness to support sustained and widespread adoption of project-
promoted practices.  
                                                                 
1 PCTMCDB 2016 
2http://www.rccp.gov.np/

=== PAGE 7 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 117 
 
 
 
A 
A 
4. 
Post-project sustainability considerations have been embedded at all three levels to ensure beneficiaries continue 
managing natural resources in a climate resilient and sustainable manner, to enable key actors to scale up support 
(and thus benefit) additional beneficiaries, and continue driving the process of transformation. 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
N/A 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
N/A 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 01/01/2020 
End:  31/12/2026 
Project/programme lifespan 
7-year project implementation period 
20-year lifespan of project outcomes/benefit streams

=== PAGE 8 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 117 
 
 
B 
B 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
5. 
The BRCRN project requests USD 39.3 million in grant financing from the GCF. This is matched by USD 8.04 in 
co-financing from the Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE). This is a clear sign of the government’s 
commitment to the project. Additional funds from national entities could not be mobilized due to the constrained 
fiscal situation in Nepal. An overview of project costs is included in Table 1 below. A more detailed overview of 
project costs is included in Annex 3 – Integrated Financial Model. 
6. 
The BRCRN project is also expected to unlock considerable additional investment in climate-resilient and low-
emissions land use in the medium/long term. Investment by government and local communities beyond project 
closure will continue to drive the transition toward a climate-resilient and low-emissions development pathway for 
the Churia region. 
 
Table 1. Overview of financial information for the BRCRN project * 
Component 
Sub-Component 
Total cost (USD) 
Total cost (NPR) 
GCF total (USD) 
Co-financing 
total (USD) 
Component 1: Scaling 
up climate-resilient 
SNRM 
1.1: Climate-resilient 
land use practices 
are adopted 
10,518,897 
1,239,803,512 
9,659,402 
859,495 
1.2: Natural forest 
ecosystems are 
better maintained 
and protected 
4,287,608 
505,356,309 
4,287,608 
- 
1.3: Forests and tree 
cover are restored 
and maintained in 
the river system 
landscapes 
19,177,200 
2,260,309,202 
19,081,863 
95,337 
Component 2: 
Strengthening 
institutions and 
planning for climate-
resilient SNRM 
2.1: Planning for 
climate-resilient 
SNRM is enhanced 
2,087,222 
246,009,122 
2,087,222 
- 
2.2: CBOs are 
equipped to scale up 
climate-resilient 
SNRM 
1,226,525 
144,563,627 
954,825 
271,700 
Component 3: 
Improving 
knowledge, 
awareness and local 
capacity for climate-
resilient SNRM 
3.1:Local knowledge 
on climate-resilient 
SNRM is enhanced 
702,364 
82,783,717 
702,364 
- 
3.2: The extension 
system is equipped 
to promote climate-
resilient SNRM 
7,304,378 
860,926,130 
948,578 
6,355,800 
Project management costs (PMC) 
2,037,960 
240,202,903 
1,578,044 
459,916 
TOTAL 
47,342,154 
5,579,954,523 
39,299,905 
8,042,248 
* Project cost estimates in Nepalese Rupee (NPR) use the UN Operational Rate of Exchange as at 1 November2018, which was 
USD 1 = NPR 117.8644.  
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
47.34 
million USD 
($) 
 
(b) GCF 
financingto 
recipient 
 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
 
39.3 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
million USD 
($) 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
 
 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR

=== PAGE 9 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 117 
 
 
B 
B 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected 
to provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing 
and that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
39.3 
million USD 
($) 
 
(c) Co-financingto 
recipient 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Grant 
 
8.04 
 
million USD 
($) 
Ministry of 
Forests and 
Environment 
(MoFE) 
 
(  )  years 
 
(   ) %  
IRR 
 
 
(d) Financial terms 
between GCF and 
AE (if applicable) 
In addition to the project budget outlined above, an Accredited Entity fee is requested to enable FAO 
to perform supervision, oversight, reporting, closure and other roles expected of Accredited Entities. 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
Not applicable.

=== PAGE 10 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 117 
 
 
C 
C.1. Strategic Context 
SOCIAL, POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT 
7. 
Nepal is one of the world’s Least Developed Countries (LDCs). Despite recent economic progress, the country has a per 
capita income of only USD 766.3In addition, Nepal has experienced several shocks in the last three years that have had 
a substantial impact on its economy, including: the devastating 2015 earthquake; trade disputes that led to a fuel crisis 
shortly after the earthquake; and devastating floods in 2017 that affected over 1.1 million people.4 
8. 
Agriculture (including livestock) and forestry are key economic sectors and are responsible one third of the country´s GDP. 
These sectors employ over 70% of the population.5 The prevalence of the primary sector in the economy makes the 
country extremely dependent on natural resources, as well as stable and predictable climatic conditions.  
CLIMATE CHANGE CONTEXT 
Climate change: Risks and vulnerability 
9. 
Nepal is ranked as the world’s 4th most vulnerable country to anthropogenic climate change.6 The most profound impacts 
will be on the agriculture sector, water resources, public health and energy.7 
10. Historical analysis of climate data indicates that a large part of the Eastern Himalayan region is undergoing warming. 
Overall, the analysis indicates that the Eastern Himalayas are experiencing widespread warming of generally 0.01 to 
0.04°C per year. The highest rates of warming are generally in the winter.8Long-term trends for annual precipitation in 
Nepal (1970 – 2012) indicate a signiﬁcant increase of precipitation over the middle mountains and hills within the western 
region of Nepal, and over the high mountains within the central region. Monsoonal and annual precipitation feature 
signiﬁcantly decreasing trends over the whole central and eastern regions, except for the eastern middle-mountain and 
hills. On the other hand, winter precipitation demonstrates a decreasing trend over most of Nepal. 
11. Future projections for Nepal suggest a continued increase in mean annual temperature, shifting precipitation patterns – 
with many models suggesting that the monsoon season will become wetter and the dry season will become drier – as well 
as an increased likelihood of heavy precipitation events. While there is considerable uncertainty in climate models with 
respect to precipitation,9 it is likely that annual average precipitation in Nepal will increase in the future, albeit with 
differences in the regional and temporal distribution of this precipitation.10 
12. Among other impacts, the above-mentioned changes in climatic variables are expected to increase the frequency and 
intensity of climate-related hazards in many regions of Nepal. This is particularly true of the Churia Terai-Madhesh region. 
Climate change context of the Churia Terai-Madhesh region 
13. The Churia hills are located between the mid hill areas to the north and the plains in the south of Nepal (Terai), where the 
Churia hills perform critical ecological and socio-cultural functions both upstream and downstream (Error! Reference 
source not found.). With more than 50% of its territory under forests and riverine areas, the Churia hills render 
hydrological services such as regulating surface water flows and recharging groundwater. All major river systems in Nepal 
pass through the Churia hills before reaching the densely populated alluvial plains in the Terai and northern India. In 
addition, the Terai-Madhesh area of Nepal is known as the country´s ´rice basket´– responsible for the majority of the 
country´s agricultural production.11 Together, the Terai and Churia comprise about 25% of Nepal’s land area, but harbour 
close to 50% of its population.12 
                                                                 
3 MoF 2016 
4 United Nations office of the Resident Coordinator, 2017. 
5 MoF 2012 
6Maplecroft 2011 
7World Bank 2011; NAPA 2010 
8 ICIMOD 2009 Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerability in the Eastern Himalayas 
9Described in further detail within the Feasibility Study in Annex B.  
10 NCVST 2009 NCVST. 2009. Vulnerability Through the Eyes of Vulnerable: Climate Change Induced Uncertainties and Nepal’s 
Development Predicaments. Boulder, CO and Kathmandu, Nepal: Nepal Climate Vulnerability Study Team (NCVST), Institute for 
Social and Environmental Transition (ISET), Institute for Social and Environmental Transition-Nepal (ISET-N). Available at: 
http://lib.icimod.org/record/14405/files/7156.pdf 
11 PCTMCDB 2016 
12http://www.rccp.gov.np/

=== PAGE 11 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 117 
 
 
C 
14. Agriculture is the main form of employment in the region, with 62% of the economically active population involved in the 
sector.13 In addition, forests are an essential resource and safety net for communities, providing key ecosystem and 
cultural services, as well as diverse products including timber for construction, fuelwood, and other non-timber forest 
product (NTFPs).Thus, households in the Churia region are directly dependent on the health of Churia ecosystems to 
ensure their food, water and energy security. 
 
Figure 1: Location of the Churia hills along the Himalayas and within Nepal 
 
Source: Bharti et al. 2017; GoN 2014 
15. The Churia-Terai Madhesh region is already experiencing the impacts of climate change. These impacts are 
expected to increase in the coming decades. Although available data and models indicate that there is uncertainty 
regarding the severity of negative climate change impacts, the overall risks and associated trends are clear and warrant 
a concerted response. These are outlined in Section 2 of the Feasibility Study, and briefly summarized here below. 
a) Average annual temperatures have increased – driven in part by particularly notable increases in temperatures 
during winter months – over the past 40-60 years, with many models indicating annual increases of 0.02-0.05 oC 
over the past few decades (see for example ICIMOD 2009). Temperatures are expected to continue increasing in 
both summer and winter months in the coming decades, with some models predicting that average annual 
temperatures in Nepal could increase by 1.3-3.8oC by 2060, and 1.8-5.8oC by 2090 compared to a reference period 
of 1986-2005.14 In addition, the number of hot days and extremely hot days is expected to increase in the pre-
monsoon, monsoon, post-monsoon and winter seasons, with some models predicting about a 16% increase in the 
frequency of hot days by the 2060s (relative to the mean from 1970-1999). 
b) Average precipitation during the post-monsoon and winter seasons decreased between 1970 and 2012, further 
exacerbating the challenges that local farmers and communities must confront during the dry season.15Recent 
analysis of data from weather stations across Nepal observed decreasing post-monsoon precipitation at 92% of 
stations from 1981-2010, and decreasing winter precipitation at 68% of stations in this same period. These trends 
are expected to continue in the coming decades. Some models predict that (under both RCP 4.5 and 8.5) overall 
                                                                 
13ILO 2017 
14World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal, 2018. 
15 Karki et al. 2017.

=== PAGE 12 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 117 
 
 
C 
average winter precipitation could decline by around 10% for the period 2021-2050 relative to the period 1961-
1990.16 
c) The average number of consecutive dry days has increased across Nepal and in the Churia region over the past 40 
years, with a recent analysis finding that 80% of analyzed stations in Nepal (including in the region targeted by this 
project) exhibit a significant increase in consecutive dry days over the period 1970-2012.17The average number of 
dry days and consecutive dry days is projected to continue increasing in the coming decades.18 
d) Although the overall volume of precipitation during monsoon season has varied considerably over the preceding 
decades (both across regions and from year to year), models indicate that summer precipitation – particularly during 
the monsoon season, which runs from June until September – is expected to increase considerably in the future. 
Some models predict that monsoon precipitation could increase by around 14-15% (under RCPs 4.5 and 8.5 
respectively) for the period 2021-2050 relative to the period 1961-1990.19 Over the course of the entire summer 
season, precipitation could increase to an even greater degree – between 10-25% – over this same time period. 
e) Extreme precipitation events have become more common over the past 40 years, with some recent observations in 
the nearby Koshi river basin (from 1970-2010) suggesting increases in the number of heavy precipitation days at 
62% of weather stations, and increases in extremely heavy precipitation days at 64% of weather stations.20These 
trends are projected to continue in the coming decades, particularly during monsoon season. The number of very 
wet days is expected to steadily increase, while the number of moderate rainfall days and consecutive wet days is 
expected to decrease. In other words, increases in overall monsoon precipitation (as outlined in (d) above) will likely 
fall in less frequent but more intense precipitation events. 
16. These past and future changes in climatic conditions pose serious challenges for households and communities in the 
Churia-Terai Madhesh region, the broader Churia ecosystem, and (by extension) the food security, livelihoods and well-
being of downstream communities and other inhabitants of Nepal. These climate change impacts are briefly summarized 
here below and in Figure 2, and are explained in detail in Section 2 of the Feasibility Study. 
a) The dry winter season has become drier, exacerbating challenges associated with seasonal water stress. As 
temperatures continue increasing, and post-monsoon and winter precipitation continue to decline in the coming 
decades, communities in the Churia region may increasingly struggle to cope. 
b) Extended dry periods throughout the year will pose increasingly significant challenges for the Churia region. As the 
number of consecutive dry days continues to increase, rainfall becomes more sporadic, and the water that does fall 
(during intense precipitation events) increasingly exceeds the infiltration capacity of the landscape, poor agricultural 
communities will have to find new ways to cope with water deficit. Unsustainable natural resource management 
practices (further described below) are reinforcing this dynamic. 
c) The incidence of flooding events has increased considerably since the 1970s, albeit with significant inter-annual 
variation. Due in part to changing precipitation patterns, the frequency of floods is projected to further increase in 
the Churia region in the future, as are the severity, damages and costs per household of these flooding events. 
Unsustainable management of land and forest resources also contribute to this by: (i) further reducing infiltration 
capacity of the landscapes; and (ii) exacerbating erosion and sedimentation (described below), which contribute to 
riverbed rise, river channel change, and thus flash floods further downstream. 
d) Rates of soil erosion and sedimentation have steadily increased, driven in part by the combined effects of drying 
soils and increasingly extreme precipitation events – trends that are projected to intensify in the future. Churia 
landscapes are particularly vulnerable to this due to continued deforestation and forest degradation, as well as the 
widespread use of unsustainable land and forest management practices. The impacts on Churia livelihoods, 
communities and ecosystems are considerable, including: (i) the loss of top soil in upstream areas, which is reducing 
cultivable land; and (ii) sedimentation in downstream areas, which is contributing to river channel change, river bank 
cutting, flash floods and loss of fertile farm land. 
                                                                 
16 ICIMOD 2015. 
17 Karki et al. 2017. 
18 Rajbhandari at al. 2017. 
19 ICIMOD 2015. 
20 Shrestha et al. 2017.

=== PAGE 13 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 117 
 
 
C 
17. The Churia region and its inhabitants are particularly vulnerable to the above-mentioned climate change impacts. Key 
vulnerability factors are briefly summarized below, and elaborated in more detail in Section C.2 of the Funding Proposal, 
and in Feasibility Study Sections 3 & 4, and Appendices B and E. 
a) The geological features of the Churia region leave communities particularly exposed to climate-related hazards.The 
rivers/streams that originate from the Churia are ephemeral with surplus water flow during monsoon season, and 
little or no water flow during the rest of the year. In addition, the Churia consists of highly fractured sedimentary 
rocks with low groundwater retention potential. During the wet season, rainfall can quickly exceed the infiltration 
rate. Due to its sloping lands, the Churia is therefore more prone to flash floods, and retains little water to discharge 
during dry season. The Churia´s fragile slopes are also susceptible to erosion and landslides, particularly as extreme 
precipitation events become more common. 
b) Unsustainable natural resource management (NRM) has reduced adaptive capacity and reinforced vulnerability to 
climate change. Deforestation and forest degradation in upstream areas, as well as the use of inappropriate 
agricultural practices, have resulted in soil degradation, reduced vegetative cover, and further reduced water 
infiltration capacity of landscapes. This has contributed to accelerated erosion and sedimentation, resulting in 
riverbed rise downstream that increases the risk of flash flooding. It has also further exposed the Churia’s already 
steep and fragile slopes, increasing risk of erosion and landslides upstream.21 
c) Predominant livelihood strategies in the Churia region depend on stable climatic conditions and a healthy natural 
resource base, and thus are particularly sensitive to the above-mentioned climate change impacts. Many 
communities depend on (semi-)subsistence rain-fed agriculture, and often use agricultural practices that are not 
optimal for the local terrain – particularly under the anticipated changing climatic conditions – including cultivation 
on steep slopes. 
18. These climate change impacts pose significant challenges for Churia communities and ecosystems, but also have a 
significant impact on the management of forest resources in the project area. Deforestation and forest degradation in the 
Churia region are driven in part by poverty and other economic factors (see Section C.2, and Feasibility Study Appendix 
E). As communities and the predominant (agricultural) livelihoods on which they depend are undermined by climate 
change, expansionary pressures driving deforestation and forest degradation will increase – a feedback loop that will 
accelerate both vulnerability and GHG emissions. While Nepal accounts for only 0.027% of global greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions,22 more than two thirds of the country´s emissions come from agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU), 
with 52% from agriculture and 15% from land use change, especially deforestation and degradation. The country is 
committed to reducing these emissions and pursuing a more low-emissions development pathway – something that can 
only be done by addressing the aforementioned challenge.   
 
Figure 1. Overview of climate change projections and resulting primary and secondary impacts  
                                                                 
21 Ibid. 
22NDC Nepal

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 117 
 
 
C 
 
 
19. Figure 3 illustrates the complex and interlinked interactions between climate change and unsustainable NRM in the Churia 
Terai-Madhesh region. A landscape of four distinct physiographic zones is increasingly exposed to climate-related 
hazards, causing cascading and interlinked impacts from the hills to the downstream areas. The combination of recent 
and projected changes in climatic variables, coupled with unsustainable farming, land management and NRM that are 
exacerbating vulnerability, will significantly undermine the viability of predominant livelihood strategies in the region and 
result in widespread damages and losses, while also exacerbating existing vulnerabilities in the future and increasing 
emissions from the AFOLU sector. In other words, in an already-vulnerable region, climate risk and vulnerability 
are both increasing. This is expected to steadily undermine local livelihoods, which (in turn) is expected to further 
reinforce vulnerability in tandem with steadily increasing climate change impacts – a vicious cycle that must be 
broken. Failure to do so could have severe medium/long term consequences for the Churia region and its inhabitants, as 
well as for downstream communities and broader food security in Nepal. 
 
Figure 3. Climate change impacts and a vicious cycle of vulnerability in the Churia Terai-Madhesh region of Nepal 
Increasing temperatures
-
Temperature could increase by 4oC by the 
end of the century
Shifting Precipitation patterns
Higher level of uncertainty/ inconsistency than 
temperature predictions, but available 
evidence indicates: 
-
Reduced post-monsoon and winter 
precipitation.
-
Number of consecutive dry days 
increasing throughout the country.
-
Increased number of extreme 
precipitation events in monsoon season.
-
Monsoonal precipitation expected to 
increase.
Main Changes in Climatic Variables
Seasonal Water Stress
-
Undermines the viability 
of baseline livelihood 
strategies
Extended dry periods
-
Undermines the viability 
of baseline livelihood 
strategies
Increasing frequency and/or 
intensity of floods
-
Damages household and 
public assets, ecosystems 
and imposes economic 
losses
Primary Impacts
Increased Soil Erosion
-
Driven by combined effects of climate 
change (prolonged dry periods and 
intense precipitation events) coupled 
with human drivers (esp. deforestation 
and degradation) and unsustainable 
agricultural practices.
-
Soil erosion undermines the viability 
of baseline livelihood strategies:
o
Upstream: Top soil and nutrient 
loss.
o
Downstream: sedimentation, 
riverbank cutting (land loss), 
riverbed rise (increased 
vulnerability to floods).
Secondary Impacts
By undermining the viability of baseline livelihood strategies and farming models in the Churia, primary and secondary 
impacts will reinforce the expansionary pressures driving deforestation and forest degradation (creating a feedback 
loop that accelerates both vulnerability to climate change and emissions from deforestation and forest degradation).

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 117 
 
 
C 
 
 
 
POLICY AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT 
International and national commitments, policies and strategies 
20. The Government of Nepal is committed to responding to climate change. Nepal ratified the Kyoto Protocol (2002) and 
Paris Agreement (2016), and has submitted its 1st and 2nd National Communication Reports (2004 and 2014) and 
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the UNFCCC. Nepal´s NDC notes that given its status as a low-income 
economy and ongoing recovery from the devastating 2015 Earthquake, the country requires additional bilateral and 
multilateral grant support to meet its commitments for both climate change mitigation and adaptation.  
21. Nepal has initiated various national strategies, policies and plans to support climate change mitigation and adaptation, 
including the elaboration of its Climate Policy (2011) and the mainstreaming of climate change in sector strategies and 
development plans. Nepal´s Climate Change Policy (2011) aims to improve livelihoods by reducing climate change 
impacts, adopt a low-carbon economic development strategy and reduce greenhouse gas emissions through clean energy 
and sustainable natural resource management. These priorities are also highlighted in the Fourteenth Periodic Plan 
(2017), which recognizes the role of forests and agriculture in contributing to both climate change adaptation and mitigation 
efforts, and calls for the conservation, sustainable management and use of forests and watersheds. This is further 
supported by the development of the Country´s REDD+ Strategy, which aims to reduce emissions from deforestation and 
forest degradation within the country. Meanwhile, the National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) identifies a 
number of priority actions, including: i) sustainable land and forest management; ii) improved agricultural value chains; iii) 
restoration of degraded areas; iv) climate-related research, information and awareness generation; and v) disaster 
preparedness. Additional information on relevant policy commitments is included in Feasibility Study Section 3.2.

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 117 
 
 
C 
 
Strategies focusing on the Churia Terai Madhesh region of Nepal 
22. Recognizing the scale and extent of environmental degradation in the Churia Terai-Madhesh region in Nepal and its 
vulnerability to climate-related hazards, the Government of Nepal has enacted various policies, programs and strategies 
focusing on the Churia region. This includes the ´President’s Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation Development Board´ 
(PCTMCDB), which was enacted on July 17, 2014 to support integrated and coordinated efforts for conservation in the 
Churia region. The board supported the elaboration of the ‘President’s Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation and 
Management Master Plan’ (henceforth referred to as the ´Churia Master Plan´), which aims to provide strategic direction 
for conservation in the Churia. More specifically, it aims to support the integrated management of upstream and 
downstream land use activities, promoting an integrated landscape approach. The Churia Master Plan aims to support 
poverty reduction through conservation and sustainable management of the Churia region´s resources and improvement 
of ecosystem services. It also aims to mitigate climate change-related impacts and damages by  ensuring the sustainable 
management of natural resources favourable to their bio-geophysical status and distinct ecosystems. 
23. The PCTMCDB prepared the Churia Master Plan with an investment budget of NRs 13 billion (c. USD $122 million) per 
annum. From domestic resources, Nepal has secured approx. USD $16.5 million for the current financial year for the 
implementation of the Plan, which prioritized 64 (out of 164) river systems but can only work in 29 of them due to a budget 
crunch. The Churia Master Plan is led by MoFE, which is also the co-Executing Entity for the proposed GCF project. MoFE 
will benefit significantly from and contribute to securing national ownership of the project implementation.  
24. The proposed project takes an approach focused on the restoration of critical ecosystems, and further includes a climate 
change –informed digital extension platform that will benefit PCTMCD to mainstream climate change considerations in 
their targeted river systems at national scale. As a result, the project is expected to mainstream climate change 
considerations and climate-resilient Sustainable Natural Resources Management (SNRM) into the implementation of the 
Churia Master Plan, which would leverage additional resources to sustain and scale up the process of transforming natural 
resource management in the Churia region beyond project closure. The successful implementation of the project would 
also provide a framework for the Government of Nepal to secure additional external funds needed to bridge the financial 
gap towards the full implementation of the Churia Master Plan. 
Political transition and institutional restructuring 
25. While Nepal has been successful in mainstreaming climate change into national development strategies and sectoral 
plans, there is a need to strengthen institutional capacities and support climate change mainstreaming at the provincial 
and local level. Nepal is transitioning from a constitutional monarchy to a federal state, as mandated in the 2015 
Constitution. This process has shifted responsibility for natural resource management from the federal level to the local 
and provincial levels. As a result, provinces and local governments (municipalities) will become the relevant authorities to 
oversee forest and agricultural management,23 although their capacities to support climate-resilient land use planning and 
management are limited. This institutional transition offers a significant opportunity to equip these new custodians of the 
Churia region’s natural resources with the capacities, policies and plans needed to support the scaling up of climate 
resilient land use practices.  
26. Provincial governments have their own Ministries and technical departments and will be directly responsible for the 
majority of public investment and service provision in all land use sectors. While they are staffed by experienced 
technicians, mostly seconded from the federal Ministries, they are yet to develop coherent planning cycles and 
development strategies. This project will avail the opportunity to incorporate climate resilient SNRM into these cycles and 
strategies from the outset, serving as an example which can be replicated in other provinces and river systems throughout 
the country. 
27. The proposed project therefore benefits from a strong political commitment and the opportunity to shape the development 
trajectory of the new decentralized institutions. However, since Nepal is a Least Developed Country (LDC) with high rural 
poverty and relatively low potential to attract private investment for climate resilience, the proposed project focuses on 
locally-appropriate, low-cost and low-maintenance technical approaches that can be adopted/applied by local 
communities largely through existing resources, sustained by robust institutions and support services. 
28. Furthermore, Nepal is internationally recognized as a leader in Community-Based Natural Resource Management, with 
CBOs having long-term usufruct rights and decision-making over forests and other resources. The project will build on the 
                                                                 
23 LGOA 2017

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 117 
 
 
C 
experience of CBOs, the system of government extension services developed to support them, and the widespread 
political and social acceptance of decentralized management. 
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
29. The overarching objective of the proposed GCF project is to enhance the climate resilience of ecosystems and vulnerable 
communities in Nepal´s Churia region through integrated sustainable natural resource management (SNRM) approaches. 
30. Project activities will focus in the Central and Eastern Churia-Terai Region, where 26 vulnerable river systems (see Figure 
4)were identified through a multi-criteria risk analysis together with the vulnerability assessment conducted for the project 
(described in Feasibility Study Appendix D).24These river systems are located in Provinces 1, 2 and 3, and are comprised 
of 121 rural municipalities.  
31. Within these 26 vulnerable river systems there are over 3.2 million people, of which 51% are women and 77% are 
considered to have experienced inter-generational socio-economic exclusion. 25  Around 31% of inhabitants are of 
indigenous nationalities, and 13% Dalits. The project intends to work with 750 community-based organizations (CBOs), 
comprised of approximately 200,681 member households or 963,268 people. Women will make up at least 50% of 
beneficiaries. At least 31% of beneficiaries will be indigenous peoples and 13% Dalits. Beneficiary CBOs will be identified 
during the initial stages of implementing Sub-Component 2.1, further described in Section C.3 below. 
 
Figure 4: BRCRN project location in 26 vulnerable river systems in Central and Eastern Churia-Terai region 
                                                                 
24 A list of each river system and key characteristics can be found in the Feasibility Study in Annex B 
25Excluded groups are defined as “…those who have experienced inter-generational discrimination and have been systematically 
excluded due to economic [situation], caste, ethnicity, gender, disability, sexual orientation, and geographical reasons” (GESI Working 
Group 2017). This includes groups including women, poor people, Dalits, Adivasi/ Janajati, Madhesis, Muslims, people with disabilities, 
third-gender and people living in remote areas.25 Socially-excluded groups comprise over 77% of the project population (including 
Indigenous Peoples 31%, Terai-Madhesi 28%, Dalits 13% and Muslims 5%, among others; CBS 2014). Additional information on 
vulnerable groups and excluded groups can be found in the ESMF (Annex E).

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 117 
 
 
C 
 
 
BASELINE SCENARIO IN THE INTERVENTION AREA 
32. The 26 BRCRN river systems cover a combined area of 702,011 ha.26Within each of the river systems there are four 
distinct biophysical zones, with shared land use characteristics, land use changes and socio-economic activities:  
a) Churia Hills (33% of project area): Hilly terrain with steep slopes, typically located at higher altitudes where 13% of 
the land is cultivated, and 76% of the area is covered by forests. 
b) Bhavar (18% of project area): Transition zone between the Churia Hills and Terai consisting of 35% cultivated land 
and 49% forested land. It is a key zone for groundwater recharge, given its unique geological characteristics and soils. 
c) Dun Valleys (3% of project area): Valleys (also known as the inner-Terai) surrounded by the Churia Hills, often 
containing human settlements where 40% of the land is cultivated and 37% covered by forests. 
d) Terai (46% of project area): Fertile plains in the South of the country. Often called the ´rice basket´ of Nepal, where 
83% of the area is cultivated and only 3% is forest cover. Given low forest cover and quality in the Terai, many 
households in the Terai are dependent on Churia forests as distant users. 
33. Table 2 provides an overview of the land use characteristics and trends in each zone, as well as a description of how 
current land use practices influence vulnerability to the climate change impacts summarized in Figure 2.The ways in which 
climate change challenges (as described in Section C.1) are expected to affect each of these biophysical zones is 
summarized in Schematic 1 (further below). Additional information about baseline agricultural production systems, 
extension services, and land and forest management patterns is available in Feasibility Study Sections 3 & 4 and 
Appendices B & E. 
                                                                
26 Excluding water bodies and settlements

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 117 
 
 
C 
Table 2. Existing land use practices and their impact on climate change vulnerability 
 
Description of Land Use Trends 
Land Use Driving Vulnerability to Climate Change 
Churia Hills 
 
Households use fuelwood for household energy needs. 
Forests also provide fodder, forage, timber and NTFPs. 
 
Majority of terrain unsuitable for agriculture, however 
many households have subsistence farms within the 
hills. Agricultural production is characterized by rain-fed, 
low-yield fallow agriculture with different crops. Erosion 
and soil degradation pose major barriers. 
 
Subsistence from agriculture provides livelihoods only for 
6-8 months a year.  
 
Many households have small-livestock27 and/or buffalo 
raised in primarily low-yield free-grazing systems. 
 
Churia Hills play a vital function as a watershed for the 
downstream Terai plain - where inhabitants rely on 
delivered water resources for domestic and agricultural 
purposes (regulating water). 
 
75% of deforestation in BRCRN area occurs in the Churia 
Hills. Deforestation and degradation increase vulnerability to 
erosion 
and 
sedimentation 
that 
reduce 
agricultural 
productivity, and increase exposure to flooding and 
landslides. 
 
Unsuitable agricultural practices increase vulnerability to 
erosion through vegetation removal and soil degradation 
(e.g. agricultural practices on sloped hills, lack of soil and 
water conservation practices). 
Bhavar 
 
Terrain is primarily unsuitable for rain-fed agriculture due 
to the irregular supply of water. Many households have 
small-livestock and/or buffalos using primarily free-
grazing production systems.  
 
Majority of households use fuelwood for household 
energy needs. Forests also provide fodder, forage, 
timber and non-timber forest products. 
 
Deforestation and degradation contribute to increased 
sedimentation 
and 
erosion 
that 
reduce 
agricultural 
productivity. Such land use trends further increase the 
vulnerability of downstream communities to flooding through 
accelerated sedimentation and erosion.  
 
Reduced 
vegetation 
cover 
(from 
deforestation 
and 
inappropriate agricultural practices) limit ground water 
recharge, increasing the vulnerability of downstream 
communities to extreme heat and challenges related to 
water deficit.  
 
Gully erosion leads to significant loss of land. 
Dun Valley 
 
Most households use fuelwood for household energy 
needs. Forests also provide fodder, forage, timber and 
non-timber forest products. 
 
Among the most fertile and productive lands in Nepal with 
steady groundwater supply. Major production area for 
staple foods including paddy, cereals, pulses and 
oilseeds. Many households have small-livestock and/or 
buffalo 
raised in 
primarily 
low-yield 
free-grazing 
production systems. 
 
Deforestation within the Dun Valley, as well as in the Churia 
Hills, increases the vulnerability of local communities and 
ecosystems to extreme flooding events. 
 
Inappropriate agricultural practices do not apply soil or water 
conservation practices that leave areas vulnerable to 
flooding, extreme heat, water deficit, and soil erosion.  
 
Upstream deforestation and forest degradation, as well as 
the continued use of practices that fail to address issues 
related to soil degradation and water deficit exacerbate 
challenges associated with dry-season crop production. 
Terai 
 
Farmers in the Terai produce most of the country´s grains 
(wheat, maize, rice, among others) and other crops. The 
Terai is the sole region in agricultural surplus, and thus is 
the principal area of production relied upon to supply the 
less productive hill and mountain areas. 
 
More heavily populated than the other three zones. 
Population growth in the Terai puts increased pressure 
on natural resources. Many communities in the Terai are 
´distant forest users´, dependent on forest resources in 
Churia and Bhavar forests. While most households use 
cow dung for energy needs, forests are still an important 
source of fodder, forage, timber and NTFPs. 
 
Distant-forest 
users 
from 
the 
Terai 
contribute 
to 
deforestation and forest degradation upstream, with impacts 
described in the rows above.  
 
Inappropriate agricultural practices do not apply soil or water 
conservation practices that leave areas vulnerable to 
flooding, extreme heat, water deficit, and soil erosion.  
 
Combined factors from upstream deforestation and forest 
degradation, as well as use of practices that fail to address 
issues related to soil degradation and water deficit 
exacerbate challenges associated with dry-season crop 
production in the Terai. 
 
Upstream land management practices (described above) 
increase exposure to sedimentation in the Terai. 
 
                                                                 
27goats, rams, pigs

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 117 
 
 
C 
Schematic 1. Climate change impacts and their effects on land use in the four biophysical zones throughout the 
calendar year 
 
 
Forested Land 
34. Deforestation is a major cause of land use change that further accelerates vulnerability to climate change in upstream and 
downstream areas of the Churia Terai-Madhesh region. Deforestation and forest degradation not only lead to increasing 
GHG emissions, but also erosion and sedimentation that increase river bank rise downstream, increasing the risk of 
flooding for many communities. Sedimentation in the Bhavar region further limits groundwater recharge and impacts water 
security in the Terai. In addition, the removal of vegetation on sloped areas in the Churia and Bhavar regions can also 
increase the risk of landslides and severe erosion events.  
35. Deforestation in the project area has dramatically increased in recent years, increasing by 0.2% annually from 2000-
2010,and 1.9% annually  from 2010-2015. Nearly 75% of deforestation in the project area occurred in the Churia hills. 
The direct drivers of deforestation and forest degradation can be split into four categories:28 
e) Unsustainable extraction of forest products: This can include unsustainable (over-harvesting) or illegal logging, 
over-harvesting NTFPs, fuelwood collection and uncontrolled grazing.29 Cattle and goat grazing is common in the 
Churia hills, and uncontrolled grazing is problematic as it leads to the loss of shrubs and felling of small to medium 
sized trees for fodder, leading to increased soil erosion and reduced water filtration.  
f) 
Agricultural expansion and degradation: While the area of agricultural land has remained relatively stable over a 
15-year period, it is still considered a driver of deforestation and forest degradation. This is due to the use of fallow-
agriculture in the hills, combined with the use of inappropriate agricultural practices that contribute to soil loss and 
erosion, reducing soil fertility and requiring additional clearing. Livestock also contribute to degradation given the impact 
of free-grazing livestock, and the over-harvesting of fodder for livestock feed. 
g) Development or expansion of infrastructure: Several national roads and transmission line corridors are in various 
stages of development in the Churia region, sometimes without adequate planning.30 Beyond this, roads can further 
act as an indirect driver of deforestation by improving accessibility to other previously inaccessible areas.  
                                                                 
28 UN-REDD 2014 
29MoFSC 2014; UN-REDD 2014  
30Bhattarai et al. 2009; Government of Nepal/ FCPF 2017 
Jan.
Feb.
March
April
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Key changes in climatic variables and 
other CC impacts
Precipitation
Wet days
Temperature
Dry days
Key impacts in the four biophysical 
zones in each of the 26 river systems
Up-
stream
Down-
stream
Churia hills
Bhavar
Dun Valley
Terai
Overall, increasing temperatures are expected throughout the year, as are the number of hot days and extremely 
hot days.
Particularly large 
increases in winter 
temperatures.
Particularly large 
increases in winter 
temperatures.
Decrease in average precipitation in the post-
monsoon and winter season  observed (1970-
2012) and projected to continue.
Decrease in average precipitation in the 
winter season observed (1970-2012) 
and projected to continue.
The average number of consecutive dry days has increased over the past 40 years, while the average number of dry days and consecutive dry days is expected to further 
increase in the coming years.
The overall average volume of precipitation is expected 
to increase in the summer and monsoon season in the 
coming years.
The number of moderate rainfall days and consecutive wet days is expected to 
decrease over the coming years, while the number of very wet days is expected to 
steadily increase.
(a) Increased soil erosion and top soil loss in the hills, with significant 
downstream impacts (as outlined below).
(b) Increased risk of landslides in the hills.
Increased risk of water deficit due to 
intensifying seasonal (winter) water stress and 
extended dry periods.
Increased risk of water deficit due to 
intensifying seasonal (winter) water stress and 
extended dry periods.
Increased sedimentation and riverbank cutting 
(land loss), as well as increased risks of (and 
vulnerability to) flooding.
Increased risk of water deficit due to intensifying seasonal 
(winter) water stress and extended dry periods.
Increased risk of water deficit due to intensifying seasonal 
(winter) water stress and extended dry periods.
(a) Increased soil erosion and top soil loss, with significant downstream 
impacts (as outlined below).
(b) Increased gully erosion (land loss) and vulnerability to flooding.
Increased sedimentation, and riverbank cutting 
(land loss), as well as increased risks of (and 
vulnerability to) flooding.

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 117 
 
 
C 
h) Natural land use change and bio-physical conditions: The fourth identified direct driver of land use change is not 
anthropogenic but natural. However, it should be noted that unsustainable human activity can further exacerbate 
natural causes of forest degradation. Forest fires are a common occurrence in Churia due to dry weather and friction, 
however, human activity or carelessness can increase the likelihood of these events. As noted above, the Churia Terai-
Madhesh region of Nepal is increasingly experiencing extreme precipitation events,31 which exacerbate soil erosion 
and sedimentation in a region that is already highly fragile given its geological conditions.  
36. Key underlying drivers of deforestation are briefly described in the following Table: 
 
 
Table 3. Underlying drivers of deforestation and forest degradation 
Factors 
Description 
Economic/ 
financial 
- Poverty limits local peoples investments into improved land use practices 
- High demand for forest products (timber, fodder, fuelwood, NTFPs) 
- Lack of opportunities/ availability of substitute products or sustainable production systems 
Policy 
- Insufficient enforcement mechanisms 
- Weak land tenure 
- Lack of sufficient incentives and support for the adoption of sustainable practices 
Socio-political  - Low level of education in rural areas 
- Limited awareness of impacts and alternative measures 
- Inequality 
Demographic  
- Population growth 
Technological  - Poor awareness of improved practices and technologies 
- Low productivity of existing production systems 
 
ENVISAGED CLIMATE-RESILIENT DEVELOPMENT PATHWAY 
37. The baseline situation demonstrates the vulnerability of the Churia Terai-Madhesh region, and the need to support 
widespread adoption of climate-resilient land use practices. Given the complex interactions among the main biophysical 
zones within the project area, an ecosystem-based approach should be applied that promotes integrated management, 
considering upstream and downstream dynamics. 
38. Table 4 provides an overview of key practices that are needed within the project area to respond to the climate change 
impacts and challenges outlined in Section C.1.Specific project-promoted practices and structures – and their role in 
responding to the specific climate change challenges outlined in Section C.1 – are explained in greater detail in Feasibility 
Study Appendix A. Figure 5 (further below) illustrates how widespread adoption of these practices would shift the Churia 
region toward a more climate-resilient and sustainable development pathway. In addition, Attachment 2 of the Funding 
Proposal summarizes an overview of climate change impacts, baseline conditions and project-promoted measures 
disaggregated by biophysical zone. 
 
Table 4. Key climate-resilient practices and pathway in each biophysical zone 
 
Relevant Climate-Resilient Land Use Practices 
Role in responding to CC 
Churia Hills 
Climate-resilient agricultural practices: implementing practices that 
stabilize slopes (agroforestry, terracing, grass strips, alley crops etc.), 
improved livestock practices (stall-feeding, fodder banks) 
Intensification of agricultural land through integrated agroforestry-crop-
livestock systems in order to improve soil fertility and productivity while 
reducing pressure on forests 
Ecosystem restoration: gully stabilization in landslide susceptible areas, 
forest restoration and sustainable management, bio-engineering/ soil and 
water conservation infrastructure to stabilize river banks and reduce flows  
Reduced risk of erosion, reduced exposure to 
landslides. 
Reduced exposure to flooding, particularly in 
downstream areas. 
Reduced emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
Improved storage of soil carbon. 
Improved forest quality and quantity. 
                                                                 
31MoSTE 2015

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 117 
 
 
C 
Bhavar Region 
Climate-resilient agriculture practices to reduce erosion and improve soil 
moisture and overall soil fertility (tillage management, nutrient 
management, residue management, inter-cropping, alley crops), improved 
livestock practices to reduce degradation (stall-feeding, fodder banks) 
Ecosystem restoration: gully stabilization in landslide susceptible areas, 
green belt establishment along vulnerable river banks, forest restoration, 
sustainable forest management, bio-engineering/ soil and water 
conservation (conservation ponds, check-dams, contour bunds) 
Resilient forestry: commercial plantations, wood lots and horticulture 
plantations to sustainably produce fuelwood and other forest products, 
Improved resilience to extreme heat and water deficit 
challenges. 
River bank stabilization limits the impact of flooding. 
Reduced emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
Improved forest quality and quantity. 
Improved groundwater recharge due to reduced 
sedimentation/ erosion, improving resilience to water 
scarcity downstream.  
Dun Valley 
Climate-resilient agriculture practices to reduce erosion and improve soil 
moisture and overall soil fertility 
Ecosystem restoration: gully stabilization in landslide susceptible areas, 
green belt establishment along vulnerable river banks, forest restoration, 
sustainable forest management, bio-engineering/ soil and water 
conservation to reduce erosion, improve ecosystem stability and resilience 
Resilient forestry: commercial plantations, wood lots and horticulture 
plantations to sustainably produce fuelwood and other forest products, 
Improved resilience to extreme heat and water deficit 
challenges. 
River bank stabilization limits the impact of flooding. 
Reduced emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
Improved forest quality and quantity. 
Improved groundwater recharge due to reduced 
sedimentation/ erosion, improving resilience to water 
scarcity downstream. 
Terai 
Climate-resilient agriculture practices to reduce erosion and improve soil 
moisture and overall soil fertility (tillage management, nutrient 
management, residue management, inter-cropping, alley crops) 
Ecosystem restoration: gully stabilization in landslide susceptible areas, 
green belt establishment along vulnerable river banks, forest restoration, 
sustainable forest management, bio-engineering/ soil and water 
conservation (conservation ponds, check-dams, contour bunds, stone 
walls) 
Resilient forestry: commercial plantations, wood lots and horticulture 
plantations to sustainably produce fuelwood and other forest products, 
Improved resilience to extreme heat and water deficit 
challenges. 
River bank stabilization limits the impact of flooding. 
Planted forests are able to reduce the reliance on 
upstream forests. 
Improved groundwater recharge due to reduced 
sedimentation/ erosion, improving resilience to water 
scarcity downstream. 
 
 
Figure 5. Overview of envisaged climate-resilient land use in BRCRN biophysical zones

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 117 
 
 
C 
 
BARRIERS AND CHALLENGES 
39. Despite efforts by the Government of Nepal and the development community, a number of challenges and barriers 
continue to inhibit the transition toward a climate-resilient, sustainable and low-emissions development pathway in the 
Churia region. The following Table summarizes these barriers, as well as how the project will address them. 
 
Table 5. Overview of barriers and the project´s approach to address them 
Barriers/Challenges 
Approach to Address Barrier 
Poverty, inappropriate land management practices, the lack of alternative livelihood activities to implement SNRM 
 Up-front costs of investing in climate-resilient land use 
practices are too high for many CBOs and their members. 
In Nepal, 26.9% of the country´s population is affected by 
multidimensional poverty, equivalent to around 7.5 million 
people.
32
 Focusing 
on 
income-related 
poverty, 
approximately 15% of the population is considered to be 
living below the poverty line of $1.99 per day. 
 Insufficient 
government 
resources 
for 
large-scale 
investments in climate-resilient SNRM, large-scale 
restoration of ecosystems and DRR. 
 Weak government and private sector support on 
marketing and value adding opportunities for CBOs and 
producers.33 
 Provision of technical support and resources to cover up-front costs of 
adopting climate-resilient land use practices. Alignment with critical 
ecosystem restoration plans (CERP) will ensure farmer field schools are 
strategically established in the most vulnerable areas. Project support 
will enable climate-formed extension and advisory services that access 
men and women in vulnerable river systems. 
 Promoted activities are designed to further address sector specific 
barriers which can further limit incomes or limit the ability of CBOs and 
households to invest in such practices (e.g. poor quality planting material 
for forestry). Build off of best-practices and lessons learned. CBO 
members participating in FFS will continuously improve and consolidate 
their knowledge and skills. Promoted measures are economically viable 
(see Economic and Financial Analysis), and will encourage reinvestment 
in resilient land use practices from increased revenue streams.  
                                                                
32 UNDP 2016 
33Dhital 2017

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 117 
 
 
C 
 Close link between support with up-front measures and support with 
strengthening related sustainable value chains (including private sector 
engagement) to support alternative income opportunities. 
 Where possible the project builds on existing structures, and a clear exit 
strategy has been developed (c.f. Section D.2). 
Limited awareness of climate change and climate-resilient land use practices 
 While poverty is a barrier, many CBOs also have limited 
awareness of future climate change threats and climate-
resilient land use approaches.  
 Weak extension services limit awareness (due to limited 
budgets that limit the reach of services and input support, 
lack of youth engagement, inadequate use of ICT, 
outdated curricula [including limited information on 
climate-change and value chains/ marketing], low-
education level of participants, limited capacities of 
trainers, poor cooperation with private sector, among 
others). 34  Climate-change has not been sufficiently 
mainstreamed into extension services/ trainings. 
 Women and marginalized groups experience additional 
barriers to access trainings due to various factors 
(economic, socio-cultural, geographic, among others). 
 Limited awareness leads to the lack of consideration of 
climate change in land use planning at CBO, rural 
municipality and provincial-government level.  
 Project activities will strengthen climate-informed extension and advisory 
services (improved reach of services, improved materials and 
approaches, training trainers, improved knowledge management and 
use of climate information in planning and land use management). 
 Emphasis on trainings to build capacities of CBOs and local and 
provincial government officials. 
 Activities include measures to promote knowledge to support innovation, 
including compiling guidance on effective local indigenous practices for 
climate change adaptation and best practices and lessons learned to 
support scaling-up. 
 Measures include sub-activities to engage youth on climate change and 
climate-resilient land use, increasing their awareness of climate risks 
and interlinked dynamics, risk-reduction strategies, and key knowledge 
and information hubs.  
 Support the development of strategies and critical ecosystem restoration 
plans that are climate-informed and promote suitable climate-resilient 
land use to raise awareness and promote scaling up. The creation of a 
framework to identify ecosystems and communities that are vulnerable 
to climate change, especially climate-related hazards, combined with 
strengthening government capacities to operationalize this framework 
and conduct a vulnerability assessment will enable them to consider 
climate-related information in planning and decision-making. This is 
particularly relevant given the political context in Nepal and the 
devolution of decision making power to the local and provincial levels.  
 Emphasis on improving knowledge, educational materials and 
knowledge dissemination pathways to engage diverse stakeholders. 
 GESI approaches mainstreamed. 
 Participatory land use planning at the local level to raise awareness of 
climate change within local CBOs, and implement suitable land use 
practices to enhance ecosystem and community resilience. 
Weak inter-sectoral horizontal and vertical coordination 
 Weak inter-sectoral coordination inhibits the use of 
integrated ecosystem-based approaches.35 
 Horizontal coordination: Often programs do not fully build 
upon synergies and have a sectoral focus. 
 Uncoordinated investments in river system management 
lead to inefficient and ineffective support for ecosystem 
resilience. 
 Improved coordination is needed at the local and 
provincial level given the political transition. 
 
Project management structures are designed to promote regular 
communication and improved coordination among key stakeholders. 
Multi-stakeholder engagement promoted throughout the project. 
 
Elaboration of Provincial and river-system level strategies and action 
plans to promote integrated and climate-informed planning and 
decision making, considering upstream and downstream interactions, 
to improve coordination of investments that will benefit multiple 
sectors and promote low-carbon and climate resilient development. 
Based on the demonstration of this process, it can be replicated in 
other regions of the country (due to strengthened capacities, 
supporting materials, improved knowledge management and 
institutional trainings), with notable benefits to invest in maintaining 
such processes (e.g. reduced disasters, strengthened livelihoods and 
ecosystem services).DRR strategies at the provincial level will 
provide a framework to orient local governments, and improve 
coordination and planning. 
Weak institutions and limited capacities to plan, implement and monitor measures for climate-resilient land use and SNRM 
                                                                 
34Dhital 2017 
35 MoFSC 2015

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 117 
 
 
C 
 Limited capacities on climate change and climate-resilient 
land use limits coordination and action on climate change, 
especially at the local and provincial level.  
 Weak integration of climate change considerations into 
local CBO-level land use planning and management 
plans. This is due to limited awareness (described above) 
as well as weak institutional capacities. 
 Nepal´s ongoing political transition is an opportunity to strengthen local 
and provincial capacities from an early stage. The project places an 
emphasis of engaging local and provincial actors throughout project 
implementation, building capacities and guiding planning to promote 
climate-informed planning and decision making, and support the 
implementation of climate-resilient land use and SNRM based on best 
practices, and aligned with critical ecosystem restoration plans. 
 Strengthen land use planning by balancing integrated spatial planning 
with participatory land use planning, accompanied by capacity building 
for local and provincial governments and CBOs. 
Limited capacity to monitor assess and address climate-induced disasters 
 Limited technical capacity within provincial and local 
institutions to monitor and assess the impacts of climate 
change 
and 
climate-induced 
disasters. 
This 
is 
exacerbated by the absence of systematic approaches to 
assemble and manage climate data. This results in limited 
generation of early warnings for climate-induced disasters 
and implementation of few proactive measures for DRR.  
 The lack of a comprehensive and effective mechanism for 
sharing knowledge and information, including information 
on monitoring of climate risks, limits the use of climate 
information in decision making and planning. 
 
 
 
 
Land use planning processes will be strengthened and applied by 
balancing integrated spatial planning with participatory land use 
planning, accompanied by capacity building for local and provincial 
governments and CBOs. This will enable provincial governments to 
understand climate risks, and implement a holistic approach for 
disaster risk-reduction, as well as low-carbon and climate-resilient 
land use. Such an approach will demonstrate a new framework for 
low GHG and climate-resilient planning in Nepal, which will be 
replicable in other river systems in the country.  
 
Establishment of Churia Knowledge Centre (CKC) to facilitate 
improved knowledge management, dissemination and monitoring. 
Investments in improved technology and tools for monitoring and 
knowledge sharing will be promoted, along with trainings for CSOs 
and local and provincial government staff. CKC will be embedded in 
existing institutions (within MoITFE Offices) to ensure its long-term 
sustainability, and continued knowledge management, retention and 
learning after project close. 
 
Manuals, protocols and guidelines will be developed to guide 
provincial staff on CKC knowledge generation, gathering and 
management, including after project completion.  
 
Project activities on knowledge sharing, generation of information and 
capacity building will help increase the generation and use of climate-
related data and information in decision making and land use 
planning, and will strengthen the capacities of government officials at 
the local and provincial level, as well as CBOs, CSOs and other key 
stakeholders to understand and plan for climate change risks. 
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
40. Through the ‘Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal’ (BRCRN) project (“Project”), GCF grant financing and co-
financing provided by MoFE will strengthen the resilience of local communities and ecosystems to adapt to climate change, 
and reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. The Project will address the specific barriers inhibiting 
Churia communities, government entities and other stakeholders from transitioning to a more climate-resilient, sustainable 
and low-emissions development pathway, and will equip them to continue pursuing this pathway after project closure. 
This is summarized in the Theory of Change included in Attachment 1 of this Funding Proposal. 
41. The Project will focus on the Churia Terai-Madhesh region of Nepal, in particular 26 of the most vulnerable river systems 
within Provinces 1, 2 and 3, where over 3.2 million people live. The main beneficiaries will include representatives of 
provincial and local (i.e. rural municipalities) governments, as well as at least 750 CBO Beneficiaries (comprised of 
approximately 200,681 households, 963,268 people).  
42. Activity interventions will be targeted for different biophysical zones and contexts, with a focus on the Churia, Bhavar and 
upstream36 Terai areas.  
43. Beneficiary targeting and selection is briefly summarized in Table 1 below. 
 
                                                                 
36 Considered as areas north of the East-West highway.

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 117 
 
 
C 
Table 6. Selection of geographic locations, sites and beneficiaries 
Level 
Type 
Criteria / process 
Stage / timing 
Geographic 
locations 
Provinces 
Among the 7 Provinces in Nepal, Provinces 1, 2 and 3 were selected during the 
project design stage as the overall geographic focus for this project. The 
selection of these three Provinces was based on the assessment of Collective 
Vulnerability in the Eastern Himalayas (ICIMOD, 2009), i.e., vulnerability 
integrated across different components of mountain ecosystems and 
dimensions and relative vulnerability of biodiversity, water, ecosystems, and 
human wellbeing to climate change impacts. 
Completed 
during 
project design. 
River systems 
Due to the inter-connected (upstream and downstream) nature of  climate 
change challenges and unsustainable natural resource management 
challenges in the Churia region, and the associated focus on integrated climate-
resilient SNRM within this project, river systems within Provinces 1, 2 and 3 
were selected as the most appropriate geographic unit to guide project planning 
and interventions. In total, 26 river systems within Provinces 1, 2, and 3 (the 
“Project Area”) were selected and prioritized for interventions and support 
under this Project. These river systems were selected based on the results of 
a multi-criteria analysis, which included an analysis of the river systems’ 
exposure to climate change impacts and their particular vulnerabilities, as well 
as the extent of natural resource (including forest) degradation. The 
methodology used to select these river systems is described in more detail in 
Annex 2: Feasibility Study –Appendix D. 
Completed during 
project design. The 
selected river 
systems are: 
Kokaha; Gideri 
Khola; Patnali Khola; 
Thakur Khola; Sun 
Koshi; Chadaha 
Khola; Kamala-North; 
Tawa-North; Tawa-
South; Kankai Nadi; 
Ratuwa Nadi; 
Adherei Khola, 
Baruwa Khola, Duar 
Khola; Lakhandehi 
Khola; Kamala-
South; Biring Khola; 
Balan Khola; 
Charnath; Bataha 
Khola; Budhi Khola; 
Lohandra Nadi; 
Kamala, Belsot, 
Jogiya; Ratu Nadi; 
Mechi Khola; 
Bakraha Khola; Bihul 
Nadi; and Khado 
Khola. 
Sites 
Sites for 
Farmer Field 
Schools 
(“FFS”) 
Specific sites for FFS within each of the 26 river systems (which collectively 
comprise the Project Area) will be determined in part through the Critical 
Ecosystem Restoration Plans (CERPs) developed under Activity 2.1.2.These 
CERPs will identify (inter alia) ecosystem restoration priorities, as well as 
specific priority farming systems and practices to be promoted in each of the 26 
river systems through FFS. The CERPs will also specify the number of FFS (of 
the 120 total) that the Project will establish in each river system, with a minimum 
of 3FFS established in each river system. 
Once the scope, focus and number of FFS to be established in each river 
system are defined in the CERPs, FAO, as the Executing Entity, will recruit a 
service provider, in accordance with its procurement policy and procedure, to 
identify specific sites and establish FFS within each river system. After 
consultation with MoFE, MoITFE, MoACLM and respective municipalities, FAO 
will approve the final selection of sites for FFS based on the following criteria: 
 
Suitability of each site’s agro-ecological conditions to train Farmer 
Beneficiaries, 
Local 
Resources 
Persons 
and 
Professional 
Beneficiaries on the farming systems and practices prioritized in the 
relevant CERPs (note: this qualitative assessment will be made by 
FAO technical experts);  
CERPs 
will 
be 
developed in each of 
the 26 river systems 
in 
Project 
Year 
(“PY”)2. 
Selection of sites and 
establishment of FFS 
will be completed by 
the end of PY3.

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 117 
 
 
C 
 
Proximity of each site to the relevant Community-Based Organizations 
(CBOs) and CBO-member households to be trained at the FFS sites 
(note: this qualitative assessment will be made by FAO experts); and  
 
The farmer/landowner must consent to the use of their land as an FFS 
site for at least PY3-7. 
Sites for 
check dams, 
gully 
stabilisation 
measures and 
other local 
infrastructure 
Specific sites for check dams, stabilisation measures and other local 
infrastructure within each of the 26 river systems (which collectively comprise 
the Project Area) will be determined in part through the CERPs developed 
under Activity 2.1.2. These plans will identify priority locations (based on extent 
of resource degradation and climate change-related risk) and types of 
structures to be built in each river system, with a minimum of 3 upstream (total 
86) and 4 downstream (total 129) structures built in each river system. 
Once the priority locations and types of structures to be built in each river 
system are identified in the CERPs, MoFE will recruit civil engineers to work 
with MoITFE, Koshi River basin conservation office, respective municipalities, 
relevant CBOs and other actors in each river system to identify specific sites 
for each structure. After consultation with FAO and the project-recruited civil 
engineers, MoFE will approve the final selection of sites based on the following 
criteria: 
 
Suitability of each structure and its selected site to maximize resilience 
benefits in response to the climate change impacts/challenges 
identified in the CERP (note: this qualitative assessment will be made 
by MoFE experts and FAO experts); and 
 
The owner(s) of the selected sites (whether privately owned, 
community owned or government owned) consent to the use of the 
land for the proposed structure(s). 
CERPs 
will 
be 
developed in each of 
the 26 river systems 
in PY2. 
Selection of sites will 
be made each year 
between PY3-6 as 
new structures are 
built every year. 
Sites for tree 
nurseries 
The Project will support the establishment of a network of decentralized small-
scale tree nurseries which offer ready access to new tree seedlings at a low 
cost for all beneficiaries. A total of 52 nurseries will be established in the project 
area (2 in each of the 26 targeted river systems), each with capacity to produce 
50,000 tree seedlings per annum.  
Sites for nurseries will be recommended by MoITFE to MoFE. The Host 
Country, acting through MoFE, will approve the final sites for nurseries based 
on the following criteria: 
 
Nurseries must: have access to reliable water supply; availability of 
good soils; protection from strong wind, livestock and shade from 
direct sunlight; be established on a gentle slope for water drainage; 
and have adjacent areas available for expansion if necessary (note: 
these qualitative assessments will be made by MoFE and FAO 
experts); and  
 
Proximity to CBO Beneficiaries and plantation areas identified in 
CERPs, and to roads or other transport networks (note: these 
qualitative assessments will be made by MoFE experts and FAO 
experts). 
Nurseries will preferably be hosted by CFUGs or other CBOs, where there is 
presence of individuals trained and/or experienced in nursery management, 
availability of, and willingness to allocate, necessary space and labour. The 
CBOs must be assessed as possessing the potential capacity to sustain the 
nursery as a viable enterprise beyond the duration of the project. The 
establishment of the nurseries will be subject to a consultation process 
according to the principles of FPIC, and in river basins where no suitable CBOs 
can host, the premises of the Divisional Forest Office (DFO) under MoITFE will 
be proposed. 
 
CERPs 
will 
be 
developed in each of 
the 26 river systems 
in PY2. 
Specific 
sites 
for 
nurseries 
will 
be 
determined each year 
as new nurseries are 
established in PY3-5.

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 117 
 
 
C 
Sites for 
forest/tree 
planting 
Specific sites for tree planting within each of the 26 river systems (which 
collectively comprise the Project Area) will be determined in part through the 
CERPs developed under Activity 2.1.2. These plans will identify priority 
locations (based on extent of resource degradation), the number of locations 
and the types of tree species to be planted at each location in each river system, 
with a minimum of 100 ha planted in each river system. 
Plantation activities will consist of the following approaches, with different site 
selection processes:  
 
Demonstration plantations: The Project will provide the materials 
necessary to establish 1,300 ha of demonstration plantations of native 
species suitable for timber production, including teak, at strategic 
locations within the Bhavar and Terai zones of the 26 target river 
systems. Selected sites will be on government-managed land with no 
tenure conflict that is suitable for plantation, while also being identified 
(in the CERPs) as having high potential to address ecosystem 
vulnerability through afforestation.  Additional criteria to be taken into 
consideration include: proximity to beneficiary CBOs and to roads or 
other transport networks; availability of land of at least 10 ha, and 
maximum 100 ha, within each target river system. Site suitability will 
be assessed by MoITFE and FAO experts.  Sites will be proposed by 
MoITFE, and validated by MoFE and FAO experts, and according to 
the principles of FPIC. 
 
Public land forests on river banks: The Project will support the 
establishment of 1,000 ha of riparian plantations in the project area, 
each of which will be formally registered under the public land forest 
users’ agreement process.  Site selection will be based in part on the 
analysis and consultations during the CERP process. At least 25 ha 
of riparian plantations will be established in each river system, taking 
into account proximity to agricultural land vulnerable to flooding and/or 
siltation, proximity to landholdings of beneficiary CBOs, and clarity of 
tenure. Site suitability (in accordance with the above criteria) will be 
assessed by local Municipalities, MoITFE and FAO experts.  Sites will 
be proposed by MoITFE and validated by MoFE and FAO experts, 
according to the principles of FPIC. 
 
Public land forests on community land: The Project will support the 
establishment of 5,000 ha of forest plantations in the project area 
through participation of highly vulnerable and marginalized 
households to plant multipurpose trees in open community land, 
identified in CERPs developed under Activity 2.1.2. At least 50 ha will 
be established in each river system. Site selection will be based on 
the availability of land in Churia and Bhavar areas, with no tenure-
related conflict, with priority assigned to locations with higher 
proportions of marginalised and poor households. Site suitability (in 
accordance with the above criteria) will be assessed by local 
Municipalities, MoITFE and FAO experts.  Sites will be proposed by 
MoITFE and validated by MoFE and FAO experts, according to the 
principles of FPIC. 
 
Establish woodlots in downstream areas: The Project will support 
establishment of 16,500 ha of tree plantation on privately-owned land 
in the project area. Sites will be focused on downstream areas of the 
26 river systems, distant from CF, LF and CFM areas. Potential areas 
for such woodlots will be identified in CERPs. Within these areas, the 
identification of specific sites will:(i) focus on households with clarity of 
tenure and no prevailing ownership disputes; (ii) prioritize lower-
income households (specific thresholds due to be determined during 
inception, based on baseline survey) to maximize sustainable 
development benefits and ensure project does not crowd out private 
investment; (iii) provide maximum 1 ha plantation support per 
household; and (iv) ensure at least 100 households are supported in 
each river system. Sites will be proposed by MoITFE after consultation 
CERPs 
will 
be 
developed in each of 
the 26 river systems 
in PY2. 
Specific 
sites 
for 
forest/tree 
planting 
will be determined as 
the relevant Activities 
are implemented in 
PY3-7.

=== PAGE 29 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 117 
 
 
C 
with local municipalities and Private Forest Owners Associations, 
validated by MoFE and FAO experts, and finalised through dialogue 
with private land owners, according to the principles of FPIC. 
 
Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR):The project will support 
tools/equipment and logistical costs for extension support in 
implementing ANR measures on 15,990 ha of community-managed 
forest land. Preliminary areas for ANR sites will be identified through 
the CERP process. Within these areas, the identification of specific 
sites will focus on forest areas of any management category (CF, LF, 
CFM), with priority assigned to areas that: were degraded or 
deforested within the past 20 years; were not converted to agricultural 
use; and are in close proximity to upstream sites of high vulnerability 
to flooding and landslides.  Sites will be proposed by MoITFE, 
validated by MoFE and FAO experts, and confirmed through a 
dialogue with CBOs in accordance with the principles of FPIC. 
 
Beneficiaries 
Community-
Based 
Organizations 
(“CBO 
Beneficiaries”) 
Approximately 750 CBO Beneficiaries will be identified and selected by MoFE 
(after consulting with MoITFE) under Sub-Component 2.2. This includes all 557 
Community Forest User Groups (CFUGs) and 3 Collaborative Forest 
Management (CoFM) that fall within the Churia and Bhabar zones (upstream 
areas) of the 26 river systems (the Project Area), out of total 1531 CFUGs and 
11 CoFMs that are in Project Area. It also includes all 40 Leasehold Forest 
Groups (LFGs) in the Project Area.  It also includes at least 1 Indigenous 
Peoples’ Organisation (IPO) in each of the three provinces; a comprehensive 
list of IPOs will be developed in consultation with the Nepal Federation of 
Indigenous Nationalities (NEFIN). The remaining CBO Beneficiaries out of the 
750 will be Farmers Groups (FGs), Soil Conservation Users Groups (SCUGs) 
and Public Land Forest Users Groups (PLFUGs). The total number of FGs and 
SCUGs is not certain, because they are not formally registered, but estimated 
to be at least 50 in the total Project Area.  The total number will be determined 
during the development of the CERPs, and will focus on those which are 
located in the upstream areas of the 26 river basins. PLFUGs are not yet 
formalised, and Activity 2.2.1 will facilitate the formation and registration of at 
least 100 PLFUGs, based on the identification of sites for public land plantations 
(according to CERPs and site selection process described above) which will 
thus become part of the 750 CBO Beneficiaries of the Project. 
All 750 CBO Beneficiaries will benefit from activities under Component 1 of the 
Project.  The degree to which each CBO benefits will be based on the initiatives 
and priorities determined through the CERPs. CBO Beneficiaries based in or 
near more vulnerable and degraded landscapes may be involved in multiple 
activities. When identifying sites for field-level interventions under Component 
1, the CERPs will also identify the relevant CBO Beneficiaries to be involved in 
such activities based on their proximity to the selected areas and relevance of 
their livelihood strategies to the planned activities in the relevant area. 
All CFUGs, CoFMs and LFGs will benefit from technical support to improve 
existing forest management operational plans and improve sustainable forest 
management (SFM) practices under Sub-Component1.2. 
Approximately 250 CBO Beneficiaries (out of the total 750) will receive in-depth 
support to revise and adjust CBO management plans under Activity 2.2.2. The 
CBO Beneficiaries to be selected for this support will be those that are identified 
as being most vulnerable based on the analysis done for CERP planning (under 
Activity 2.1.2), and will also include the three (3) CoFM groups. A list of 
prioritized CBOs will be prepared by FAO experts. Final selection will be made 
by the Host Country, acting through MoFE, after consultation with MoITFE.  
Local Resource Persons (LRPs) will be identified from among the members of 
these CBOs. 
CERPs 
will 
be 
developed in each of 
the 26 river systems 
in PY2. 
Formalisation 
of 
PLFUGs 
will 
take 
place in PY1. 
Support 
for 
forest 
management 
plans 
and improvement of 
SFM practice will take 
place from PY3-7. 
Support 
for 
mainstreaming 
climate resilience into 
SNRM plans will take 
place in PY3-7.

=== PAGE 30 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 117 
 
 
C 
Professional 
Beneficiaries 
Professional staff (from MoFE, MoITFE, MoACLM and other ministries) who will 
benefit from training and capacity building support under this Project (i.e. under 
Activities 1.1.1, 1.3.3, 2.1.1, 2.1.3, 3.2.1, 3.2.2 and 3.2.3) will be selected by 
the Executing Entities according to the following criteria (“Professional 
Beneficiaries”): 
 
Organizations have been and/or will be identified based on alignment 
between the proposed activities and the organizations’ mandates, 
expertise and/or services delivered (note that these determinations have 
been/will be made by MoFE, in consultation with MoITFE and MoACLM); 
 
Identified organizations will be invited to nominate staff to participate in the 
activities based on the alignment between the contents of the proposed 
activity (e.g. technical focus of the training) and the respective individuals’ 
responsibilities and expertise within their organization; and  
 
MoFE and FAO will review the lists of nominated participants, and either 
confirm or reject their nomination, in consultation with MoITFE, based on 
an assessment of the alignment between the activity and the participants’ 
responsibilities and expertise. 
This 
will 
be 
conducted during the 
early 
stages 
of 
executing each of the 
relevant Activities. 
Farmer 
Beneficiaries 
(Activity 1.1.2) 
CERPs will identify critically vulnerable locations within the 26 river systems, 
and the communities most directly at risk from reduced agricultural productivity 
or loss of productive land. The technical advisory team of MoFE and FAO 
experts will identify the appropriate climate-resilient farming practices (CRFPs) 
for these vulnerable areas.   
The introduction of CRFPs to these areas will be achieved through a total of 
260 training events in the Project Area (approx. 10 per river system), provided 
through the FFSs established under Activity 1.1.1. Each CBO active in these 
areas will be asked to propose training participants (“Farmer Beneficiaries”) 
based on the following criteria. Final selection will be made by the Executing 
Entities: 
 
Relevance of the individuals’ current livelihood strategies and farming 
practices to the project-promoted practices; 
 
The individuals’ access to land on which to apply the CRFPs; and 
 
The individuals’ ability to train additional households within their community 
on the project-promoted CRFPs. 
For each training event, the pool of nominated participants will include at least 
30% women, and at least one nominee per training will be a committee member 
from a relevant CBO. 
MoITFE and MoACLM extension agents (in PY3-4) and LRPs (in PY5-7) will 
review nominees for each training to confirm their nominations are consistent 
with the aforementioned selection criteria. MoFE and FAO will approve final 
selection of Farmer Beneficiaries based on MoITFE and MoACLM reviews. 
This 
selection 
process 
will 
be 
applied 
as 
the 
trainings 
are 
gradually 
delivered 
from PY3-7. 
Agro-forestry 
and Livestock 
Beneficiaries 
(Activity 1.1.3) 
 
CERPs will identify: (i) locations within 26 river systems where slope 
stabilisation and degradation of agricultural and forest land are critical; (ii) the 
communities and associated CBOs most directly affected by these issues; and 
(iii) the agroforestry and livestock management practices appropriate for 
addressing them. 
Each CBO active in these areas will be asked to propose training participants 
(“Agro-Forestry and Livestock Beneficiaries”) based on the following criteria. 
Final selection will be made by the Executing Entities: 
 
Relevance of the individuals’ current livelihood strategies and practices to 
the project-promoted practices; 
 
The individuals’ access to land on which to apply the CRFPs; and 
 
The individuals’ ability to train additional households within their community 
on the project-promoted CRFPs. 
Agroforestry 
and 
Livestock 
activities 
will be implemented 
from PY 3-7

=== PAGE 31 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 117 
 
 
C 
For the establishment of household-level fodder tree and grass nurseries, for 
on-farm agroforestry plantation, and for training and establishment of stall-
feeding practices, female participants will be prioritised to reflect the 
disproportionate amount of time that women spend on fodder collection 
compared to men. MoITFE and MoACLM extension agents (in PY3-4) and 
LRPs (in PY5-7) will review nominees for each training to confirm their 
nominations are consistent with the aforementioned selection criteria. MoFE 
and FAO will approve final selection of Agro-forestry and Livestock 
Beneficiaries based on MoITFE and MoACLM reviews. 
For the establishment of biogas plants, relevant CBO Beneficiaries will 
nominate households within their communities (among the Agro-forestry and 
Livestock Beneficiaries) to receive biogas-related assistance (“Agro-forestry 
and Livestock + Biogas Beneficiaries”). The Agro-forestry and Livestock + 
Biogas Beneficiary households will be selected by the Executing Entities, based 
on the following criteria: 
 
They own at least two livestock units (i.e. oxen, cattle, buffalo) that can be 
used to produce manure to feed the biogas digesters;  
 
They have sufficient income to cover the operations and maintenance 
costs of the biogas digesters during and after the project period (note: this 
assessment will be made by FAO and MoFE experts);  
 
Higher dependence on fuelwood from forest areas; and  
 
Current lack of access to alternative forms of energy or electricity. 
Nominated beneficiary households will be proposed by targeted CBO 
Beneficiaries, in consultation with MoITFE and MoACLM, and confirmed by 
MoFE and FAO experts in accordance with the above criteria and the principles 
of FPIC. 
 
Forest 
Training 
Beneficiaries 
The Project will deliver 180 trainings on Forest Landscape Restoration (“FLR”) 
for members from forestry-related CBO Beneficiaries and other forest sector 
stakeholders in the 26 targeted river systems (“Forest Training Beneficiaries“). 
Trainings will include representatives from all forestry-related CBO 
Beneficiaries, with trainees nominated by the participating CBOs. CBO 
Beneficiaries will be instructed to nominate equal numbers of male and female 
participants, and ensure that at least one trainee from each CBO is a member 
of the CBO committee. MoFE and FAO will review nominees from each CBO 
Beneficiary and approve the final selection of Forest Training Beneficiaries. 
The Project will also deliver 122 trainings on sustainable management of forest 
ecosystems. As above, trainings will include representatives from all forestry-
related CBO Beneficiaries, with trainees nominated by the participating CBOs. 
CBO Beneficiaries will be instructed to nominate equal numbers of male and 
female participants, and ensure that at least one trainee from each CBO is a 
member of the CBO committee. MoFE and FAO will review nominees from 
each CBO Beneficiary and approve the final selection of Forest Training 
Beneficiaries. 
 
FLR and other forests 
trainings 
will 
be 
conducted in PY3-7. 
The aforementioned 
beneficiary selection 
criteria and process 
will be applied before 
the 
start 
of 
each 
relevant training. 
 
Local 
Labourers   
 
Forest restoration and plantation Activities, as well as other tree planting 
Activities, often involve the recruitment and payment of local labourers to 
support tree planting. To recruit labourers for such Activities (under Sub-
Component 1.3), participating CBO Beneficiaries will be asked to nominate 
members as labourers to be involved in (and benefit from) these Activities. CBO 
Beneficiaries will be asked to nominate members based on the following 
criteria. Final selection will be made by the Host Country, acting through MoFE, 
and FAO:

=== PAGE 32 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 117 
 
 
C 
 
Labourers must be from poor households (based on thresholds to be 
defined by FAO and MoFE during project inception); and 
 
Labourers must be at least 17 years of age. 
FAO and MoFE experts will review nominated participants from each CBO 
Beneficiary and validate the final selection of Local Labourers. When selecting, 
FAO and MoFE will strive to ensure equal representation of women, indigenous 
peoples and Dalits. 
 
 
44. The project objective will be achieved through the following Components. Figure 6 presents the sequencing of the 
Components and Activities, how the Components are complementary and collectively contribute to achieving tangible 
impacts on the ground, and how the Activities are expected to continue enabling CBO members to apply (and support 
more widespread adoption) of project-promoted farming, land use and forestry practices after project closure. 
a) Component 1: Scaling up climate-resilient Sustainable Natural Resource Management (SNRM). 
b) Component 2: Strengthening institutions and planning for climate-resilient SNRM. 
c) Component 3: Improving knowledge, awareness and local capacity for climate-resilient SNRM. 
 
Figure 6: Project components, impact streams and post-project sustainability  
 
45. Under Component 1, the project will support activities focused on scaling up proven climate-resilient SNRM approaches 
to strengthen ecosystem stability and resilience in vulnerable river systems. Such interventions will focus on climate-
resilient agricultural practices on agricultural land, ecosystem restoration and sustainable management in degraded and 
critical ecosystems, and tree planting on non-forested land to build resilience and reduce pressure on natural forests for 
fodder, fuelwood and forage, targeting especially distant forest users in the upstream Terai. This support will be delivered 
in each of the 26 targeted river systems, with the specific constellation of support (capturing upstream and downstream 
dynamics) to be defined in consultation with government and community stakeholders during the process of developing 
Beneficiary CBO members will continue to apply (and 
support other members of their communities to adopt) 
project-promoted practices, drawing on support from 
government, other partners and local extension services.
PY 1
PY 2
PY 3
PY 4
PY 5
PY 6
PY 7
Post-project period
Project implementation period
COMPONENT 2
Supporting planning & 
strengthening institutional 
capacity to:
COMPONENT 1
Providing CBOs with training, expert guidance and inputs/materials to enable:             
(i) adoption of climate-resilient land use practices; (ii) construction of local structures 
and nature-based solutions to enhance resilience; (iii) application of sustainable forest 
management practices; and (iv) restoration & maintenance of forests and tree cover.
COMPONENT 3
Strengthening local extension services and 
awareness to enable widespread adoption and 
continued use of project-promoted farming, land 
use and forestry practices.
A) Define and 
guide the 
constellation 
of support to 
be provided by 
the project 
(under Comp. 
1) in each of 
the 26 river 
systems.
B) Enable government and other partners to continue monitoring 
natural resources and climate change impacts, and use this information 
to inform future planning and investment decisions.
Public sector policy, regulatory and investment 
decisions continue to promote sustained use (and more 
widespread adoption) of project-promoted practices.
Local extension and advisory services continue to 
support CBO members (incl. those who directly 
benefited from the project and others) to utilize project-
promoted farming, land use and forestry practices.

=== PAGE 33 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 117 
 
 
C 
Critical Ecosystem Restoration Plans (CERPs) under Activity 2.1.2 – an Activity that will precede (and guide) field-level 
interventions under Component 1. 
46. To support the implementation and scaling up of climate-resilient SNRM, activities within Component 2 will focus on 
strengthening local and provincial capacities, supporting operational planning at the local level within each of the project´s 
26 target river systems and mainstreaming climate-resilient land use planning at the provincial, local (i.e. rural municipality) 
and community-level. This Component will balance top-down integrated spatial planning with participatory land use 
planning for climate-resilience at the CBO level. Importantly, this Component will support the development of CERPs in 
each of the 26 targeted river systems. These plans (and the priorities and interventions identified therein) will be consulted 
and validated with the relevant CBOs within each river system, thereby ensuring full community buy-in for interventions to 
be delivered under Component 1. 
47. Project activities will further enhance awareness, knowledge and communication on climate risks, climate-resilient SNRM. 
Component 3 includes measures to strengthen extension materials for farmer-field schools, operational costs to scale-up 
the reach of extension services, and trainings for trainers to implement climate-resilient SNRM approaches. This will 
ensure such approaches are mainstreamed into training materials and that government extension staff and service 
providers understand climate change threats, low-carbon and climate-resilient land use practices. The establishment of 
an innovative knowledge center will further enhance climate monitoring, knowledge management and dissemination, and 
improve climate-informed decision making and planning.  
48. Together, these complementary measures will help to overcome barriers to adaptation and mitigation, and will support 
the desired paradigm shift with a strong enabling environment and the scaling up of interventions that will increase the 
resilience of both communities and critical ecosystems to climate change.   
 
COMPONENT1. SCALING UP CLIMATE-RESILIENT SUSTAINABLE NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
(SNRM) 
49. Component 1 focuses on implementing and scaling up of climate-resilient SNRM practices to increase the resilience of 
ecosystems and local households within 26 river systems that are vulnerable to climate change. CBO Beneficiaries and 
their members, as well as local governments will be provided with technical and financial support to scale up sustainable 
practices including climate-resilient agricultural practices on 60,965 ha, restoration of 202,237 ha of critical forest, wetland 
and grassland ecosystems (including areas that are highly susceptible to landslides and flooding), and tree planting on 
23,800 ha as new forest systems (including enrichment planting on shrub land, conservation and commercial plantations 
and horticulture). Such measures will not only increase the adaptive capacities and resilience of communities, but also 
enhance the resilience of ecosystems and the provision of key ecosystem services.  
50. Promoted measures have been selected based on their relevance given the key climate risks faced by the region, and 
considering differentiated vulnerabilities within each river system. Implementation of these measures will be supported 
through river system-based spatial and operational plans developed under Component 2. Investments in climate-resilient 
land use practices and technologies will further be supported by knowledge products and resources developed within 
Component 3, including guidelines and educational materials for field schools and extension trainings. The monitoring of 
such measures will be integrated with the Churia Knowledge Centre (developed under Component 3). 
51. Scaling up climate-resilient land use practices will help address the proximate and underlying drivers of deforestation and 
land degradation in the project area, leading to further emission reductions through reduced deforestation and forest 
degradation as well as improved carbon sequestration in areas under forest and tree cover. Measures will have numerous 
positive socio-economic and environmental impacts, including improved water security, food security, soil nutrition, 
biodiversity conservation and agricultural productivity. Since poverty is a major barrier to the adoption of climate-resilient 
land use practices in the BRCRN project area, investments in climate-resilient land uses will be provided to local CBOs, 
although communities are expected to provide in-kind labour in exchange for participating in farmer field schools and/or 
trainings and receiving ongoing extension / technical support.  
52. Sub-Component 1.1 – Climate-resilient land use practices are adopted. This Sub-component will work with farmers 
and other land users in the 26 targeted river systems (the “Project Area”) to scale up the adoption of farming and other 
land use practices that enhance the resilience of agricultural production in the Project Area. This Sub-component will 
directly train and support farmers from relevant CBOs, and equip them to return to their communities to teach and train 
other farming households on project-promoted practices. This Sub-component will also establish crucial local

=== PAGE 34 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 117 
 
 
C 
infrastructure in each river system to enhance resilience against climate change-induced erosion, sedimentation and 
flooding risks. 
a) Activity 1.1.1 – Establish Farmer Field Schools (FFSs) in the Project Area to promote climate-resilient 
land use. This Activity will establish 120 FFSs in the Project Area to encourage the use of climate-resilient 
farming practices, with at least 3 FFS to be established in each of the 26 targeted river systems. These FFSs 
will be used to deliver trainings on climate-resilient farming practices to Farmer Beneficiaries under Activity 
1.1.2, as well as to continue promoting climate-resilient land use in the Project Area after project closure. A 
FFS technical expert recruited by FAO will design the overall approach to this Activity, including the 
development and supervision of agreements with national service providers to identify sites, establish FFSs 
and orient local communities regarding their function. A second agreement will be developed, under the 
supervision of the FFS technical expert, to deliver Training of Trainers (ToT) for MoITFE and MoACLM field 
staff, extension workers, based on the modules developed under Activity 3.2.1. The FFS technical expert will 
identify the equipment needs for all 120 FFSs and organise the procurement and delivery of this equipment, 
including agricultural and forestry technical supplies for training purposes. FAO will sign and manage these 
agreements. The Provincial Project Management Units (PPMUs) will cover the travel and logistical costs for 
MoITFE and MoACLM field staff to establish capacity of all 120 FFSs to deliver capacity building activities 
based on the FFS training modules.  This is anticipated to require a total of 120 visits, by teams of 3 field staff, 
to FFS over the project period in provinces 2 and 3, and 240 in province 1, to ensure the long-term ability of 
all FFS to deliver all modules to local farmers and communities as required. 
b) Activity 1.1.2 – Train farmers to adopt and apply climate-resilient land use practices. This Activity will 
train Farmer Beneficiaries in each of the 26 targeted river systems to understand and apply climate-resilient 
farming practices (CRFPs) that are most relevant to the challenges and conditions within their communities 
(see Annex 2: Feasibility Study – Appendices A1.2-A1.5 for more information on promoted practices). Farmer 
Beneficiaries will not only be equipped to apply relevant CRFPs on their own land, but will also be able to teach 
and train other members of the communities on such practices. Widespread adoption of such practices will 
build resilience of farming households against many of the climate change impacts outlined in Section C.1 
(above), while also reducing soil runoff and erosion that have significant negative impacts in downstream 
communities. Based on the results of the Critical Ecosystem Restoration Plans (CERPs) developed under 
Activity 2.1.2, project staff will identify the CRFPs most appropriate for vulnerable areas of the 26 river systems, 
and identify the CBO Beneficiaries to be targeted for capacity building efforts and the training approaches to 
be employed, both on-site and in FFSs.  Based on this analysis, carried out on an annual basis, the equipment 
needs for support to the CRFP training programme will be identified, and the procurement and delivery of this 
equipment will be organized through FAO (as co-EE). Under Activity 1.1.2, the project will organize 260 training 
events (approximately 10 per river system), each of which will be supported by 3 government field staff and 
train approximately 30 Farmer Beneficiaries. In total, Activity 1.1.2 is expected to train about 7,800 Farmer 
Beneficiaries. 
c) Activity 1.1.3 – Train farmers to adopt agroforestry and livestock management practices. This Activity 
will support Agro-Forestry and Livestock Beneficiaries to apply agroforestry and livestock management 
practices in their fields in each of the 26 targeted river systems, and equip them to promote more widespread 
adoption of such practices within their communities (practices are described in more detail in Annex 2: 
Feasibility Study – Appendices A1.6-A1.7). Such practices will not only enhance resilience of agricultural 
production among Agro-Forestry and Livestock Beneficiaries, but will also contribute to easing the 
expansionary pressures that are driving deforestation and forest degradation in the Project Area. Importantly, 
such practices will also contribute to increasing incomes for the predominantly poor and vulnerable small-scale 
farming and livestock-owning households with which this Activity will work. Building on the identification of 
priority areas and appropriate practices from the CERPs under Activity 2.1.2, Activity 1.1.3 will train 
approximately 120 Agro-Forestry and Livestock Beneficiaries from relevant CBO Beneficiaries to understand 
project-promoted practices, and procure the materials needed for them to establish small on-farm tree 
nurseries to continue supporting agroforestry within their communities and beyond project closure. Once these 
small on-farm nurseries are established, three full-time government field staff in each province will conduct 
regular visits (from PY3-7) to communities in which on-farm nurseries have been established to train additional 
Agro-Forestry and Livestock Beneficiaries to adopt project-promoted agroforestry and livestock management 
practices, drawing in part on the seedlings produced at the on-farm nurseries established in PY3. During the 
training/extension visits, government field staff will also identify about 500 livestock-owning households within 
the relevant communities (in line with the selection process and eligibility criteria outlined in Table 6 above)

=== PAGE 35 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 117 
 
 
C 
who are eligible to access the government’s biogas subsidy, and provide them with the technical assistance 
and guidance needed to access this subsidy and ultimately purchase and install a biogas digester on their 
respective farms. 
d) Activity 1.1.4 – Construct check dams, gully stabilization measures and other local infrastructure to 
enhance resilience against climate change-induced erosion, sedimentation and flooding risks. This 
Activity will construct local structures (described in more detailed in Annex 2: Feasibility Study – Appendix 
A2.2) that will play a crucial role in reducing community vulnerability to climate change impacts, accounting for 
both upstream and downstream dynamics in each of the 26 river systems that collectively comprise the Project 
Area. In particular, these structures will reduce erosion risk and sedimentation in upstream areas, and reduce 
flooding risk and water stress in downstream areas. Building on the key risks and priority areas for specific 
structures identified in the CERPs developed under Activity 2.1.2, MoFE will recruit 3 civil engineers to work 
with provincial technical support officers in MoACLM, rural municipalities, watershed management centres and 
relevant CBO Beneficiaries to identify specific sites and approaches for local structures. The engineers will 
develop detailed project reports and technical standard guidelines to be followed in construction, which will be 
carried out by service providers contracted by MoFE (with technical supervision and backstopping from MoFE 
and FAO project staff). In particular, Activity 1.1.4 will: (i) establish relevant structures and practices to stabilize 
86 gullies, mostly in the Churia hills; and (ii) establish and maintain check dams and/or community-managed 
water harvesting ponds in 129 sites, mostly in the Bhavar zone. 
53. Sub-Component 1.2 – Natural forest ecosystems are better maintained and protected. This Sub-Component will 
work with communities to support more sustainable management and preservation of existing, natural forest ecosystems 
in the Project Area. In so doing, the project aims to reduce the rate of deforestation and forest degradation, which will 
produce important climate change mitigation benefits while also preserving (and enhancing) crucial ecosystem functions 
that are essential to the resilience of communities (both upstream and downstream) throughout each of the 26 targeted 
river systems that collectively comprise the Project Area.  
a) Activity 1.2.1 – Guide and assist all forestry-related CBOs to develop/strengthen and deliver forest 
management operational plans. This Activity will focus on the improvement of sustainable forest 
management (SFM) in all forest land managed by forestry-related CBO Beneficiaries in the Project Area, to 
ensure silvicultural practices are implemented to maximise ecosystem service provision, both in terms of 
climate resilience and in terms of enhancement of forest carbon stocks (see Annex 2: Feasibility Study – 
Appendix A2.4 for more information on promoted practices). Building on the priorities and relevant CBOs 
identified in the CERPs developed under Activity 2.1.2, the Project will recruit qualified service providers in 
each province to work with relevant CBO Beneficiaries to develop and/or strengthen forest management 
operational plans to enable coordinated and sustainable management of their local forest ecosystems. Project 
staff will then procure relevant equipment for each of these CBO Beneficiaries (including for inventory, 
plantation, cultivation and harvesting operations) to be distributed to the relevant CBOs in accordance with the 
specific needs identified in their forest management operational plans. Under Activity 1.2.1, project staff will 
subsequently work with these CBO Beneficiaries throughout PY3-7 to provide ongoing advice and guidance 
to enable implementation of their forest management operational plans. In so doing, Activity 1.2.1 expects to 
support sustainable management of 186,247 ha of forest land within the Project Area. 
b) Activity 1.2.2 – Train CBO Beneficiaries and land owners to enable more sustainable management of 
forest ecosystems. This Activity will build the capacity of government staff and all forestry-related CBO 
Beneficiaries to better understand the principles and practices that underpin sustainable management of forest 
ecosystems, and continue applying such principles and practices after project closure. Such trainings will go 
beyond simply supporting delivery of forest management operational plans developed under Activity 1.2.1, 
and aims to build broader capacity among key actors within the Project Area to continue promoting and scaling 
up relevant knowledge and practices after project closure. To do so, Activity 1.2.2 will support the development 
of a regular, locally-relevant and demand-driven extension service on forest planning and management for 
CBOs and other land owners. Project staff will start by delivering 26 Training of Trainers (ToT) events for 
MoITFE field staff at local level (“Professional Beneficiaries”) during PY3-5. These field staff will in turn deliver 
122 local training events to CBOs and other land owners (“Forest Training Beneficiaries”) to build their capacity 
on sustainable management of forest ecosystems. Representatives from forestry-related CBO Beneficiaries 
to be trained under Activity 1.2.2 will be nominated by the executive committee of their respective CBOs. 
54. Sub-Component 1.3 – Forests and tree cover are restored and maintained in the river system landscape. This 
Sub-Component will work with CBO Beneficiaries and other forest stakeholders to expand tree cover and restore forest

=== PAGE 36 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 117 
 
 
C 
ecosystems in the Project Area. In so doing, this Sub-Component will contribute to enhancing resilience in critical areas 
(e.g. along riverbanks) and restoring other ecosystem services that enhance resilience for downstream communities. 
Forest restoration and expanded tree cover will also deliver important mitigation benefits by increasing biomass and 
carbon sequestration, as well as providing alternative fuelwood and timber sources that enable local communities to meet 
their needs without encroaching on natural forest ecosystems. 
a) Activity 1.3.1 – Establish and support the operation of 52 multi-purpose tree nurseries to serve the 
plantation and restoration needs of CBOs and other forest sector stakeholders. This Activity will 
establish tree nurseries that are needed to support tree planting and forest restoration under this project, as 
well as by communities throughout the Project Area (specifications for project-supported nurseries are 
available in Annex 2: Feasibility Study – Appendix A3.3). Nurseries are expected to continue providing 
seedlings to support continued planting and restoration activities beyond project closure, in line with CERPs 
and other local plans supported under the project. Without such services, CBOs and other actors in the Project 
Area would struggle to procure the necessary seedlings in the future, which would risk undermining local buy-
in and support for the broader process of sector transformation that this project aims to set in motion. To 
accomplish this, project staff will procure the equipment and materials needed to establish two nurseries in 
each of the 26 targeted river systems, for which sites will be selected in accordance with the criteria and 
process outlined in Table 6 (above). Project staff will also procure material inputs (e.g. poly bags, soil, sand) 
and labour inputs needed for production of seedlings from PY3-7, ensuring that each nursery has the capacity 
to produce at least 50,000 seedlings per year. Nurseries will be operated by local forest offices, and project 
staff will work with MoITFE to ensure operations and maintenance costs for these nurseries are integrated into 
their annual budgets by project closure. Nurseries will be developed in line with GESI principles, promoting 
equitable employment opportunities for women, as well as indigenous peoples, Dalits and marginalized 
groups. 
b) Activity 1.3.2 – Establish and maintain 7,300 ha of forest plantations to enhance resilience. This Activity 
will establish and support maintenance of several different forest plantations in the Project Area that will 
contribute to building resilience and mitigating climate change, while also equipping local stakeholders to 
promote and support more sustainable forestry activities beyond project closure. These are described below, 
while technical specifications are provided in more detail in Annex 2: Feasibility Study – Appendix A3.2). 
i. Demonstration plantations: Project staff will establish demonstration plantations to expand tree cover 
and build capacity of local MoITFE staff (those who train and support CBOs, land owners and other 
forest users in the Project Area) to promote sustainable plantation management beyond project 
closure. This in turn will deliver important long-term adaptation and mitigation benefits. To do so, 
project staff will train 20 MoITFE staff in each of the three provinces (60 total “Professional 
Beneficiaries”) on how to promote/support sustainable plantation management. Project staff will in turn 
procure materials and seed stock needed to establish 1,300 ha of demonstration plantations of native 
species (including teak) in the Bhavar and Terai zones of the 26 targeted river systems. These 
demonstration plantations will contribute to enabling trained MoITFE staff to promote and support 
sustainable plantation management after project closure. 
ii. Public land forests on river bank sites: Building on the priorities identified in the CERPs developed 
under Activity 2.1.2, project staff will work with vulnerable and marginalized communities to plant 
grasses, bamboo and trees along key river banks, primarily in the Bhavar zone in each of the 26 river 
systems. This will contribute to stabilizing these river banks, which in turn will build resilience for within 
the Bhavar zone but also for downstream communities whose vulnerability to sedimentation and 
flooding will be reduced. The CBO Beneficiaries with whom project staff will work to establish these 
plantations will also be supported to take over management responsibility for these forests by signing 
formal agreements with their respective Municipality offices. Project staff will further support these 
CBOs to develop management plans that will guide post-project management of these forest 
resources. In total, this Activity is expected to result in the establishment of 1,000 ha of riparian 
plantations (with at least 25 ha being established in each river system), and equip local CBO 
Beneficiaries to sustainably manage these forest resources after project closure. 
iii. Public land forests on community land: Building on the priorities identified in the CERPs developed 
under Activity 2.1.2, project staff will work with vulnerable and marginalized communities to plant 
multipurpose trees in open community land, primarily in the (upstream) Churia hills and Bhavar zone 
in each of the 26 river systems. This expanded forest cover will enhance resilience against climate-

=== PAGE 37 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 117 
 
 
C 
change induced soil erosion (thus reducing downstream risks related to sedimentation and flooding) 
and enhance crucial ecosystem functions that underpin the resilience of upstream communities, while 
also providing important mitigation benefits. The CBO Beneficiaries with whom project staff will work 
to establish these plantations will also be supported to take over management responsibility for these 
forests by signing formal agreements with their respective Municipality offices. Project staff will further 
support these CBO Beneficiaries to develop management plans that will guide post-project 
management of these forest resources. In total, this Activity is expected to result in the establishment 
of 5,000 ha of plantations (with at least 50 ha being established in each river system), and equip local 
CBO Beneficiaries to sustainably manage these resources after project closure. 
c) Activity 1.3.3 – Train government field staff and CBOs on Forest Landscape Restoration, and support 
CBOs to implement Assisted Natural Regeneration on 15,990 ha. This Activity will assist CBO 
Beneficiaries to expand forest cover and restore forest landscapes in critical locations in each of the 26 
targeted river systems, in line with the priorities identified in the CERPs developed under Activity 2.1.2. This 
will enable CBOs to restore crucial ecosystem functions and ecosystems resilience in each river system, while 
also generating significant mitigation benefits. Under Activity 1.3.3, the project will not only support CBO 
Beneficiaries to expand and restore forests in the Project Area, but will also build their capacity (and that of 
government) to continue scaling up such approaches after project closure, in line with their CERPs and drawing 
on the network of services and resources (e.g. nurseries) established under this project. In particular, the 
project will support the approaches outlined below, technical specifications for which are included in Annex 2: 
Feasibility Study – Appendix A2.3). 
i. Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR):Project staff will prepare training materials on FLR, which they 
will then use to train 240 provincial forestry field staff (“Professional Beneficiaries”) through 12 training 
events (20 Professional Beneficiaries per training) organized in PY3-5. These provincial forestry field 
staff will in turn organize 180 training events for members from relevant CBO Beneficiaries (“Forest 
Training Beneficiaries”) to enhance their understanding and ability to apply FLR approaches in their 
respective communities. Approximately 30 Forest Training Beneficiaries will be trained at each 
training, reaching a total of about 5,400 Forest Training Beneficiaries. 
ii. Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR): Building on the priorities and areas identified in the CERPs 
developed under Activity 2.1.2, project staff will work with relevant CBO Beneficiaries (557 CFUGs 
and 3 CoFMs) to implement ANR on at least 15,990 ha of community-managed forest land, focusing 
in particular on the Churia hills and Bhavar zones in the 26 targeted river systems. Project staff will 
start by identifying specific sites (in line with the selection criteria and process outlined in Table 6) and 
developing ANR methodologies and implementation plans that are suited to the local contexts. Project 
staff will then procure tools, equipment, inputs and local labour needed to implement ANR in 
collaboration with relevant CBO Beneficiaries, which may include (depending on the needs of specific 
sites): 
1. Plantation for protection and stabilization: To reduce degradation and promote the 
ecosystem services and sustainable use of forests, communities will be supported to establish 
fodder banks, fire breaks and other locally-appropriate measures, while ensuring that 
measures to control grazing or forest product extraction do not disproportionately affect 
marginalized or poor households within CBOs.   
2. Measures to accelerate natural forest recovery (e.g. direct seeding, planting seedlings) in 
degraded primary or secondary forests. Promoted measures will include the establishment of 
enrichment planting to restore over-exploited forest-dominated ecosystems, especially along 
upstream riversides.37 
3. Measures to support natural regeneration will involve promoting tree seedlings and 
favorable species within a forest landscape, supporting multiple-use forest management 
plans, with equal consideration of social, ecological and economic functions of forest 
                                                                 
37 Native species will be promoted to the greatest extent possible, however in highly degraded areas locally-adapted exotic species 
with no risk of invasion may be required to facilitate soil restoration (as a nurse crop for the eventual recovery of natural forest). 
Measures to avoid and mitigate adverse impacts are further described in the ESMF in Section F.

=== PAGE 38 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 117 
 
 
C 
ecosystems. Planning concepts and components such as multi-functional zoning and control 
forest inventories will be supported where necessary. 
d) Activity 1.3.4 – Provide technical guidance and seedlings to establish tree cover on 16,500 ha of 
woodlots to enhance ecosystem resilience, and improve fuelwood and timber availability in 
downstream communities. This Activity will work with small-scale land owners to establish woodlots on their 
lands (see Annex 2: Feasibility Study – Appendix A3.2 for more detailed technical specifications). In so doing, 
the project will further enhance resilience of soils (against erosion upstream, and the associated sedimentation 
downstream) and broader ecosystem services that are essential to the overall resilience of the river systems. 
This Activity will also provide additional sources of fuelwood and timber for downstream communities, thereby 
reducing expansionary pressures on natural forest ecosystems. To do so, project staff will draw on the 
prioritized areas in the CERPs to guide the identification of landowners with whom to collaborate (in line with 
the selection process outlined in Table 6). Project staff will then organize exchange visits between these small-
scale landowners and other successful forest owners in neighbouring districts to enhance their interest in 
engaging with the project. Interested landowners will then provide the necessary labour for establishing 
woodlots on their land, while project staff will procure the necessary seedlings and government field staff will 
provide the necessary extension and advisory services. Under this Activity, the project will support at least 100 
households in each of the 26 river systems (to be selected according to the criteria and process outlined in 
Table 6). Each household will receive support to establish woodlots on a maximum of 1 ha of their land. The 
government remains committed to continue providing extension support for such planting, further contributing 
to the potential to scale up tree planting on woodlots beyond project closure. 
 
COMPONENT2. STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS AND PLANNING FOR CLIMATE-RESILIENT SNRM 
55. Component 2 is designed as a precursor for the investments in Component1, and will support the necessary planning for 
interventions within each of the 26 targeted river systems while equipping government officials and CBO members with 
the capacities to understand and apply climate-resilient land use. Given Nepal´s ongoing political transition, Provincial 
and Local governments have new responsibilities over natural resource management and there is a need to build 
awareness on climate threats and low carbon and climate-resilient land use practices, providing support to mainstream 
climate-resilient land use planning into local strategies and processes. Local CBOs also play an important role in managing 
local resources, however there is limited awareness about the long-term risks that climate change poses as well as 
sustainable natural resource management approaches that can strengthen their adaptive capacities and overall resilience 
to climate change.  
56. Ultimately, this Component will address climate change risks by improving awareness of threats and building capacities 
to continuously monitor climate change and vulnerability at the provincial, local (rural municipality) and CBO level. It will 
further raise awareness of suitable low carbon and climate-resilient practices that are adapted to local conditions and 
differentiated vulnerabilities and contexts. It is closely linked with Component 3, which focuses on improving knowledge, 
strengthening extension services and trainings and improving knowledge dissemination to support awareness raising and 
the enhancement of adaptive capacities.  
57. Sub-Component 2.1 – Planning for climate-resilient SNRM is enhanced. This Sub-Component will support 
government stakeholders and CBO Beneficiaries to identify and assess climate change risks and resource degradation 
within the Project Area, and develop corresponding plans that will enable relevant actors to respond to such challenges. 
This Sub-Component will also build the capacity of these actors to further monitor local risks and resources in the future. 
In so doing, Sub-Component 2.1 not will only provide an evidence-based foundation to guide interventions under 
Component 1, but will also equip government stakeholders and CBOs to continue investing in climate-resilient SNRM – 
in a manner that coordinates upstream and downstream interventions to maximize adaptation and mitigation benefits – 
beyond project closure. 
a) Activity 2.1.1 – Strengthen institutions on climate change impacts and ecosystem mapping. Under this 
Activity, the Project will build the capacity of key entities (line ministries such as MoFE, MoITFE, MoACLM and 
other provincial and municipal authorities, as well as other relevant stakeholders) that intend to collaborate 
with and/or benefit from the project – including those whose mandates are linked to promoting climate-resilient 
SNRM in the Project Area, and who will play an important role in sustaining and scaling up support for such 
practices after project closure – on climate change and climate resilient land use planning and management 
practices. To do so, project staff will organize four national-level trainings, three provincial-level trainings and

=== PAGE 39 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 117 
 
 
C 
64 local-level trainings for Professional Beneficiaries on such topics. Trainings will further include a component 
on Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI), discussing how differentiated vulnerabilities to climate change 
affect the overall vulnerability of communities, as well as key considerations to enhance and strengthen GESI 
within the context of the BRCRN project (building on measures identified in the Gender Action Plan, Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework and cross-cutting measures to support social inclusion). 
Project staff will organize one national-level training and 6 provincial-level trainings for staff from MoFE, 
MoITFE and other relevant provincial and municipal authorities (“Professional Beneficiaries”) on the production 
and use of GIS tools used in the multi-criteria analysis that informed the development of CERPs under Activity 
2.1.2. In so doing, the project will equip key provincial and local stakeholders with the knowledge and tools 
needed to continue monitoring climate change impacts and natural resources in the Project Area after project 
closure – knowledge that is essential to enable government to continue refining the support it provides for 
climate-resilient SNRM. 
b) Activity 2.1.2– Develop and validate Critical Ecosystem Restoration Plans (CERPs) for each of the 26 
targeted river systems. Under this Activity, project staff will work with a range of provincial and local 
stakeholders to develop and validate CERPs, which will enable evidence-based planning for interventions 
under Component 1, while also providing governments and CBOs with common plans and priorities to guide 
coordinated investments in climate-resilient SNRM in the future. The CERP planning process will also draw 
on insights and information from relevant national entities, including the Department of Hydrology and 
Meteorology (DHM). Project staff will start by recruiting a qualified firm to perform a multi-criteria spatial 
analysis for each of the 26 targeted river systems to help identify: climate change risks within each river system; 
critical ecosystems within each river system; priority climate-resilient SNRM practices and approaches for each 
biophysical zone in each river system; priority interventions to be delivered (under Component 1) to enable 
short-term action on the aforementioned priorities, including priority areas for such interventions; and CBOs 
for inclusion/involvement in prioritized interventions in each river system.Building on this analysis, project staff 
will organize a series of 26 river system-level consultations (one per targeted river system) to discuss the 
identified priorities with key stakeholders and develop this into a Critical Ecosystem Restoration Plan (CERP). 
Once the CERPs are validated, project staff will organize a series of field consultations (following FPIC 
principles) to ensure: (i) interventions identified in the CERPs are locally-relevant and appropriate; (ii) relevant 
CBOs and other local stakeholders in each river system are supportive of the priorities and plans outlined in 
their respective CERPs; and (iii) the implementation methodologies are adapted to local circumstances as 
appropriate, including to address locally-specific social and environmental risks and capacity gaps. In so doing, 
project staff will ensure that prioritized interventions reflect the relevant management regimes, such as 
community forestry, leasehold forestry, collaborative forestry, public land forests, and private forestry, among 
others. While promoting collective action through local CBOs/ user groups, the project will take into account 
the priorities and needs of vulnerable groups (e.g. women, Dalits and indigenous peoples). In total, project 
staff will organize 52 local-level consultations (2 per river system) to secure community buy-in and support for 
the CERPs and the specific interventions prioritized therein. Project staff will then discuss the community-
endorsed CERPs with stakeholders at the national and provincial levels (through two national workshops and 
six provincial-level workshops) to secure feedback on the planning processes and government validation of 
the plans, and discuss opportunities for mainstreaming CERP priorities into regular planning cycles. 
c) Activity 2.1.3 – Support provincial governments in Provinces 1, 2 and 3to plan and increase resilience 
to projected climate change-related extreme events. Due to an increasing risk of climate change-induced 
extreme events (e.g. flooding) in the Project Area, it is essential that government stakeholders understand 
these risks and how best to support enhanced preparedness – both within the government and at community 
level. Under this Activity, project staff will raise awareness of such risks among provincial and local government 
staff (“Professional Beneficiaries”) and support them to develop corresponding risk management plans. Project 
staff will begin by organizing 26 awareness-raising workshops (one in each targeted river system) for provincial 
and local government staff, during which participants will learn about river system-specific risks (drawing on 
analysis done under Activity 2.1.2) and train them on relevant guidelines and tools for further assessing such 
risks in the future. These trainings are also expected to draw on insights from DHM staff (among others), both 
to inform the planning processes and strengthen the linkages between entities such as DHM and the provincial-
level authorities responsible for planning and delivering support in this area. Participants will also be trained 
on how to access information from the Churia Knowledge Centre in their respective provinces (established 
under Activity 3.2.3), and how this important resource can facilitate future analysis of climate change risks in

=== PAGE 40 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 117 
 
 
C 
each of the targeted river systems. Following the awareness-raising workshops, project staff will work with 
provincial governments (“Professional Beneficiaries”) to develop provincial-level risk management plans for 
climate change-related extreme events, building on detailed hazard mapping, vulnerability assessments and 
risk mapping from the CERP planning process under Activity 2.1.2. Once these plans are developed, project 
staff will subsequently work with provincial governments organize 26 multi-stakeholder validation workshops 
to secure endorsement and community buy-in for such plans. 
58. Sub-Component 2.2 – Community-based organizations (CBOs) are equipped to scale up climate-resilient SNRM. 
This sub-component will work with local stakeholders and CBOs to improve local-level planning, build their capacity to 
provide support for climate-resilient SNRM in their river systems, and address other legal and institutional barriers that 
otherwise inhibit local actors from taking a leadership role in shifting the management of land, forests and other natural 
resources toward more climate-resilient and low-emission pathways. 
a) Activity 2.2.1 – Establish, formalize and register CBOs to enable climate-resilient SNRM. Community 
organizations play a key role in managing natural resources within the Project Area, and are essential to 
shifting the management of forests and other resources toward more climate-resilient and sustainable 
approaches. Such organizations also play an important role in supporting individual households to adopt and 
sustain climate-resilient practices in their own fields. In order to empower such organizations to provide support 
at scale, project staff will support them to overcome key institutional hurdles under Activity 2.2.1. Project staff 
will begin by working with all 750 CBO Beneficiaries to ensure they are registered with the relevant authorities, 
in line with Provincial and Federal Law. This will include CFUGs, collaborative forestry user groups, pro-poor 
leasehold forestry groups, soil conservation user groups, farmer groups, agriculture cooperative groups, public 
land forest user group. While existing CFUGs, collaborative forestry user groups, leasehold forestry and private 
forest users are registered with the Department of Forestry, with the ongoing political transition they will be 
required to register at either the provincial or local level (Article 11, LGOA 2017). Meanwhile, project staff will 
also support local governments to formalize recognition of public land forest user groups, comprised of 
primarily marginalized and highly vulnerable households, to benefit from the sustainable management of public 
land forests. Many of these groups already exist (particularly where pilot projects have successfully engaged 
them in the sustainable management of public forests) but are not yet formally recognised. Based on the local 
government operation act (2017), local government will have the authority to formalize such groups, having 
positive impacts on highly vulnerable households. Finally, project staff will help establish 26 networks of 
CFUGs and private forest owner networks. This will include organizing initial workshops for such groups in 
each river system, as well as supporting the organization of annual meetings of such groups from PY3-7. This 
will encourage information exchange among similar groups within each of the targeted river systems. It will 
also provide important platforms to exchange experiences and lessons learned, and support long-term 
capacity development of these local institutions. 
b) Activity 2.2.2 – Train CBO Beneficiaries on climate-resilient land use planning, and assist them to 
mainstream climate-resilient SNRM into their CBO management plans. Under this Activity, project staff 
will strengthen the technical capacities of CBO Beneficiaries to better understand climate change risks and 
how best to respond through climate-resilient SNRM approaches that are catered to their local needs (drawing 
on insights gained through the CERP process under Activity 2.1.2). Trainings will also include sessions on 
GESI principles to promote (inter alia) greater involvement of women in climate-resilient SNRM, as well as to 
promote greater understanding among males CBO members of women’s roles. In so doing, CBOs throughout 
the Project Area will be better equipped to sustain and scale up climate-resilient SNRM practices beyond 
project closure. To accomplish this, project staff will start by recruiting a service provider to organize a training 
of trainers (ToT) for Local Resource Persons (LRPs) (on behalf of “CBO Beneficiaries”) on climate-resilient 
land use. LRPs will include women, indigenous peoples and marginalized minority groups (including Dalits), 
and all trainers will be given additional training on GESI to ensure women and marginalized groups are 
effectively engaged. Once LRPs have been trained, project staff will organize at least 250 community-level 
workshops for the 750 CBO Beneficiaries (with 3-5 CBOs per workshop), at which LRPs will train CBO 
members to improve their awareness on climate change and associated risks, and support them to map out 
adaptation needs and strategies to build resilience at the local level. Such an approach is based on multi-
stakeholder participation, and will promote the empowerment and inclusion of women as well as indigenous 
peoples, Dalits and members from other marginalized groups. After the initial workshops and trainings, project 
staff will select the 250 most vulnerable CBO Beneficiaries (in line with the selection criteria and process 
outlined in Table 6), and recruit a qualified service provider, trained on gender quality and social inclusion, to 
support these CBOs to develop CBO management plans that effectively mainstream support for climate-

=== PAGE 41 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 117 
 
 
C 
resilient SNRM. These plans are expected guide members/households of these 250 CBO Beneficiaries to 
scale up climate-resilient SNRM within their communities in a coordinated manner. 
During the planning and mainstreaming of climate-resilient SLM into CBO management plans, planned 
interventions will be screened for risks following FAO´s environmental and social screening checklist and 
process (described in Chapter 6.1 in greater detail). Sub-components where possible environmental and social 
risks have been identified will be considered in environmental and social management plans (ESMP) that 
include information on the mitigation measures, indicators, responsibilities and timeframe where the 
completion of such measures are expected. See the project´s ESMF (Annex 4.1) for more detailed information. 
 
COMPONENT3. IMPROVING KNOWLEDGE, AWARENESS AND LOCAL CAPACITY FOR CLIMATE-
RESILIENT SNRM 
59. Component 3 will improve awareness of climate change threats and build capacities to continuously monitor climate 
change and vulnerability at the provincial, local (rural municipality) and CBO level. It will further raise awareness of suitable 
low carbon and climate-resilient practices that are adapted to local conditions and differentiated vulnerabilities and 
contexts. It is closely linked with Component 2, with a stronger focus on improving knowledge, strengthening extension 
services and improving the dissemination of information to support awareness raising and the enhancement of adaptive 
capacities. This is crucial to the broader process of transforming the way communities manage natural resources within 
the Project Area.  
60. The project places a strong emphasis on strengthening local extension services to support widespread adoption of project-
promoted practices during and beyond the project implementation period. Among other support, the project will equip 
government extension staff with the skills and materials needed to promote climate-resilient SNRM. The Provincial 
Ministries that (as a result of the ongoing decentralization process) are taking over responsibility for such services have 
indicated their intention to continue financing rural extension capacity and the provision of climate-informed extension 
services, both during the project (as evidenced by the government’s co-financing commitment outlined in Annex 3.2) and 
after project closure. As part of the proposed project, FAO also commits to work with these government actors to mobilize 
the funds needed to sustain such services (including through the Churia Master Plan) – a key element of the process of 
transforming land use and natural resource management in the Churia region. 
61. While the project aims to strengthen coordination and the use of networks for vertical and horizontal information and 
knowledge dissemination, there is also a need to establish a formal mechanism to monitor climate change and natural 
resource management in the Project Area, and to share knowledge and information, such as templates for operational 
guidelines, success stories/lessons learned, action plans and strategies, among other documents. Component 3 therefore 
aims to establish a systematic knowledge and information sharing and monitoring mechanism concerning climate-resilient 
SNRM: The Churia Knowledge Centre (CKC). CKC will serve as a comprehensive resource including a database of 
natural resources – including soil, water, ecosystems and forests – to support informed policy-/decision-making and 
planning, and knowledge-sharing mechanisms. The CKC will include an online digital platform and will further have 
regional representation within MoITFE´s Science Environment and Climate Change Division in each province, serving as 
a provincial knowledge hub, where IT and computer experts are employed. The CKC will play a crucial role in enabling 
local stakeholders to continue delivering (and even scale up) climate-informed extension services to farmers and other 
land users after project closure, and in areas in Provinces 1, 2 and 3 that are beyond the Project Area.The MoITFEs in 
each province have expressed strong support for the establishment of the CKC, and a willingness to operate and maintain 
them during and after the project. 
62. Sub-Component 3.1 – Local knowledge on climate-resilient SNRM is enhanced. This Sub-Component will collect 
and analyse existing local and indigenous knowledge about climate-resilient SNRM in the Project Area, and support the 
effective dissemination of this knowledge. In so doing, this Sub-Component will catalyse broader interest in climate-
resilient SNRM among communities in the Project Area, thereby reinforcing interest in engaging in Component 1 Activities 
(the implementation of which will coincide with awareness-raising Activities under this Sub-Component) as well as in 
scaling up climate-resilient SNRM beyond the scope of the direct support provided by the Project. 
a) Activity 3.1.1 – Equip LRPs with best practices on climate-resilient SNRM from local experience, 
including indigenous knowledge. Under this Activity, project staff will gather local and indigenous knowledge 
on climate-resilient SNRM, and distil this information into user-friendly guidelines for LRPs and other local 
stakeholders to train and support CBO members to adopt such practices during and beyond the project. To

=== PAGE 42 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 117 
 
 
C 
do so, project staff will start by recruiting qualified service providers to organize 105 local/community 
consultations38 (about 4 consultations in each of the 26 targeted river systems) to better understand and 
consolidate traditional knowledge on climate resilience and SNRM. Project staff will then develop a 
compendium of local and indigenous knowledge based on these local-level consultations, and subsequently 
organize five provincial-level workshops to review and validate this compendium, drawing on additional 
information from civil society organizations (CSOs), development cooperation partners and government 
officials. Once the compendium of local and indigenous knowledge is validated at the provincial-level 
workshops, project staff will recruit a qualified service provider to develop best practice guidelines for LRPs to 
assist them in promoting and training CBO members on climate-resilient SNRM. These guidelines will draw in 
part on the compendium of local and indigenous knowledge, as well as additional information about lessons 
learnt and best practices from other projects and programmes that have been implemented in the Project Area. 
b) Activity 3.1.2 – Raise awareness on climate-resilient SNRM through local schools, media and intra-
regional exchange. Under this Activity, project staff will organize awareness raising campaigns to promote 
climate-resilient SNRM, and increase interest in such practices among communities and households living 
throughout the Project Area. Project staff will start by recruiting a qualified service provider to develop a 
knowledge dissemination and communication plan. Working with local and provincial governments, NGOs, 
indigenous people’s federations, Dalit organizations, women’s organizations and others, the service provider 
will establish methods for widespread dissemination of project-generated information (including that which is 
developed under Sub-Component 3.1, as well as the information contained in the CKC established under Sub-
Component 3.3) via these entities’ respective networks. Project staff will subsequently recruit a service 
provider to develop curricula on climate-resilient SNRM for local high school students. Project staff will then 
work with schools in the Project Area to establish student-run eco-clubs and organize 260 awareness-raising 
sessions for the eco-club members. To further raise awareness within the Project Area, project staff will recruit 
service providers to develop and broadcast 119 local-level radio programmes on climate change risks and 
climate-resilient SNRM. These radio programmes will be adapted to the local contexts in which they will be 
broadcast, drawing on the insights gained from the CERP process (under Activity 2.1.2) and the local and 
indigenous knowledge gathered under Activity 3.1.1). Finally, to enhance awareness of climate-resilient SNRM 
among local governments – whose buy-in and support are essential to the longer-term process of transforming 
land-use practices and natural resource management in the Project Area – project staff will organize 28 
exchange visits within Nepal for local government authorities (“Professional Beneficiaries”) to demonstrate 
good practices related to technical implementation of climate-resilient SNRM and extension processes through 
which to promote such practices. 
63. Sub-Component 3.2 – The extension system is equipped to promote climate-resilient SNRM. This Sub-Component 
will ensure that recent projections on climate change impacts and appropriate response measures (including local and 
indigenous knowledge) are integrated into the extension system in the Project Area. It will ensure that extension workers 
and trainers are equipped to promote climate-resilient SNRM, and can scale up the provision of climate change-informed 
extension services to ensure local communities, farmers and other land users are able to benefit from such services during 
and after the project. 
a) Activity 3.2.1 – Develop 10 modules on climate-resilient SNRM to be used by extension workers, 
including in the farmer field schools. This Activity will ensure that government extension workers have 
locally-adapted training modules to be used when training farmers and other land users to adopt project-
promoted climate-resilient SNRM practices. Project staff will develop 10 training modules to be used by 
government personnel and extension workers during and beyond the project, including for trainings on farmer 
field schools. Project staff will also recruit a qualified service provider to translate these modules in local 
languages to ensure they cater to local needs. Project staff will ensure these modules draw on the feasibility 
work done for this project, as well as the insights gained from the CERP process (under Activity 2.1.2) and the 
collection of local and indigenous knowledge (under Activity 3.1.1). The modules will cover sensitisation and 
extension processes for rural communities and beneficiaries including implementation planning, self-learning, 
quality assurance and incentive structures, and will support the facilitation of all key interventions under 
Component 1. 
                                                                 
38 Adapted based on an approach piloted for the Government of Nepal´s study on ´Indigenous and Local Knowledge and Practices 
for Climate Resilience in Nepal´ (2015).

=== PAGE 43 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 117 
 
 
C 
b) Activity 3.2.2 – Enhance and deliver quality extension services on climate-resilient SNRM to 
households. The extension system plays a crucial role in shaping how farmers, forest users and communities 
use land and other natural resources in the Project Area. To promote lasting and sustainable behavourial 
change, it is therefore essential to scale up the delivery of high-quality, climate-informed extension services in 
all 26 targeted river systems. Under Activity 3.2.2, project staff will therefore organize 78 training events during 
which they will train government extension workers and LRPs (“Professional Beneficiaries”) to understand and 
apply the 10 training modules developed under Activity 3.2.1. In total, these trainings are expected to benefit 
approximately 2,340 extension workers and LRPs (about 30 at each of the 78 training events). Under this 
Activity, the project will also cover the financing of improved and climate-informed extension services within 
the Project Area. MoFE co-financing will be used to engage the services of provincial-level extension workers 
(on secondment with MoITFE and MoALMC) to specifically support the delivery of climate-informed extension 
modules and support under the BRCRN project. These extension workers will directly support delivery of 
project-financed trainings and extension & advisory services under Component 1. They will also provide 
ongoing advice, guidance and support to CBOs throughout the project implementation period to enable the 
continued adoption and use of climate-resilient SNRM practices promoted by the project, including among 
households who were not selected by their CBOs to directly participate in formal trainings organized by the 
project. By building the capacity of local extension workers and drawing on their existing insights and networks, 
the project expects to generate high adoption rates among CBOs. This approach will also ensure that the 
provincial governments are well equipped to continue providing climate-informed extension services in the 
Project Area after project closure – thereby increasing the prospects for scaling up and out that are so 
important to the broader process of sector transformation that this project aims to set in motion. 
Activity 3.2.3 – Establish and operate the Churia Knowledge Centre (CKC) in each province to enable 
continuous delivery of climate-informed extension services and planning, and to monitor 
implementation and results of CERPs and CBO management plans. To effectively provide climate 
change-informed extension and advisory services beyond project closure, the government requires a user-
friendly platform to store relevant knowledge and training materials, as well as the latest data and tools to track 
evolving climate change impacts and the state of natural resources within the Project Area. Project staff will 
therefore recruit qualified service providers to design and establish the CKC. This online platform will include 
a database of natural resources within the Project Area (including soils and forests), as well as provide a 
centralized and easily-accessible repository for project-generated information, knowledge, guidelines and 
materials. This is also expected to include relevant hydro-meteorological data and information from DHM, with 
which the project will actively consult during the delivery of this Activity (and others). In addition, the CKC will 
be used to facilitate participatory monitoring of the impact of project Activities (as described in Section H.2). 
The service providers will also establish regional CKC hubs in the MoITFE offices in provinces 1, 2 and 3, 
specifically within the Science, Environment and Climate Change Division. This platform will not only underpin 
the delivery of climate-informed extension services, but will also enable government and other stakeholders to 
continuously monitor the evolving impacts and needs in the 26 targeted river systems, and update relevant 
plans and support programmes/services accordingly. 
Once the CKC is established, project staff will organize one national training and three provincial trainings to 
build the capacity of Professional Beneficiaries on the CKC online platform and regional hubs. The three 
provincial trainings will focus in particular on building the capacity of MoITFE staff in each of the provincial 
CKC hubs to operate the CKC. To complement this support, project staff will develop manuals, protocols and 
guidelines will be developed to guide provincial staff on CKC knowledge generation, gathering and 
management, including after project completion. This will include the development of Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs), which will be agreed with MoITFE to ensure the provincial CKC hubs are well operated 
and maintained beyond project closure. Project staff will also train relevant MoITFE staff on these protocols, 
guidelines and SOPs in PY7 to build their capacity to continue operating the CKC, and ensure it fulfils its role 
as a repository to support climate-informed extension services and planning into the future.

=== PAGE 44 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 117 
 
 
C 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor(Executing Entity) 
64. The Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE)39 will be an Executing Entity for the BRCRN project (legally one of 
two “co-EEs” for this project along with the FAO TA Team). MoFE is responsible for the conservation, development, use, 
and sustainable management of forests (which is the predominant land use in the Churia). The Ministry is also in charge 
of REDD+ in Nepal, and hosts the REDD+ Implementation Centre (RIC). In addition, MoFE has experience and expertise 
in successfully implementing projects related to the main thematic areas of intervention under this project, for example, 
SNRM and ecosystem restoration in the Churia region. MoFE is thus well placed to play a central role in the delivery of 
the proposed project. As co-Executing Entity, MoFE will manage a large proportion of the GCF grant resources, as well 
as the co-financing that it is mobilizing for the BRCRN project. MoFE has considerable experience managing projects of 
this size and nature, including: the Multi-Partner Forestry Project (MFSP); Hariyo Ban project; Building Climate Resilience 
of Watersheds in Mountain Eco-Regions; Adaptation for Smallholder in Hilly Areas (ASHA); Sustainable Land 
Management in Churia region; and the Terai Arc Landscape Program. In addition, MoFE is the lead EE for the 
implementation of the USD 24 million World Bank Forest Investment Programme (FIP) in Nepal. In line with its internal 
procedures, FAO commissioned a capacity assessment of MoFE during the preparation of the BRCRN project. This 
assessment found MoFE to be a low-risk partner, and thus very well placed to serve as the Executing Entity for the project. 
Through the Project Steering Committee (PSC), the ministry will coordinate with other relevant sector Ministries to ensure 
synergies for transformational change. MoFE’s Gender Focal Point will also play an important role in coordinating with the 
project management unit, and participating in PSC ensuring that gender concerns are adequately addressed, and closely 
monitored. Additional information on MoFE´s role and capacity to deliver is provided in Sections C.7 and E.4.2, and in 
Feasibility Study Section 8. 
65. A FAO Technical Capacity Development Team will also support execution of the project as a co-Executing Entity. The 
Technical Capacity Development Team will deliver targeted technical assistance to support delivery of project activities 
by MoFE (as co-EE), and maintain responsibility and/or controls over international tenders and procurement requiring 
expert/requiring technical oversight. Under this arrangement, project execution will benefit from FAO’s considerable 
technical expertise while ensuring that most project management responsibility remains with MoFE, thus ensuring efficient 
project delivery. In addition, this arrangement will reinforce efforts to build the technical capacity of MoFE and other entities 
involved in project delivery, improving their ability to sustain benefit streams and scale up support after project closure. 
The team will further include gender and safeguard specialists, who will oversee that gender, indigenous peoples and 
Dalits concerns are adequately addressed, and closely monitored. The work of the FAO Technical Capacity Development 
Team will be kept separate from FAO’s Accredited Entity functions. This is further described in Section C.7 below. These 
co-Executing Entity functions will be anchored in the FAO office in Nepal. FAO has been working in Nepal since 1951 and 
has extensive expertise in delivering projects of large scale on agricultural development, climate change and disaster risk 
management.  The FAO country office in Nepal addresses four priority areas of food and nutrition security and safety, 
institutional and policy support, market orientation and competitiveness, and natural resources conservation and 
utilization. Since its inception in Nepal, FAO has completed over 400 projects in Nepal and has made major achievements 
related to policy dialogue and formulation support, technical assistance and capacity building, national data and 
information management, and innovative technology transfer.  
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
Not applicable. 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
66. For activities relating to procurement of goods and services through FAO, according to the Standard Basic Assistance 
Agreement signed with the Government of Nepal, Section 7 of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the 
United Nations provide that the United Nations and its subsidiary organs are exempt from all direct taxes, except for 
utilities services, and is exempt from customs duties and charged of a similar nature in respect of items imported or 
exported for its official use. If the services are procured directly by the Government of Nepal, then national procedures 
apply. 
 
                                                                 
39 Formerly the Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation

=== PAGE 45 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 117 
 
 
C 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
67. The institutional framework for this project will engage a wide range of stakeholders, ensuring their sustained engagement 
from project design to implementation, to monitoring and evaluation (M&E).  
68. Nepal´s new governance structure envisions three tiers of Government structure (i.e. local, provincial, national), with fully 
devolved authority to local government to conserve, monitor, regulate and use natural resources within its jurisdiction. 
However, to ensure that the BRCRN project is implemented in accordance with established operational and financial 
modalities, and in the context of building institutional capacity of the new provincial government Ministries (particularly 
MoITFEs), the MoFE will function as the Executing Entity for the project, and the sole government entity responsible for 
management of all activities implemented through government institutions. MoFE will not sub-delegate or transfer GCF 
grant resources to any other government entity. 
 
Figure 7: BRCRN project governance and reporting arrangements 
 
69. FAO will serve as the Accredited Entity for the BRCRN project.As such, FAO will be resposible for the overall management 
of this project, including: (i) all aspects of project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical oversight and 
supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver results and achieve 
objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as the timeliness and quality of reporting to the GCF; and 
(v) project closure and evaluation. FAO will assume these responsibilities in accordance with the detailed provisions 
outlined in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) between FAO and GCF. Accountability on the use of financial 
resources will be facilitated through the review of annual and bi-annual project reports, as well as through audit and 
monitoring reports. 
70. To perform these Accredited Entity functions, FAO will set up a dedicated FAO-GCF project supervision team comprising 
relevant staff from the FAO Country Office in Nepal, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, and FAO 
Headquarters. Members of this project supervision team will perform the necessary supervision and oversight functions, 
including supervision and backstopping missions during the entire implementation period, as required. The project 
supervision team will remain independent of the Executing Entity functions also performed by FAO (see below). In line 
Green Climate Fund
(GCF)
ACCREDITED 
ENTITY
FAO-GCF Project 
Supervision Team
Financial Flow
Financial Reporting
Progress Reporting
Advising
CO-EXECUTING ENTITY
Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE)
Project Management Unit (PMU)
Based in MoFE
Ministry of Finance 
(MoF) 
Co-Executing 
Entity
FAO Technical 
Capacity 
Development Team
Provincial 
Project 
Management 
Unit (PPMU)
Based in 
MoITFE 1
Provincial 
Project 
Management 
Unit (PPMU)
Based in 
MoITFE 2
Provincial 
Project 
Management 
Unit (PPMU)
Based in 
MoITFE 3
Project Steering Committee (PSC)
Host: MoFE
Chair: Secretary of MoFE
PCU 
Province 1
PCU 
Province 2
PCU 
Province 3

=== PAGE 46 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 117 
 
 
C 
with the GCF policy on fees adopted through GCF Board Decision B.19/09, the above-mentioned segregation of 
responsibilities within FAO will ensure that the Organization can independently and effectively perform the types of 
Accredited Entity functions listed in the GCF General principles and indicative list of eligible costs covered under GCF 
fees and project management costs. 
71. FAO as AE will transfer GCF funds to MOFE through the Ministry of Finance (MOF) that, as per Government of Nepal’s 
procedures, is the only ministry with the authority to accept funds from interantional partners and channel them to line 
ministries. A tripartite Operational Partner Agreement (OPA) between FAO, MOF and MOFE will be signed to govern this 
arrangement. 
72. Both MOFE and the FAO Technical Capacity Development Team (as co-EEs) can enter into contrats and/or Letters of 
Agreement (LoAs) with qualified service providers to support delivery of some activities. The Government of Nepal 
procurement rules as per the Public Procurement Act 2007 and Public Procurement Regulation 2007 will govern MOFE’s 
contractual arrangements with the Service Providers. FAO procurement procedures will govern the FAO Technical 
Capacity Development Team’s contractual arrangements with the Service Providers. 
 
Figure 8: Project management, financial flow and contractual arrangements 
 
Project Coordination and Management 
73. MoFE will establish a national Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the Secretary of MoFE. This committee will 
be comprised of joint-secretary level representative members from relevant federal ministries, provincial ministries, FAO 
(in its role as Accredited Entity), as well as a member secretary of PCTMCDB. PSC will also invite representatives from 
relevant CSOs, the private sector and academia as necessary to discuss thematic issues as well as partnership 
opportunities. PSC´s main responsibility will be to provide strategic guidance and support coordination among government 
institutions, and will provide general oversight for the implementation of the project. The committee will further be 
responsible for revising and approving annual working plans and budgets, and mobilizing relevant technical expertise 
Beneficiaries
Green Climate Fund 
(GCF)
FAO-GCF Project Supervision Team
(AE role)
Flow of fuds
Delivery of Support
Ministry of Forests and Environment (co-EE)
Project Management Unit (PMU)
Based in MoFE
Ministry of Finance
FAO Technical 
Capacity 
Development Team
(co-EE)
PPMU – Province 1
Based in MoITFE 1
Provincial government 
authorities
Local government 
authorities
Community-based 
organizations (CBOs)
PPMU – Province 2
Based in MoITFE 2
PPMU – Province 3
Based in MoITFE 3
Service providers
Governed by AMA 
and FAA.
Internal to 
FAO. Legal 
agreement 
not required.
Governed by a tripartite Operational Partners 
Agreement (‘Subsidiary Agreement’) between 
FAO, MOF and MOFE. MOF involvement is due to 
the fact that it is the only ministry with the 
authority to accept funds from international 
partners and channel them to line ministries via 
Nepal’s ‘Red Book’ account.
Both co-EEs will enter into 
contracts and/or Letters of 
Agreement with qualified 
service providers to 
support delivery of some 
Activities.

=== PAGE 47 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 117 
 
 
C 
where necessary. They will approve the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) and Project Reporting Guidelines (PRG) 
during the inception phase.PSC meetings will be held twice a year: prior to annual budget planning and after the closure 
of fiscal year. 
74. MoFE will serve as an Executing Entity for the BRCRN project (legally one of the two co-EEs for this project along with 
the FAO TA Team, as described below). In this capacity, MoFE will also establish and host a Project Management Unit 
(PMU) at the federal level. It will be headed by a full-time National Project Director (NPD), appointed by MoFE in 
consultation with the PSC, and will include three provincial-level support teams, termed Provincial Project Management 
Units (PPMUs)– one in each of Provinces 1, 2 and 3. The PMU will be responsible for implementation of project activities 
according to annual work plans and budgets submitted to, and approved by, the PSC. Once approved by the PSC, these 
works plans and budgets will be submitted to the FAO project supervision team (FAO’s Accredited Entity role) for final 
review and endorsement before proceeding with execution of activities for that particular year. The PMU will also prepare 
and submit to the PSC annual progress reports to track performance against project targets, and against the targets of 
the Gender Action Plan, Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and ESMF. These reports will also be submitted to the 
FAO project supervision team for review and endorsement. In the inception phase, the PMU will develop a detailed work 
plan and monitoring framework for the full project duration, and the PIM and PRG, for submission and approval by the 
PSC before they are submitted to the FAO project supervision team for final review/endorsement. These will govern the 
roles of all responsible institutions and project stakeholders, including in terms of procurement, monitoring, reporting and 
auditing. 
75. The PPMUs will be hosted in the provincial Ministries of Industry, Tourism, Forests and Environment (MoITFE), but will 
remain directly accountable to the PMU under MoFE at the federal level, and operate according to the regulations and 
guidance set out in the PIM and PRG. These teams will be responsible for coordinating the development of provincial 
work plans, in consultation with the Provincial Coordination Units (PCUs, see below), for delivery and oversight of project 
activities at the province and local level, for development of quarterly progress reports and their submission to the PMU. 
76. In addition to the above project coordination and management structures, FAO will establish a Technical Capacity 
Development Team to support effective and technically sound delivery of the BRCRN project. The FAO Technical 
Capacity Development Team will serve as a co-Executing Entity that will:(i) deliver targeted technical assistance to 
complement and support Activities executed primarily by MoFE (i.e. by executing specific technically specialized 
actions/budget lines under Activities that are otherwise executed by MoFE); (ii) lead the execution of highly technically 
specialized activities (e.g. Activities 3.2.1 and 3.2.3); and (iii) maintain responsibility and/or controls over international 
tenders and procurement requiring expert/requiring technical oversight. In addition, the FAO Technical Capacity 
Development team will recruit a qualified procurement advisory/support service to assist MoFE with their procurement 
actions to ensure adherence with international standards. This team will operate under the supervision of the FAO-GCF 
project supervision team (described above) to ensure FAO’s Accredited Entity and co-Executing Entity functions are kept 
separate from one another. Detailed information on the specific activities and budget items for which the FAO Technical 
Capacity Development Team will be responsible is included in the detailed budget in Annex 3 – Integrated Financial 
Model. 
 
Multi-stakeholder Coordination Units 
77. Provincial Coordination Units (PCUs) will be established in each of the three provinces, and will be chaired by the 
Secretary of the provincial MoITFE. Each PCU will include representative members (Under Secretary level) from other 
relevant provincial ministries, departments, CSOs (including women´s organizations, indigenous people’s federations and 
representatives, and Dalit organizations, among others) and private sector representatives, with the coordinator of the 
PPMU acting as PCU Secretary. PCUs will serve as multi-sectoral and multi-stakeholder committees to develop proposals 
for provincial work plans, with guidance from the PMU and PPMU and according to the PIM and PRG. Each PCU will 
convene on a quarterly basis to review project progress against provincial targets, ensure coordination of project activities 
with those of provincial institutions and provincial policy and legislative priorities, and communicate provincial-level 
concerns and issues to the PMU. The PCUs are a key part of the project’s exit strategy. During the second half of the 
project timeframe, and based on the recommendations of the independent mid-term evaluation, the PPMUs will work with 
provincial stakeholders towards handover of project technical and operational support structures to the PCUs.

=== PAGE 48 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 117 
 
 
C 
Other key actors and entities involved in the project 
78. The Ministry of Finance (MoF) is the National Designated Authority (NDA) for the GCF in Nepal. In line with government 
regulations and procedures, MoF will channel project finance from FAO (as Accredited Entity) to MoFE (as the Executing 
Entity) for project execution, and will contribute to reviewing financial reporting. As part of the PSC, MoF will also contribute 
to oversight of project management in its capacity as the NDA. The Ministry as long-standing experience managing project 
finance from international development projects. 
79. The Ministry of Agriculture, Land Management and Cooperatives (MoALMC) will play an important role supporting 
and guiding interventions targeting the agricultural sector. MoALMC currently oversees agricultural land management, the 
establishment of cooperatives and agricultural extension, which will have an important role in planning processes for 
climate-resilient SNRM, the implementation of climate resilient land use practices in the agricultural sector, and in 
supporting the activities underComponent1. 
80. The Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation (MoEWRI)40 will support interventions related to sustainable 
water resource management and alternative renewable energy (biogas) through the provision of technical support. 
81. The Ministry of Federal Affairs and General Administration (MoFAGA)will contribute to improving coordination 
between national ministries and local and provincial governments, especially ensuring alignment with the BRCRN and 
provincial level policies and decision-making. 
82. The Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) will support interventions related to disaster risk reduction planning under 
Component3 through the provision of technical support by the Disaster Management Section of the Ministry.  
83. Provincial Ministries of Industry, Tourism, Forests and Environment (MoITFE) in Provinces 1, 2 and 3will act as 
hosts of the PPMUs and chairs of the PCUs (as described above), and will be the recipients of institutional capacity 
building efforts at the provincial level along with other provincial stakeholders, contributing to the sustainability of project 
outcomes and impact. MoFE will also use a portion of its co-financing to enlist the services of MoITFE extension workers 
to support a selection of trainings under the project.  
84. Local governments (i.e. rural municipalities) will benefit from BRCRN capacity building interventions, including to develop 
their competence in planning and implementation of climate-resilient SNRM and DRR. Local governments will also support 
PPMUs to coordinate project activities at the local level, and facilitate alignment of project activities with local development 
plans and budgets.  
85. Community-based organizations (CBOs) such as Community Forest Users Groups (CFUGs), Collaborative Forest User 
Groups, Pro-Poor Leasehold Forest User Groups, Public Land Forest User Groups, Indigenous Peoples’ Organisations, 
Soil Conservation User Groups and Farmer Groups play important roles in managing natural resources in the Churia 
region. CBOs and their members are the main beneficiaries of the project. A detailed overview of these groups is included 
in Feasibility Study Section 4. 
86. Private forest owners: Private forest owners will be engaged in Component 1, with a focus on trainings and capacity 
building on climate-resilient forestry practices.  
87. Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) will support activities that strengthen and empower communities and CBOs on 
topics related to SNRM and climate change, providing extension services to local communities, supporting institutional 
strengthening and acting as key actors to support knowledge dissemination. Examples of CSOs to engage include NEFIN, 
forest user group federations (e.g. FECOFUN, ACOFUN), pro-poor leasehold forest user groups, women’s organizations 
(e.g. HIMAWANTI, NIWF) and organizations representing ethnic minorities and marginalized groups (e.g. DANAR, 
FEDO), among others.  Some CSOs may also be engaged as service providers through Letters of Agreement (LoAs), as 
appropriate. 
88. PrivateSector Actors: BRCRN project aims to further strengthen cooperation with the private sector in the promotion of 
sustainable value chains and capacity building, among other activities.  
89. Research and Academic Entities: To be engaged in various project activities as appropriate, through LoAs, to help 
generate and disseminate relevant knowledge and research outcomes on climate change, climate-resilient land use and 
DRR in the Churia Region. 
 
                                                                 
40 Formerly the Ministry of Energy and the Ministry of Water Supply & Sanitation

=== PAGE 49 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 117 
 
 
C 
Fund mobilization procedure 
90. Every year the PMU will prepare the annual work plan and budget, including a procurement plan, which will be approved 
by the PSC. The work plan and budget will draw on the discussions at provincial level and proposals of the PCUs, as 
communicated to the PMU by the PPMUs.  Based on the approval of this plan, FAO will transfer funds according to its 
covenants, rules and standards, to MoF. MoF will confirm these funds in the ‘Red Book’ system of budget management 
and transfer to MoFE accordingly. 
91. According to FAO internal procedures and the Operational Partners Agreement (OPA) negotiated with MoFE, FAO will 
maintain controls over any funds related to international tenders, provision of expert advisory services, and goods or 
equipment for which technical specifications or quality assurance is required.  Such procurement will be conducted or 
technically overseen by the FAO Technical Capacity Development team directly as part of the TA services to the project. 
92. GCF grant finance allocated to the PMU within MoFE according to annual ‘Red Book’ Government accounts, will be the 
responsibility of the NPD and PMU staff.  As part of MoFE and the PMU structure, PPMUs will have access to funds for 
implementation of provincial and local-level interventions according to provincial work plans. These funds will be mobilized 
directly by PPMUs, in their capacity as out-posted units of MoFE, and will not be transferred for any purposes to other 
government or non-government entities at provincial or local levels.  
 
 
C.8. TIMETABLE OF PROJECT/PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
93. Project components and activities rely on sequential implementation of activities and measures, where 
activities under Components 2 and 3 will form the basis for the implementation of investments in climate-
resilient land use under Component 1. Such measures are important to address the barriers described 
above, and to establish capacities, tools and materials to facilitate the effective and efficient implementation 
and scaling up of climate-resilient SNRM practices. The detailed timetable for project implementation is 
presented in Annex6.

=== PAGE 50 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
D.1.Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
94. GCF support will be instrumental for enhancing the climate resilience of ecosystems and vulnerable communities 
in Nepal’s Churia region through integrated climate-resilient SNRM approaches. Nepal´s NDC discusses the 
country´s strategy and commitments to climate change, yet notes the need for additional technical and financial 
support to fully implement its NDC. This project is fully aligned with the NDC.   
95. Nepal´s adaptation needs cannot be addressed through government expenditure alone. The country is still 
recovering from a devastating earthquake in 2015 that led to substantial loss of life and damage to productive 
assets. Budget constraints due to post-earthquake recovery continue to limit the ability of the government to finance 
interventions to address climate change in the Churia region.41 The country´s economy is also still recovering from 
a fuel crisis and extreme flooding in 2017.Thus, Nepal will need considerable grant financing to fund development 
priorities in the medium term.  
96. Nepal’s social and economic development challenges further exacerbate the vulnerability of its population. 
The Gross National Income per capita (purchasing power parity) is $2,500, and 25% of the country’s population 
lives below the poverty line 42.  Over 70% of its population lives in rural areas and approximately 46% are 
unemployed43. While about 1/6 of its population are food insecure, the situation is particularly acute in hilly regions, 
including the Churia. Vulnerability situation is further compounded by the dependence of rural communities on a 
fragile/deteriorating natural resource base which will worsen with climate change. 
97. GCF financial support would allow Nepal to invest in climate action at an opportune time, and avoid predicted 
higher costs associated with delayed responses to climate change. As much of the population is dependent on 
natural resources, the proposed project will support local people and governments to adopt climate-resilient land 
use practices, strengthening their resilience to climate change through improved adaptive capacities. 
98. GCF support will be instrumental for establishing climate-resilient land use planning and management as 
the central paradigm for promoting climate resilience in broader national, provincial and local policymaking 
and planning.  By providing an opportunity to incentivize and scale up Nepal’s flagship, broad-based, 
transformational community-based natural resource management models across the Churia, the project will add 
further momentum to Nepal’s current efforts to transition towards resilient, inclusive, low-carbon development. 
Given Nepal’s political transition, the project further represents an opportune moment to establish capacities on 
climate-resilient land use planning and management and DRR, as well as mainstream climate change mitigation 
and adaptation into provincial and local strategies and plans.  
99. The GCF support is also noteworthy in terms of the catalytic impact it will have in bringing together cross-
sectoral landscape-level climate-resilient planning across a region comprising more than 720,620 ha and a 
population of over 3.2 million people (of which 51% of inhabitants are women, 31% indigenous peoples and 13% 
Dalits).44Successful demonstration of this landscape-scale, ecosystem-based approach in the Churia region will 
provide a model for integrated, cross-sectoral climate change adaptation for adoption in the other regions as well. 
Improved planning at the provincial and local level will promote improved coordination between upstream and 
downstream communities, ensuring that a holistic management approach is promoted that takes into 
consideration the inter-connectedness of ecosystems and land use systems.  
100. BRCRN project activities will crowd-in public financing and mobilize community-level investments for 
climate-resilient land use. Government co-financing demonstrates the government’s commitment to invest in 
climate-resilient land use. Improved extension modules and support, knowledge dissemination and demonstrable 
activities will encourage CBOs and farmers to invest in improved practices. Public-private-CSO platform will support 
opportunities for the private sector to become engaged in climate-resilient value chains, and strengthen 
coordination with the public sector, CSOs and CBOs.  It is highly complementary to the Forest Investment Program 
(FIP), as well as the proposed REDD+ Emissions Reduction Program, among others. 
101. The BRCRN project will have a trans-boundary impact, providing positive environmental, social and economic 
benefits to downstream communities, including in Northern India where many of the Churia´s rivers flow. Particularly 
in the monsoon season, the degree of runoff and sedimentation from the Churia hills and swells in river flows can 
be controlled by SNRM – ultimately reducing the impact of floods.

=== PAGE 51 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
                                                                 
41 IMF 2017 
42ADB 2017 
43World Factbook - https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/np.html 
44Note: Excluding water bodies and settlements, the project area covers 702,011 ha. 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
 
102. The proposed project has been developed through ongoing consultations with government representatives 
from relevant ministries and departments to ensure ownership over the project and ensure that it is closely aligned 
with government policies and plans, and that project activities support medium- and long-term planning to ensure 
the project´s sustainability and continued progress towards mainstreaming climate-resilience in Nepal. 
103. By aligning the project with key national climate policies, priorities, and commitments, including Nepal´s 
NDC and the 20-year Churia Master Plan, the chances of its continuity after GCF investment are very high. 
Improving natural resource management, adapting to and mitigation climate change, and enhancing livelihoods of 
local communities are explicit goals of Nepal’s political leadership. As such, the Government of Nepal is a strong 
proponent of the project’s interventions and continuity. The proposed project is expected to contribute to 
mainstreaming climate change considerations and support for climate-resilient SNRM into the implementation of 
the Churia Master Plan, which would leverage additional resources to sustain and scale up the process of 
transforming natural resource management in the Churia region beyond project closure. The successful 
implementation of the proposed project would also provide a framework for the Government of Nepal to secure the 
additional external funds needed to bridge the financial gap towards the full implementation of the Churia Master 
Plan. 
104. The long-term sustainability of project interventions is further enhanced by the project’s focus on individual and 
institutional capacity building with key stakeholders at all levels. Measures focused on institutional 
strengthening at the provincial and local level are essential given the political transition, and the increasing role 
and influence of such organizations over land use planning and management. It represents an opportune time to 
establish required capacities and expertise early on to enable broad awareness on climate change and climate 
risks, facilitate the use of climate-information in planning and decision making, and mainstream climate-resilience 
into local policies and plans as they are being established. The project’s emphasis on capacity development will 
further enhance the sense of ownership of provincial and local governments during the project life-cycle as well as 
the ongoing implementation of such activities after project closure. 
105. Economic sustainability is achieved through the project’s support for viable, cost-effective and climate-resilient 
measures that provide tangible benefits.  It is particularly important that the project cover such up-front adoption 
costs to provide an initial impetus for CBOs and member households in vulnerable river systems – who are often 
averse to risk and change – to adopt project promoted practices during the project implementation period. As 
shown in the financial analysis, all of the proposed investments related to the land-based interventions and bio-
engineering structures are financially attractive from a land user perspective. The recurrent costs associated with 
continued use of project-promoted farming and forestry models are modest and can be covered by beneficiary 
households through increased cashflows due to the project interventions. The demonstration plantation and 
protection forest will be maintained by the CBOs and will require limited labor inputs until the revenues occur and 
recover the investment costs. FAO and MoFE expect that additional CBOs and member households interested in 
adopting such practices beyond the scope of the project could cover such costs through a combination of own 
resources and those made available through government initiatives such as the Churia Master Plan. The 
institutionalization of trainings, and improved knowledge management will also support sustained adoption of 
climate-resilient SNRM. 
106. The water and soil conservation infrastructure investments will be operated and maintained by CBOs when they 
are built on community-managed land. The project-supported bio-engineering measures and structures are mostly 
made from locally available materials, and thus operations and maintenance (O&M) costs are expected to be 
modest. In addition, the structures are all considered to be durable, thus further contributing to ensuring that O&M 
costs to be borne by CBOs remain sufficiently modest that they can cover such costs beyond project closure – 
particularly given the anticipated increases in revenue among CBO members due to project-supported practices, 
as well as the anticipated reductions in climate change-related losses and damages due to the below bio-

=== PAGE 52 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
 
engineering structures, as well as other resilience-building practices, measures and structures promoted through 
the BRCRN project.  Selected measures are often combined with revenue generating activities to contribute to 
the financial sustainability of such investments (e.g. river bank stabilization with grasses and bamboo/ tree 
planting), as evidenced in the financial and economic analysis. 
107. Investments on public land will be maintained by the government institutions responsible for the infrastructure. 
Investments such as farmer field schools and nurseries will be operated under the responsibility of the CBOs after 
the project ends and will be supported by the government extension system. 
108. Improvements in extension services (e.g. through strengthening extension materials/ modules, training trainers 
and improving access to extension and demonstration activities) will improve access to knowledge on climate 
change and climate resilient land use, both among extension services providers and land users. The project 
anticipates that in so doing, it will increase the demand and supply for such services and information in the broader 
project area, thus increasingly the likelihood that such knowledge exchange, advisory support and other benefit 
streams are sustained (and even scaled up) beyond project closure. By building the capacity of local extension 
workers and drawing on their existing insights and networks, the project expects to also generate high adoption 
rates among CBOs. This will be further aided by ensuring the alignment of FFS with CERPs, ensuring that FFS 
are strategically established in the most vulnerable areas, and provide climate-informed advisory and extension 
services based on priority interventions and local conditions.   
109. In addition, the Government of Nepal is providing considerable co-financing to improve the extension system 
throughout project implementation – demonstrating their recognition of this pressing need and commitment to 
address it – and will be encouraged and actively supported to mobilize the funds needed to continue this enhanced 
support beyond project closure.  Provincial Ministries will mobilize their extension staff to support FFS from 
year 3 to the end of the project period. Knowledge management systems (CKC), institutionalization of trainings, 
development of high-quality training modules on low-GHG and climate-resilient SNRM, and capacity development 
of government staff will facilitate Provincial and Central Government to mobilize the funds needed and continue 
investment beyond project closure.  This approach will also ensure that the provincial governments are well 
equipped to continue providing climate-informed extension services in the Project Area after project closure – 
thereby increasing the prospects for scaling up and out that are so important to the broader process of sector 
transformation that this project aims to set in motion.  
110. Ultimately, investments in FFS will address the main barriers faced by the current system (highlighted in the FS in 
Table 9 and Box 1) by improving the reach of services in highly vulnerable areas, and increasing the quality 
of trainings (trained Local Resource Persons, promoted good climate-resilient land use practices), and providing 
targeted support for women and excluded/ marginalized groups (see GAP and IPPF/SIPF for specific 
measures). Farmers participating in FFS will continuously improve and consolidate their knowledge and 
skills, including through testing and validating on their own farmland. The FFS and the practices promoted by the 
project are economically sustainable. Participation in FFS is voluntary and will employ locally available resources 
(materials and labour), so economic means will not limit farmers to undertake the improved practices. Moreover, 
the practices promoted improve farmers’ income through increased productivity, cost savings, or other means. 
FAO experience in the region including in Nepal shows a positive rate of farmers adopting new 
technologies/practices through FFS, including among non-participant who observe the benefits of such 
practices.

=== PAGE 53 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
111. The project has been designed to generate positive adaptation and mitigation impacts, in line with Nepal´s 
National Climate Policy and NDC. 
a) Adaptation: The BRCRN project will significantly improve the resilience of ecosystems and 
communities in the Churia region. Through support for the adoption of climate-resilient land use 
practices, at least 200,681 households (963,268 people, equivalent to about 30% of the inhabitants in 
the project area) in the 26 targeted river systems will become more resilient to short- and medium-term 
climate change risks. The project will support enhanced resilience of ecosystems on 270,502 ha of 
land, which will also indirectly reduce vulnerability to climate change-related risks for countless other 
inhabitants of the Churia region. In addition, the project will: mainstream gender-sensitive and climate-
resilient land-use planning and management practices into key plans at the sub-national level; 
strengthen the capacities of government and other actors to provide extension and other advisory 
services that are more responsive to climate change risks; and significantly improve knowledge and 
awareness of climate change risks and appropriate response measures. In so doing, the BRCRN 
project will indirectly benefit all inhabitants of the project area, which is equivalent to about 3.2 million 
people. 
b) Mitigation: The BRCRN project will have an impact on GHG emissions from the AFOLU sector in 
Nepal. Importantly, the project is expected to significantly reduce deforestation and forest degradation 
and improve forest management in the project area. The project will also: support the restoration and 
sustainable management of degraded forests, wetlands and grassland ecosystems; support tree 
planting on degraded or non-forested land; and scale up the adoption of climate-resilient agriculture 
and land management practices that (inter alia) enhance carbon sequestration in soils. Assuming an 
80 percent adoption rate, the project will therefore deliver average annual emissions reductions of 
574,180tCO2eq, which is equivalent to about 11.48 million tCO2eq over the 20-year lifetime of the 
project. 
112. The project Components and Activities are complementary and collectively will achieve impacts on the ground and 
beyond project timeframe. In the first two years of the project, activities within Component 2 will focus on 
strengthening local and provincial institutions and supporting operational planning at the local level within each of 
the project´s 26 target river systems and mainstreaming climate-resilient land use planning at the provincial, local 
(i.e. rural municipality) and community-level. Complementing the government decentralization process, this 
Component will balance top-down integrated spatial planning with participatory land use planning for climate-
resilience at the CBO level, culminating in the development of CERPs in each of the 26 targeted river systems. 
These plans (and the priorities and interventions identified therein) will be consulted and validated with the relevant 
CBOs within each vulnerable river system, thereby ensuring full community buy-in for interventions to be delivered 
under Component 1. 
113. The delivery of support under Component 1 generally involves a combination of: (i) training for member households 
from partner CBOs; (ii) the procurement and provision of inputs, tools and materials that the trained CBO member 
households need to adopt the specific project-promoted practices (note: the specific inputs, tools and equipment 
vary by activity, as outlined in Annex 3.2); and (iii) the provision of expert guidance and assistance (i.e. extension) 
throughout the project implementation period to support beneficiaries to sustain the project-promoted practices. 
As a result of the combination of these types of support, FAO assumes a relatively high adoption rate under 
Component 1 activities. Households and CBOs are generally expected to incur minimal additional costs when 
adopting and applying project-promoted practices, and where costs are involved (e.g. basic equipment and tools 
for farming activities; seedlings, tools/equipment and local labour for reforestation/planting activities), the project 
will cover these costs. 
114. As a result, the project allocates approximately 55% of GCF grant finance to cover the costs of inputs (e.g. 
seedlings), materials (e.g. for community structures), tools and equipment that would otherwise serve as barriers 
to adoption. In the case of community structures (e.g. check dams), plantation establishment and forest restoration

=== PAGE 54 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
activities, establishment costs are the key barriers to adoption and the project’s demonstration of cost-effective, 
needs-based and locally-supported investment in such activities, guided by the CERPs, will serve as the template 
for allocation of domestic finance under the Churia Master Plan beyond the project timeframe. Furthermore, the 
project will invest in the establishment of, and local management capacity for, tree nurseries managed by 
beneficiary CBOs. This will ensure a sustainable source of local material beyond the project timeframe, reducing 
the costs to the beneficiaries of continued application of climate-resilient practices. 
115. It is particularly important that the project cover such up-front adoption costs to provide an initial impetus for CBOs 
and member households in vulnerable river systems – who are often averse to risk and change – to adopt project 
promoted practices during the project implementation period. FAO and MoFE expect that additional CBOs and 
member households interested in adopting such practices beyond the scope of the project could cover such costs 
through a combination of own resources and those made available through government initiatives such as the 
Churia Master Plan. The economic rationale for this is provided in Annex 3.1 – Financial and Economic Analysis, 
which presents comparisons of agriculture and forestry practices to be promoted through this project with current 
baseline practices. 
116. Component 1, implemented in a manner that draws on and benefits from Components 2 and 3, expects to achieve 
important tangible impacts in the Churia region, as summarized in Section H.1 of the Funding Proposal. Key project 
impacts and associated cost at sub-component level are summarized below. Attachment 3 of this Funding proposal 
provides more details on impacts of project activities and their sustainability. 
 
Sub-
component 
Budget breakdown 
(see Annex 3.2 for more 
detail) 
Impact rationale 
Physical impact to 
be achieved 
Direct 
beneficiaries 
1.1: 
Climate-
resilient 
land use 
practices 
are adopted 
Inputs, 
equipment, 
materials 
and 
associated 
contracts 
Approx. 
USD 
7.6 
million 
The project will train CBO members and 
provide them with the necessary equipment 
& inputs needed to adopt the relevant 
practices, as well as directly engage service 
providers to build/establish community-level 
structures to enhance resilience – thereby 
increasing FAO’s and MoFE”s confidence 
that a high adoption rate will be achieved.  In 
particular, the project will: 
 
a) train at least 7,800 farmers, and provide 
them with minor tools/equipment to enable 
adoption of project-promoted practices; 
 
b) cover the costs of stabilizing at least 86 
gullies and establishing and maintaining 
check dams and/or community-managed 
ponds in at least 129 sites; 
 
c) train at least 120 farmers on agro-forestry, 
and provide them with equipment needed to 
establish small on-farm tree nurseries; and 
d) assist approx. 500 households to access 
the government biogas subsidy. 
Assuming an 80% 
adoption rate, the 
project expects to 
stimulate 
adoption/application 
of climate-resilient 
land use measures 
on at least 48,772 
ha of land. 
Over the 
course of 
implementing 
the activities 
that will deliver 
the impacts 
outlined in the 
preceding 
columns, the 
project expects 
to cumulatively 
benefit at least 
200,681 
households, 
which are 
expected to 
include about 
963,268 
members. 
Training, 
capacity 
development 
and 
associated 
travel 
USD 
1.04 
million 
Personnel 
costs 
Approx. 
USD 2 
million 
Other costs 
 
1.2 Natural 
forest 
ecosystems 
Inputs, 
equipment, 
materials 
and 
Approx. 
USD 
3.75 
million 
The project will work with the approx. 600 
forestry-related CBOs in the project area to 
develop/strengthen their forest management 
operational plans to ensure silvicultural 
Assuming an 80% 
adoption rate, the 
project expects that 
the support

=== PAGE 55 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
are better 
maintained 
and 
protected 
associated 
contracts 
practices are promoted and ecosystem 
service provision and resilience are 
maximized; and subsequently directly 
support the implementation of these plans for 
the remainder of the project period by 
procuring and providing these CBOs with: (a) 
the necessary tools and equipment; and (b) 
expert advisory services. 
 
provided under 
Sub-Component 
1.2 will result in at 
least 148,998 ha of 
forest ecosystems 
being managed 
sustainably. 
Training, 
capacity 
development 
and 
associated 
travel 
Approx. 
USD 
0.25 
million 
Personnel 
costs 
Approx. 
USD 
0.27 
million 
Other costs 
 
1.3 Forests 
and tree 
cover are 
restored 
and 
maintained 
in the river 
system 
landscapes 
Inputs, 
equipment, 
materials 
and 
associated 
contracts 
Approx. 
USD 7 
million 
The project will provide trainings and inputs 
(materials, tools and labour), to enable 
relevant CBOs to engage in planting 
activities, while also directly guiding and 
overseeing these planting activities – thereby 
increasing FAO’s and MoFE’s confidence 
that a high adoption rate will be achieved.  In 
particular, the project will: 
 
a) provide relevant CBOs with the 
equipment, inputs and materials needed to 
establish tree nurseries in currently under-
served locations – nurseries that will provide 
seedlings (inputs) for other planting activities 
under the project, as well as provide 
seedlings for post-project planting activities; 
 
b) procure materials, seed stock/seedlings, 
tools/equipment and local labour needed to 
plant: (i) demonstration plantations on 1300 
ha; (ii) riparian plantations on 1000 ha; and 
(iii) plantations on 5000 ha of community land 
– and directly oversee/guide the process of 
establishing these plantations. 
 
c) train relevant CBOs on Forest Landscape 
Restoration, and procure and provide them 
with the tools, equipment, inputs and local 
labour needed to implement Assisted Natural 
Regeneration on at least 15990 ha of 
community-managed forest land – and 
directly oversee/guide this planting process. 
Assuming an 80% 
adoption rate, the 
project expects that 
the support 
provided under 
Sub-Component 
1.3 will result in at 
least 5,840 ha of 
new planted forests 
being established, 
and 12,792 ha of 
community-
managed natural 
forests being 
restored by 
assisted 
regeneration. 
Training, 
capacity 
development 
and 
associated 
travel 
Approx. 
USD 
0.19 
million 
Personnel 
costs 
Approx. 
USD 
0.53 
million 
Other costs 
Approx. 
USD 
11.4 
million 
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
GCF core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
574,180tCO2eq 
Lifetime 
11,48million tCO2eq over 20 years

=== PAGE 56 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
 
Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) 
Total 
Direct: Improved resilience of at least 
200,681 households, comprised of 
~963,268 people, where 50% of the 
beneficiaries are women with 
proportional representation of 
indigenous peoples and marginalized 
groups. 
Indirect and Direct: Improved resilience 
of over 3.2 million people living within 26 
vulnerable river systems. 
Percentage 
(%) 
Direct beneficiaries are equivalent to 
about 3% of the population of Nepal, 
and about 30% of the population of the 
project area. 
 
Methodology for Calculating the Mitigation Impact: 
117. The methodology for calculating the mitigation impact indicators follows IPCC GPG (2006) principles for land based 
accounting. The main logic is that for each BRCRN activity which impacts the mitigation indicator a specific impact 
factor is derived which will be applied to calculate the overall impacts. This impact factor, measured in tCO2/ha/year 
consists of several Baseline-to-Project change factors if a specific intervention is involved more than one land use 
practice. The figure below illustrates this approach. More detailed information on the applied approach is described 
in Feasibility Study Section 5.5. 
 
Methodology for Calculating Beneficiaries: 
118. The number of direct beneficiaries were calculated as follows: 
 
Within the project districts, the average household contains 4.8 people (slightly higher than the national average 
of 4.5).45 The project aims to reach 750 CBOs. On average this will imply ~28-29 user groups per river system, 
while in practice some river systems may have more groups than others based on their size. The following 
assumptions were made in terms of the composition of groups and number of beneficiaries: 
Table 7. Overview of beneficiary calculations. 
Type of Community-based 
Organization (CBO) 
Average membership (# of 
households per CBO) 
Number of 
CBOs to Target 
No. of Households 
engaged in BRCRN project 
CFUG 
180 
557 
100260 
CoFM 
32,227 
3 
96681 
Farmer Groups and Soil 
Conservation User Groups 
40 
50 
2000 
Public Land Forest User Groups 
15 
100 
1500 
Pro-Poor Leasehold Forest Groups 
6 
40 
240 
Total 
N/A  
750 
200,681 
 
 
In total, the 750 CBOs are expected to include at least 200,681 households within the project. Based on average 
household size in the project area, the total number of beneficiaries would be around963,268people. 
 
At least 1 Indigenous Peoples Organisation (IPO) in each province will also be among the beneficiary CBOs.  It 
is expected that this will not add to the total number of beneficiary households; the members of these IPOs will 
also be members of other CBOs (CFUGs etc).The IPOs will be targeted as beneficiary CBOs for particular 
project activities, in consultation with IP representative bodies e.g. NEFIN. 
                                                                 
45CBS 2014, District Level Data

=== PAGE 57 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
 
The number of women within communities is based on ward level population information from CBS (2011) that 
identified 51% of project-area inhabitants as female. Meanwhile, population statistics on indigenous peoples, 
Dalits and other ethnicities and/or castes are based on averaged district-level data from CBS (2014). 
119. Indirect beneficiaries include all individuals residing in the 26 prioritized river systems that comprise the BRCRN 
project area. Information from the Central Bureau of Statistics was used from 2011 at the ward level,46 which 
identified 3.2 million people residing within the project area, of which 51% are women, 31% indigenous peoples 
and 13% Dalits. 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication 
120. The project will be the first ecosystem-wide initiative in the Churia region to move beyond pilots and institutionalize 
climate change mitigation and adaptation objectives into multi-sectoral local development planning processes. It 
will ensure large-scale sustainable impacts by focusing on the implementation of nationally-endorsed and locally-
validated policies and measures, without the need for substantial investment in intensive small-scale piloting 
activities. The proposed GCF project is thus an innovative programme that will integrate a range of aspects of 
climate vulnerability and adaptive capacity, rural livelihoods and national/sub-national governance for enhancing 
climate resilience at the watershed (i.e. landscape) level. 
121. The project will support investment in climate-resilient SNRM at scale to address critical climate change challenges 
and demonstrate (for communities, governments and other stakeholders) the substantial benefits to be accrued 
from adopting such practices, while also laying a foundation for key actors to scale up such practices beyond 
project closure and drive a transformation process. 
122. At the policy and institutional level, the project will ensure that climate-resilient SNRM becomes a central feature 
of future planning and investment for natural resources management and rural development. This will benefit from 
a strong political commitment and the opportunity to shape the development trajectory of the new decentralized 
institutions and to implement the Churia Master Plan. However, since Nepal is a Least Developed Country (LDC) 
with high rural poverty and relatively low potential to attract private investment for climate resilience, the proposed 
project focuses on locally-appropriate, low-cost and low-maintenance technical approaches that can be 
adopted/applied by local communities largely through existing resources, sustained by robust institutions and 
support services. The development of CERPs and numerous trainings for Professional Beneficiaries on the use of 
tools to measure and monitor climate change impacts and natural resources, and apply this knowledge to refine 
planning over time, will enable government at all levels to scale up their support for climate-resilient SNRM within 
and beyond the 26 river systems targeted by this project, and beyond project closure. 
123. At field level, the project will work directly with 750 CBOs to support their member households to adopt and invest 
in climate-resilient SNRM approaches that are suited to their local conditions and needs. The project will do so by 
strengthening CBO management plans, trainings for CBOs on climate-resilient SNRM and strengthening forest 
management operational plans (among other measures). The project will also deliver targeted technical trainings 
(e.g. on climate-resilient farming practices, forest management and other approaches) for nominated CBO 
members and provide crucial tools and equipment that complement trainings, which will not only enable adoption 
of such practices by direct beneficiaries but also equip these individuals to train other households within their CBOs 
to adopt and apply project-promoted practices. Recognizing the financial and capacity constraints of households 
in the project area, the participatory planning process (in Component 2) will enable partner CBOs to work with 
project staff to identify and prioritize practices that are best suited to their local conditions and needs, and which 
can be adopted and maintained at minimal cost to local beneficiaries. Where up-front adoption costs are involved 
and would otherwise impede adoption – as is the case with community structures and reforestation activities – the 
project will cover such costs to enable high adoption rates among beneficiaries. In addition, it is important to note 
that the preliminary practices that have been identified for promotion through the project (which are described in 
Appendix A of the Feasibility Study) provide noteworthy financial benefits to households (relative to baseline 
models) among other sustainable development benefits (e.g. improved soil nutrition, enhanced biodiversity, 
                                                                 
46Ward level statistics were only available for 2011.

=== PAGE 58 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
reduced time for women and girls to collect fuelwood and water, etc.), which is expected to incentivize beneficiary 
households to continue using project-promoted practices, as well as incentivize other households to replicate and 
scale up such approaches. These assumptions are substantiated by the financial analysis of project-promoted 
practices included in Annex 3.1. 
124. The project will actively promote further training and capacity building within CBOs in part through its approach to 
beneficiary selection (see Section C.3). It also commits to monitor the extent to which this spread of knowledge 
and capacity is happening through the project monitoring system (see project performance indicators in Section 
H). Project support for the establishment of nurseries and strengthening of extension and advisory services, as 
well as information dissemination and awareness-raising efforts, will also contribute to strengthening the enabling 
environment that is needed to support further scaling up by CBOs during and beyond the project implementation 
period. 
125. As a result of field-level support, the project expects to achieve a critical mass of tangible and visible benefits within 
the project area – impacts that are described in Section E.1 above and more details in Section H1. This in turn is 
expected to further incentivize CBOs and additional member households to adopt, apply and sustain climate-
resilient SNRM practices. It will also have the added benefit of reinforcing demand for extension and advisory 
services that support such practices. To further facilitate widespread adoption of project-promoted practices within 
partner CBOs during and after the project, FAO, MoFE and Provincial Ministries will support Local Resource 
Persons, within the CBOs, in the development of management plans, and to facilitate internal knowledge sharing 
and exchange among their members with a view to ensuring skills accrued by households involved in project 
trainings are transferred to other member households (Activity 2.2.2).  
126. With regards to the broader enabling environment, the project also places a strong emphasis on strengthening 
local extension services to ensure land users have continued access to the latest knowledge, information and 
guidance needed to continue applying climate-resilient SNRM approaches – even as climate change impacts and 
the state of natural resources within the project area continue to evolve over time. Improved extension modules, 
methods and farmer field schools, combined with improved knowledge and capacity of local extension workers on 
climate change and climate resilient SNRM, will improve awareness and capacities on such measures among 
CBO members throughout the project area, including those not directly reached by the BRCRN project during its 
7-year implementation period. There is a large potential to replicate and scale up the projects activities in CBOs 
around Nepal. For example, the project will work with 557 CFUGs, whereas in all of Nepal there are over 18,000 
CFUGs comprised of over 2.2 million households managing over 1.7 million ha of forest. In addition to field level 
support, the integration of training materials into the CKC, and the institutionalization of training (training trainer 
materials and handbooks, training materials) will enable such an approach to be replicated in other areas of the 
river system, and within the country. 
127. The Provincial Ministries that (as a result of the ongoing decentralization process) are taking over responsibility for 
such advisory services have indicated their intention to continue financing rural extension capacity and the 
provision of climate-informed extension services, both during the project (as evidenced by the government’s co-
financing commitment outlined in Annex 3.2) and after project closure. Increased cooperation with the private 
sector will be promoted, potentially leveraging private resources for extension. As part of the proposed project, 
FAO also commits to work with these government actors to mobilize the funds needed to sustain such services 
(including through the Churia Master Plan) – a key element of the process of transforming land use and natural 
resource management in the Churia region. 
128. To further reinforce the capacity of the extension system, the project plans to establish a Churia Knowledge Centre 
(CKC), with a knowledge hub in each of the three Provinces, that will serve as a repository for extension materials 
and information, while also facilitating exchange of crucial information and data on natural resources and climate 
change among relevant stakeholders – exchange that is expected to contribute to post-project planning and 
investment decisions as outlined above. While the CKC will reinforce the government’s capacity to make climate-
informed decisions and provide climate-informed extension services after project closure, it will be hosted and 
managed by the Provincial Ministries of Industry, Tourism, Forests and Environment (MoITFEs). These ministries 
have expressed strong support for the establishment of the CKC, and a willingness to operate and maintain them 
during and after the project.

=== PAGE 59 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
129. The project will also organize awareness raising campaigns to stimulate broader interest in climate-resilient SNRM 
practices. Coupled with the demonstrable benefits accrued by communities and households who adopt such 
practices during the project (as outlined above), this is expected to reinforce demand for climate-informed 
extension and advisory services and other support, including that which would be provided through the Churia 
Master Plan. This in turn will strengthen the incentives for MoFE and Provincial MoITFEs to provide such services 
beyond project closure. 
130. Close coordination and collaboration with national and sub-national (e.g. local and provincial) entities further 
ensures local ownership and sustainability, and thus the potential for scaling up and replication after project 
closure. The project is well aligned with existing planning and administrative processes, and builds capacities of 
partners to deliver these processes. For example, the project has significant elements that respond to the latest 
developments in national forest policy; national climate policy; national REDD+ strategy draft and recent 
amendments to the Forest Act of 1993. 
131. The planning approaches mainstreamed in the Churia (e.g. CERPs, provincial and CBO planning) can be 
replicated and scaled up to other regions of Nepal in a cost-effective and efficient manner, and, indeed may result 
in net savings through targeted, efficient, results-oriented investment of national resources. This will be aided by 
the establishment of a national database on water, soil, forest, and grassland resources that will guide planning 
and implementation of measures for increasing climate resilience. Scaling-up efforts will be facilitated by the 
establishment of knowledge-sharing mechanisms (e.g. CKC) and platforms for dialogue to inform national and 
sub-national institutions on best practices for climate-resilient SNRM. The project will thus promote the active 
exchange of information, lessons learned and best practices to guide implementation of climate-resilient SNRM 
and DRR measures across Nepal. 
132. As the Churia region extends to India to Pakistan, the experiences, knowledge generated and lessons learnt from 
this GCF project will be useful for these countries as well. There is substantial potential to scale up and replicate 
measures within these countries. The project will have substantial impacts downstream, not only in the 
downstream-Terai in Nepal, but also in India, a country that also experiences high exposure to flooding and that is 
greatly impacted by upstream land use in the Churia hills of Nepal. 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
133. The project will encourage innovative knowledge management to improve awareness, build capacities, and 
support the integration of climate and land use information into decision making processes at the national, 
provincial and local level. Within Components2 and 3, activities focus on institutional capacity building and learning. 
Provincial and local government authorities will be trained on climate-resilient land use planning and practices, 
including on the job support to identify critical hotspots and conduct a mapping activity within each river system. 
Such knowledge and learning is critical given the political transition and the important new roles that provincial and 
local governments will have with regards to natural resource management. The development of CERPs will 
contribute to the provision of climate-informed extension and advisory services, and will ensure climate change 
and disaster risk reduction are integrated into planning and decision making processes. This will ultimately guide 
the adoption of prioritized low-carbon and climate-resilient SNRM.  
134. At least 750 local CBOs will participate in workshops to raise awareness of climate change risks and climate-
resilient land use practices that are adapted and appropriate to their local contexts and priorities. A participatory 
approach will be utilized that allows such communities to access information and technical support, promoting 
participatory land use planning and allowing communities to develop ownership and apply their knowledge based 
on their own priorities. By participating in project workshops, communities will become increasingly aware of 
climate change risks in their locality/ region, risk-reduction measures, as well as how/ where they can access 
relevant information and support (e.g. CKC, local extension agents, radio programs, among other sources). 
135. Activity 3.1.1 will support the consolidation of local and indigenous knowledge on adaptation related to water, 
agriculture and forests, where innovative and locally adapted approaches will be identified, disseminated and 
integrated into supporting materials (e.g. extension modules). Many local communities, including indigenous 
communities, have noted the importance of existing traditional and indigenous knowledge for climate change 
adaptation. Thus, the project aims to consolidate such information and integrate it into extension support materials

=== PAGE 60 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
and farmer field schools. This represents a major innovation for supporting the mainstreaming of this knowledge 
into extension modules, combined with other good practices that build on key lessons and experiences. 
136. Activity3.2.2 focuses specifically on strengthening extension services in the project area, with a focus on 
knowledge and information. The project will finance the elaboration of 10 extension modules for climate-resilient 
land use that will be used within farmer field schools. Training modules draw on best practices identified in the 
feasibility work done for this project, as well as the insights gained from the CERP process (under Activity 2.1.2) 
and the collection of local and indigenous knowledge (under Activity 3.1.1). Modules will be adapted to the context 
of the project area and the different bio-geographical zones and aim to support the transfer of knowledge on climate 
change risks and improved climate-resilient practices to diverse groups of people including people from diverse 
socio-cultural backgrounds, poor households, women, and people who are illiterate, among others. Diverse 
communication methods will be used including manuals, videos and radio programs/ audio materials. Trainers 
(including women, indigenous peoples, Dalits, and Madheshi people, among others) will be trained on the modules 
and equipped to apply this knowledge in the field. Where necessary, translations will also be provided (either 
through official translators or through local resource persons) to support extension services and knowledge 
dissemination. Training module development and the implementation of trainings will enable improved institutional 
and individual learning, improved knowledge management (through the CKC), and will support the replication of 
training and adoption of climate-resilient land use in other parts of the country. 
137. As discussed in E.2.1, the knowledge generated by this project is relevant for the entire Churia region, as well as 
the Churia landscape that extends from India to Bangladesh and Bhutan, passing through Nepal. Thus, the 
dissemination of the project´s approach and lessons learned, including through the innovative online CKC 
knowledge hub, would support learning processes and the potential scaling up and replication of project activities.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
138. The BRCRN project contributes to the creation of an enabling environment through a step-wise approach. Through 
Component2, it establishes an institutional and planning framework conducive to implement the project activities. 
Ultimately, the capacity of government stakeholders and local CBOs will be built by the project to understand and 
assess climate risks, utilize climate information and vulnerability assessments to plan, and monitor climate resilient 
land use, and further monitor local risks and resources in the future. This will equip them to continue investing in 
climate-resilient SNRM – in a manner that coordinates upstream and downstream interventions to maximize 
adaptation and mitigation benefits – beyond project closure. 
139. Given the government´s ongoing political transition, and the associated devolution of power to the local and 
provincial levels, it is an opportune moment to mainstream and build capacities on climate-resilient planning, DRR 
and SNRM at the local and provincial level. Building institutional capacities at an early phase will facilitate 
institutional learning, mainstream climate change, and ensure that climate-resilient planning becomes a cross-
cutting consideration for government institutions after project closure.  
140. Provincial strategies and CERPs will further create an enabling environment for climate-resilient land use, ensuring 
a strong provincial and local framework is in place to demonstrate commitment and actively promote climate-
resilient land use planning, ensuring an integrated approach considering upstream and downstream management. 
Such strategies and CERPs will highlight key targets and goals for climate-resilient land use, and support the 
longevity and scaling up of such practices. Specifically, they will enable provincial governments to understand 
climate risks, and implement a holistic approach for disaster risk-reduction, as well as low-carbon and climate-
resilient land use. Such an approach will demonstrate a new framework for low GHG and climate-resilient planning 
in Nepal, which will be replicable in other river systems in the country. This is necessary to support the country’s 
needs, given the high vulnerability of the region and the political context of the country, where there is a need to 
quickly invest in the capacities of provincial and local policy makers to enable the adoption of necessary adaptation 
measures. 
141. Capacities of CSOs, CBOs and other stakeholders will be strengthened as well, ensuring that there is a clear 
foundation to support the adoption and scaling up of climate-resilient practices at household level. Participatory 
planning approaches through workshops will help communities become aware of climate risks and improved 
practices to reduce risks and vulnerability, yet provide them with the flexibility to decide what measures they want 
to implement based on their local context and priorities. Such an approach will increase awareness of climate

=== PAGE 61 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
change, climate-risks and risk-reduction strategies, and create ownership that will generate local interest and 
support for climate-resilient land use after project closure. In addition, the adoption of climate-resilient technologies 
and land use practices in the 26 vulnerable river systems will demonstrate the effectiveness of such measures at 
scale, which is likely to shape future investment decisions by CBOs – groups that are otherwise risk-averse and 
thus averse to change given their limited financial resources. 
142. Targeted support will further be provided to public land forest users, containing primarily members from poor 
households and marginalized groups, to help them strengthen their capacities and plan for climate-resilient land 
use practices. Such user groups often contain marginalized households, and the project can support them to 
strengthen their institutional capacity to support inclusive development. 
143. Knowledge generation activities (e.g. Activity 3.1.1) and improved extension support (e.g. Activities 3.2.2 and 3.2.3) 
will ensure that innovative and locally adapted practices are promoted. Such materials and services will create a 
strong foundation to raise awareness on climate change risks, promote climate-resilient land use, and have a 
lasting on the decisions of land users. The use of these materials and implementation of these climate-sensitive 
farmer field schools will continue after project completion, ensuring the strengthened enabling environment 
continues to shape land-use decisions – by the project’s beneficiaries and others – well into the future. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
144. Promoted measures will contribute to the implementation of Nepal´s NDC as well as various national policies and 
plans, including the Churia Master Plan, Forest Sector Strategy and the Agriculture Sector Strategy (described in 
Section E.5 below).Promoted measures will further contribute to various SDGs (described in Section E.3.1), as 
well as various Aichi Targets for the Convention on Biological Diversity, especially Targets 5, 7, 14 and 15. 
145. Climate-resilient SNRM will be integrated into provincial strategies and CERPs through the BRCRN project. This 
will support governments to orient investments and priorities towards climate-resilient land use practices, and 
encourage local governments to implement climate-resilient land use planning at the local level, aligned with 
provincial and river system level planning to promote integrated management and improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of investments. Given the political transition, capacity building on climate change risks, SNRM and 
DRR will support mainstreaming of such practices at the provincial and local level, encouraging newly formed 
governments to integrate such principles into policies and planning processes. 
146. Capacity building for CBOs will contribute to local level management plans, and guide the implementation of 
informed management plans that take into account climate risks and suitable climate-resilient practices. Capacity 
building, combined with improved knowledge materials and dissemination processes and support to implement 
investments, will help to leverage future investments in climate-resilient land use practices by CBOs.  
147. Public land forest user groups will also be formalized and engaged throughout the implementation of this project, 
which will have an important impact to allow (often) marginalized public land forest users to legally benefit from 
the sustainable management of natural resources. The current political transition represents an opportune moment 
to formalize such user groups at the local level. 
 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
Environmental Co-benefits 
148. The project will support the following Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) related to the environment: 
 
Table 8. Link between project activities and environment-related SDGs 
SDG 
Link with Project Activities 
SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food 
security and improved nutrition 
Improved food security will be achieved through the adoption of climate-resilient and 
sustainable agricultural practices, as well as through the adoption of water conservation

=== PAGE 62 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
and promote sustainable 
agriculture 
measures (including retention ponds) that can help improve water retention in soils and 
water-access, especially in the dry season.  
SDG 6: Ensure availability and 
sustainable management of water 
and sanitation for all 
Project activities will support target 6.6 that aims to protect and restore water-related 
ecosystems, including forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes. 202,747ha of forests, 
wetlands and grasslands will be restored and sustainably managed by the project, and 
measures will help stabilize ecosystems, and reduce degradation and sedimentation.  
SDG 7: Ensure access to 
affordable, reliable, sustainable 
and modern energy for all 
Project activities will support 500 households to access government subsidies and adopt 
biogas technologies, increasing the adoption of renewable energy in the project area. 
Project activities will also help reduce pressure on natural forests for fuelwood. 
SDG 12 : Ensure sustainable 
consumption and production 
patterns 
The project´s objective is closely aligned with the target 12.2 to achieve the sustainable 
management and efficient use of natural resources. Project activities focused on 
awareness raising and capacity building will strengthen awareness for SNRM.  
SDG 13: Take urgent action to 
combat climate change and its 
impacts 
The project will strengthen resilience to climate-related hazards and natural disasters 
within Nepal and northern India through investments in climate-resilient land use, 
supported by strengthened capacities and approaches. Capacity-building and awareness 
raising are measures that are cross-cutting through all project components and activities 
that contribute to Target 13.3 (i.e. improved awareness and capacities) 
SDG 15: Protect, restore and 
promote sustainable use of 
terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably 
manage forests, combat 
desertification, and halt and 
reverse land degradation and half 
biodiversity loss 
The adoption of climate-resilient land use practices will reduce environmental degradation 
in comparison to business-as-usual practices, slowing down soil degradation, erosion and 
sedimentation processes, and deforestation and forest degradation. These measures will 
further support biodiversity conservation through improving habitat and ecosystem quality.  
 
Social Co-benefits 
149. The project will deliver numerous health-related co-benefits. For example, appropriately managed water 
conservation ponds can reduce water-borne illnesses in communities. In addition, project-related improvements in 
resource quality and production can reduce collection distances for fuelwood, water and fodder (where women 
previously had to walk several hours carrying heavy loads – activities that were increasing due to climate change 
and unsustainable resource use). Reduced collection times may have the added benefit of indirectly enabling girls 
(who play an important role in collecting water) to allocate more time to their education.47 
150. The project aims for proportional representation of indigenous peoples, where at least 31% of direct beneficiaries 
should be indigenous peoples. An indigenous peoples planning framework has been developed, based on diverse 
consultations with indigenous peoples, to ensure that indigenous people’s rights are safeguarded, promote 
targeted measures to empower indigenous peoples and ensure that a responsive M&E framework can be applied 
to the project to continuously monitor the project´s impact on indigenous peoples.  
151. The project will support SDG 10 to reduce inequality within and among countries, as social-inclusion is 
mainstreamed as a cross-cutting consideration within the project with the aim to enhance social inclusion and 
empower marginalized households. Many marginalized groups tend to live in highly vulnerable areas, along river 
banks or in areas that are susceptible to landslides, and the project will further help reduce their vulnerability to 
climate change and strengthen their adaptive capacities by targeting the most vulnerable communities.  
 
Economic Co-benefits 
152. The BRCRN project will deliver crucial economic co-benefits through its support for agricultural development. 
Investments in climate-resilient agriculture will improve soil quality, water availability and reduce land degradation, 
which can help to strengthen agricultural production and productivity that can allow households to generate more 
                                                                 
47 Some consulted communities that girls miss more school in the dry season, where due to seasonal water scarcity girls had to walk 
up to 2.5 hours one-way in the dry season to access water resources. Some communities who adopted conservation ponds with 
government support noted that there was a positive impact on girls´ education within their community.

=== PAGE 63 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
income from agricultural activities. In other words, project-supported practices will strengthen the natural resource 
base on which productive agriculture depends. This is essential given that agricultural development is the 
backbone of economic activity in the Churia region, particularly among the poor and vulnerable households and 
communities targeted by the BRCRN project. The project will also open up new economic opportunities for some 
of these households and communities, including fish and duck farming on conservation ponds, ecotourism in 
restored ecosystems, and the diversification of household income streams through agroforestry. 
153. Measures to strengthen sustainable forestry activities will also help farmers overcome barriers to access markets 
(e.g. quality, poor private sector linkages), and improve coordination and dialogue with the private sector. This will 
benefit not only local producers and CBOs, but also the private sector. 
154. The BRCRN project will also help avoid losses and damages that can have severe impacts on economic 
development in the Churia region. The adoption of climate-resilient land use practices, as well as measures for 
ecosystem restoration, water conservation, gully stabilization and riverbank stabilization, among others, will reduce 
the risk and impact of climate-induced hazards, thereby avoiding lost economic activity (including the loss of arable 
farmland) and the costs of recovering from damages to productive assets and infrastructure. This constitutes 
important economic savings for governments, communities and households that can instead be invested in local 
economic development. 
 
Gender-Sensitive Development Impact 
155. Gender-equality is a cross-cutting theme within the project, which aims to ensure women´s full and effective 
participation. At least 50% of direct beneficiaries will be women, of which proportional representation of indigenous 
women, Dalit women and other marginalized groups will be ensured. All members of project management 
committees, trainers and local resource persons will be trained on GESI measures, increasing awareness and 
capacities of government officials and other key stakeholders. 
156. The project aims to empower women and promote their equality through targeted measures (e.g. trainings on 
business literacy for women’s groups, ensuring representation of women trainers, among other measures). It will 
further have substantial positive socio-economic impacts for women, who are often particularly affected by climate 
change due to the trend towards the feminization of agricultural work in the project area, as well as women’s 
traditional role in collecting fodder, water and fuelwood (see Gender Assessment in Annex 5).  
157. A gender-sensitive M&E framework has been designed to ensure the project actively monitors the impact of the 
project on women as well as progress in achieving project targets and the goals set out in the GAP.The project 
will thus support SDG 5 and its goal to achieve gender equality and empower all girls. 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
158. As described in the previous Sections, Nepal is highly vulnerable to climate change. The vulnerability of already 
fragile ecosystems in the Churia-Terai Madhesh region is further aggravated by numerous anthropogenic 
interventions such as settlement through the clearing of forests for cultivation, over exploitation of timber and other 
forest products through illegal logging and unsustainable harvesting of timber and NTFPs, uncontrolled grazing 
of livestock - thereby rapidly altering ecosystem function and the overall resilience of the region. Local people´s 
resilience is negatively impacted through the loss of key ecosystem services and resilience that increase their 
exposure to climate change.  
159. Based on historical trends and future climate change predictions, Nepal will likely become increasingly exposed 
to climate related hazards including flooding and droughts, among others. Current costs associated with the 
impacts of climate variability and extreme events are estimated at US$ 270-360 million/year, representing 1.5 to

=== PAGE 64 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
2% of the country’s GDP.48 If no action is taken the economic cost of climate change in the primary sector alone 
could exceed to 2-3% of the current GDP per year by mid-century. 
160. Poor and vulnerable households and communities suffer most from climate change, because of their higher 
exposure and sensitivity (of assets and livelihoods) to hazards, and their low capacity to manage risks and avoid/ 
mitigate negative impacts.49 To cope with these pressures, and for their survival and subsistence, poor people 
rely on their surrounding natural resources, resulting in their further degradation and, ultimately pushing them into 
a perpetual cycle of poverty and environmental degradation. Thus the impending impacts of climate change will 
have significant negative impacts on their basic survival and subsistence needs, for example quality and 
availability of water resources, agricultural productivity, animal husbandry and ecosystem integrity.50 This will in 
turn have an adverse impact on the overall social development of Nepal. 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Financial and Economic Needs 
161. Nepal’s daunting social, financial and economic development challenges exacerbate the vulnerability risks of its 
population, as described in Section D.1 above. Given these challenges, Nepal requires considerable grant 
financing to fund development priorities, including those described in its NDC, in the medium term. If such support 
does not materialize and adaptation measures are not implemented in a timely manner, the financial cost of 
adaptation will increase, as will the costs for local households and communities as climate change impacts 
increase in intensity and frequency. 
 
Social and Institutional Needs 
162. The government is undergoing a transition toward a federal state. Nepal´s political transition is a landmark event 
accompanied by the devolution of power over forest and agricultural resources to the provincial and local level. 
Capacities on climate change and climate-resilient development remain limited at the provincial and local levels, 
and additional technical and financial support is required to support these institutions to build individual and 
institutional capacities. At the same time, this transition represents an opportune moment to strengthen capacities 
and mainstream climate-resilient land use into provincial and local plans and strategies as these institutions are 
initiated. Trainings are needed on various topics, especially climate change risks and climate-resilient land use 
practices, mainstreaming climate-resilient land use planning into local and provincial plans and processes, and 
tools and approaches for disaster risk reduction planning. 
163. Many CSOs are also undergoing restructuring due to the changing political structure. Before the transition, CSOs 
often had national representation with district-level chapters. Many CSOs will now have to adapt to provincial level 
chapters, as well as increasing local level representation to match the new roles that local and provincial level 
governments have adopted. The project can support local and provincial CSOs to build capacities and improve 
coordination with local and provincial government authorities and other stakeholders. 
164. While many CBOs have demonstrated their ability to responsibly manage natural resources, many are not aware 
of climate change threats and local-level vulnerability (critical ecosystems, differentiated vulnerabilities, risks). 
Capacity building and technical support is needed for CBOs to understand climate risks at the local level, as well 
as low carbon and climate-resilient land use management practices and DRR measures.  
165. As mentioned in Section C.2, a range of barriers have limited the effectiveness of extension services in Nepal, 
and ultimately knowledge dissemination. The project will help overcome such barriers, and support enhanced 
capacity building to strengthen adaptive capacities and overall resilience.  
                                                                 
48IDS-Nepal, PAC and GCAP. 2014. Economic Impact Assessment of Climate Change in Key Sectors in Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal: 
Integrated Development Society (IDS). 
49 Mearns and Norton 2010 
50 WB FIP Inception Workshop 2016

=== PAGE 65 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
166. As identified in the Gender Assessment and GAP (Annex 5), targeted measures are needed to encourage the full 
engagement of women in knowledge platforms, especially at the local and provincial levels, and strengthen the 
capacities of women on SNRM, climate change and disaster risk reduction. 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
167. The project is closely aligned with Nepal´s NDC, and is congruent with existing plans and policies. 
a. The Fourteenth Development Plan (2017) of Nepal recognizes the role of forests in contributing to both 
climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts, and calls for the conservation, sustainable management and 
use of forests. It further notes the challenges faced by the Churia region and the risks posed to downstream 
communities due to unsustainable land use and the fragility of the ecosystem. It promotes the implementation 
of integrated conservation activities within river systems, with an emphasis on planning considering the 
interconnectedness of upstream and downstream natural resource management. 
b. President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation and Management Master Plan (2017) provides strategic 
direction for conservation of the Churia area. It promotes the integrated management of upstream and 
downstream land use activities using an integrated landscape approach. It supports poverty reduction through 
the conservation and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystem services.  
c. The Climate Change Policy (2011)51 aims to improve livelihoods by mitigating climate change impacts, 
adopting a low-carbon development path and endeavours to reduce greenhouse gas emissions through clean 
energy and sustainable natural resource management.  
d. Nepal’s NDC(2016)describes the impacts of climate change on a number of sectors to which the proposed 
GCF project is aligned, including: i) water resource management, particularly concerning reduced water 
availability as well as increased frequency of droughts and floods; ii) agriculture, both crops and livestock; iii) 
food security; and iv) renewable energy. The NDC also describes adaptation priorities with which the proposed 
project is closely aligned, including: i) climate-resilient sustainable land and forest management; ii) ecosystem 
rehabilitation and restoration; iii) strengthened community-based natural resources management; and iv) 
improved agricultural techniques. 
e. The National Adaptation Programme of Action and draft National Adaptation Plan (2015) identifies a 
number of priority actions for adaptation, including: i) sustainable land and forest management; ii) improved 
agricultural value chains; iii) restoration of degraded areas; iv)climate-related research, information and 
awareness generation; and v) disaster preparedness at provincial and local levels.  Nepal will receive support 
from UN Environment to further advance the NAP process.  This project will seek alignment with this process 
to the extent possible. 
f. 
Forest Sector policy (2015) replaces the former forest policy (2000) and envisions contributing to local and 
national development through sustainable management of forests, biodiversity and watersheds. It aims to 
improve the livelihoods of poor communities by increasing employment and income opportunities through 
conservation, management and utilization of forests and forestry resources. 
g. Nepal’s Forestry Sector Strategy (2016-2025) aims to: support adaptive capacity of communities and forest 
ecosystems; develop and strengthen PES mechanisms; and promote biomass-based renewable energy. 
BRCRN contributes to the Strategy’s goal of enhancing Nepal’s forest carbon stock by at least 5% compared 
to 2015 level, and decrease mean annual deforestation rate from 0.18% to 0.05% in the Churia hills. 
h. Nepal´s Agriculture Development Strategy (2015-2035)sets forth priorities to move towards a self-reliant, 
sustainable, competitive and inclusive agriculture sector that drives economic growth and contributes to 
improving livelihoods, food and nutrition security. 
                                                                 
51 MoE 2011b

=== PAGE 66 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
i. 
The Nepal Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) 2014-2020 aims to provide a strategic 
framework for the conservation of Nepal’s biodiversity, contributing to sound and resilient ecosystems and 
national prosperity. Component1 directly contributes to NBSAP goals by supporting sustainable management 
and restoration of forest landscapes in the Churia region. 
j. 
National REDD+ Strategy (draft currently under the process of adoption) calls for the formulation of Policies 
and Measures (PAMs) that would achieve emission reductions in various sectors such as the energy, 
infrastructure and agriculture sectors. It supports the elaboration of action plans for REDD+ at the local level, 
and supports institutional strengthening to mainstream REDD+ into planning processes. The country has set 
a target to reduce GHG emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (including a sub-national project 
on REDD+ to reduce about 14 million tCO2-eq by 2020)52. 
168. Additional information on the congruence the BRCRN project and existing policies, strategies and plans in Nepal 
is provided in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study, Section 4.2 and Appendix C. 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
169. FAO will serve as the project´s Accredited Entity. FAO is a specialized technical agency of the United Nations 
whose main goals are the eradication of hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition; the elimination of poverty and 
the driving forward of economic and social progress for all; and the sustainable management and utilization of 
natural resources, including forest, land, water, air, climate and genetic resources for the benefit of present and 
future generations. FAO has supported projects for climate adaptation and mitigation worldwide. A list of notable 
projects can be found in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study, Section 4. 
170. FAO has a strong track record of providing technical assistance to the agriculture and forestry sector since its 
inception in Nepal in 1951. FAO is in the process of negotiating the country programming framework (CPF) with 
the Government of Nepal for the next five-year planning period. From 2013-2017 one of the four main priority 
areas of the country´s CPF was natural resource conservation and utilization. FAO programs during this period 
have included diverse measures to enhance sustainable production and land use practices, including climate-
resilient agriculture, sustainable forest and watershed management, improve institutional and technical capacities 
for climate change adaptation in the land use sector, and strengthen climate-resilient value chains, among others.  
171. More information about how FAO will discharge its Accredited Entity functions is outlined in Section C.7. 
172. The Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE) will be the Executing Entity for the project, and has 
substantial experience with the management of bilateral and multi-lateral funds for projects within the land use 
sector. MoFE is responsible for the conservation, development, use, and sustainable management of forests. The 
Ministry has supported the implementation of many large projects focusing on sustainable natural resource 
management in the Churia and Terai regions of Nepal. This is further described in Sections C.4 and C.7. 
173. MoFE is well placed to play a central role in the delivery of BRCRN.To assess the capacity of MoFE to implement 
the BRCRN project, FAO contracted an independent assessment of the Ministry to gauge the level and types of 
risk inherent in such a role.  This assessment, conducted from May-June 2018, found that this risk was low, based 
largely on MoFE’s experience of managing and implementing the projects mentioned above. Arrangements 
between MoFE (as Executing Entity) and FAO (as Accredited Entity and co-Executing Entity) are further described 
in Section C.7. 
174. FAO’s comparative advantage as an international agency with a mandate for provision of technical advisory 
services in SNRM is acknowledged by both parties as an important element of the BRCRN project. The project’s 
strong focus on technical advisory (TA) services and institutional capacity building, particularly during early stages, 
is therefore anticipated to involve FAO’s assistance. To this end, in support of MoFE (as Executing Entity), 
dedicated resources will be incorporated into the project budget for provision of technical capacity development 
services, to be implemented by FAO.These resources and associated support will be delivered by an FAO 
Technical Capacity Development team, which will serve as a co-Executing Entityproviding services to PMU 
                                                                 
52FCPF/MoFSC 2017

=== PAGE 67 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
and PPMU in MoFE. More information about this team, and its role in the broader institutional and implementation 
arrangements for the BRCRN project, is available in Sections C.4 and C.7. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
Engagement with NDA 
175. Ongoing communication with the NDA has been conducted since project conceptualization. Since May 2017, five 
bi-lateral meetings were organized with the NDA to discuss project development. In addition, concept note and 
proposal development were regularly informed by Technical Committee Meetings (TCM), consisting primarily of 
government representatives from across sectors, including the NDA/ MoF, to present updates on proposal 
development. TCMs served as an important platform to receive cross-sectoral feedback on the project concept 
and proposal. Non-governmental experts were also invited to participate in TCMs to provide feedback in line with 
their areas of expertise. These meetings reiterated the Government´s commitment to scaling up climate-resilient 
land use in the Churia region of Nepal, and ensured a collaborative effort across line agencies to develop a cross-
cutting multi-sectoral project. In total, 5 TCMs were held from June 2017 to May 2018. It further identified co-
financing opportunities from government ministries, and discussed the project´s exit strategy (further described in 
Section D.2). A more detailed description of the aforementioned meetings is included in Annex 4).  
176. Thus, the proposal has been elaborated with ongoing coordination and support from the NDA, who has regularly 
provided insight into the process. With the submission of the Concept Note to the GCF in 2017, the NDA issued 
a letter of support. Upon the finalization of the draft funding proposal, the proposal underwent a 30-day internal 
review by MoFE and the NDA. A Letter of No-Objection by the NDA is provided in Annex 1. 
 
Multi-stakeholder Engagement Plan and Consultations 
177. In addition to regular communication with government authorities and the NDA, project development was informed 
by diverse stakeholder consultations. Throughout the process these stakeholders expressed their views, 
expectations, concerns and recommendations for the BRCRN project. Over 420 people have been consulted 
through various workshops at the national and district level, bi-lateral meetings with non-governmental 
organizations (at the national and local level), as well as local CBOs and communities in the project area.53 The 
stakeholder consultation process ensured the participation of diverse stakeholders, including women, indigenous 
nationalities, Dalit people and other marginalized minority groups.  
178. The BRCRN project aims to maintain regular stakeholder engagement throughout project implementation, 
ensuring the engagement of government authorities from national, provincial and local governments across 
sectors, CSOs (including women´s organizations, indigenous people’s federations and organizations, Dalit 
organizations, among others), CBOs, private sector actors, among others. A plan for continued stakeholder 
consultations during project implementation is provided in the ESMF (Annex 4), along with a detailed description 
of the stakeholder consultation process, meeting summaries and attendance sheets.  
179. It should also be noted that many of the project activities have been piloted and included within the framework of 
other projects and initiatives, many of which have undergone extensive stakeholder consultation processes 
themselves. In particular, the proposal has received considerable support from the President’s Churia 
Conservation Programme and Nepal’s REDD+ Implementation Centre –two key institutions with mandates for 
multi-stakeholder engagement for a number of projects related to sustainable land and forest management, 
agricultural development and ecosystem management/restoration. These platforms already engage with 
government institutions, other donor agencies and development partners, NGOs/CSOs, among others. While new 
partnerships will be established as needed to broaden the scope of involvement of potential partners, the proposed 
project will continue to engage and build on the existing processes and platforms during implementation to ensure 
that these structures are strongly involved in guiding the planning and implementation of project objectives. 
                                                                 
53Meeting summaries can be found in Annex 3 of the ESMF.

=== PAGE 68 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
180. The total project costs are estimated at USD 47.34 million, comprised of a USD 39.3 million grant from the GCF 
and USD 8.04 million in national co-financing from MoFE. The project requests grant finance given that: Nepal is 
a low-income country and Least Developed Country; the project targets vulnerable regions, poor communities 
and predominantly (semi)-subsistence households; and uses grant financing primarily for barrier-addressing and 
non-revenue generating activities. Overall, the BRCRN project will directly benefit at least 200,681 households, 
which is equivalent to at least 963,268 people. This corresponds to a cost of about USD 49 per direct beneficiary. 
This is considered to be a competitive cost-per-beneficiary ratio, particularly when considering that many project 
activities are cross-cutting in nature, and thus total project costs – which were used to calculate this ratio – deliver 
both the aforementioned adaptation benefits as well as considerable mitigation benefits (which are described in 
more detailed in Section E.6.5). 
181. The project also takes into account the differentiated needs, financial circumstances, and barriers to investment 
of the direct beneficiaries. For instance, measures supporting bio-gas will provide technical support for middle 
income households to access government subsidies, ensuring that private finance is not crowded out. Investments 
for commercial forestry will focus on creating an enabling environment to crowd-in private finance, whereas actual 
investments in woodlots for distant users will focus on public land forest users containing marginalized and poor 
households who are unable to cover the up-front costs of investing in such measures (a major barrier for these 
individuals). Such targeted approaches will ensure the project delivers support in a cost-effective and efficient 
manner. Such approaches are explained in further detail in Section C.3 and in the Feasibility Study.   
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
182. MoFE will provide USD 8.04 million in co-financing for the implementation of the BRCRN project, which is 
equivalent to about 17% of the total project cost. 
183. Project financing will leverage additional private investment during and after the project, mainly in form of the in-
kind contributions of farmers and project participants to manage agricultural and forestry interventions. GCF 
financing will cover only the initial investment costs of transitioning to climate resilient agricultural and forestry 
models, while maintenance and management of the proposed models will be financed by the project participants.  
E.6.3. Financial viability  
184. The financial viability of the proposed project is presented in detail in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study and Annex 3 – 
Integrated Financial Model, as well as in Section F.1 of the Funding Proposal.  
185. A financial analysis was carried out for the project-supported agriculture and forestry models. These were 
compared to a without project scenario to demonstrate the financial viability of the interventions. A summary is 
provided in Section F.1, which presents the net present values (NPV) for these models, discounted at a rate of 
10% for the ´with´ and ´without´ project scenario. This analysis demonstrates that all proposed climate resilient 
models are financially more profitable compared to the without project scenario, thus justifying the investment 
from the land user’s perspective.    
186. After 7 years, the economic rate of return for the project is negative in absolute terms (NPV at 10% discount 
rate: USD -11.73 million), while the incremental ERR (absolute project cash flows minus baseline project cash 
flows) is positive with an ERR of 97% (NPV at 10% discount -18.05 million). In the long-run, incremental benefits 
of the project far outweigh the costs, resulting in an incremental ERR of 114% (NPV: USD 78.53 million) after 10 
years and ERR of 115% (NPV: USD 201.76 million) after 20 years. 
187. In short, GCF grant financing will cover up-front costs of adopting climate-resilient models and practices promoted 
by the project – in part to incentivize this transition –and will build much-needed capacities to support adoption of 
these models and practices during (and after) the project, all of which will significantly increase benefits to the 
society after 10 years.

=== PAGE 69 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
188. All of the technologies and practices promoted within the framework of the BRCRN project are demonstrated 
approaches that have a clear proof of concept based on good practices. Component2 is largely built off of the 
process to develop district-level REDD+ Action Plans in Nepal, and processes for local engagement within the 
framework of REDD+. It further builds off of decades of lessons learned in supporting decentralized community-
based natural resource management, including community-forests and collaborative forestry, among other 
initiatives.  
189. For Activity 2.1.3, various pilot programs have been implemented that have supported communities to strengthen 
their resilience and adopt risk reduction measures. FAO has supported the Ministry of Agriculture, Land 
Management and Cooperatives in piloting disaster risk management plans at the district level including in Siraha 
and Udayapur Districts, where climate change adaptation and risk reduction are major components in the plans.  
190. The promotion of biogas (within Activity 1.1.3) builds off of years of experience of the Alternative Energy Promotion 
Centre (AEPC) and MOEWRI in supporting the adoption and scaling up of biogas in rural communities.54 The 
activity is designed based on AEPC guidelines and common practices applied. 
191. The measures promoted in Component 1 have all been piloted in various regions of the Churia within the context 
of diverse development projects (Terai Arc Landscape Programme, Hariyo Ban Program), as well as through 
district-level governments, especially related to water management, forestry, agriculture and soil conservation. 
While a barrier in the past has been coordination between these institutions, there is a clear proof of concept for 
the investment and many communities have expressed interest in the proposed measures. 
192. Related to gender, the project further promotes best practices and builds on the recommendations of various 
studies (e.g. promoting leadership skills and trainings, increasing the number of women extension staff, providing 
targeted trainings for women).55 The gender assessment and GAP were presented and discussed in a workshop 
with practitioners from different organizations, including organizations representing indigenous and Dalit women, 
reflecting their own lessons learned and experiences, as well as best practices based on the project´s context. 
For social inclusion and the full and effective engagement of indigenous peoples, Dalits, and other excluded 
groups, the project further builds on best practices piloted in various projects from the Government in the land use 
Sector (e.g. Hariyo Ban, FAO, GTZ Churia Project), and have been further discussed in stakeholder consultations, 
including with diverse organizations (e.g. NEFIN, DANAR, FEDO) who provided insight on lessons learned and 
best practices from their organizations. Specific examples are provided in the IPPF and Gender Action Plan. 
193. Thus, it is evident that project will support the application of best practices. However despite so many successful 
experiences, a major barrier to scaling up these practices has been the lack of finance given the country´s financial 
situation and endemic poverty, as well as the poor documentation and dissemination of best practices. The project 
will help to create an enabling environment to support the uptake of proven climate-resilient land use practices, 
and will further help fill information gaps and improve the consolidation of relevant information on climate-resilient 
land use planning and management, while also improving extension services and training and information 
dissemination. Annex 2provides a detailed list per activity of key best practices and experiences for each activity. 
                                                                 
54 Bajgain and Shakya 2005 
55 E.g. Recommendations from: WWF´s Hariyo Ban Project, World Bank and FAO Recommendations (WB and FAO 2018); CARE 
Nepal (including the SAKCHAM Project); Government of Nepal; World Bank´s State and Peacebuilding Fund (SPF); HIMAWANTI 
consultations; FEDO consultations; RECOFTC 2015;  REDD+ Consultations and Pilot Projects in Nepal, among others. Examples of 
practices include: disaggregated data and gender-responsive monitoring, GESI mainstreamed into policy, action plans and 
management plans as a crosscutting element, leadership training for men and women, targeted trainings for women, training of all 
project staff, extension staff and project partners on GESI to enable gender equality and social inclusion within the project, cooperation 
with women´s organizations and NGOs, capacity enhancement on gender-based violence, promotion of female extension agents 
(including indigenous women, and Dalit women, among others), awareness raising for women’s opportunities and rights within CBOs, 
and extension services tailored to female farmers, among others. See the GAP and IPPF for more detailed information.

=== PAGE 70 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 117 
 
 
 
E 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
 
(a) Total project financing 
US$ 47.34 million 
(b) Requested GCF amount  
US$39.3 million 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
11.48 million tCO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
US$ 4.13/ tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eqremoved (e = b / c) 
US$ 3.43/ tCO2eq 
 
Methodology used for calculating indicators: 
Cost (a) and (b): While both adaptation and mitigation measures are supported by the project many of the 
activities are cross-cutting in nature and thus it is challenging to break the budget down into mitigation and 
adaptation-exclusive activities. Thus, the total budget was used for the calculation, which will result in a 
conservative estimation of the costs per emission reductions overtime. In reality, the costs will likely be 
lower as not all funds will be used for mitigation activities.  
Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime (c) is the same figure presented in Section E.1.2. The 
methodology for its calculation is summarized in Section E.1.2, and explained in more detail in the 
Feasibility Study. 
Comparison with appropriate benchmarks: 
The cost per tCO2eq for the overall project and for the GCF are very competitive. Many carbon projects/ 
programs, such as the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility´s Carbon Fund, have set a price of US$ 5 per 
tCO2eq. Considering that the costs are a conservative calculation, including funding for both adaptation 
and mitigation activities, this represents a cost-effective approach to reducing GHG emissions.  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
GCF grant will directly leverage USD 8.04 million in national co-financing from MoFE. Overall, the project 
will also leverage additional private investment during and after the project, mainly in form of the in-kind 
contributions of farmers and project participants to manage agricultural and forestry interventions. GCF 
financing will cover only the initial investment costs of transitioning to climate resilient agricultural and 
forestry models, while maintenance and management of the proposed models will be financed by the 
project participants.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)

=== PAGE 71 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 117 
 
 
 
F 
F 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Economic Analysis 
194. For the economic analysis, the Net Present Value (NPV) and Economic Rate of Return (ERR) are used as 
performance indicators. A discount rate of 10% was used, which reflects the opportunity cost of capital. This is the 
rate that is currently used by multilateral development agencies in Nepal for natural resource management 
projects.   
195. A period of 7 years, 10 years and 20 years is used for the analysis. The 7-year period reflects the GCF project length. 
Considering that many investments will continue to generate benefits into the future, the 10-year and 20-year periods 
were also analysed to better capture the full benefits of the project. 
196. The project is assessed from two perspectives: One that integrates the social value of carbon (global perspective) 
and one that excludes it (domestic perspective). A social carbon price of USD 40 / tCO2 was used. This is based 
on the World Bank guidance note on the shadow price of carbon in economic analysis.56 
197. Incremental costs and benefits are quantified as a result of comparing the ´with´ and ´without´ project scenarios. 
The project economic costs and benefits include all investment and production costs as estimated in the financial 
analysis (see below). The costs were converted to economic cost using the standard conversion factor of 1 for 
production models. In addition, non-land-based investment cost requested from GCF and government co-financing 
is integrated in the economic analysis. 
198. The project will directly support interventions on 60,965 ha of agricultural land, 202,237 of forest land, and create 
about 7,300 ha of new (agro)-forests. The water and soil conservation infrastructure investment will target about 
130 villages / settlements, which is equivalent to at least 21,300 ha of agricultural land. Biogas is expected to be 
adopted by at least 500 households as a result of support from the project. The economic analysis uses anaverage 
adoption rate of 80%. At this adoption rate, the project is estimated to deliver mitigation benefits of 574,180 
tCO2eq/year, which is equivalent to about 11.48 million tCO2eq over the 20-year lifetime of the project. 
199. In the ´with´ and ´without´ project scenarios, climate risks due to extreme events and slow onset impacts are taken 
into account. The project is expected to reduce climate change related economic losses in the target area by at 
least 50% compared to the without project scenario. 
200. Benefits that are excluded: Additional economic benefits are likely to be generated as a result of the project, including 
due to interventions that strengthen the capacities of government and other stakeholders to respond to climate change 
risks and manage natural resources in (and beyond) the project area. Further benefits may occur due to the 
‘demonstration effect’, through which the project’s support for land-use practices may prompt additional 
communities/households to adopt similar practices beyond the scope of the project. None of these potential benefits 
were factored into the economic analysis. In addition, the project will generate considerable non-marketable 
ecosystem services such as biodiversity protection that are excluded from the analysis due to the lack of robust 
monetary values for these non-market services. The results of the economic analysis (below) are therefore 
considered to be conservative.   
 
Results of economic analysis 
201. From the perspective of the Government of Nepal (i.e. without social value of carbon), the economic analysis 
demonstrates that the project is profitable over its 20-year lifetime, with an NPV of USD 40.9 million and an ERR 
of 20%. The project is considerably more profitable from a global perspective, resulting in a positive NPV of USD 
18.1 million after just 7 years (ERR: 97%) and USD 201.8 million after 20 years (ERR: 115%).This clearly justifies 
the GCF investment into the project from an economic point of view. 
                                                                 
56 It suggests to use price ranges between USD 40 – 80 /tCO2 for the year 2020.  To be conservative the lower carbon price was used 
in the economic analysis for the BRCRN project.

=== PAGE 72 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 117 
 
 
 
F 
F 
 
Table 9.Results of the economic analysis with and without GHG emission reduction 
  
Governmental perspective without social value of 
carbon 
Global perspective with a  social 
value of carbon (USD 40/tCO2eq) 
  
NPV (USD) 
ERR 
NPV (USD) 
ERR 
7 years 
-39,649,794 
Not quantifiable 
18,052,633 
97% 
10 years 
-16,211,670 
-2% 
78,531,090 
114% 
20 years 
40,905,003 
20% 
201,763,711 
115% 
 
202. A sensitivity analysis was also developed to assess how robust the economic benefits of the project would be to 
key changes. The results of the sensitivity analysis are summarized in Table 10 (below), and clearly demonstrate 
that the project would deliver strong economic benefits even if: costs were to increase; revenues were to decrease; 
the social value of carbon were calculated differently; and the adoption rate were to decline. 
 
Table 10. Results of the sensitivity analysis 
Sensitivity analysis 
Change 
factor 
NPV (USD) 
10 years 
NPV (USD) 
20 years 
ERR 10 
years 
ERR 20 
years 
Base case 
  
78,531,090 
201,763,711 
114% 
115% 
Cost increases 
10% 
58,755,773 
168,890,798 
77% 
81% 
20% 
38,980,455 
136,017,886 
48% 
57% 
30% 
19,205,138 
103,144,974 
27% 
40% 
Revenues reduction in project scenario 
-10% 
51,380,097 
150,628,103 
72% 
77% 
-20% 
24,229,104 
99,492,496 
36% 
48% 
-30% 
-2,921,889 
48,356,888 
7% 
27% 
Social value of carbon (USD/tCO2) 
60 
125,902,470 
282,193,064 
220% 
220% 
50 
102,216,780 
241,978,388 
167% 
168% 
30 
54,845,400 
161,549,034 
69% 
74% 
Adoption rate compared to base case (80%) 
110% 
88,403,878 
222,831,487 
130% 
131% 
90% 
68,658,302 
180,695,934 
98% 
100% 
80% 
58,785,515 
159,628,157 
83% 
86% 
 
Financial Analysis 
203. Financial analysis was used to: evaluate the financial viability of the climate resilient investment and interventions 
promoted by the project from a land user perspective; assess the incremental costs and revenues resulting from 
project interventions; and provide a basis for the economic analysis of the project. This involved performing a Cost-
benefit analysis (CBA) for the ‘with’ and ‘without’ project scenarios. For each land use category, costs, yields, 
revenues and cash flows were compiled on a per hectare basis. The models used for the analysis are briefly 
summarized in Table 14 below.

=== PAGE 73 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 117 
 
 
 
F 
F 
 
Table 11. Intervention models considered in financial analysis 
Churia 
Terai 
Baseline 
Project scenario 
Baseline 
Project scenario 
Agricultural land 
1.Mixed agricultural farming 
(maize and vegetables) 
1.Transition to climate resilient 
mixed farming system (maize 
and vegetables) 
1.Mixed agricultural farming 
(maize and vegetables) 
1.Transition to climate resilient 
mixed farming system (maize 
and vegetables 
2.Transition to horticulture 
systems (e.g. mango production) 
2.Soil conservation measures, 
ponds and irrigation infrastructure 
rehabilitation 
3.Soil conservation measures, 
ponds and irrigation 
infrastructure rehabilitation 
2.Agricultural land loss due to 
erosion and reduction of 
agricultural land 
4.Gully stabilization 
2.Agricultural land loss due to 
erosion and reduction of 
agricultural land 
3.Gully stabilization 
Forest land 
1.Unsustainable management of 
natural forests under degradation   
1. Natural Forest Management 
and enrichment planting with 
native tree species  
1. Non-forest land along river 
banks subject to erosion and land 
loss 
1.Protection forest establishment 
(e.g. bamboo) 
2. Commercial forest plantations 
(Teak) 
Non-land interventions 
Unsustainable extraction of 
fuelwood  
Adoption of small-scale biogas 
plans at household level 
- 
- 
 
204. The analysis considers only the land-based cost and revenues from a land user perspective. The broader 
investment package for each land use will include e.g. improved extension and training and benefit from improved 
institutions. These are assessed as part of the economic analysis and not integrated in the financial analysis.  
205. The financial analysis of the project is based on prices, costs and yields collected during project preparation, and 
a review of published literature on Nepalese forestry and agriculture. The prices of farm products used in the 
analysis are farm gate prices. The results of the financial analysis are summarized in the table below. 
 
Table 12.Net Present Values of production models with and without the BRCRN Project 
  
  
Churia 
Terai 
Without project  
With project  
Without project  
With project  
Agriculture (10 years) 
NPV (USD/ha) 
NPV (USD/ha) 
Climate resilient farming practices 
-576 
735 
301 
2,002 
Horticulture management practices 
-576 
687 
 
 
Forestry (20 years) 
Sustainable Natural Forest  Management with enrichment planting 
with native tree species  
233 
257 
 
 
Sustainable natural forest management model - commercial 
utilization (per ha) 
233 
412 
 
 
Conservation of natural forests (only NTFP use) (per ha) 
233 
159 
 
 
Protection forest establishment - Bamboo on riverbanks 
 
 
0 
883 
Commercial forest plantation (Teak) 
 
 
0 
1,674 
Infrastructure - Soil and water conservation (10 years) 
Rehabilitation of ponds and small-scale irrigation infrastructure  
-576 
906 
301 
2,065 
Gully stabilization  
-576 
173 
301 
1,440 
Non-land based investment 
Biogas promotion and investment (per household) 
-843 
217

=== PAGE 74 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 117 
 
 
 
F 
F 
206. The analysis demonstrates that all project scenario models are profitable from a farmer /land user perspective 
ranging between USD 159 /ha and USD 2,506 /ha. However, in order to achieve this profitability, GCF investments 
are required, as the increased revenue streams will occur a few years after the initial investment – up-front costs 
that the poor and vulnerable smallholders targeted by the BRCRN project cannot incur on their own. 
207. A more detailed overview of the economic and financial analysis done for this project is included in Annex 2 – 
Feasibility Study Section 6.2, and in Annex 3 – Integrated Financial Model (specifically document 3.1 – Financial 
and Economic Analysis). 
F.2. Technical Evaluation 
208. The project has been designed building on the longstanding experience of FAO Nepal, MoFE,  MoALMC, MOEWRI 
and MoHA, among other key actors, on topics related to climate change adaptation and mitigation. A summary of 
the technical evaluation considerations is included here below. Detailed technical specifications for project-
supported practices, approaches and structures are included in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study, Appendix A, 
specifically: 
a) Climate-resilient agriculture (nutrient management, soil and water conservation, agronomic practices, 
tillage and residue management, agroforestry) in Appendix A.1. 
b) Ecosystem restoration (soil and water conservation/bio-engineering, restoration and rehabilitation of 
degraded forest ecosystems, sustainable management of forest resources) in Appendix A.2. 
c) Tree planting on private and public lands (fruit orchards/horticulture, smallholder woodlots, contour 
free/boundary planting, fodder banks, commercial tree plantations, protective plantations, nursery and 
seed management) in Appendix A.3. 
209. Various proven technologies and best practices will be promoted within the context of the BRCRN project. 
Interventions will be based on climate-resilient land use planning focusing on integrated holistic management 
identifying key intervention areas and mapping best practices at the local level, as well as local-level workshops 
and participatory land use planning with CBOs to support them to integrate climate-resilient land use into their 
management strategies and ensure that proposed measures are suitable based on the environmental, cultural 
and socio-economic context at the local level.  
210. The approach applied within Component 2 builds off of government experiences, especially from REDD+ ER-PD 
and DRAP development, in combining top-down and bottom-up planning, while also addressing existing capacity 
gaps identified as barriers for the adoption and scaling up of climate-resilient practices. Component 2 Activities 
will strengthen government capacities while supporting operational planning for project implementation, while also 
building on the results from this planning to strengthen capacities and promote participatory land use planning 
based on local contexts and priorities aligned with CERPs. This approach will ensure that integrated planning at 
the river system level is adopted, while providing flexibility and engaging local CBOs to build their adaptive 
capacities and support them to plan and implement climate-resilient land use tailored to their priorities and 
differentiated vulnerabilities.   
211. Given the new roles of newly formed institutions, CERPs and other local-level plans are important to raise 
awareness of climate change risks and resilient land use practices and to build capacities on such planning 
processes. CERPs will further engage local governments and promote integrated land use planning, and will be 
developed with support from experts on topics ranging from integrated watershed management, biodiversity, 
agriculture, forestry and GESI.  
212. Technologies promoted under Component 1 (described in Section C.3 and E.6.4) have been selected due to their 
relevance and effectiveness for climate change adaptation and mitigation based on the context of the project area. 
Technologies and best practices promoted through these measures are all demonstrated measures with a clear 
proof of concept, where the project will build on experiences and lessons learned from piloted projects in Nepal as

=== PAGE 75 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 117 
 
 
 
F 
F 
well as international best practices. A detailed assessment of these measures is available within the feasibility 
study. 
213. Measures related to extension services have been designed in close consideration of key barriers facing extension 
services (e.g. youth engagement, lack of information on climate change, weak capacities, among others further 
described in Annex 2).  
214. Insufficient investments in ITC have been identified as a barrier for monitoring the impacts of climate change, but 
also for disseminating knowledge and improving information materials. 57  Within extension services, such 
investments have the potential to provide up-to-date information to local resource persons, farmers and 
government officials and improve communication and coordination. To support the longevity of this measure, it will 
be delivered through MoITFE – who will receive regular trainings on the system and its management.  
215. Before the government transition, some pilot districts elaborated DRR plans at the district level. Such processes 
and the resulting plans, including efforts from FAO to implement planning processes in Udayapur among others, 
were successful in providing increased attention to DRR and providing orientation to support disaster 
preparedness and risk reduction processes. Districts no longer exist under the current government structure, and 
thus the project aims to build on these experiences and develop risk management plans at the Provincial level for 
provinces 1-3. 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
216. The FAO Project Environmental and Social Screening Checklist was prepared (ESMF - Annex 4), and the project 
was identified as a Category B (moderate risk). 
Environmental Impacts and Risks 
217. While the project is expected to generate primarily positive environmental impacts, there are some potential short-
term and site-specific environmental impacts that could arise from project implementation. Small-scale 
environmental degradation could occur due to the construction of small-scale infrastructure including check dams, 
stone walls, contour bunds, and conservation ponds (e.g. removing the dirt from conservation ponds could result 
in increased erosion or runoff into local waterways). Impacts will be mitigated through the preparation of a 
management plan for the proposed activities that will be prepared together with local government technicians from 
the Department of Soil Conservation. Before construction can occur, plans will need to be reviewed and approved. 
These plans will take into account seasonal-restrictions and conditions, as well as measures to limit the 
environmental impact. Construction activities will be undertaken during the dry season in order to reduce erosion 
and sedimentation into rivers and bodies of water.  
218. One protected area´s buffer zone slightly overlaps with one of the 26 BRCRN prioritized river systems (Adherei 
Khola, Baruwa Khola and Duar Khola River System): the Koshi Tappu Wilfdlife Reserve. The Wildlife Reserve was 
designated a Ramsar site in 1987, and is home to diverse wildlife including 485 species of birds, 31 species of 
mammals, among other flora and fauna. 58 While no direct project interventions are planned for the core-
intervention area, a Biodiversity Management Framework has been developed to ensure the project causes no 
harm and promotes positive environmental impacts within and around the reserve (Annex 4). 
219. The project will also support the establishment of forest plantations and agroforestry systems on degraded lands 
(that are not used for agricultural purposes and that do not require deforestation). The project will ensure that 
relevant national regulations, such as the country´s Forest Policy (2015), as well as operational guidelines for 
community-forest users groups. Both native and non-native species will be promoted for woodlots and commercial 
plantations, however non-native species will only be promoted when they are locally adapted species with a long-
                                                                 
57 Dhital 2017 
58https://www.nepjol.info/index.php/INIT/article/view/2513

=== PAGE 76 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 117 
 
 
 
F 
F 
history of implementation in the region, taking into account the principle of site-species matching.59 Only native 
species will be used for ecosystem restoration and rehabilitation in critical ecosystems. Additional information on 
risk avoidance and mitigation measures can be found within the BRCRN project´s ESMF (Annex 4).  
Social Impacts and Risks 
220. As with environmental impacts, majority of the project´s impacts are expected to be largely positive and enhance 
the resilience of local communities. Nonetheless, it is possible that site-specific short-term negative impacts could 
occur. The project could lead to conflicts between community members who disagree on land use planning 
processes. Changes in land use due to the mainstreaming of climate-resilient SNRM practices and promotion of 
improved livelihood practices could discriminate against some members of society, especially poor and 
marginalized communities (e.g. if they are no longer able to free graze in forests). Participation in the BRCRN 
project is voluntary, and communities’ participation will be based on the principle of FPIC. The project provides a 
flexible approach for communities to integrate climate-resilient land use practices into their local management 
plans, where communities can decide, based on their specific operational protocols and decision making 
processes, what practices are appropriate based on their context. Part of the process in Component 1 will also 
ensure that in instances where certain land uses are restricted that there is clear consultation with disadvantaged 
households and a plan to address potential limitations for these households.  
221. Indigenous peoples and marginalized minority groups, including Dalits among others, often experience 
discrimination and may face additional barriers to their participation and engagement that could limit their 
engagement within the project. The project has been designed with extensive consultations from diverse 
stakeholders, and targeted measures to strengthen social inclusion have been mainstreamed as cross-cutting 
elements throughout the project proposal. Representatives from indigenous federations, Dalit organizations and 
other organizations representing marginalized groups will be invited to participate in multi-stakeholder bodies 
within the project management structure, to enhance coordination, collaboration and ongoing communication 
during project implementation.   
222. Within the BRCRN project area, 31% of inhabitants are indigenous peoples. An Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework has been established within the context of the BRCRN project, in consultation with diverse indigenous 
peoples, as well as representatives from indigenous federations and organizations in Nepal, to ensure the project 
causes no harm to indigenous peoples. The planning framework further ensures that efforts will be made to 
respect, include and promote indigenous peoples issues during project implementation, including their right to 
FPIC. The project will generate numerous additional benefits to indigenous peoples, and has been designed to 
take into account the different contexts and vulnerabilities of indigenous peoples living in the project area.  
Gender Equality  
223. At least 50% of project beneficiaries will be women, with proportional representation of indigenous peoples, Dalits 
and other marginalized groups. All members of project management structures will undergo trainings on GESI in 
the context of the BRCRN project, ensuring that all staff are aware of potential barriers, differentiated vulnerabilities 
and opportunities within the project to empower and engage these groups of beneficiaries. Trainers and local 
resource persons supporting the project will include diverse people, including women, indigenous peoples and 
other marginalized groups, including Dalits.  
224. The project will build off of best-practice approaches piloted in the Churia and Terai Regions to strengthen gender 
equality. Diverse consultations have been conducted with women’s organizations, including organizations 
representing indigenous women and Dalit women, among others, as well as local community members and local-
level gender focus groups. Based on these consultations as well as best-practice approaches, strategies for 
supporting gender equality and empowerment within the framework of the BRCRN project were devised and 
integrated into the GAP (including project-wide measures and activity-specific considerations).  
                                                                 
59 Species-site matching: selecting tree species so as to align their particular growth requirements (e.g. nutrients; water; climate / altitude) 
with the given parameters at any one site. The selection of site-compatible species – irrespective of their provenance – is the prime 
option of choice.

=== PAGE 77 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 117 
 
 
 
F 
F 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
225. A grievance redress mechanism for the BRCRN project has been developed to ensure that complaints are 
adequately addressed in an effective and timely manner. Anyone who has a complaint or who is negatively 
impacted by the project is able to communicate their complaints or problems thorough the official mechanism 
(described in greater detail within the ESMF - Annex 4).  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
226. As the Accredited Entity for the BRCRN project, FAO will ensure that financial management and procurement of 
goods and services using GCF resources will adhere to international standards and good practices. This includes 
financial management and procurement performed by MoFE (as Executing Entity). An FAO-commissioned micro-
assessment of MoFE in June 2018 (which included an assessment of MoFE’s financial management and 
procurement policies and practices) identified the ministry as a “low-risk” partner in this respect. This includes a 
low-risk rating specifically for procurement actions to be undertaken by MoFE, which are done in line with the 
prevailing Public Procurement Law of the Government of Nepal. To enable effective performance of financial 
management and procurement functions by the Executing Entity, the project will also hire: (i) a finance officer, 
procurement officer and administrative officer to work in the PMU throughout the duration of the project; and (ii) 
provincial administrative/finance officers in each of the PPMUs. 
227. The FAO Technical Capacity Development Team (as co- Executing Entity) will perform a range of supervisory and 
support functions in relation to financial management and procurement performed by MoFE. These are geared 
toward (inter alia) ensuring all procurement is done in line with agreed standards and practices, and to minimize 
procurement-related risk. In addition, the FAO Technical Capacity Development Team will directly manage a small 
proportion of the project budget to deliver Technical Assistance and other such services to the project. Financial 
management and procurement performed by this team will be guided by relevant FAO rules and regulations, as 
well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed by FAO and the GCF. These 
rules and regulations were reviewed and deemed satisfactory by the GCF Secretariat and Accreditation Panel as 
part of FAO’s accreditation to the GCF. 
228. FAO has deployed an Oracle based Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system entitled the ‘Global Resources 
Management System’ (GRMS). This system provides all FAO employees around the world with travel, human 
resources, procurement and finance functionalities. Using GRMS improves the flow of financial information, 
supports financial monitoring and reporting, increases transparency and visibility, and strengthens internal control. 
FAO maintains a Chart of Accounts which is used by the whole Organization and that allows for a separation of 
income and expenditure by donor and project and it provides a standardised coding structure that enables data to 
be recorded, classified and summarised to facilitate internal management and external reporting requirements. 
229. Direct procurement by FAO is done in accordance with its Manual Section on “Procurement of Goods, Works and 
Services”. To sub-contract the delivery of specific activities using Letters of Agreement, FAO operates in 
accordance with a specific Manual Section on “Letters of Agreement”. Such services are managed under the FAO 
Procurement Service, which provides policy and operational support to FAO offices and staff undertaking these 
activities to ensure the Organization procures goods, works and services based on “Best Value for Money” 
principles. To sub-contract delivery for agreed results, FAO operates in accordance with its policy that governs the 
indirect implementation of FAO-led projects and programmes. 
230. Financial management and procurement by MoFE (as Executing Entity) will also be overseen and supervised by 
the FAO-GCF project supervision team. As per the provisions of the FAO Operational Partners Implementation 
Modality (OPIM), the FAO-GCF project supervision team will undertake regular supervision missions, and will 
recruit a qualified, internationally recognized auditing firm to perform regular spot checks and audits, to ensure 
financial management and procurement by the PMU and PPMUs are being performed in line with agreed 
standards and practices. This will be governed by the agreement to be signed between FAO and the Government 
of Nepal before the project becomes operational.

=== PAGE 78 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Insufficient coordination and collaboration among 
government institutions and community-based natural 
resource management committees. 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Risk mitigation will focus on: (i) sensitization and awareness raising of the importance of strong collaboration; (ii) 
alignment with government policies; (iii) drawing on existing examples of inter-sectoral collaboration in the delivery of 
similar projects (e.g. REDD+); iv) involving key stakeholders from the beginning through diverse consultations60 with 
clear roles and responsibilities for all, including representation on project management structures such as the PSC 
and PCU; (iv) ensuring transparency in decision making, (v) organizing trainings to  build capacities and develop joint 
sense of purpose; and (vi) maintaining effective communication channels. A results-based project framework based 
on shared resources will further catalyze effective coordination as these institutions will be fully aware of the 
importance of the project in contributing towards their own respective development agendas and providing co-benefits. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Weak enforcement capacity that may make it 
challenging to change the status quo of illegal or 
unsustainable natural resource use. 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Incentives for local communities to engage in better resource management will act as a motivator for the adoption of 
sustainable legal practices and improved enforcement. CBOs, as well as local and provincial government staff will be 
trained to understand threats from climate change and suitable climate-resilient land use practices to improve 
resilience. Targeted approaches will be applied that take into account the differentiated contexts, needs and 
vulnerabilities of local people. Furthermore, the project is closely aligned with key policies of Nepal, and have strong 
synergies with the FIP and proposed ER-PD program that aim to reduce deforestation and unsustainable land use. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
                                                                 
60Additional information available in ESMF (Annex E) 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
231. Risk factors associated with the implementation of the BRCRN project include technical, institutional and 
operational risks. Prominent risks that may compromise the success of the BRCRN project include: 
a) The risk that government and non-government entities involved in the project may be unable/unwilling 
to coordinate and collaborate, which is essential to the success of the project and its efforts to promote 
a landscape and ecosystem-based approach. 
b) Weak enforcement capacity among key entities, and path dependency among communities, that may 
make it difficult to sustainably achieve changes in land-use patterns and decision-making. 
c) Institutional risks associated with the ongoing political transition in Nepal, which may complicate 
project implementation if the government decides to further adjust the specific distribution of 
mandates, roles and/or responsibilities. 
232. These risks, as well as the project´s risk mitigation strategies, are briefly presented below.

=== PAGE 79 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Turnover of key project personnel, implementing 
agencies, provincial and local governments.  
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
While some personnel turnover is expected to occur, the negative impacts on project implementation will be mitigated 
through various measures. Project operational handbooks will be developed to provide project staff a standard training 
on project activities. Project standard processes for project implementation, management and reporting will ensure 
clear processes and mechanisms are in place for knowledge transfer. PPMUs will further ensure close coordination 
with provincial and local governments. The development of provincial strategies and CERPs will further help to ensure 
the medium- to long-term orientation to support the implementation of the BRCRN project. The presence of FAO´s 
office in Nepal will further help to ensure continuous coordination.  
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Potential climate change impacts may prevent the 
expected positive environmental outcomes, even if 
the project is successful in encouraging local 
communities to mainstream and implement climate-
resilient SNRM and DRR. 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Implemented activities will take into account the risk of extreme weather events and climate risks into their design. 
Environmental and social management plans will be developed for Component 1 Activities during the second year of 
project implementation that will identify protocols for risk management, monitoring and maintenance. Seasonal risks 
will also be taken into account in local-level activity planning and implementation. Detailed information on activity-
specific risks and mitigation measures is provided within the ESMF (Annex 4).  
The introduction of resilient practices over a large contiguous area, alongside complementary efforts funded by other 
donors, will help mitigate risks that climate change is likely to cause.  
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Women, indigenous peoples, Dalits and other 
marginalized groups do not participate in project 
activities.  
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Diverse stakeholders have been consulted for the elaboration of the project funding proposal, including women, 
indigenous peoples, Dalits and other marginalized groups. Based on these consultations, recommendations to 
strengthen the engagement of these groups have been mainstreamed across activities and components. A GESI-
responsive M&E framework will ensure regular monitoring is conducted, and adjustments are made as necessary to 
strengthen GESI within the project context. 
The project will draw on existing protocols to ensure that regulations and best practices are followed on all times to 
ensure full participation of such marginalized groups in planning, decision-making and implementation of project 
activities. All members of the project management bodies will undergo GESI trainings. The GAP and IPPF will further 
contribute to the effective and sustained engagement of these key stakeholders in project implementation. Trainers 
hired will include women, indigenous peoples and Dalits, among others. Representatives from women’s groups, 
indigenous federations and Dalit organizations, among other organizations representing marginalized groups, will be 
invited to participate on the PCU in each Province. Close cooperation will be sought with such organizations.

=== PAGE 80 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Site-specific environmental impacts due to the 
construction of small-scale rural infrastructure 
(retention ponds, check dams, etc.) 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Small-scale site-specific impacts could arise due to the project´s activities. Environmental and Social Management 
Plans will be developed for Component 1 Activities to address and manage potential site-specific impacts. Annual 
reporting on the maintenance and monitoring of these measures will be done local authorities, and reported to the 
PMU safeguards officer. Activity-specific mitigation measures to are described in further detail within the ESMF.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Conflicts within CBOs about land use decisions, 
including decisions that could have disproportionate 
impacts on some community members, especially 
poor households and marginalized groups 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Local level land use planning based on participatory local-level planning processes based on consultations with 
members of local CBOs/users groups, promoting proportional representation women, indigenous peoples and people 
from marginalized minority groups. Through the application of a local participatory process, climate resilient SNRM 
and land use planning is integrated based on communities priorities and local context. Decision-making processes will 
be based off of the organization/ user group´s operational guidelines and protocols. GESI considerations and pro-poor 
measures have been integrated operational guidelines and laws, which will help ensure the integration and 
participation of diverse men and women, including indigenous peoples, Dalits and other marginalized persons.  
Trainers and project management will be trained in GESI. Awareness raising and capacity building on climate-resilient 
land use planning and SNRM, based on piloted good practices, will ensure local CBOs are aware of climate risks and 
risk-reduction measures, such as climate resilient SNRM. Investments in climate-resilient land use will target highly 
vulnerable ecosystems and households, taking into account differentiated needs and vulnerabilities. In the case where 
any household/ person feels discriminated against or has concerns related to the project, they are able to access the 
project´s grievance redress mechanism (described greater detail within Annex 4). 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Long-term sustainability of investments 
 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Investments in long-term land use practices (e.g. forestry) or soil and water conservation measures may require future 
investments to maintain investments. For all investments that will require ongoing maintenance costs, such costs will 
be clearly communicated prior to activity implementation. Operational management plans will be developed for all 
CBOs who adopt such practices, which will clearly communicate management needs and maintenance requirements, 
and establish a plan for financing future maintenance costs based on operational guidelines and procedures of the 
respective community-based organization. Local resource persons and local government officials will be trained on 
monitoring, management and maintenance of such investments to lower costs. An emphasis on capacity building and 
trainings will further build capacities for appropriate management and maintenance.  
Selected Risk Factor 8 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring

=== PAGE 81 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
Government transition could lead to delays or 
adjustments in anticipated government structures. 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Government of Nepal is currently undergoing a transition from a constitutional monarchy to a federal democratic 
republic. While the Constitution and Local Government Operation Act (2017) both provide detailed information on the 
roles, responsibilities and coordination mechanisms, in practice capacities and institutions are still being built and 
established. This is seen as a low-risk since the project was closely developed with a cross-sectoral committee from 
various ministries and departments, whom are highly aware and engaged in the transition process, Nonetheless, there 
may need to be additional fine-tuning upon project approval to ensure that institutional structures proposed for the 
project are still appropriate during the project inception phase. The PSC will further support close communication with 
government officials to address potential delays or adjustments.  
Selected Risk Factor 8 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Large volume of procurement to be managed by 
MoFE could result in compliance risks associated 
with financial management (e.g. AML/CFT). 
Financial 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE) will manage a large volume of contracts and procurement under the 
proposed GCF project. MoFE policies, practices and track record on financial management and procurement were 
reviewed by a qualified audit and accounting firm during project design and deemed (by the firm and FAO_ to be 
satisfactory to ensure compliance with international standards. The FAO Technical Capacity Development Team will 
further mitigate the above-mentioned risks by working closely with MoFE to deliver activities under the proposed 
project, and by recruiting a procurement advisor/support expert to directly support MoFE with its procurement actions 
to ensure international standards are adhered to. In addition, the FAO-GCF project supervision team will recruit a 
qualified audit/accounting firm to perform regular audits and spot checks to further reinforce compliance with 
international standards. 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon

=== PAGE 82 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
H.1. Logic Framework. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Shift to low-
emission 
sustainable 
development 
pathways 
The BRCRN project will contribute to reducing deforestation, supporting reforestation, sustainably managing forest 
resources, conserving and enhancing forest carbon stocks and adopting land management practices that enhance 
carbon sequestration. The project will do so by supporting community-based organizations (CBOs) to adopt and 
apply such practices in their communities, while also building the capacity of these CBOs and their governments to 
sustain and scale up such investments beyond project closure.  
Increased 
climate-
resilient 
sustainable 
development 
The BRCRN project will contribute to increasing the resilience of the most vulnerable communities and ecosystems 
in 26 vulnerable river systems by working with CBOs to scale up adoption of climate-resilient land use practices 
and other climate-resilient SNRM approaches. The project will do so by directly supporting CBOs to adopt and 
apply such practices in their communities, while also building the capacity of these CBOs and their governments to 
sustain and scale up such investments beyond project closure. 
Expected 
Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(end of PY4) 
Final 
(end of PY7) 
Fund-level impacts 
GCF 
core 
indicator 
(Mitigation) 
Tonnes 
of 
carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent 
(tCO2eq) reduced or 
avoided as a result of 
Fund-funded 
projects/programmes. 
Forest 
Reference 
Emission 
Levels 
Project 
reports 
0 
743,764 tCO2eq 
2,366,485 tCO2eq 
(after 7 years) 
The mid-term target is an estimate 
only, and is based on the expected 
reach and benefits of the relevant 
project activities by the end of PY4. 
CBOs adopt climate-resilient land 
use practices (assuming the adoption 
rate that is specified in Section F.1). 
Other assumptions are described in 
detail in Section E.1 as well as in 
Annex 2 – Feasibility Study.  
Avoided deforested and degraded 
land within 20 years 27,357 ha 
Baseline emissions of 7,149,259 tCO2 
over 20 years from projected 
deforestation. 
Cost 
per 
tCO2eq 
decreased for Fund-
funded 
mitigation 
projects/programmes. 
Forest 
Reference 
Emission 
Levels 
Project 
reports 
Maps/remote 
sensing 
0 
USD 18.06 per 
tCO2eq  
USD 17.33 per 
tCO2eq 
Costs used for calculations are GCF 
grant financing only. 
The mid-term target is an estimate 
only, and is based on the expected 
reach and benefits of the relevant 
project activities by the end of PY4, 
as well as the total GCF grant 
financing expected to be committed 
by the end of PY4.

=== PAGE 83 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
GCF 
core 
indicator 
(Adaptation) 
Total number of direct 
and 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
(gender 
disaggregated) 
Baseline and 
completion 
surveys 
Project 
Reports 
Training 
logs/attendan
ce sheets 
National 
Population 
and Housing 
Census 
(est. 
2021) 
Direct: 
0 men 
0 women 
0 total 
beneficiaries 
 
 
Indirect: 
0 men 
0 women 
0 total 
beneficiaries 
 
Direct: 
115,584 men 
115,584 women 
231,168 total 
beneficiaries 
[equivalent to 
48,160 
households] 
 
Indirect: 
061 men 
0 women 
0 total 
beneficiaries 
Direct: 
481,634 men 
481,634 women 
963,268 total 
beneficiaries 
[equivalent to 
200,681 
households] 
 
Indirect: 
1.6 million men 
1.6 million 
women 
3.2 million total 
beneficiaries  
Surveys to be implemented at start-
up and completion. Surveys will 
collect data to (inter alia) assess 
household resilience at baseline and 
completion. The surveys will be 
administered by an independent 
firm to be contracted by FAO (as co-
EE). 
CBOs adopt climate-resilient land 
use practices. 
Consultations, according to FPIC 
principles, conducted with all 
beneficiaries prior to 
implementation of investments. 
The mid-term target for direct 
beneficiaries is an estimate based on 
the number of CBOs and households 
that are expected to be reached 
through field-level support by the 
end of PY4, multiplied by the 
average number of people (4.8) 
living in each household in the 26 
river systems that comprise the 
project area. 
Number 
of 
beneficiaries relative to 
total population  
Direct: 
0% of the 
population of the 
project area 
Indirect: 
0% of the 
population of the 
project area 
Direct: 
7% of the 
population of the 
project area 
Indirect: 
0%62 of the 
population of the 
project area 
Direct: 
30% of the 
population of the 
project area 
Indirect: 
100% of the 
population of the 
project area 
These figures are presented as 
percentages of the total population 
of the project area, which comprises 
26 vulnerable river systems. These 
river systems had a combined 
population of about 3.2 million 
people in 2011 – the most recent year 
for which census data is available. 
A4.0 Improved 
resilience 
of 
ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
A4.1 Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems protected 
and strengthened in 
response to climate 
variability and change. 
Project 
reports 
Training logs 
Land use and 
land cover 
assessment 
using FAO 
Open Foris 
0 
About 12,189 ha 
of climate 
resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
implemented 
About 45,848 ha 
of forest 
ecosystems 
About 48,772 ha 
of climate-
resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
implemented 
148,998 ha of 
forest 
ecosystems 
The mid-term target is an estimate 
only, and is based on the expected 
reach and benefits of the relevant 
project activities by the end of PY4. 
Baseline forest cover across the 26 
targeted river systems is about 
226,850 ha (2015). 
                                                                 
61The project expects to have supported some direct and indirect beneficiaries to adopt climate-resilient SNRM practices by mid-term, but this will not be 
measured. This is because the number of people benefiting from the adoption of such practices is considered to be meaningfully measured through a 
household survey, which in the interest of efficient use of resources will not be commissioned at mid-term because project activities that will directly produce 
the beneficiary benefits begin in PY3 and reach scale in PY5, and thus a mid-term household survey would not provide an accurate indication of project 
progress.  
62Ibid.

=== PAGE 84 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
Collect Earth 
toolkit 
Ground-
truthing 
exercises by 
project staff. 
 
sustainably 
managed 
About 4,000 ha 
community-
managed natural 
forests restored 
through assisted 
regeneration 
0 ha of new 
planted forests 
established 
sustainably 
managed 
About 12,792 ha 
community 
managed natural 
forests restored 
by assisted 
regeneration 
About 5,840 ha 
new planted 
forests 
established 
CBOs adopt climate-resilient land 
use practices (assuming the adoption 
rate that is specified in Section F.1)  
Consultations, according to FPIC 
principles, conducted with all 
beneficiaries prior to 
implementation of investments 
Some measures may overlap in 
terms of area, as some hectares of 
land may benefit from two of the 
three forms of support listed in the 
previous column. For this reason, the 
targets are listed in terms of the 
total geographic reach of each type 
of support (figures within which 
there is no potential for overlap) 
rather than an overall aggregated 
figure.  
Investments for public land forest 
user groups depend on formalization 
of public land forest user groups at 
the local level.  
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
land 
use, 
reforestation, 
reduced 
deforestation, 
and 
through 
sustainable 
forest 
management 
and 
conservation 
and 
enhancement 
of 
forest 
carbon stocks 
M4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent 
(tCO2eq) reduced or 
avoided 
(including 
increased removals) as 
a 
result 
of 
Fund-
funded 
projects/programmes.  
Forest 
Reference 
Emission 
Levels 
Project 
reports 
Maps/remote 
sensing  
0 
743,764 tCO2eq 
2,366,485 tCO2eq 
(after 7 years) 
The mid-term target is an estimate 
only, and is based on the expected 
reach and benefits of the relevant 
project activities by the end of PY4. 
CBOs adopt climate-resilient land 
use practices (assuming the adoption 
rate that is specified in Section F.1), 
and also reduce the extent to which 
they degrade and encroach on 
forests and other ecosystems within 
the project area. 
Other assumptions are described in 
detail in Section E.1 as well as in 
Annex 2 – Feasibility Study.  
Avoided deforested and degraded 
land within 20 years 27,357 ha 
Baseline emissions of 9,976,598 tCO2 
over 20 years from projected 
deforestation.

=== PAGE 85 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
 
 
                                                                 
63 Level for each coordination mechanism is expressed on a scale of 1-4. Each ‘level’ refers to a different degree of effectiveness (1 = no 
coordination mechanism; 2 = coordination mechanism in place; 3 = coordination mechanism in place, meeting regularly with appropriate 
representation (gender and decision-making authorities); 4 = coordination mechanism in place, meeting regularly, with appropriate 
representation, with appropriate information flows and monitoring of action items/issued raised). 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
Final 
Project 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
M9.0 
Improved 
management of land 
or 
forest 
areas 
contributing 
to 
emissions reductions 
M9.1 Hectares of 
land 
or 
forests 
under 
improved 
and 
effective 
management 
that 
contributes to CO2 
emission reductions 
Maps/remote 
sensing 
Project reports 
0 
About 12,189 ha 
of climate 
resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
implemented 
About 45,848 ha 
of forest 
ecosystems 
sustainably 
managed 
About 4,000 ha 
community-
managed natural 
forests restored 
through assisted 
regeneration 
0 ha of new 
planted forests 
established 
About 48,772 
ha of climate-
resilient 
agricultural 
practices 
implemented 
About 148,998 
ha of forest 
ecosystems 
sustainably 
managed 
About 12,792 
ha community 
managed 
natural forests 
restored by 
assisted 
regeneration 
About 5,840 ha 
new planted 
forests 
established 
Beneficiaries adopt climate-
resilient land use practices 
(assuming the adoption rate that 
is specified in Section F.1). 
Communities not only engage 
with the project to adopt project-
promoted climate-resilient SNRM, 
but also reduce the extent to 
which they degrade and encroach 
on forests and other ecosystems 
within the project area. 
Consultations, according to FPIC 
principles, are concluded. 
A5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional 
and 
regulatory 
systems 
for 
climate-
responsive planning 
and development 
A5.2Number 
and 
level 63  of effective 
coordination 
mechanisms  
Project reports 
Reports and 
minutes from 
CFUG network 
meetings. 
Reporting by 
CBOs via the 
Churia Knowledge 
Centre 
26 river-system 
level CFUG 
coordination 
networks at 
Level 1  
26 river-system 
level CFUG 
coordination 
networks at Level 
2 
 
26 river-system 
level CFUG 
coordination 
networks at 
Level 4 
 
CFUGs in each of the 26 targeted 
river systems engage with the 
project. 
CFUGs in each of the 26 targeted 
are able to coordinate well 
amongst themselves.

=== PAGE 86 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
 
 
 
A8.0 
Strengthened 
awareness of climate 
change threats and 
risk 
reduction 
processes 
A8.1 
Number 
of 
males and females 
made 
aware 
of 
climate threats and 
related appropriate 
responses 
Baseline 
and 
completion 
surveys 
Workshop/trainin
g 
attendance 
sheets 
and 
materials 
Project reports 
Reporting by CBOs 
via 
the 
Churia 
Knowledge Centre 
0 men 
0 women 
0 total 
115,584 men 
115,584 women 
231,168 total 
481,634 men 
481,634 women 
963,268 total 
Beneficiaries are interested in 
adopting climate resilient land 
use practices.  
Consultations, according to FPIC 
principles, conducted with all 
beneficiaries prior to 
implementation of investments.  
Indigenous peoples, marginalized 
groups, and women are 
effectively targeted and enabled 
to participate in the project.  
The mid-term target for direct 
beneficiaries is an estimate based 
on the number of CBOs and 
households that are expected to 
be reached through field-level 
support by the end of PY4, 
multiplied by the average number 
of people (4.8) living in each 
household in the 26 river systems 
that comprise the project area.

=== PAGE 87 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
 
Project/Programme Performance Indicators 
 Expected 
Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
Component 1: Scaling up climate-resilient SNRM 
Farmers are 
skilled in using 
climate-resilient 
land use 
practices. 
Proportion of 
farmers trained 
by the project 
who begin to 
apply climate-
resilient land 
use practices on 
their fields in 
the relevant 
season following 
their respective 
trainings. 
Assessments 
(administered by 
trainers) of 
farmers’ actions 
during the 
relevant seasons 
following 
trainings. 
Reporting by 
CBOs via the 
Churia Knowledge 
Centre. 
Randomized site 
visits to farmers’ 
fields by project 
monitoring 
specialists. 
0 
At least 80% of 
the farmers 
involved in 
project trainings 
by the end of PY4 
report that they 
have begun to 
apply project-
promoted 
climate-resilient 
land use practices 
in the season 
following their 
training. 
At least 80% of the 
farmers involved in 
project trainings by 
the end of PY7 
report that they 
have begun to apply 
project-promoted 
climate-resilient 
land use practices in 
the season following 
their training. 
The final selection of practices 
to be promoted at each 
specific training site are highly 
relevant to targeted farmers’ 
cropping systems and 
conditions, as well as the 
climate change challenges with 
which they must contend. 
Trainings are delivered in a 
form and manner that is 
accessible to, and relevant for, 
targeted farmers. 
Local structures 
are enhancing 
resilience against 
climate change-
induced erosion, 
sedimentation 
and flooding 
risks. 
Volume of 
sedimentation  
In-person 
assessments 
performed by 
project staff at 
lower gabions. 
Baseline 
sedimentation level 
in each of the 
targeted river 
systems in which 
the project 
constructs / 
establishes gully and 
riverbank 
stabilization 
measures to be 
established in PY1. 
Sedimentation 
level in each of 
the targeted river 
systems in which 
the project 
constructs / 
establishes gully 
and riverbank 
stabilization 
measures is 
reduced by 5% 
(relative to the 
baseline level) by 
the end of PY4. 
Sedimentation level 
in each of the 
targeted river 
systems in which 
the project 
constructs / 
establishes gully and 
riverbank 
stabilization 
measures is reduced 
by25% (relative to 
the baseline level) 
by the end of PY7. 
Extreme events (e.g. seismic 
activity) do not damage the 
project-supported structures 
to the extent that they are 
unable to perform their 
anticipated functions. 
An unexpectedly large number 
of extreme precipitation 
events do not occur in short 
periods of time, which would 
otherwise increase runoff and 
sedimentation independently 
of the project-supported 
structures. 
Other climate-resilient SNRM 
practices (including Activities 
on climate-resilient land use, 
sustainable management of 
forests and reforestation) are 
successfully implemented, 
further reducing potential for 
erosion and sedimentation.

=== PAGE 88 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
Natural forest 
ecosystems are 
better 
maintained and 
protected within 
the project area. 
Density of forest 
area in each of 
the 26 targeted 
river systems. 
Biomass 
measurements in 
permanent 
sample plots of 
National Forest 
Inventory (NFI) in 
the project area 
Baseline forest 
density in each of 
the 26 targeted 
river systems to be 
established PY1. 
Forest density in 
each of the 26 
targeted river 
systems is 
increased by 1% 
(relative to the 
baseline level) by 
the end of PY4. 
Forest density in 
each of the 26 
targeted river 
systems is increased 
by 2% (relative to 
the baseline level) 
by the end of PY7. 
NFI permanent sample plots 
which are measured in the 
second NFI cycle (2018-20) are 
identified and re-measured 
before project end. 
Communities not only engage 
with the project to adopt 
project-promoted climate-
resilient SNRM, but also 
reduce the extent to which 
they degrade and encroach on 
forests and other ecosystems 
in the project area. 
The mid-term target is an 
estimate only, and is based on 
the expected reach and 
benefits of the relevant project 
activities by the end of PY4. 
Forests and tree 
cover are 
restored and 
maintained in the 
river system 
landscapes. 
Additional area 
of non-forest 
land converted 
and total forest 
cover in each of 
the 26 targeted 
river systems. 
Forest cover 
assessment using 
FAO Open Foris 
Collect Earth 
toolkit 
Ground-truthing 
exercises by 
project staff. 
 
About 227,276 ha of 
forest cover across 
the 26 targeted 
river systems. 
Area of non-forest 
land converted to 
forest land across 
the 26 targeted 
river systems 
totals 3,636 ha by 
the end of PY4. 
This is expected 
to result in forest 
cover of about 
230,912 ha across 
the 26 river 
systems at the 
end of PY4. 
Area of non-forest 
land converted to 
forest land across 
the 26 targeted 
river systems totals 
19,040 ha by the 
end of PY7. This is 
expected to result in 
forest cover of 
about 246,316 ha 
across the 26 river 
systems at the end 
of PY7. 
The mid-term target is an 
estimate only, and is based on 
the expected reach and 
benefits of the relevant project 
activities by the end of PY4. 
Estimates of total forest cover 
in PY4 and PY7 assume 
historical annual deforestation 
rates in PY1-2 (-1.2%), and a 
reduced annual deforestation 
rate in PY3-7 (-0.5%), in line 
with the assumptions used in 
the mitigation impact 
calculations. This will be re-
assessed/updated during 
project inception to account 
for the latest trends in 
deforestation rates. 
Communities not only engage 
with the project to adopt 
project-promoted climate-
resilient SNRM, but also 
reduce the extent to which 
they degrade and encroach on 
forests and other ecosystems 
in the project area. 
Baseline data on forest cover is 
from 2015. The baseline for 
the area of forest cover across 
the 26 targeted river systems 
will therefore be re-
assessed/updated during 
project inception. 
Component 2: Strengthening institutions and planning for climate-resilient SNRM

=== PAGE 89 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
Provincial and 
local 
governments in 
Provinces 1, 2 
and 3 are 
equipped to 
continue 
monitoring 
natural resources 
and mapping 
critical 
ecosystems to 
inform future 
planning and 
investment 
decisions. 
Change in 
provincial and 
local 
government 
staff’s 
understanding 
of: (i) current 
and projected 
climate change 
impacts in the 
project area; (ii) 
the current 
state of natural 
resources and 
critical 
ecosystems in 
the project area; 
and (iii) the use 
of key GIS tools 
that facilitate 
monitoring and 
mapping of 
natural 
resources and 
ecosystems. 
Assessments 
(administered by 
project staff) of 
local and 
provincial 
government 
staff’s 
understanding of 
climate change 
impacts, natural 
resources and key 
GIS tools, 
measured on a 
scale of 1-5 
(1=limited 
understanding; 
2=basic 
understanding; 
3=moderate 
understanding; 
4=strong 
understanding; 
5=advanced 
understanding). 
0 
75% of surveyed 
staff in the 
provincial and 
local governments 
improve their 
assessment scores 
by at least 1 level 
when surveyed at 
mid-term relative 
to their baseline 
assessments. 
100% of surveyed 
staff in the 
provincial and local 
governments 
improve their 
assessment scores 
by at least 2 levels 
when surveyed at 
end-term relative to 
their baseline 
assessments. 
Provincial and local 
governments mobilize staff 
with appropriate technical 
backgrounds for project 
trainings. 
Note: Baseline levels of 
understanding of provincial 
government staff will be 
assessed during project year 1. 
Community-
based 
organizations 
(CBOs) are 
actively 
promoting 
climate-resilient 
SNRM within 
their 
communities. 
Proportion of 
beneficiary 
CBOs in which 
individuals 
trained by the 
project have 
organized their 
own trainings 
(or other forms 
of 
learning/knowle
dge exchange) 
on climate-
resilient SNRM 
for other 
households/me
mbers of their 
CBO. 
Baseline and 
completion 
surveys. 
Reporting by 
CBOs via the 
Churia Knowledge 
Centre. 
Randomized site 
visits to 
communities by 
project 
monitoring 
specialists. 
0 
At least 40% of 
the 750 
beneficiary CBOs 
have organized 
their own training 
(or other forms of 
learning/knowled
ge exchange) on 
climate-resilient 
SNRM for 
member 
households, 
including those 
who did not 
directly benefit 
from project 
trainings. 
At least 80% of the 
750 beneficiary 
CBOs have 
organized their own 
training (or other 
forms of learning / 
knowledge 
exchange) on 
climate-resilient 
SNRM for member 
households, 
including those who 
did not directly 
benefit from project 
trainings. 
Beneficiary CBOs nominate 
qualified individuals to 
participate in project trainings 
(i.e. those with the capacity to 
not only learn, but also teach 
other households/individuals 
within their CBOs). 
Climate-resilient SNRM 
practices promoted to specific 
CBOs are highly relevant to 
their conditions and needs. 
Trainings to CBOs are 
delivered in a form and 
substance that is accessible to 
CBO members. 
Component 3: Improving knowledge, awareness and local capacity for climate-resilient SNRM 
Extension 
workers and 
Local Resource 
Persons (LRPs) 
are skilled in 
promoting 
climate-resilient 
SNRM. 
Change in 
understanding 
of government 
extension 
workers on 
climate-resilient 
SNRM practices. 
Pre-training (PY3), 
post-training 
(PY4) and follow-
up (PY7) 
assessments 
completed by 
extension workers 
benefiting from 
training, 
measured on a 
scale of 1-5 
(1=limited 
0 
At least 80% of 
trained extension 
workers improve 
their assessment 
score by at least 1 
level in their post-
training 
assessment (PY4) 
relative to their 
pre-training 
100% of trained 
extension workers 
improve their 
assessment score by 
at least 2 levels in 
their follow-up 
assessments (PY7) 
relative to their pre-
training 
assessments (PY3). 
Although extension workers 
will only be trained once in 
PY4, the project assumes they 
will continue to enhance their 
understanding of climate-
resilient SNRM through 
engagement with other 
extension workers over the 
subsequent years. This is 
expected to result in all 180 
trained extension workers 
having a strong understanding

=== PAGE 90 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
understanding; 
2=basic 
understanding; 
3=moderate 
understanding; 
4=strong 
understanding; 
5=advanced 
understanding). 
assessments 
(PY3). 
of climate-resilient SNRM by 
PY7. 
Note: Baseline levels of 
understanding of LRPs will be 
assessed during project year 3. 
Change in 
understanding 
of CBO 
members 
trained by 
extension 
workers (under 
Component 1) 
on climate-
resilient SNRM 
practices. 
Pre- and post-
training 
assessments 
completed by 
CBO members 
(administered by 
extension workers 
/ trainers) 
participating in 
project trainings, 
measured on a 
scale of 1-5 
(1=limited 
understanding; 
2=basic 
understanding; 
3=moderate 
understanding; 
4=strong 
understanding; 
5=advanced 
understanding). 
 
0 
80% of CBO 
members trained 
by extension 
workers (under 
Component 1) by 
the end of PY4 
score at least 1 
level better on 
their post-training 
assessments than 
on their pre-
training 
assessments. 
90% of CBO 
members trained by 
extension workers 
(under Component 
1) by the end of PY7 
score at least 2 
levels better on 
their post-training 
assessments than 
on their pre-training 
assessments. 
Government fulfils its 
commitment to make qualified 
extension workers/field staff 
available to be trained by (and 
deliver support under) the 
project. 
Trained extension 
workers/field staff are 
retained by the government 
and do not transfer to other 
jobs. 
The extension system can only 
sustainably (i.e. after project 
closure) promote climate-
resilient SNRM if extension 
agents not only have a strong 
understanding of such 
practices, but are also able to 
effectively support farmers 
and other land users to learn 
about such practices – a key 
step in the process of changing 
behaviour and practices at 
field level. 
 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Sub-Component 1.1 
1.1.1: Establish Farmer Field Schools 
to promote climate-resilient land use. 
Establish a network of training sites 
on which farmers can be trained on 
climate-resilient SNRM during and 
after the project. 
- 
Identify sites for Farmer Field 
Schools (FFS). 
- 
Establish FFS, including 
procurement of farming 
equipment. 
- 
Training of trainers (ToT) for field 
staff to build capacity of FFS. 
- 
120 FFS established and 
operational. 
1.1.2: Train farmers to adopt and 
apply climate-resilient land use 
practices. 
Strengthen farmers’ capacities to 
adopt/apply climate-resilient 
farming practices in their own 
fields, as well as support other 
members of their CBOs to 
adopt/apply such practices. 
- 
Procure basic farming 
tools/equipment to support 
adoption of tailored climate-
resilient farming practices (based 
on results of CERPs). 
- 
Deliver trainings and associated 
farming tools/equipment. 
- 
260 training events organized 
(reaching about 7,800 Farmer 
Beneficiaries). 
1.1.3: Train farmers to adopt 
agroforestry and livestock 
management practices. 
Strengthen farmers’ capacities to 
adopt/apply suitable agroforestry 
and livestock management 
- 
Organize initial training for CBO 
households on agroforestry and 
livestock management practices. 
- 
120 initial Agro-forestry and 
Livestock Beneficiaries supported 
to adopt project-promoted

=== PAGE 91 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
practices on their own land, as well 
as support other members of their 
CBOs to adopt/apply such 
practices, thereby building 
household-level resilience and 
easing the expansionary pressures 
driving deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
- 
Procure materials to establish 
small on-farm tree nurseries for 
initial training beneficiaries. 
- 
Regular site visits by field staff in 
PY3-7 to support broader 
adoption of agroforestry and 
livestock management practices, 
as well as identify and support 
livestock-owning households to 
access the government biogas 
subsidy.  
practices and establish small on-
farm tree nurseries. 
- 
Approximately 500 households 
supported to access the 
government biogas subsidy and 
purchase/install biogas digesters. 
1.1.4: Construct check dams, gully 
stabilization measures and other local 
infrastructure to enhance resilience 
against climate change-induced 
erosion, sedimentation and flooding 
risks. 
Construct local structures in each 
of the 26 targeted river systems 
that will reduce community 
vulnerability to climate change 
impacts (accounting for both 
upstream and downstream 
dynamics), including: (i) erosion risk 
and sedimentation in upstream 
areas; and (ii) flooding risk and 
water stress in downstream areas. 
- 
Identify specific sites for 
community structures. 
- 
Develop technical specifications 
and construction guidelines for 
individual structures once sites are 
identified. 
- 
Recruit service providers to build 
structures in upstream and 
downstream locations, and 
supervise them while they do so. 
- 
Establish relevant structures and 
practices to stabilize 86 gullies, 
mostly in the Churia hills. 
- 
Establish and maintain check 
dams and/or community-
managed water harvesting ponds 
in 129 sites, mostly in the Bhavar 
zone. 
Sub-Component 1.2 
1.2.1: Support CBOs to 
develop/strengthen and deliver 
forest management operational 
plans. 
Improving the application of 
sustainable forest management 
practices in all forest land managed 
by forestry-related CBOs within the 
Project Area, ensuring silvicultural 
practices are implemented and 
maximizing ecosystem service 
provision and resilience, as well as 
generating significant climate 
change mitigation benefits. 
- 
Recruit service providers to work 
with all forestry-related CBOs to 
develop and/or strengthen forest 
management operational plans. 
- 
Procure relevant equipment for 
each relevant CBO to support 
implementation of forest 
management operational plans. 
- 
Regular site visits by field staff (in 
PY3-7) to provide ongoing advice 
and guidance to enable 
implementation of forest 
management operational plans. 
- 
Approximately 600 forest 
management operational plans 
developed and/or strengthened. 
1.2.2: Train CBOs and land owners to 
enable more sustainable 
management of forest ecosystems. 
Build the capacity of government 
staff and all forestry-related CBOs 
to better understand the principles 
and practices that underpin 
sustainable management of forest 
ecosystems, and continue applying 
such principles and practices after 
project closure. 
- 
Deliver Training of Trainer (ToT) 
events for MoITFE field staff. 
- 
Deliver trainings for forestry-
related CBOs and other land 
owners (“Forest Training 
Beneficiaries”). 
- 
Approximately 26 ToT events 
organized. 
- 
Approximately 122 local training 
events for forestry-related CBOs 
organized. 
Sub-Component 1.3 
1.3.1: Establish and support the 
operation of 52 multi-purpose tree 
nurseries to serve the plantation and 
restoration needs of CBOs and other 
forest sector stakeholders. 
Establish tree nurseries in the 
Project Area to support tree 
planting and forest restoration 
under this project, as well as 
planting and restoration by 
communities throughout the 
Project Area during the project and 
after project closure. 
- 
Procure equipment and materials 
needed to establish two nurseries 
in each of the 26 river systems. 
- 
Identify suitable sites and stablish 
nurseries on these sites. 
- 
Procure material inputs and 
labour needed for production of 
seedlings in PY3-7, ensuring each 
nursery has the capacity to 
produce at least 50,000 seedlings 
per year. 
52 tree nurseries established and under 
operation. 
1.3.2: Establish and maintain 7,300 ha 
of forest plantations to enhance 
resilience. 
Establish and support maintenance 
of different types of forest 
plantations (demonstration 
plantations; public land forests on 
- 
Train MoITFE staff in each 
province on sustainable plantation 
management. 
- 
Three training events organized (1 
per province) for MoITFE staff. 
- 
1,300 ha of demonstration 
plantations established.

=== PAGE 92 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
river bank sites; public land forests 
on community land) to build 
resilience and deliver important 
mitigation benefits, while also 
building capacity to support 
sustainable forestry activities 
beyond project closure. 
- 
Procure materials, seed stock and 
local labour needed to plant 1,300 
ha of demonstration plantations 
in the Bhavar and Terai zones, and 
directly support and oversee this 
planting. 
- 
Procure materials, seedlings and 
local labour needed to establish 
1,000 ha of riparian plantations 
(on river bank sites), and directly 
support and oversee this planting. 
- 
Assist relevant CBOs to sign formal 
agreements with local 
Municipality offices for 
management of riparian 
plantations, as well as develop 
management plans. 
- 
Procure materials, seedlings and 
local labour needed to establish 
5,000 ha of plantations on 
community land, and directly 
support and oversee this planting. 
- 
Assist relevant CBOs to sign formal 
agreements with local 
Municipality offices for 
management of plantations on 
community land, as well as 
develop management plans. 
- 
1,000 ha of riparian plantations 
established (on river bank sites). 
- 
5,000 ha of plantations 
established on community land. 
1.3.3: Train government field staff 
and CBOs on Forest Landscape 
Restoration, and support CBOs to 
implement Assisted Natural 
Regeneration on 15,990 ha. 
Assist (and build the capacity of) 
CBOs to expand forest cover and 
restore forest landscapes in critical 
locations in each of the 26 targeted 
river systems, thereby restoring 
crucial ecosystem functions and 
ecosystems resilience while also 
generating significant mitigation 
benefits. 
- 
Prepare training materials on 
Forest Landscape Restoration 
(FLR). 
- 
Train provincial forestry field staff 
on FLR. 
- 
Train CBOs on FLR. 
- 
Identify specific sites and 
communities for Assisted Natural 
Regeneration (ANR) support, and 
develop ANR methodologies and 
implementation plans. 
- 
Procure tools, equipment, inputs 
and local labour needed to 
implement ANR on 15,990 ha of 
community-managed forest land, 
and directly support and oversee 
this planting. 
- 
12 training events on FLR 
organized for provincial forestry 
field staff. 
- 
180 training events on FLR 
organized for relevant CBOs. 
- 
ANR methodologies and 
implementation plans (adapted to 
local contexts) developed. 
- 
ANR implemented on 15,990 ha 
of community-managed forest 
land. 
1.3.4: Provide technical guidance and 
seedlings to establish tree cover on 
16,500 ha of woodlots to enhance 
ecosystem resilience, and improve 
fuelwood and timber availability in 
downstream communities. 
Establish woodlots on small-scale 
landowners’ land, thereby 
enhancing resilience of soils and 
broader ecosystems, while also 
easing expansionary pressures 
(particularly from downstream 
communities and ‘distant forest 
users’) that are driving 
deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
- 
Identify landowners with whom to 
collaborate to establish woodlots. 
- 
Organize exchange visits between 
prioritized small-scale landowners 
and other successful forest 
owners in neighbouring districts. 
- 
Procure seedlings needed to 
establish woodlots on 16,500 ha 
of land, and directly oversee and 
support this planting (coupled 
with labour provided by 
beneficiary households and 
advisory services provided by 
government). 
Woodlots established on 16,500 ha of 
land owned by small-scale landowners. 
Sub-Component 2.1

=== PAGE 93 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
2.1.1: Strengthen institutions on 
climate change impacts and 
ecosystem mapping. 
Build the capacity of key entities 
that intend to collaborate with 
and/or benefit from the project – 
including those that will play an 
important role in sustaining and 
scaling up support for climate-
resilient SNRM after project closure 
– on climate change and climate-
resilient land use planning & 
management practices. 
- 
Train relevant national, provincial 
and local stakeholders on climate 
change and climate-resilient land 
use planning & management, as 
well as GESI principles and 
measures. 
- 
Train relevant national and 
provincial stakeholders on 
relevant GIS tools for critical 
ecosystem mapping. 
- 
4 national-level trainings on 
climate change and climate-
resilient land use planning & 
management organized. 
- 
3 provincial-level trainings on 
climate change and climate-
resilient land use & planning 
organized. 
- 
64 local-level trainings on climate 
change and climate-resilient land 
use & planning organized. 
- 
1 national-level training on GIS 
tools for critical ecosystem 
mapping organized. 
- 
6 provincial-level trainings on GIS 
tools for critical ecosystem 
mapping organized. 
2.1.2: Develop and validate Critical 
Ecosystem Restoration Plans (CERPs) 
for 26 river systems. 
Assist provincial and local 
stakeholders to develop a Critical 
Ecosystem Restoration Plan (CERP) 
for each of the 26 targeted river 
systems, thereby providing 
governments and CBOs with 
common plans and priorities to 
guide coordinated investments in 
climate-resilient SNRM. 
- 
Recruit a service provider to 
perform a multi-criteria spatial 
analysis for each of the 26 
targeted river systems, and use 
this analysis as a basis to identify 
needs and propose 
investment/intervention priorities 
in each river system. 
- 
Organize a consultation in each 
river system to discuss identified 
priorities and develop them into a 
CERP for each river system. 
- 
Organize field consultations to 
raise awareness about (and secure 
buy-in for) CERP priorities among 
relevant CBOs. 
- 
Organize national and provincial-
level workshops to secure high-
level government validation of 
CERPs. 
- 
26 CERPs developed and 
validated. 
- 
26 river system-level 
consultations organized. 
- 
52 field consultations organized. 
- 
2 national and 6 provincial 
validation workshops organized. 
2.1.3: Support provincial 
governments to plan and increase 
resilience to projected climate 
change-related extreme events. 
Raise awareness of the evolving 
risks related to climate change-
induced extreme events within the 
Project Area, and assist provincial 
governments to develop risk 
management plans for such 
extreme events. 
- 
Organize awareness-raising 
workshops for provincial and local 
government staff. 
- 
Develop provincial risk 
management plans for climate 
change-induced extreme events, 
building on detailed hazard 
mapping, vulnerability 
assessments and risk mapping 
from CERPs. 
- 
Organize multi-stakeholder 
validation workshops for risk 
management plans. 
- 
26 awareness-raising workshops 
organized. 
- 
3 provincial risk management 
plans for climate change-induced 
extreme events developed. 
- 
26 multi-stakeholder validation 
workshops organized. 
Sub-Component 2.2 
2.2.1: Establish, formalize and 
register CBOs to enable climate-
resilient SNRM. 
Assist community-based 
organizations to overcome 
institutional hurdles that are 
otherwise impeding them from 
providing effective support for their 
member households to adopt and 
scale up climate-resilient SNRM. 
- 
Ensure all 750 beneficiary CBOs 
are registered with the relevant 
authorities in line with Provincial 
and Federal Law (i.e. supporting 
any non-registered CBOs to 
become registered). 
- 
With a view to establishing 
Community Forest User Groups 
(CFUGs) and private forest owner 
networks, organize initial 
- 
All 750 beneficiary CBOs 
registered with the relevant 
authorities. 
- 
Organize 39 initial (one-day) 
workshops for CFUG and private 
forest owner networks. 
- 
Logistical support provided to 260 
CFUG and private forest owner 
network meetings.

=== PAGE 94 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
workshops for each of these 
networks and provide financial 
and logistical support for annual 
meetings of such groups from 
PY3-7. 
2.2.2: Train CBOs on climate-resilient 
land use planning, and assist them to 
mainstream SNRM into their CBO 
management plans. 
Build technical capacities of CBOs 
to understand climate change risks 
and how best to respond through 
climate-resilient SNRM approaches 
that are catered to their local 
needs, drawing on insights gained 
through the CERP process. 
- 
Recruit a service provider to 
organize Training of Trainers (ToT) 
for Local Resource Persons (LRPs) 
on climate-resilient land use. 
- 
Organize community workshops 
at which LRPs will train members 
from all 750 beneficiary CBOs. 
- 
Provide advice and guidance to 
mainstream climate-resilient 
SNRM into CBO management 
plans for the most vulnerable 
CBOs in the Project Area. 
- 
26 ToT training events for LRPs 
organized. 
- 
250 community-level workshops 
for CBOs organized (with about 3-
5 CBOs per workshop). 
- 
250 CBO management plans 
developed and/or strengthened 
to mainstream support for 
climate-resilient SNRM. 
Sub-Component 3.1 
3.1.1: Equip Local Resource Persons 
(LRPs) with best practices on climate-
resilient SNRM from local experience, 
including indigenous knowledge. 
Gather local and indigenous 
knowledge on climate-resilient 
SNRM and distil this information 
into user-friendly guidelines for 
LRPs to train and support CBO 
members to adopt such practices 
during and beyond the project. 
- 
Recruit a service provider to 
organize local consultations to 
gather local and indigenous 
knowledge. 
- 
Develop a compendium of local 
and indigenous knowledge, 
building on insights gained from 
consultations. 
- 
Organize workshops to 
review/validate the compendium. 
- 
Recruit a service provider to 
develop best practice guidelines 
for LRPs, drawing in part on the 
compendium. 
- 
105 community consultations 
organized (about 4 in each of the 
26 targeted river systems). 
- 
1 compendium of local and 
indigenous knowledge developed. 
- 
5 provincial-level validation 
workshops organized. 
- 
1 set of best practice guidelines 
for LRPs developed. 
3.1.2: Raise awareness on climate-
resilient SNRM through local schools, 
media and intra-regional exchange. 
Organize awareness-raising 
campaigns and other forms of 
information exchange to promote 
climate-resilient SNRM, and 
increase interest in such practices 
and communities living throughout 
the Project Area. 
- 
Recruit a service provider to 
develop a knowledge 
dissemination and communication 
plan. 
- 
Recruit a service provider to 
develop curricula on climate-
resilient SNRM for local high 
schools. 
- 
Establish student-run eco-clubs in 
all 26 targeted river systems. 
- 
Organize local-level radio 
programmes. 
- 
Organize exchange visits for local 
government authorities. 
- 
1 knowledge dissemination and 
communication plan developed. 
- 
1 set of high school curricula 
developed. 
- 
Student-run eco-clubs 
established, and 260 sessions held 
at schools in the Project Area. 
- 
119 local-level radio programmes 
broadcast. 
- 
28 local exchange visits for local 
government officials organized. 
Sub-Component 3.2 
3.2.1: Develop 10 modules on 
climate-resilient SNRM to be used by 
extension workers, including in the 
farmer field schools. 
Develop locally-relevant training 
modules that cover the range of 
climate-resilient SNRM practices to 
be supported by the project, which 
extension workers and other 
trainers can use to promote more 
widespread adoption/application of 
climate-resilient SNRM throughout 
the Project Area during and after 
the project. 
- 
Develop training modules. 
- 
Recruit a service provider to 
translate training modules. 
- 
10 training modules developed 
and translated.

=== PAGE 95 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
 
  
 
                                                                 
64 Please refer to FAO OED webpage for further details: http://www.fao.org/about/who-we-are/departments/office-of-evaluation/en/ 
3.2.2: Enhance and deliver quality 
extension services on climate-
resilient SNRM to households. 
Build the capacity of extension 
workers and LRPs to understand 
and apply the 10 training modules 
developed under Activity 3.2.1, as 
well as engage the services of 
provincial extension workers to 
promote and support adoption of 
climate-resilient SNRM in the 
Project Area by: (i) supporting 
delivery of project-organized 
trainings; and (ii) continuing to 
support CBOs to adopt and 
continue using climate-resilient 
SNRM, including among households 
who were not selected by their 
CBOs to participate directly in 
project-organized trainings. 
- 
Train extension workers and LRPs 
on climate-resilient SNRM, 
including how to use/apply the 10 
training modules developed under 
Activity 3.2.1. 
- 
Engage provincial extension 
workers (using MoFE co-financing) 
to deliver climate-informed 
extension support in the Project 
Area, including under 
Components 1 and 2. 
- 
78 training events organized. 
- 
Extension workers providing 
11,880 months of project-related 
support for climate-resilient 
SNRM, with the specific 
distribution of these working 
months (i.e. days per worker) to 
be determined. 
3.2.3: Establish and operate a Churia 
Knowledge Centre (CKC) in each 
province to enable continuous 
delivery of climate-informed 
extension services and planning, and 
to monitor implementation and 
results of CERPs and CBO 
management plans. 
Establish (and build capacity to use) 
the CKC as a platform to underpin 
the continued provision of climate 
change-informed extension and 
advisory services, as well as 
support continued monitoring of 
natural resources and evidence-
based planning in the Project Area, 
beyond project closure. 
- 
Recruit a service provider to 
establish the CKC, including 
provincial hubs within the MoITFE 
offices in Provinces 1, 2 and 3. 
- 
Train government staff and other 
relevant specialists to understand 
the CKC, and the information they 
can access from it. 
- 
Develop CKC manuals, protocols 
and guidelines (including Standard 
Operating Procedures, SOPs). 
- 
Train relevant MoITFE staff on CKC 
protocols and SOPs to support 
continued maintenance/operation 
of the CKC. 
- 
CKC platform established. 
- 
3 provincial CKC hubs established 
in MoITFE offices in Provinces 1, 2 
and 3. 
- 
4 training events on CKC 
use/access organized. 
- 
1 set of CKC manuals, protocols, 
guidelines and SOPs developed. 
- 
3 training events on CKC 
maintenance/operations 
organized. 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
233. In its role as Accredited Entity, FAO (specifically the FAO-GCF project supervision team) will oversee and supervise 
the implementation of this project in accordance with the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed between 
FAO and the GCF. As per the GCF Monitoring and Accountability Framework, and in accordance with the AMA, 
FAO will provide the GCF with an Inception Report, Annual Performance Reports, an independent Mid-term 
Evaluation report, a Project Closure Report and an independent Final Evaluation report. FAO will also provide semi-
annual and annual Financial Reports throughout project implementation. 
 
Evaluation 
234. In accordance with the AMA between FAO and GCF, the FAO Office of Evaluation64will be responsible for the 
independent interim and final evaluations for BRCRN. The evaluations will use a question-driven approach, and may 
include assessments against the criteria of relevance, effectiveness and sustainability, among others. The interim 
evaluation will be instrumental in contributing – through operational and strategic recommendations – to improve 
implementation, setting out any necessary corrective measures for the remaining period of the project. The final 
evaluation will assess the relevance of the intervention, its overall performance, as well as sustainability and 
scalability of results, differential impacts and lessons learned. The evaluation should also assess the extent to which

=== PAGE 96 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 117 
 
 
 
H 
H 
 
the intervention has contributed to the Fund’s higher-level goal of achieving a paradigm shift to low-emissions 
sustainable development pathways and climate-resilient sustainable development in Nepal. To measure attributable 
changes, the evaluation will draw on mixed-methods, using qualitative methods (e.g. participatory rural appraisal) in 
combination with counterfactual analysis (e.g. quasi-experimental methods, depending on the existence of reliable 
control group data from the project’s baseline and completion surveys, which will be confirmed during project 
inception). In addition to primary data collected by the evaluators and secondary national data, both interim and final 
evaluations will draw on the baseline and completion surveys financed by the project, as well as monitoring reports 
and other data and activities prepared by project staff, including remote sensing data on changes in forest and land-
use patterns. Careful attention will be paid to the disaggregation of data, results and outcomes by gender. 
 
Project monitoring and reporting 
235. Project-level monitoring will be the responsibility of the PMU. The PMU will establish an effective monitoring system 
to track implementation and continuously assess efficacy, targeting and project assumptions and targets. The 
project´s monitoring will be designed to be responsive, and provide ongoing feedback to permit for adaptive 
management as needed, and to generate key lessons learned.  
236. Within the PMU, the National Project Director (NPD) will oversee project implementation and monitoring, and ensure 
coordination between FAO, PSC and PMU, as well as other relevant stakeholders. The NPD will be supported by a 
project gender focal point and monitoring & reporting specialists, all of whom will be members of the PMU. FAO will 
support the NPD and project management entities as necessary to ensure transparent, effective and inclusive 
monitoring & reporting. All members of project management bodies will be trained on project monitoring & reporting 
protocols during project inception. 
237. Project progress will be assessed in part against the detailed project implementation plan, gender action plan, 
indigenous peoples plan and social inclusion plan, while results will be measured against the targets outlined in 
Section H.1 (above). Such assessments will be guided by a detailed Monitoring Plan, which will be developed during 
project inception and submitted to the GCF as part of the Project Inception Report. Monitoring of project progress 
will take place on a quarterly basis, with PPMUs reporting to the main monitoring & reporting specialist in the PMU, 
who in turn will provide progress updates to the PSC and FAO (as AE).Project progress will be communicated to the 
GCF Secretariat in the form of Annual Progress Reports. 
238. The basic parameters of the anticipated BRCRN monitoring system are briefly summarized here, and elaborated in 
more detail in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study, Section 7.2.The project monitoring system will feature a combination of 
activity-based proxy indicators and scientific models that will be used to assess performance. The system design is 
based on a COMBINATION of field-based surveys and user group self-monitoring and digital data collection, 
communication and information technologies. The system will be directly developed as an integral part of the CKC 
(Component 3). In terms of monitoring project impact/ performance in a quantitative manner, the key approach is 
that beneficiaries in the project perform periodic self-assessments (using easy self-assessment sheets) using proxy 
indicators. For every 5-10 registered CBOs, one community member is selected as the Community Group Leader 
(CGL). The group leader is trained on how to total the specific data from individual self-assessment sheets (those 
developed by individual group members) into a group record. Summarized data of each group will be collected and 
entered into the web-based data project MIS system – the CKC. This aggregated self-assessment data can then be 
used to complement other elements of the monitoring system and ultimately assess progress against targets. To 
avoid any potential bias in monitoring and reporting of project results, the project will also recruit an external entity 
to administer baseline and completion surveys in the project area, providing robust data that will contribute to 
providing a complete picture of the evolving economic, social and environmental conditions in the 26 targeted river 
systems over the course of the project implementation period. This project-generated information will also be 
triangulated against data sources generated outside the project, including the National Population and Housing 
Census (which is expected to be administered in 2021).In addition, the project will use remote sensing to monitor 
some forest and land use-related indicators (as outlined in Section H.1) as well as triangulate data from other 
indicators to ensure accuracy.

=== PAGE 97 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS FOR FUNDING PROPOSAL 
☒ 
NDA No-objection Letter 
☒ 
Feasibility Study 
☒ 
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  
☒ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment (If applicable) 
☐ 
Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet 
☒ 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
☐ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations(If applicable) 
☐ 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project(If applicable) 
☒ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme 
☒ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation 
 
List of Annexes: 
Annex 
Name of Annex 
Document(s) within Annex 
Annex 1 
Commitment letters  
1.1 – Letter of No-Objection by the NDA (Ministry of 
Finance) 
1.2 – Co-financing letter 
Annex 2 
Feasibility Study 
2.1 – Feasibility Study 
Annex 3 
Integrated Financial Model 
3.1 – Economic and Financial Analysis 
3.2 – Detailed budget 
3.3 – Indicative procurement plan 
3.4 – GHG mitigation calculations 
Annex 4 
Environmental and Social 
Management Framework 
4.1 – Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (including Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework and Biodiversity Management Framework) 
4.2 – ESMF Annex 3 (Consultations) 
Annex 5 
Gender assessment and action 
plan 
5.1 – Gender assessment and action plan 
Annex 6 
Timetable for project 
implementation 
6.1 – Timetable for project implementation

=== PAGE 98 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 94 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
References 
Acharya, G.P., McDonald, M.A., Tripathi, B.P., Garder, R.M., Mawdesley, K.J. 2007. Nutrient losses from 
rain-fed bench terraced cultivation systems in high rainfall areas of the mid-hills of Nepal. Land 
degradation & Development, 18(5): 486-499.  
ADB, 
Asian 
Development 
Bank. 
2017. 
Nepal. 
Available 
online: 
< 
https://www.adb.org/countries/nepal/overview>[Accessed 2017.12.20]  
Ando, M. 1998. Risk assessment of global warming on human health. Global Environmental Research, 2: 
68-78 
Bajgain, S., Shakya, I.S. 2005. The Nepal Biogas Support Program: A Successful Model of Public Private 
Partnership for Rural Household Energy Supply. The Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs, SNV – 
Netherlands Development Organization and Nepal Biogas Sector Partnership, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
Bhattarai, K., Conway, D., Yousef, M. 2009. Determinants of deforestation in Nepal´s Central Development 
Region. Journal of Environmental Management, 91(2): 471-488.  
Bouchama, A., Parhar, R.S. El-Yazigi, A., Sheth, K., Al-Sedairy, A. 1991. Endotoxemia and release of tumor 
necrosis factor and interleukin 1 alpha in acute heatstroke. Journal of Applied Physiology 70(6): 2640-
2644. 
CBS. 2014. Population Monograph of Nepal. Vol. II (Social Demography). Kathmandu, Nepal. 
CBS. 
2018. 
GIS 
Maps. 
Available 
online: 
CBS 
2018;  
<http://cbs.gov.np/index.php?route=information/gis_maps>[Accessed 2018.03.24] 
Centre for Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance. 2015. Nepal Disaster 
Management 
Reference 
Handbook. 
Available 
online: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/disaster-mgmt-ref-hdbk-2012-nepal.pdf) 
Chettri, N., Chaudhary, S., Uddin, K., Sharma, B., Kandel, P., Bahadur Khatri, T., Dhakal, M., Ning, W., 
Sharma, E. 2016. Biodiversity values of the Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve. In: Doody, T.M., Cuddy, S.M., 
Bhatta, L.D. [eds.]. Connecting flow and ecology in Nepal: current state of knowledge for the Koshi Basin. 
Sustainable Development Investment Portfolio Project. CSIRO, Australia. Pp. 71-78. 
CIAT, World Bank, CCAFS, LI-BIRD. 2017. Climate-Smart Agriculture in Nepal. CSA Country Profiles for 
Asia Series. International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT); The World Bank; CGIAR Research 
Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS); Local Initiatives for Biodiversity 
Research and Development (LI-BIRD). Washington, D.C. 26 p 
Climate-Smart Agriculture in Nepal. CSA Country Profiles for Asia Series. International Center for Tropical 
Agriculture (CIAT) 
Collins, M., Knutti, R., Arblaster, J., Dufresne, J.L., Fichefet, T., Friedlingstein, P., Gao, X., Gutowski, W.J., 
Johns, T., Krinner, G., Shongwe, M., Tebaldi, C., Weaver, A.J., Wehner, M. 2013. Long term climate 
change: Projections, commitments and irreversibility. In: Climate change. The physical science basis. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. [Stocker TF; Qin D; Plattner GK; Tignor M; Allen SK; Boschung J; Nauels A; Xia Y; Bex 
V; Midgley PM. (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, 
USA. pp. 1029–1036;  
CSRC, Community Self Reliance Centre. 2005. Community Self Reliance Centre. Available online: 
<www.csrcnepal.org> [Accessed 2018.06.08] 
DFRS/FRA. 2014. Churia Forests of Nepal. Forest Resource Assessment Nepal, Department of Forest 
Research and Survey (DFRS). Kathmandu, Nepal 
DFRS/FRA. 2015. State of Nepal's Forests. Forest Resource Assessment Nepal, Department of Forest 
Research and Survey. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Dhital, P.R. 2017. Agricultural extension in Nepal: Experiences and Issues. Journal of Advances in 
Agriculture, 7(3): 1071-1082. 
DHM, 2016. Study of Climate and climatic variation over Nepal. Kathmandu: Department of Hydrology and 
Meteorology (DHM), Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment

=== PAGE 99 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Dixit, 
A. 
Climate 
Change 
in 
Nepal: 
Imapcts 
and 
Adaptive 
Strategies. 
Available 
online: 
<http://www.wri.org/our-work/project/world-resources-report/climate-change-nepal-impacts-and-
adaptive-strategies>[Accessed 2018.04.28] 
Dixit, A., Moench, M., Stapleton, S.O. 2007. When realities shift: Responding to floods and the challenges 
of climate change in Ganga Basin. In: Moench, M., Dixit, A. [eds.], Winds of Change:Towards Strategies 
for Responding to the Risks Associated with Cliamte Change and other Hazards, ProVention Consortium, 
Institute for Social and Environmental Transition International and Institute for Social and Environmental 
Transition, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
EIU. 2016 Food Security Index. Available online : <http://foodsecurityindex.eiu.com>[Accessed 2018.02.04] 
Epstein, Y., Sohar, E., Shapiro, Y. 1995. Exceptional heatstroke: A preventable condition. Israel Journal of 
Medical Science, 31: 454-462. 
FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2015. Environmental and Social 
Management Guidelines. Rome, Italy. 
FAO. 2014. Managing climate risks and adapting to climate change in the agriculture sector in Nepal. FAO, 
Rome, Italy.  
GESI Working Group. 2017. A Common Framework for Gender Equality and Social Inclusion. Gender 
Equality and Social Inclusion Working Group, International Development Partners Group, Nepal.  
Government of Nepal National Planning Commission. 2017. National Review of Sustainable Development 
Goals. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Government of Nepal/ FCPF. 2017. Carbon Fund: Emission Reductions Program Document (ER-PD). 
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
GTZ. German Technical Cooperation. 2004. Restoring Balances: Milestones of the Churia Forest 
Development Project in Eastern Nepal. GTZ, Lahan, Nepal. 
Gurung, C.B. 2017. Analysis: Nepal´s Forest Fires. CIFOR Forests News. Available online: < 
https://forestsnews.cifor.org/48187/nepals-forest-fires?fnl=en>[Accessed 2018-04-03] 
ICIMOD 2019. Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerability in the Eastern Himalayas. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
IDS-Nepal, PAC and GCAP. 2014. Economic Impact Assessment of Climate Change in Key Sectors in 
Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal: Integrated Development Society (IDS) 
IMF, International Monetary Fund. 2017. Nepal: 2017 Article IV Consultation – Press Release; Staff Report. 
IMF Country Report No. 17/74. Washington D.C., USA. 
Karki, S., DeWald, J., Polo, K. 2011. Strengthening cardamom and ginger value chains in eastern Nepal. 
Mercy Corps Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Karn, P.K. 2007. A Study Report on Economic Valuation of the Churia Region. Published by IUCN.  
Kühhas, B., Silawal-Giri, B., Barton, T. 2016. SAKCHAM and Women Empowerment in Nepal: Stories and 
strategies 
– 
lessons 
and 
guidelines. 
CARE 
Nepal 
and 
CARE 
Austria. 
Available 
at: 
<http://www.carenepal.org/uploads/pdf/publication/_SAKCHAM%20Manual%20final.pdf>[Accessed 
2018.03.20] 
Local Initiatives for Biodiversity Research and Development (LI-BIRD). Washington, D.C. 26 p 
Mainali, J., Pricope, N. 2017. High-resolution spatial assessment of population vulnerability to climate 
change in Nepal. Applied Geography, 80: 66-82. 
ManandharG.B., S.K. Adhikary and G. Sah 2009. Sustainable agricultural practices andtechnologies in 
Nepal. TECH MONITOR. Special Feature: Sustainable Agriculture 
Maplecroft. 
2011. 
Climate 
Variability 
Index. 
Available 
at: 
<https://maplecroft.com/about/news/ccvi.html>[Accessed2018.02.04] 
MoAD, Ministry of Agricultural Development. 2013. Food and Nutrition Security Plan of Action (FNSP). 
Available 
online: 
<http://www.nnfsp.gov.np/PublicationFiles/d405d609-bb00-4708-831c-
149dea4b4f49.pdf>[Accessed 2018.06.08] 
MoE. 2010a. Climate Change Vulnerability Mapping for Nepal. Ministry of Environment. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoE. 2010b. National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) to climate change. Kathmandu, Nepal.  
MoE. 2011. Climate Change Policy. Kathmandu, Nepal.   
MoF, Ministry of Finance. 2012. Economic Survey – Fiscal Year 2011/12. Kathmandu, Nepal.

=== PAGE 100 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 96 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
MoF, Ministry of Finance. 2016. Economic Survey—Fiscal Year 2015/16. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoFSC. 2014. Churia Forests of Nepal: Forest Resource Assessment. Ministry of Forest and Soil 
Conservation. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoFSC. 2015. Strategy and Action Plan 2015-2025. Terai Arc Landscape, Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoFSC. 2016- Forestry sector strategy. Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation. Kathmandu, Nepal 
MoHA, Ministry of Home Affairs. 2011. Nepal Disaster Report 2009: The Hazardscape and Vulnerability. 
Kathmandu, Nepal.  
MoPE, Ministry of Population and Environment. 2016. Renewable Energy Subsidy Policy, 2073 BS. 
Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoSTE, Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment. 2015. Study of Climate and Climatic Variation 
over Nepal. [DRAFT REPORT], Department of Hydrology and Meteorology, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
MoSTE. 2015. Indigenous and Local Knowledge and Practices for Cliamte Resilience in Nepal. Kathmandu, 
Nepal.  
NCVST, Nepal Climate Vulnerability Study Team. 2009. Vulnerability through the eyes of the vulnerable: 
Climate change induced uncertainties and Nepal´s Development predicaments. ISET-Nepal. Kathmandu, 
Nepal.  
Nepal. S., 2016. Impacts of climate change on the hydrological regime of the Koshi river basin in the 
Himalayan region. Journal of Hydro-environment research, 10: 76-89. 
NPC, National Planning Commission, Government of Nepal. 2017. Nepal’s Sustainable Development 
Goals Baseline Report June 2017. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Ørnemark, C., Thapa, M. 2013. Nepal: Final Evaluation Report of the CHULI Programme. CARE Denmark. 
Paudel, B., Tamang, B.B., Lamsal, K. &  Paudel, P. 2011. Planning and costing of agricultural adaptation 
with reference to integrated hill-farming systems in Nepal. International Institute for Environment and 
Development (IIED), London, UK. http://pubs.iied.org 
Practical Action Nepal Office. 2009. Temporal and Spatial Variability of Climate Change over Nepal (1976-
2005). Kathmandu, Nepal.  
Ramírez J., Jarvis A. 2008. High-resolution statistically downscaled future climate surfaces. International 
Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT); CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and 
Food Security (CCAFS).Cali, Colombia  
Ramírez-Villegas J; Thornton PK. 2015. Climate change impacts on African crop production. Working Paper 
No. 119. CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS), 
Copenhagen, Denmark 
Regmi H.  2007. Effect of unusual weather on cereal crop production and household food security. Journal 
of Agriculture and Environment 
Robinson, S., Mason-D´Roz, D., Sulser, T., Islam, S., Robertson, R., Zhu, T., Gueneau, A., Pitois, G., 
Rosengrant, M.W. 2015. The International Model for Policy Analysis of Agricultural Commodities and 
Trade (IMPACT): Model description for version 3 (IFPRI Discussion Paper). Washington, D.C: 
International Food Policy Research Institute. 
Satyal Pravat, P., Humphreys, D. 2013. Using a multilevel approach to analyse the case of forest conflicts 
in the Terai, Nepal. Forest Policy and Economics, 33: 47-55. 
Shrestha, N., Raes, D., Sah, S.K. 2013. Strategies to improve cereal production in the Terai region (Nepal) 
during dry season: simulations with aquacrop. Procedia Environmental Sciences, 19: 767-775. The 
Government of Nepal President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation Development Board. President 
Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation and Management Master Plan 2017 
Shresta et al. 2013. Strategies to improve cereal production in the Terai region(Nepal) during dry season: 
simulations with aquacrop. Four Decades of Progress in Monitoring and Modelling of Processes in the 
Soil-PlantAtmosphereSystem - ApplicationsandChallenges. Procedia Environmental Sciences 19 (2013) 
767 – 775 
Synnott P. 2012. Climate Change, Agriculture, & Food Security in Nepal Developing Adaptation Strategies 
and Cultivating Resilience. Report prepared for Mercy Corps Nepal

=== PAGE 101 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 97 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
UNDP, United Nations Development Programme. 2014. Nepal Human Development Report 2014: Beyond 
Geography: Unlocking Human Potential. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
UNDP, United Nations Development Programme. 2017. Renewable Energy for Rural Livelihood (RERL). 
Kathmandu, Nepal.  
UNDP. 2016. Human Development Report 2016. New York, USA. 
UN-REDD. 2014. Understanding drivers and causes of deforestation and forest degradation in Nepal: 
Potential policies and measures for REDD+ Discussion Paper. UN-REDD Programme. Kathmandu, 
Nepal.  
West, S. 2012. REDD+ and Adaptation in Nepal. REDD Net Case Study. Available online: 
<https://theredddesk.org/sites/default/files/resources/pdf/2012/redd_adaptation_nepal_simon_west.pdf
>[Accessed 2018-03-23] 
Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management. 2017. Gender 
Integration in REDD+ and the ERPD in Nepal: Assessment Report and Gender Action Plan. Report for 
the FCPF, Kathmandu, Nepal 
World Bank. 2011. Vulnerability and Adaptation to Climate Change, Nepal. Climate Risk and Adaptation 
Country Profile. World Bank. Washington DC, USA. 
World Bank. 2014. World Bank Data Catalogue. Available online:<https://data.worldbank.org/topic/poverty> 
[Accessed 2018.02.04] 
World Bank. 2016. ThinkHazard! Tool. Available online: <http://thinkhazard.org/en/>[Accesed 2018.02.04]  
WWF Nepal. 2012. Biogas Comes to Madhunam: A story of change. Kathmandu, Nepal.  
WWF. 2017a. Biodiversity, People and Climate Change: Final Technical Report of the Hariyo Ban Program, 
First Phase. WWF Nepal, Hariyo Ban Program, Kathmandu, Nepal. 
WWF. 
2017b. 
Climate 
Change. 
Available 
online: 
<http://wwf.panda.org/what_we_do/where_we_work/eastern_himalaya/threats/climate/> [Accessed 2018.06.08

=== PAGE 102 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 98 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Attachment 1 – Theory of Change 
 
        CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS 
 
 
 
 
VULNERABILITY FACTORS 
CHALLENGES 
BARRIERS INHIBITING RESPONSE TO CLIMATE CHANGE CHALLENGES 
PROJECT 
HIGHER-LEVEL RESULTS 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS TO OVERCOME BARRIERS 
KEY PROJECT RESULTS 
Assumption: CBOs engage in 
project activities, and secure 
broad buy-in from community 
members. 
Assumption: Federal, 
provincial and local 
governments remain 
committed to the project. 
Assumption: Project practices 
are suited to local needs, and 
are successful in addressing 
encroachment on forests. 
Assumption: Major exogenous 
shocks do not significantly 
disrupt project delivery. 
Assumption: CBOs continue to 
apply climate-resilient SNRM 
practices and promote them 
within their communities.  
Assumption: Extension and 
advisory services continue to 
provide guidance and advice on 
climate-resilient SNRM. 
Assumption: Governments 
support coordinated investment 
(at scale) in climate-resilient 
SNRM in line with CERPs. 
 
Increasing 
temperatures 
and shifting 
precipitation 
patterns. 
Seasonal water 
stress, 
extended dry 
periods and 
increasing 
flooding risk.  
Poverty, livelihood 
strategies and 
community locations 
exacerbate the 
vulnerability of 
people throughout 
project area. 
Increased 
erosion (with 
both up- and 
down-stream 
impacts). 
Poverty and 
financial barriers 
among 
communities. 
Limited awareness 
of CC dynamics and 
projected impacts. 
Weak inter-sectoral 
coordination. 
Limited capacity to 
plan and deliver 
support. 
Limited capacity to 
monitor CC 
impacts. 
1.1: Climate-resilient land 
use practices are 
adopted. 
1.3: Forests and tree 
cover are restored and 
maintained in the river 
system landscape. 
2.2: CBOs are equipped to 
scale up climate-resilient 
SNRM. 
3.2: The extension system 
is equipped to promote 
climate-resilient SNRM. 
1.2: Natural forest 
ecosystems are better 
maintained & protected. 
2.1: Planning for climate-
resilient SNRM is 
enhanced. 
3.1: Local knowledge on 
climate-resilient SNRM is 
enhanced. 
Component 3 result: Knowledge, awareness and 
local capacity for climate-resilient SNRM are 
strengthened. 
Component 2 result: Institutions and planning 
for climate-resilient SNRM are strengthened. 
Component 1 result: Climate-resilient 
sustainable natural resource management 
(SNRM) is implemented at scale in Project Area. 
Project objective: Strengthen the resilience of local communities and ecosystems to adapt to 
climate change and reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and equip 
these stakeholders to scale up adoption of climate-resilient SNRM after project closure. 
Paradigm shift to low-emission sustainable development pathway, and increased climate-
resilient sustainable development. 
 
Catalyzing a transformation of the ways in which land, water, forests and other natural 
resources are managed in Nepal, while equipping a critical mass of community-based 
organizations, government entities and other stakeholders to sustain (and scale up) this 
transformation beyond project closure. 
Important contributions toward achieving the objectives of: 
• 
Nepal’s Nationally Determined Contribution; 
• 
Nepal’s Fourteenth Development Plan (2017); and 
• 
The President’s Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation and 
Management Master Plan. 
Delivery against GCF adaptation & mitigation core indicators and: 
• 
A4.0 – Improved resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services. 
• 
M4.0 – Reduced emissions from land use, deforestation, forest 
degradation, and through sustainable management of forests and 
conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks. 
Deforestation, forest 
degradation, and 
degradation of the 
broader natural 
resource base and 
local ecosystems. 
 
Particular 
vulnerability among 
indigenous peoples, 
Dalits and other 
excluded groups due 
to social and 
economic exclusion. 
Knowledge and 
contributions of IPs 
and Dalits under-
appreciated.

=== PAGE 103 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 99 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Attachment 2 – Simplified overview of climate change impacts, baseline conditions and project-promoted measures, disaggregated by biophysical zone 
CHURIA HILLS 
Climate change challenges 
Description of baseline land use 
trends 
Land use driving vulnerability to 
climate change 
Relevant climate-resilient land 
use practices to be promoted 
Role of project-promoted 
practices in responding to 
climate change 
 
Increasing summer and 
monsoon precipitation, 
coupled with 
decreasing numbers of 
moderate rainfall days 
and increasing 
numbers of very wet 
days, is expected to: (i) 
increase soil erosion 
and top soil loss in the 
hills, with significant 
downstream impacts; 
and (ii) increase risks of 
landslides in the hills. 
 
Households use fuelwood for 
household energy needs. 
Forests also provide fodder, 
forage, timber and NTFPs. 
 
Majority of terrain unsuitable for 
agriculture, however many 
households have subsistence 
farms within the hills. Agricultural 
production is characterized by 
rain-fed, low-yield fallow 
agriculture with different crops. 
Erosion and soil degradation 
pose major barriers. 
 
Subsistence from agriculture 
provides livelihoods only for 6-8 
months a year.  
 
Many households have small-
livestock65 and/or buffalo raised 
in primarily low-yield free-grazing 
systems. 
 
Churia Hills play a vital function 
as a watershed for the 
downstream Terai plain - where 
inhabitants rely on delivered 
water resources for domestic 
and agricultural purposes 
(regulating water). 
 
75% of deforestation in 
BRCRN area occurs in the 
Churia Hills. Deforestation 
and degradation increase 
vulnerability to erosion and 
sedimentation that reduce 
agricultural productivity, and 
increase exposure to 
flooding and landslides. 
 
Unsuitable agricultural 
practices increase 
vulnerability to erosion 
through vegetation removal 
and soil degradation (e.g. 
agricultural practices on 
sloped hills, lack of soil and 
water conservation 
practices). 
 
Climate-resilient agricultural 
practices: implementing 
practices that stabilize 
slopes (agroforestry, 
terracing, grass strips, alley 
crops etc.), improved 
livestock practices (stall-
feeding, fodder banks). 
 
Intensification of agricultural 
land through integrated 
agroforestry-crop-livestock 
systems in order to improve 
soil fertility and productivity 
while reducing pressure on 
forests. 
 
Ecosystem restoration: gully 
stabilization in landslide 
susceptible areas, forest 
restoration and sustainable 
management, bio-
engineering/ soil and water 
conservation infrastructure 
to stabilize river banks and 
reduce flows 
 
Reduced risk of erosion, 
reduced exposure to 
landslides. 
 
Reduced exposure to 
flooding, particularly in 
downstream areas. 
 
Reduced emissions from 
deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
 
Improved storage of soil 
carbon. 
 
Improved forest quality and 
quantity. 
 
                                                                
65goats, rams, pigs

=== PAGE 104 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 100 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
BHAVAR REGION 
Climate change challenges 
Description of baseline land use 
trends 
Land use driving vulnerability to 
climate change 
Relevant climate-resilient land 
use practices 
Role of project-promoted 
practices in responding to 
climate change 
 
Increasing summer and 
monsoon precipitation, 
coupled with decreasing 
numbers of moderate 
rainfall days and increasing 
numbers of very wet days, 
is expected to: (i) increase 
soil erosion and top soil loss 
in the hills, with significant 
downstream impacts; and 
(ii) increase gully erosion 
(land loss) and vulnerability 
to flooding. 
 
Terrain is primarily 
unsuitable for rain-fed 
agriculture due to the 
irregular supply of water. 
Many households have 
small-livestock and/or 
buffalos using primarily free-
grazing production systems.  
 
Majority of households use 
fuelwood for household 
energy needs. Forests also 
provide fodder, forage, 
timber and non-timber forest 
products. 
 
Deforestation and 
degradation contribute to 
increased sedimentation 
and erosion that reduce 
agricultural productivity. 
Such land use trends further 
increase the vulnerability of 
downstream communities to 
flooding through 
accelerated sedimentation 
and erosion.  
 
Reduced vegetation cover 
(from deforestation and 
inappropriate agricultural 
practices) limit ground water 
recharge, increasing the 
vulnerability of downstream 
communities to extreme 
heat and challenges related 
to water deficit.  
 
Gully erosion leads to 
significant loss of land. 
 
Climate-resilient agriculture 
practices to reduce erosion 
and improve soil moisture 
and overall soil fertility 
(tillage management, 
nutrient management, 
residue management, inter-
cropping, alley crops), 
improved livestock practices 
to reduce degradation (stall-
feeding, fodder banks). 
 
Ecosystem restoration: gully 
stabilization in landslide 
susceptible areas, green 
belt establishment along 
vulnerable river banks, 
forest restoration, 
sustainable forest 
management, bio-
engineering/ soil and water 
conservation (conservation 
ponds, check-dams, contour 
bunds). 
 
Resilient forestry: 
commercial plantations, 
wood lots and horticulture 
plantations to sustainably 
produce fuelwood and other 
forest products. 
 
Improved resilience to 
extreme heat and water 
deficit challenges. 
 
River bank stabilization 
limits the impact of flooding. 
 
Reduced emissions from 
deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
 
Improved forest quality and 
quantity. 
 
Improved groundwater 
recharge due to reduced 
sedimentation/ erosion, 
improving resilience to 
water scarcity downstream.

=== PAGE 105 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 101 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
DUN VALLEY 
Climate change challenges 
Description of baseline land use 
trends 
Land use driving vulnerability to 
climate change 
Relevant climate-resilient land 
use practices 
Role of project-promoted 
practices in responding to 
climate change 
 
Decrease in average 
precipitation in the winter 
season, coupled with 
increases in the number of 
consecutive dry days as 
well as particularly large 
increases in winter 
temperature, are expected 
to further increase the risk 
of water deficit in the winter 
months. 
 
Increasing summer and 
monsoon precipitation, 
coupled with decreasing 
numbers of moderate 
rainfall days and increasing 
numbers of very wet days, 
is expected to increase 
sedimentation and riverbank 
cutting (land loss) as well as 
risk of flooding in 
downstream communities, 
in part as a result of the 
upstream impacts of these 
changes in climatic 
variables (as described 
further above). 
 
Most households use 
fuelwood for household 
energy needs. Forests also 
provide fodder, forage, 
timber and non-timber forest 
products. 
 
Among the most fertile and 
productive lands in Nepal 
with steady groundwater 
supply. Major production 
area for staple foods 
including paddy, cereals, 
pulses and oilseeds. Many 
households have small-
livestock and/or buffalo 
raised in primarily low-yield 
free-grazing production 
systems. 
 
Deforestation within the Dun 
Valley, as well as in the 
Churia Hills, increases the 
vulnerability of local 
communities and 
ecosystems to extreme 
flooding events. 
 
Inappropriate agricultural 
practices do not apply soil 
or water conservation 
practices that leave areas 
vulnerable to flooding, 
extreme heat, water deficit 
and soil erosion.  
 
Upstream deforestation and 
forest degradation, as well 
as the continued use of 
practices that fail to address 
issues related to soil 
degradation and water 
deficit, exacerbate 
challenges associated with 
dry-season crop production. 
 
Climate-resilient agriculture 
practices to reduce erosion 
and improve soil moisture 
and overall soil fertility. 
 
Ecosystem restoration: gully 
stabilization in landslide 
susceptible areas, green 
belt establishment along 
vulnerable river banks, 
forest restoration, 
sustainable forest 
management, bio-
engineering/ soil and water 
conservation to reduce 
erosion, improve ecosystem 
stability and resilience. 
 
Resilient forestry: 
commercial plantations, 
wood lots and horticulture 
plantations to sustainably 
produce fuelwood and other 
forest products, 
 
Improved resilience to 
extreme heat and water 
deficit challenges. 
 
River bank stabilization 
limits the impact of flooding. 
 
Reduced emissions from 
deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
 
Improved forest quality and 
quantity. 
 
Improved groundwater 
recharge due to reduced 
sedimentation/ erosion, 
improving resilience to 
water scarcity downstream.

=== PAGE 106 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 102 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
TERAI 
Climate change challenges 
Description of baseline land use 
trends 
Land use driving vulnerability to 
climate change 
Relevant climate-resilient land 
use practices 
Role of project-promoted 
practices in responding to 
climate change 
 
Decrease in average 
precipitation in the winter 
season, coupled with 
increases in the number of 
consecutive dry days as 
well as particularly large 
increases in winter 
temperature, are expected 
to further increase the risk 
of water deficit in the winter 
months. 
 
Increasing summer and 
monsoon precipitation, 
coupled with decreasing 
numbers of moderate 
rainfall days and increasing 
numbers of very wet days, 
is expected to increase 
sedimentation and riverbank 
cutting (land loss) as well as 
risk of flooding in 
downstream communities, 
in part as a result of the 
upstream impacts of these 
changes in climatic 
variables (as described 
further above). 
 
Farmers in the Terai 
produce most of the 
country´s grains (wheat, 
maize, rice, among others) 
and other crops. The Terai 
is the sole region in 
agricultural surplus, and 
thus is the principal area of 
production relied upon to 
supply the less productive 
hill and mountain areas. 
 
More heavily populated than 
the other three zones. 
Population growth in the 
Terai puts increased 
pressure on natural 
resources. Many 
communities in the Terai 
are ´distant forest users´, 
dependent on forest 
resources in Churia and 
Bhavar forests. While most 
households use cow dung 
for energy needs, forests 
are still an important source 
of fodder, forage, timber 
and NTFPs. 
 
Distant-forest users from 
the Terai contribute to 
deforestation and forest 
degradation upstream, with 
impacts described in the 
rows above.  
 
Inappropriate agricultural 
practices do not apply soil 
or water conservation 
practices that leave areas 
vulnerable to flooding, 
extreme heat, water deficit 
and soil erosion.  
 
Combined factors from 
upstream deforestation and 
forest degradation, as well 
as use of practices that fail 
to address issues related to 
soil degradation and water 
deficit, exacerbate 
challenges associated with 
dry-season crop production 
in the Terai. 
 
Upstream land 
management practices 
(described above) increase 
exposure to sedimentation 
in the Terai. 
 
Climate-resilient agriculture 
practices to reduce erosion 
and improve soil moisture 
and overall soil fertility 
(tillage management, 
nutrient management, 
residue management, inter-
cropping, alley crops). 
 
Ecosystem restoration: gully 
stabilization in landslide 
susceptible areas, green 
belt establishment along 
vulnerable river banks, 
forest restoration, 
sustainable forest 
management, bio-
engineering/ soil and water 
conservation (conservation 
ponds, check-dams, contour 
bunds, stone walls) 
 
Resilient forestry: 
commercial plantations, 
wood lots and horticulture 
plantations to sustainably 
produce fuelwood and other 
forest products, 
 
Improved resilience to 
extreme heat and water 
deficit challenges. 
 
River bank stabilization 
limits the impact of flooding. 
 
Planted forests are able to 
reduce the reliance on 
upstream forests. 
 
Improved groundwater 
recharge due to reduced 
sedimentation/ erosion, 
improving resilience to 
water scarcity downstream.

=== PAGE 107 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 103 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Attachment 3 – Activity description, deliverables and sustainability considerations 
 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
COMPONENT 1 – SCALING UP CLIMATE-RESILIENT SUSTAINABLE NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (SNRM) 
Sub-Component 1.1 – Climate-resilient land use practices are adopted 
 
1.1.1: Establish 
Farmer Field 
Schools (FFS) to 
promote climate-
resilient land use. 
Establish a network of 
training sites on which 
farmers can be trained on 
climate-resilient SNRM 
during and after the project. 
- 
Identify FFS sites. 
- 
Establish FFS, including 
procurement of farming 
equipment. 
- 
Training of trainers (ToT) 
for field staff to build 
capacity of FFS. 
- 
120 FFS established 
and operational. 
- 
120 FFS established in 
each river system at or 
near locations which are 
either 
i) 
highly 
or 
moderately susceptible to 
erosion or ii) highly or 
moderately susceptible to 
flooding 
(i.e. 
highly 
vulnerable 
to 
climate-
related 
hazards). 
FFS 
support 
particularly 
vulnerable people, and 
aim to strengthen their 
capacities to implement 
climate-resilient land use 
practices, offering them 
improved 
livelihood 
opportunities (combined 
with improved knowledge 
for 
FFS, 
covered 
in 
Component 3, and the 
operationalization of FFS 
in 1.1.2 and 1.1.3). 
- Alignment with the Critical Ecosystem Restoration 
Plan (CERP) will ensure that FFS are strategically 
established in the most vulnerable areas, 
ensuring 
climate-informed 
advisory 
and 
extension services. Such an approach can be 
replicated in different river systems to provide 
targeted and climate-informed services for the 
most vulnerable people and ecosystems. 
- FFS will enable interested CBOs In vulnerable 
areas to adapt and scale-up climate resilient 
agriculture practices and technologies (within 
sub-component 1.2-1.4).  
- Provincial Ministries will mobilize their 
extension staff to support FFS from year 3 to the 
end of the project period. The Government is 
providing considerable co-financing to improve 
the extension system throughout project 
implementation, demonstrating their recognition 
of this pressing need and commitment to 
address it. Knowledge management systems 
(CKC), institutionalization of trainings, 
development of high-quality training modules on 
low-GHG and climate-resilient SNRM, and 
capacity development of government staff will 
facilitate Provincial and Central Government to 
mobilize the funds needed and continue 
investment beyond project closure.  
- With support from extension services, farmers 
participating in FFS will continuously improve 
and consolidate their knowledge and skills, 
including through testing and validating on their 
own farmland. 
- The FFS and the practices promoted by the 
project are economically sustainable. 
Participation in FFS is voluntary and will employ 
locally available resources (materials and labour),

=== PAGE 108 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 104 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
so economic means will not limit farmers to 
undertake the improved practices. Moreover, 
the practices promoted improve farmers’ income 
through increased productivity, cost savings, or 
other means. 
- FAO experience in the region including in Nepal 
shows a positive rate of farmers adopting new 
technologies/practices through FFS, including 
among non-participant who observe the benefits 
of such practices. 
- Ultimately, investments in FFS will address the 
main barriers faced by the current system 
(highlighted in the FS in Table 9 and Box 1) by 
improving the reach of services in highly 
vulnerable areas, and increasing the quality of 
trainings (trained Local Resource Persons, 
promoted good climate-resilient land use 
practices), and providing targeted support for 
women and excluded/ marginalized groups (see 
GAP and IPPF/SIPF for specific measures). 
1.1.2: Train 
farmers to adopt 
and apply climate-
resilient land use 
practices. 
Strengthen farmers’ 
capacities to adopt/apply 
climate-resilient farming 
practices and as support 
other members of their 
CBOs to adopt/apply such 
practices. 
- 
Procure basic farming 
tools/equipment to 
support adoption of 
tailored climate-resilient 
farming practices (based 
on results of CERPs). 
- 
Deliver trainings and 
associated farming 
tools/equipment. 
- 
260 training events 
organized (reaching 
about 7,800 Farmer 
Beneficiaries). 
48,772 ha of climate-resilient, 
profitable agricultural practices 
implemented (mid-term: 
12,189 ha) 
- 
Increased-resilience to 
climate change through 
the adoption of SNRM, 
especially practices that 
improve soil moisture, 
improve resilience to 
water scarcity and 
extreme heat, enhance 
soil carbon  conservation, 
reduce soil erosion, and 
promote improved farmer 
income. 
- 
Reduced deforestation 
and forest degradation by 
addressing a key driver in 
the Churia hills and 
Bhavar region. 
- Improved awareness of climate change, climate-
risks, and risk-reduction strategies will encourage 
CBOs to adopt climate-resilient practices. 
- Strengthened capacities will enable CBOs and 
farmers to adopt low-carbon and climate-resilient 
practices during and after the project. 
- The selection of profitable, climate-resilient 
farming techniques and dissemination of 
economic benefit evidence will encourage CBOs 
and farmers to continue the practices beyond the 
life of the project. 
- Initial investments in climate-resilient practices 
covered by the project will enable highly 
vulnerable and poor small-holder farmers to apply 
the practices and benefit from them. 
- Increased income from climate-resilient practices, 
combined with additional benefits (improving soil 
nutrition and soil moisture, increased resilience 
to flooding, improved yields, increased food 
security, etc.) will incentivize the continued

=== PAGE 109 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 105 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
- 
More detailed info on 
climate benefits available 
in Table 4 of the FP, and 
in the FS in the Table on 
page 82 and FS Annex A  
 
adoption of the practices including risk-taking by 
farmers to invest in these practices. 
- Financing of equipment/ tools for climate-
resilient practices beyond project end will be 
from increased revenue streams from these 
practices. Measures that deliver financial benefits 
for farmers have been intentionally designed and 
selected to ensure financial sustainability (see 
financial and economic assessment). 
- Promoted activities (described in greater detail 
in FS and FP, designed for their relevance for 
Nepal) were assessed to have a NPV of $735 on 
a per hectare basis, providing incentives for 
CBOs and local farmers to reinvest in climate 
resilient agriculture. A 2019 case study in Nepal 
demonstrated that climate-resilient activities like 
those promoted by the project can deliver 
benefits for farmers (Subedi et al. 2019 - Climate-
smart practices for improvement of crop yields in 
mid-hills of Nepal). 
1.1.3: Train 
farmers to adopt 
agroforestry and 
livestock 
management 
practices. 
Strengthen farmers’ 
capacities to adopt/apply 
suitable agroforestry and 
livestock management 
practices on their own land, 
as well as support other 
members of their CBOs to 
adopt/apply such practices, 
thereby building household-
level resilience and easing 
drivers of deforestation and 
forest degradation. 
- 
Organize initial training 
for CBO households on 
agroforestry and 
livestock management 
practices (materials to 
be developed in 
Component 3; examples 
of suitable practices 
identified in FS 
Appendices 1.6-1.7). 
- 
Procure materials to 
establish small on-farm 
tree nurseries. 
- 
Regular site visits by 
field staff in PY3-7 to 
support broader 
adoption of agroforestry 
and livestock 
management practices, 
as well as identify and 
support livestock-
- 
120 initial 
Beneficiaries 
supported to adopt 
promoted practices 
and establish small 
on-farm tree 
nurseries. 
- 
Approximately 500 
households 
supported to access 
the government 
biogas subsidy and 
purchase/install 
biogas digesters. 
- 
Agroforestry 
activities 
implemented on 
about 15,202 ha 
(models identified as 
relevant for the 
project area included 
- 
Establishment of 
agroforestry activities on 
15,202 ha of agricultural 
land, while 
simultaneously reducing 
the impact per livestock 
unit on the degradation 
of forests in the project 
area.  
- 
Increased-resilience to 
climate change through 
the adoption of SNRM 
and agriculture, especially 
practices that improve 
soil moisture, reduce soil 
erosion, and enhance soil 
organic carbon, among 
other benefits (refer to FS 
appendices A1.6-A1.7. 
- 
Reduced deforestation 
and forest degradation by 
- Improved awareness of climate change, climate-
risks and climate-resilient livelihood strategies will 
encourage CBOs to adopt agroforestry and 
livestock management practices understanding 
the relevance, costs, and additional benefits. 
- Strengthened capacities will enable CBOs and 
local people to adopt low-carbon and climate-
resilient practices by improving their 
understanding of the benefits. 
- Such practices will increase the incomes of poor 
and vulnerable small-scale households. 
- Biogas support will be targeted to middle-income 
households with larger livestock (and considering 
other key criteria, as presented in the response to 
ITAP comments).   
- The project’s activities can be financially 
supported after the project as they are 
profitable: a biogas unit generates US $217 in 
NPV. 
- One of the key barriers identified for households 
to access the biogas subsidy is a lack of

=== PAGE 110 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 106 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
owning households to 
access the government 
biogas subsidy.  
in FS Appendices 
A1.6-1.7). 
reducing pressure on 
forests from agriculture 
and livestock.  
- 
 
knowledge and capacity, as well as (often) more 
limited access to relevant advisory services that 
would enable them to overcome this barrier. 
Therefore, the project proposes to scale up the 
provision of advisory services to targeted CBOs 
to enable interested households to access the 
government subsidy and credit facility (if 
needed) to install and operate biogas plants. FAO 
and MoFE are confident that with the technical 
advisory services budgeted into this project (of 
which about 77% is financed through MoFE co-
financing), approximately 500 households will be 
able to access the subsidy and install biogas 
digesters, who would not otherwise do so. 
1.1.4: Construct 
check dams, gully 
stabilization 
measures and 
other local 
infrastructure to 
enhance resilience 
against climate 
change-induced 
erosion, 
sedimentation and 
flooding risks. 
Construct local structures in 
each of the 26 targeted river 
systems that will reduce 
community vulnerability to 
climate change impacts 
(accounting for both 
upstream and downstream 
dynamics), including: (i) 
erosion risk and 
sedimentation in upstream 
areas; and (ii) flooding risk 
and water stress in 
downstream areas. 
The structures are 
presented in Appendix A2 
and are based on best 
practices and experiences in 
Nepal assessed in the FS, 
including those highlighted 
in the MOFSC Green Book 
for Soil Conservation and 
Watershed Management, as 
well as experiences from 
FAO, ICIMOD and others 
(see FS for references in 
- 
Identify specific sites for 
community structures. 
- 
Develop technical 
specifications and 
construction guidelines 
for individual structures 
once sites are identified. 
- 
Recruit service providers 
to build structures in 
upstream and 
downstream locations, 
and supervise them 
while they do so. 
- 
Train communities and 
government officials to 
monitor and maintain 
structures. 
- 
Establish relevant 
structures and 
practices to stabilize 
86 gullies, mostly in 
the Churia hills. 
- 
Establish and 
maintain check dams 
and/or community-
managed water 
harvesting ponds in 
129 sites, mostly in 
the Bhavar zone. 
- 
Sedimentation level in 
each of the targeted river 
systems in which the 
project constructs / 
establishes gully and 
riverbank stabilization 
measures is reduced by 
25% (relative to the 
baseline level) by the end 
of PY7. 
- 
Improved resilience 
against climate-related 
hazards, in particular 
through the adoption of 
bio-engineering (check 
dams, contour bunds and 
stonewalls, conservation 
ponds, gully stabilization 
and river bank 
stabilization). See Table 
on the climate benefits of 
promoted bio-
engineering measures on 
page 84 of the FS, which 
provides a more detailed 
summary of the relevant 
- The water and soil conservation infrastructure 
investments will be operated and maintained by 
CBOs.  
- Selected measures are often combined with 
revenue generating activities to ensure their 
financial sustainability (e.g. river bank 
stabilization with grasses and bamboo/ tree 
planting), as evidenced in the financial and 
economic analysis (water conservation practices 
have a NPV of $2,002 per hectare). 
- Investments on public land will be maintained by 
the government institutions responsible for the 
infrastructure. 
- Project-supported bio-engineering measures and 
structures are mostly made from locally available 
materials, and thus operations and maintenance 
costs are expected to be modest, and can be 
covered by revenues from sustainably produced 
products (e.g. bamboo, broom grass, NTFPs in 
riparian areas). 
- In addition, the structures are all durable, thus 
further contributing to ensuring that 
maintenance costs to be borne by CBOs remain 
sufficiently modest that they can cover such 
costs beyond project closure.

=== PAGE 111 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 107 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
regards to design 
considerations). 
climate-resilient land use 
practices. 
Sub-Component 1.2 – Natural forest ecosystems are better maintained and protected 
1.2.1: Support 
CBOs to 
develop/strengthe
n and deliver 
forest 
management 
operational plans. 
Improving the application of 
sustainable forest 
management practices in all 
forest land managed by 
forestry-related CBOs within 
the Project Area, ensuring 
silvicultural practices are 
implemented and 
maximizing ecosystem 
service provision and 
resilience, as well as 
generating significant 
climate change mitigation 
benefits. 
- 
Recruit service providers 
to work with all forestry-
related CBOs to develop 
and/or strengthen forest 
management 
operational plans. 
- 
Procure relevant 
equipment for each 
relevant CBO to support 
implementation of 
forest management 
operational plans. 
- 
Regular site visits by 
field staff (in PY3-7) to 
provide ongoing advice 
and guidance to enable 
implementation of 
forest management 
operational plans. 
- 
Approximately 600 
forest management 
operational plans 
developed and/or 
strengthened. 
- 
Management plans will 
guide project 
management and post-
project management of 
CBO forests, enabling a 
medium-term trajectory 
for the continued 
adoption of sustainable 
forest management 
resulting in REDD+ and 
increased ecosystem 
resilience. 
 
- Increased awareness and strengthened capacities 
of CBOs and government staff on sustainable 
forest management planning will ensure that SFM 
(incl. planning for climate risks and the promotion 
of resilient and sustainable practices) is 
mainstreamed in current and future plans.  
- Planning in Component 2, and knowledge 
management and transfer via the CKC will also 
help these groups to continue to utilize climate 
information in planning and decision making 
during and after the project. 
- Training of government staff, and supporting the 
institutionalization of trainings (through ToT and 
training module development), will enable the 
replication of similar processes in the future 
within other areas of the 26 river systems, and in 
other river systems in Nepal. 
- Networks in place to support information 
exchange and continued upscaling for CFUGs in 
26 river systems. These networks are also a key 
institution to support knowledge dissemination 
and sharing of experiences between CFUGs, and 
will share project information and lessons learned 
and ultimately encourage CBOs within the river 
systems (including non-direct beneficiaries) to 
understand climate-risks specific to their river 
system, and encourage them to adopt suitable 
climate-resilient SNRM practices 
1.2.2: Train CBOs 
and land owners 
to enable more 
sustainable 
management of 
forest ecosystems. 
Build the capacity of 
government staff and all 
forestry-related CBOs to 
better understand the 
principles and practices that 
underpin sustainable 
management of forest 
ecosystems, and continue 
applying such principles and 
- 
Deliver Training of 
Trainer (ToT) events for 
MoITFE field staff. 
- 
Deliver trainings for 
forestry-related CBOs 
and other land owners 
(“Forest Training 
Beneficiaries”). 
- 
Approximately 26 
ToT events organized. 
- 
Approximately 122 
local training events 
for forestry-related 
CBOs organized. 
148,998 ha of forests are 
sustainably managed, 
contributing to REDD+ and 
increasing the resilience of 
forest ecosystems in vulnerable 
river systems.. 
- 
Forest ecosystems with 
healthy structure 
permanent cover 
- Forests if sustainably managed provide one of the 
best low-cost adaptation measures for this region 
of Nepal, with high vulnerability and exposure to 
climate-induced disasters 
- SFM is financially sustainable. Improving training 
capacities, networks, and CBO management 
plans, will enable in the long-term CBOs to 
finance future investments in SFM, which has an 
estimated NPV of $833 per ha.

=== PAGE 112 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 108 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
practices after project 
closure. 
maximize ecosystem 
services including flood 
protection, water 
recharge, erosion control, 
wind control, sponge 
effect against heavy 
rainfall events, reduction 
of gully formation, 
reduction in water runoff, 
biodiversity 
enhancement, and 
conservation, and various 
other socio-economic 
benefits (see Annex A in 
the FS for more detailed 
info) 
- 
REDD+ 
- 
Sequestration of 
additional carbon in 
forests under protection 
and SFM 
- 
Increase in soil organic 
carbon 
- Income from SFM will incentivize the continued 
adoption of SFM, combined with additional 
benefits (improving biodiversity, increased 
resilience to flooding, etc.). 
- Financing of equipment/ tools, fencing and other 
materials  (see Annex 3.2 for equipment budget 
under Activity 1.2.1) for maintaining SFM beyond 
project end will be financed by increased revenue 
streams. 
Sub-Component 1.3 – Forests and tree cover are restored and maintained in the river system landscape 
1.3.1: Establish 
and support the 
operation of 52 
multi-purpose tree 
nurseries to serve 
the plantation and 
restoration needs 
of CBOs and other 
forest sector 
stakeholders. 
Establish tree nurseries in 
the Project Area to support 
tree planting and forest 
restoration under this 
project, as well as planting 
and restoration by 
communities throughout 
the Project Area during the 
project and after project 
closure. 
- 
Procure equipment and 
materials needed to 
establish two nurseries 
in each of the 26 river 
systems. 
- 
Identify suitable sites 
and stablish nurseries on 
these sites. 
- 
Procure material inputs 
and labour needed for 
production of seedlings 
in PY3-7, ensuring each 
nursery has the capacity 
to produce at least 
50,000 seedlings per 
year. 
- 
52 tree nurseries 
established and 
under operation. 
- 
Establishment and 
operationalization of 52 
multi-purpose tree 
nurseries to serve the 
plantation and restoration 
needs of CBOs and other 
forest sector 
stakeholders. This 
ensures that there are 
suitable inputs to support 
reforestation and 
ecosystem-based 
adaptation efforts within 
the project area. 
- Nurseries established through project support 
will be hosted and managed by CFUGs, or other 
CBOs, where there is a presence of individuals 
trained and/or experienced in nursery 
management, availability of, and willingness to 
allocate, necessary space and labour. The CBOs 
must be assessed as possessing the potential 
capacity to sustain the nursery as a viable 
enterprise beyond the duration of the project. 
- Nursery sites will be selected based on criteria 
described in the FP, to ensure their long-term 
suitability for seedling production, and also for 
access to markets and transport networks 
- Nurseries, once established, have the potential to 
become self-sustaining, through provision of 
planting materials to CBO members and to

=== PAGE 113 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 109 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
external stakeholders as an income-generating 
activity   
1.3.2: Establish 
and maintain 
7,300 ha of forest 
plantations to 
enhance 
resilience. 
Establish and support 
maintenance of different 
types of forest plantations 
(demonstration plantations; 
public land forests on river 
bank sites; and public land 
forests on community land) 
to build resilience and 
deliver mitigation benefits, 
while also building capacity 
to support sustainable 
forestry activities beyond 
project closure. 
- 
Train MoITFE staff in 
each province on 
sustainable plantation 
management. 
- 
Procure materials, seed 
stock and local labour 
needed to plant 1,300 
ha of demonstration 
plantations in the Bhavar 
and Terai zones, and 
directly support and 
oversee this planting. 
- 
Procure materials, 
seedlings and local 
labour needed to 
establish 1,000 ha of 
riparian plantations (on 
river bank sites), and 
directly support and 
oversee this planting. 
- 
Assist relevant CBOs to 
sign formal agreements 
with local Municipality 
offices for management 
of riparian plantations, 
as well as develop 
management plans. 
- 
Procure materials, 
seedlings and local 
labour needed to 
establish 5,000 ha of 
plantations on 
community land, and 
directly support and 
oversee this planting. 
- 
Three training events 
organized (1 per 
province) for MoITFE 
staff. 
 
- 
1,300 ha of 
demonstration 
plantations 
established. 
 
- 
1,000 ha of riparian 
plantations 
established (on river 
bank sites). 
 
- 
5,000 ha of 
plantations 
established on 
community land. 
- 
Establishment and 
maintenance of 7,300 ha 
of forest plantations to 
enhance resilience. 
- 
Expanded forest cover 
(with a focus on 
vulnerable, degraded, 
sub-utilized and/or 
abandoned land) will 
enhance resilience 
against climate-change 
induced soil erosion (thus 
reducing downstream 
risks related to 
sedimentation and 
flooding) and enhance 
crucial ecosystem 
functions that underpin 
the resilience of 
upstream communities, 
while also providing 
mitigation benefits (e.g. 
REDD+, carbon stock 
enhancement, soil 
organic carbon).  
- 
More detailed 
information on the 
impacts available in FS 
page 90, and within FS 
Annex A (see A3.1 
overview of interventions 
for tree planting on 
private and public lands). 
- Plantation support will be provided to highly 
vulnerable and marginalized households on 
community land and in riparian areas, 
safeguarding key ecosystem services, 
strengthening resilience and enhancing carbon 
stocks.  
- Tree planting and multi-purpose tree plantations 
are needed to reduce pressure on natural forests 
for timber, fodder and fuelwood among other 
products. Highly marginalized households do not 
have the resources to invest in such plantations, 
and may need support for plantation 
establishment combined with inputs and 
technical trainings. The formalization of public 
land forest user groups will be an effective 
measure to engage such households (considering 
public land forest groups consist of some of 
highly vulnerable and marginalized men and 
women, often including indigenous peoples, 
women and Dalits), supporting them to establish 
planted forests on degraded, sub-utilized or 
abandoned land.  As well as receiving direct 
support through this activity for plantation 
establishment, the public land forest user groups 
will, once registered be eligible for support from 
provincial government extension services.  
- The financial and economic analysis 
demonstrated that these activities are profitable 
in the long-run, enabling and incentivizing re-
investment by CBOs. 
- Demonstration plantations in accessible public 
land (1,300 ha) will be established to expand tree 
cover of native high value timber species and 
build capacity of local forestry staff to promote 
sustainable plantation management beyond 
project closure. This in turn will deliver long-term

=== PAGE 114 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 110 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
- 
Assist relevant CBOs to 
sign formal agreements 
with local Municipality 
offices for management 
of plantations on 
community land, as well 
as develop management 
plans. 
adaptation and mitigation benefits. To do so, 
project staff will train 20 forestry staff in each of 
the three provinces and support inputs for 
plantation in Bhavar and Terai zones of the 26 
targeted river systems. These demonstration 
plantations will enable forestry staff to promote 
and support sustainable plantation management 
after project closure.  
- CBOs, such as CFUGs, will learn from the 
demonstration plantations and targeted 
extension support to promote CBO investment in 
high value timber species. It will support CBOs 
and interested private sector actors to 
understand necessary site-conditions, and 
management practices for successful 
investments (reducing investment risk and 
improving awareness on investment 
opportunities). 
1.3.3: Train 
government field 
staff and CBOs on 
Forest Landscape 
Restoration, and 
support CBOs to 
implement 
Assisted Natural 
Regeneration on 
15,990 ha. 
Assist and build the capacity 
of CBOs to expand forest 
cover and restore forest 
landscapes in critical 
locations in each of the 26 
targeted river systems, 
thereby restoring crucial 
ecosystem functions and 
ecosystems resilience while 
generating significant 
mitigation benefits. 
- 
Prepare training 
materials on Forest 
Landscape Restoration 
(FLR). 
- 
Train provincial forestry 
field staff on FLR. 
- 
Train CBOs on FLR. 
- 
Identify specific sites and 
communities for 
Assisted Natural 
Regeneration (ANR) 
support, and develop 
ANR methodologies and 
implementation plans. 
- 
Procure tools, 
equipment, inputs and 
local labour needed to 
implement ANR on 
15,990 ha of 
community-managed 
forest land, and directly 
support and oversee this 
planting. 
- 
12 training events on 
FLR organized for 
provincial forestry 
field staff. 
- 
180 training events 
on FLR organized for 
relevant CBOs. 
- 
ANR methodologies 
and implementation 
plans (adapted to 
local contexts) 
developed. 
- 
ANR implemented on 
15,990 ha of 
community-managed 
forest land. 
- 
Implement Assisted 
Natural Regeneration on 
15,990 ha by training 
government field staff 
and CBOs on Forest 
Landscape Restoration. 
- Building up the training capacities on FLR will 
enable in the long-term CBOs to finance future 
investments in FLR. 
- Increased income from FLR will incentivize the 
continued adoption of SFM, combined with 
additional benefits (improving biodiversity, 
increased resilience to flooding, etc.). 
- Financing of equipment/ tools, fencing and other 
materials for assisted regeneration (relatively 
low-cost) beyond project end will be financed by 
increased revenue streams from FLR.

=== PAGE 115 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 111 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
1.3.4: Provide 
technical guidance 
and seedlings to 
establish tree 
cover on 16,500 
ha of woodlots to 
enhance 
ecosystem 
resilience, and 
improve fuelwood 
and timber 
availability in 
downstream 
communities. 
Establish woodlots on small-
scale landowners’ land, 
thereby enhancing 
resilience of soils and 
broader ecosystems, while 
also easing expansionary 
pressures (particularly from 
downstream communities 
and “distant forest users”) 
that are driving 
deforestation and forest 
degradation. 
- 
Identify landowners with 
whom to collaborate to 
establish woodlots. 
- 
Organize exchange visits 
between prioritized 
small-scale landowners 
and other successful 
forest owners in 
neighbouring districts. 
- 
Procure seedlings 
needed to establish 
woodlots on 16,500 ha 
of land, and directly 
oversee and support this 
planting (coupled with 
labour provided by 
beneficiary households 
and advisory services 
provided by 
government). 
- 
Woodlots established 
on 16,500 ha of land 
owned by small-scale 
landowners. 
Tree cover established on 
16,500 ha of woodlots to 
enhance ecosystem resilience, 
and improve fuelwood and 
timber availability in 
downstream communities.  
- 
Reduced 
forest 
degradation 
from 
fuelwood 
collection 
(especially from distant-
forest users downstream), 
improving forest health 
and 
the 
provision 
of 
ecosystem services 
- 
Reduced 
erosion 
and 
sedimentation, 
reduced 
exposure to landslides and 
flooding from upstream 
deforestation 
- 
Improved energy security 
- 
Carbon sequestration 
(REDD+ from reducing 
pressure on natural 
forests, carbon stock 
enhancement) 
- Sites for woodlot establishment will (i) focus on 
households with clarity of tenure and no 
prevailing ownership disputes; (ii) prioritize 
lower-income households (specific thresholds 
due to be determined during inception, based on 
baseline survey) to maximize sustainable 
development benefits and ensure project does 
not crowd out private investment; (iii) provide 
maximum 1 ha plantation support per household; 
and (iv) ensure at least 100 households are 
supported in each river system. Sites will be 
proposed by MoITFE after consultation with local 
municipalities and Private Forest Owners 
Associations, validated by MoFE and FAO experts, 
and finalised through dialogue with private land 
owners  
- The small land-owners targeted under this 
activity will be primarily identified through public 
land forest user groups, therefore receiving 
extension support through provincial government 
staff beyond project timeframe, to facilitate 
sustainability 
 
COMPONENT 2 – STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS AND PLANNING FOR CLIMATE-RESILIENT SNRM 
Sub-Component 2.1 – Planning for climate-resilient SNRM is enhanced 
2.1.1: Strengthen 
institutions on 
climate change 
impacts and 
ecosystem 
mapping. 
- 
Build the capacity of 
key entities that intend 
to collaborate with 
and/or benefit from 
the project – including 
those that will play an 
important role in 
sustaining and scaling 
up support for climate-
resilient SNRM after 
project closure – on 
climate change and 
climate-resilient land 
- 
Train relevant national, 
provincial and local 
stakeholders on climate 
change and climate-
resilient land use 
planning & 
management, as well as 
GESI principles and 
measures. 
- 
Train relevant national 
and provincial 
stakeholders on relevant 
- 
4 national-level 
trainings on climate 
change and climate-
resilient land use 
planning & 
management 
organized. 
- 
3 provincial-level 
trainings on climate 
change and climate-
resilient land use & 
planning organized. 
- 
Strategy and action plan 
will provide an improved 
policy framework and 
clear roadmap for 
mainstreaming and 
scaling up climate-
resilient SNRM and DRR, 
including measures with 
adaptation benefits 
- Strengthened capacities of provincial and local 
authorities 
to 
understand 
climate 
risks, 
interlinked dynamics related to REDD+ and 
climate 
risk, 
and 
important 
planning 
considerations. 
- The creation of a framework to identify 
ecosystems 
and 
communities 
that 
are 
vulnerable to climate change, especially climate-
related hazards, combined with strengthening 
government capacities to operationalize this 
framework 
and 
conduct 
a 
vulnerability 
assessment will enable them to consider climate-
related information in planning, and decision-

=== PAGE 116 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 112 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
use planning & 
management 
practices. 
GIS tools for critical 
ecosystem mapping. 
- 
64 local-level 
trainings on climate 
change and climate-
resilient land use & 
planning organized. 
- 
1 national-level 
training on GIS tools 
for critical ecosystem 
mapping organized. 
- 
6 provincial-level 
trainings on GIS tools 
for critical ecosystem 
mapping organized. 
making. This is particularly relevant given the 
political context in Nepal and the devolution of 
decision making power to the provincial and local 
levels.   
- Materials (guidelines, manuals, protocols and 
trainings) will be stored in the CKC, enabling 
institutionalized knowledge management and 
information retention, and will ultimately help 
facilitate replication of this approach in other 
river systems. 
2.1.2: Develop and 
validate Critical 
Ecosystem 
Restoration Plans 
(CERPs) for 26 
river systems. 
Assist provincial and local 
stakeholders to develop a 
CERP for each of the 26 
targeted river systems, 
thereby providing 
governments and CBOs with 
common plans and priorities 
to guide coordinated 
investments in climate-
resilient SNRM. 
- 
Recruit a service 
provider to perform a 
multi-criteria spatial 
analysis for each of the 
26 targeted river 
systems, and use this 
analysis as a basis to 
identify needs and 
propose 
investment/intervention 
priorities in each river 
system. 
- 
Organize a consultation 
in each river system to 
discuss identified 
priorities and develop 
them into a CERP for 
each river system. 
- 
Organize field 
consultations to raise 
awareness about (and 
secure buy-in for) CERP 
priorities among 
relevant CBOs. 
- 
Organize national and 
provincial-level 
workshops to secure 
- 
26 CERPs developed 
and validated. 
- 
26 river system-level 
consultations 
organized. 
- 
52 field consultations 
organized. 
- 
2 national and 6 
provincial validation 
workshops organized. 
- 
26 CERPS will identify 
particularly vulnerable 
priority areas within 
already vulnerable river 
systems and enable 
holistic planning to plan 
and implement priority 
measures for climate 
change adaptation and 
mitigation.  
- The capacity of government stakeholders and 
local CBOs will be built to understand and assess 
climate risks, utilize climate information and 
vulnerability assessments to plan, and monitor 
climate resilient land use, and further monitor 
local risks and resources in the future. This will 
equip them to continue investing in climate-
resilient SNRM – in a manner that coordinates 
upstream and downstream interventions to 
maximize adaptation and mitigation benefits – 
beyond project closure. 
- Priority measures will be implemented through 
investments covered in Component 1, and 
aligned with best practices (see FS) and Nepal´s 
Churia Master Plan, among other national 
policies and strategies 
- Additional funding for further measures (e.g. 
non-priority measures) may be provided by the 
Provincial Government and/or the President’s 
Chure Terai Madhesh Conservation Development 
Board; both have been working in forests, soil 
and water conservation initiatives in the project 
area. 
- Engagement of diverse stakeholders, including 
governmental entities from different sectors and 
levels (national, provincial, local), NGOs, CBOs 
and local people will create improved 
commitments and ownership over climate

=== PAGE 117 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 113 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
high-level government 
validation of CERPs. 
change adaptation and mitigation efforts within 
each river system. 
- Improved cross-sectoral coordination (including 
strengthening the engagement of DHM in 
planning processes), will result in improved 
planning and decision-making (including trans-
provincial decision-marking) outcomes that 
benefit multiple sectors and promote low-carbon 
and climate-resilient development. 
- Supported by the activities in Component 1, 
CBOs will be able to reinvest profits in climate-
resilient practices, with ongoing communication 
and guidance from the Nepali Government. 
- Based on the demonstration of this process, this 
process can be replicated in other parts of the 
country (due to strengthened capacities, 
supporting materials, improved knowledge 
management and institutional trainings) with 
notable benefits for the government to invest in 
maintaining such processes (reduced disasters, 
strengthened livelihoods and ecosystem 
services). 
2.1.3: Support 
provincial 
governments to 
plan and increase 
resilience to 
projected climate 
change-related 
extreme events. 
Raise awareness of the 
evolving risks related to 
climate change-induced 
extreme events within the 
Project Area and assist 
provincial governments to 
develop risk management 
plans for such extreme 
events. 
- 
Organize awareness-
raising workshops for 
provincial and local 
government staff. 
- 
Develop provincial risk 
management plans for 
climate change-induced 
extreme events, building 
on detailed hazard 
mapping, vulnerability 
assessments and risk 
mapping from CERPs. 
- 
Organize multi-
stakeholder validation 
workshops for risk 
management plans. 
- 
26 awareness-raising 
workshops organized. 
- 
3 provincial risk 
management plans 
for climate change-
induced extreme 
events developed. 
- 
26 multi-stakeholder 
validation workshops 
organized. 
- 
Holistic planning that 
considers climate risks, 
upstream and 
downstream impacts, and 
vulnerable ecosystems 
and communities will 
enable provinces 1, 2 and 
3 to increase their 
resilience to climate 
change-related extreme 
events. 
- Land use planning processes are strengthened 
and applied by balancing integrated spatial 
planning with participatory land use planning, 
accompanied by capacity building for local and 
provincial governments and CBOs. Combined 
with Activities 2.1.1-2.1.2, this will enable 
provincial governments to understand climate 
risks, and implement a holistic approach for 
disaster risk-reduction, as well as low-carbon and 
climate-resilient land use. Such an approach will 
demonstrate a new framework for low GHG and 
climate-resilient planning in Nepal, which will be 
replicable in other river systems in the country.  
- This is necessary to support the country’s needs, 
given the high vulnerability of the region and the 
political context of the country, where there is a 
need to quickly invest in the capacities of 
provincial and local policy makers to enable the 
adoption of necessary adaptation measures.

=== PAGE 118 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 114 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
Sub-Component 2.2 – Community-based organizations (CBOs) are equipped to scale up climate-resilient SNRM 
2.2.2: Train CBOs 
on climate-
resilient land use 
planning, and 
assist them to 
mainstream SNRM 
into their CBO 
management 
plans. 
Build technical capacities of 
CBOs to understand climate 
change risks and how best 
to respond through climate-
resilient SNRM approaches 
that are catered to their 
local needs, drawing on 
insights gained through the 
CERP process. 
- 
Recruit a service 
provider to organize 
Training of Trainers 
(ToT) for Local Resource 
Persons (LRPs) on 
climate-resilient land 
use. 
- 
Organize community 
workshops at which LRPs 
will train members from 
all 750 beneficiary CBOs. 
- 
Provide advice and 
guidance to mainstream 
climate-resilient SNRM 
into CBO management 
plans for the most 
vulnerable CBOs in the 
Project Area. 
- 
26 ToT training 
events for LRPs 
organized. 
- 
250 community-level 
workshops for CBOs 
organized (with 
about 3-5 CBOs per 
workshop). 
- 
250 CBO 
management plans 
developed and/or 
strengthened to 
mainstream support 
for climate-resilient 
SNRM. 
- 
Adaptation and mitigation 
measures mainstreamed 
into 
local 
CBOs’ 
management plans, which 
provide 
short- 
and 
medium-term 
guidance 
for 
planning 
and 
implementing 
climate-
resilient 
land 
use 
to 
improve the resilience of 
local 
livelihoods 
and 
ecosystems. 
This 
will 
strengthen 
local 
capacities, and reduce 
their 
vulnerability 
to 
climate change. 
- 
Improved awareness on 
climate-change 
impacts 
from deforestation and 
forest degradation and 
unsustainable NRM, and 
building 
capacities 
on 
SNRM and DRR measures 
in 750 CBOs.  
- 
Improved awareness on 
climate-change risks, and 
building 
capacities 
on 
climate resilient SNRM. 
- 
Improved use of climate 
information in planning 
and decision-making at 
the local level in 750 
CBOs. 
- CBOs and their members will have increased 
awareness on climate-risks, and climate-risk 
reduction measures, and measures for REDD+ 
and climate-resilient land use that are suitable 
for their context.  
- Mainstreaming support will provide them with 
clear guidance for adopting climate-resilient 
SNRM (in combination with other technical and 
investment support within Components 1 and 3). 
- The integration of training materials into the 
CKC, and the institutionalization of training 
(training trainer materials and handbooks, 
training materials) will enable such an approach 
to be replicated in other areas of the river 
system, and within the country. For example, 
there are over 18,000 CFUGs alone established 
in Nepal, comprised of 2.2 million households 
that manage over 1.7 million ha of forests. Once 
materials are developed, early experiences 
conducted and staff trained, there is a significant 
potential to replicate such an approach in other 
parts of the country through extension services 
of provincial and local government staff and 
CBOs.  
- Mainstreamed climate-resilient SNRM measures 
(implementation and investment support 
included within Component 1 and 3) will have 
various co-benefits, including improved water 
quality and quantity, food security, improved 
health, biodiversity conservation, among others, 
providing additional incentives for CBOs to 
continue to invest in climate-resilient land use.  
COMPONENT 3 – IMPROVING KNOWLEDGE, AWARENESS AND LOCAL CAPACITY FOR CLIMATE-RESILIENT SNRM 
Sub-Component 3.1 – Local knowledge on climate-resilient SNRM is enhanced 
3.1.1: Equip Local 
Resource Persons 
(LRPs) with best 
practices on 
climate-resilient 
Gather local and indigenous 
knowledge on climate-
resilient SNRM and distil this 
information into user-
friendly guidelines for LRPs 
- 
Recruit a service 
provider to organize 
local consultations to 
gather local and 
indigenous knowledge. 
- 
105 community 
consultations 
organized (about 4 in 
each of the 26 
- 
Local and indigenous 
knowledge on climate-
resilient SNRM will be 
identified and distilled 
into user-friendly 
- Indigenous and local knowledge should be 
combined with scientific knowledge and other 
best practices to provide vulnerable communities 
with diverse strategies to adapt to climate 
change. Local and traditional knowledge

=== PAGE 119 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 115 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
SNRM from local 
experience, 
including 
indigenous 
knowledge. 
to train and support CBO 
members to adopt such 
practices during and beyond 
the project. 
- 
Develop a compendium 
of local and indigenous 
knowledge, building on 
insights gained from 
consultations. 
- 
Organize workshops to 
review/validate the 
compendium. 
- 
Recruit a service 
provider to develop best 
practice guidelines for 
LRPs, drawing in part on 
the compendium. 
targeted river 
systems). 
- 
1 compendium of 
local and indigenous 
knowledge 
developed. 
- 
5 provincial-level 
validation workshops 
organized. 
- 
1 set of best practice 
guidelines for LRPs 
developed. 
guidelines for LRPs and 
other local stakeholders 
to train and support CBO 
members to adopt such 
practices during and 
beyond the project, 
scaling up best practices 
piloted by the 
Government of Nepal 
(MoSTE 2015, mentioned 
in the FS). 
identified from this activity will provide insight 
into how local communities from different 
cultural backgrounds identify climate change and 
cope with these changes – building on their own 
lessons learned. Such practices can help ´bridge 
national strategies ´with local level realities, and 
enable the adoption of climate-resilient land use 
based on local and traditional knowledge – 
especially promotion the adoption of such 
practices by men and women from diverse 
indigenous groups, and castes (as suitable - see 
IPPF/SIPF for more information).   
- Knowledge and information on local climate-
adaptation strategies will be integrated and 
disseminated via CKC (3.2.3), and awareness 
campaigns (3.1.2). This knowledge will further be 
mainstreamed into the training modules below, 
promoting the adoption of low-cost, local and 
culturally appropriate adaptation strategies. 
Combined with investment support provided in 
Component 1, this enables the promotion and 
adoption of such practices taking into account 
the available resources and barriers faced by 
particularly vulnerable households.  
3.1.2: Raise 
awareness on 
climate-resilient 
SNRM through 
local schools, 
media and intra-
regional exchange. 
Organize awareness-raising 
campaigns and other forms 
of information exchange to 
promote climate-resilient 
SNRM, and increase interest 
in such practices and 
communities living 
throughout the Project 
Area. 
- 
Recruit a service 
provider to develop a 
knowledge 
dissemination and 
communication plan. 
- 
Recruit a service 
provider to develop 
curricula on climate-
resilient SNRM for local 
high schools. 
- 
Establish student-run 
eco-clubs in all 26 
targeted river systems. 
- 
Organize local-level 
radio programmes. 
- 
1 knowledge 
dissemination and 
communication plan 
developed. 
- 
1 set of high school 
curricula developed. 
- 
Student-run eco-
clubs established, 
and 260 sessions held 
at schools in the 
Project Area. 
- 
119 local-level radio 
programmes 
broadcast. 
- 
28 local exchange 
visits for local 
- 
Increased awareness of 
local people on climate 
change, climate risks and 
climate-resilient SNRM 
and available resources, 
initiatives and 
opportunities. 
- Engagement with local and provincial 
governments, NGOs, indigenous people’s 
federations, Dalit organizations, women’s 
organizations and others, the service provider will 
establish methods for widespread dissemination 
of project-generated information (including what 
is developed under Sub-Component 3.1 and the 
information contained in the CKC established 
under Sub-Component 3.3) via these entities’ 
respective networks. 
- This will increase awareness of climate risks and 
available resources (including the CKC), to 
support local people to adapt to climate-risks.

=== PAGE 120 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 116 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
- 
Organize exchange visits 
for local government 
authorities. 
government officials 
organized. 
Sub-Component 3.2 – The extension system is equipped to promote climate-resilient SNRM 
3.2.1: Develop 10 
modules on 
climate-resilient 
SNRM to be used 
by extension 
workers, including 
in the FFS. 
- 
Develop locally-
relevant training 
modules that cover 
the range of climate-
resilient SNRM 
practices to be 
supported by the 
project, which 
extension workers and 
other trainers can use 
to promote more 
widespread 
adoption/application 
of climate-resilient 
SNRM throughout the 
Project Area during 
and after the project. 
- 
Develop training 
modules. 
- 
Recruit a service provider 
to 
translate 
training 
modules. 
- 
10 training modules 
developed and 
translated.  
- 
Government extension 
workers have locally-
adapted training modules 
to be used when training 
farmers and other land 
users to adopt project-
promoted climate-
resilient SNRM practices 
(supporting trainings and 
adoption of measures 
presented in Component 
1). The modules will cover 
sensitization and 
extension processes for 
rural communities and 
beneficiaries including 
implementation planning, 
self-learning, quality 
assurance and incentive 
structures, and will 
support the facilitation of 
all key interventions 
under Component 1. 
 
- Training modules draw on best practices 
identified in the feasibility work done for this 
project, as well as the insights gained from the 
CERP process (under Activity 2.1.2) and the 
collection of local and indigenous knowledge 
(under Activity 3.1.1). 
- Enables improved institutional and individual 
learning, improved knowledge management, and 
facilitates the replication of training in other parts 
of the country. 
3.2.2: Enhance and 
deliver quality 
extension services 
on climate-
resilient SNRM to 
households. 
- 
Build the capacity of 
extension workers and 
LRPs to understand 
and apply the 10 
training modules 
developed under 
Activity 3.2.1; engage 
the services of 
provincial extension 
workers to promote 
and support adoption 
of climate-resilient 
SNRM in the Project 
- 
Train extension workers 
and LRPs on climate-
resilient SNRM, including 
how to use/apply the 10 
training modules 
developed under Activity 
3.2.1. 
- 
Engage provincial 
extension workers (using 
MoFE co-financing) to 
deliver climate-informed 
extension support in the 
Project Area, including 
- 
78 training events 
organized. 
- 
Extension workers 
providing 11,880 
months of project-
related support for 
climate-resilient 
SNRM, with the 
specific distribution 
of these working 
months (i.e. days per 
worker) to be 
determined. 
- 
To promote lasting and 
sustainable behavioural 
change to enable the 
adoption of climate-
resilient and low-carbon 
land use (including 
practices aimed at 
addressing the main 
drivers and underlying 
causes of deforestation 
and forest degradation, 
and increasing resilience 
of local livelihoods and 
- By building the capacity of local extension 
workers and drawing on their existing insights 
and networks, the project expects to generate 
high adoption rates among CBOs. This approach 
will also ensure that the provincial governments 
are well equipped to continue providing climate-
informed extension services in the Project Area 
after project closure – thereby increasing the 
prospects for scaling up and out that are so 
important to the broader process of sector 
transformation that this project aims to set in 
motion.

=== PAGE 121 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 117 OF 117 
 
 
 
I I 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Impact 
Sustainability Considerations 
Area by: (i) supporting 
delivery of project-
organized trainings; 
and (ii) continuing to 
support CBOs to adopt 
and continue using 
climate-resilient 
SNRM, including 
among households 
who were not selected 
by their CBOs to 
participate directly in 
project-organized 
trainings. 
under Components 1 
and 2. 
ecosystems), it is essential 
to scale up the delivery of 
high-quality, climate-
informed extension 
services in all 26 targeted 
river systems. 
- 
Extension workers will 
directly support delivery 
of project-financed 
trainings and extension & 
advisory services that 
support investments 
under Component 1. 
 
- MoFE co-financing will be used to engage the 
services of provincial-level extension workers (on 
contract with MoITFE and MoALMC) to 
specifically support the delivery of climate-
informed extension modules and support under 
the BRCRN project, and signals an intention to 
continue to finance these services after closure.  
- They will provide ongoing advice, guidance and 
support to CBOs throughout the project 
implementation period to enable the continued 
adoption and use of climate-resilient SNRM 
practices promoted by the project, including 
among households who were not selected by 
their CBOs to directly participate in formal 
trainings organized by the project.  
3.2.3: Establish 
and operate a 
Churia Knowledge 
Centre (CKC) in 
each province to 
enable continuous 
delivery of 
climate-informed 
extension services 
and planning, and 
to monitor 
implementation 
and results of 
CERPs and CBO 
management 
plans. 
- 
Establish (and build 
capacity to use) the 
CKC as a platform to 
underpin the 
continued provision of 
climate change-
informed extension 
and advisory services, 
as well as support 
continued monitoring 
of natural resources 
and evidence-based 
planning in the Project 
Area, beyond project 
closure. 
- 
Recruit a service 
provider to establish the 
CKC, including provincial 
hubs within the MoITFE 
offices in Provinces 1, 2 
and 3. 
- 
Train government staff 
and other relevant 
specialists to understand 
the CKC, and the 
information they can 
access from it. 
- 
Develop CKC manuals, 
protocols and guidelines 
(including Standard 
Operating Procedures, 
SOPs). 
- 
Train relevant MoITFE 
staff on CKC protocols 
and SOPs to support 
continued 
maintenance/operation 
of the CKC. 
- 
CKC platform 
established. 
- 
3 provincial CKC hubs 
established in MoITFE 
offices in Provinces 1, 
2 and 3 (integrating 
into existing 
institutions). 
- 
4 training events on 
CKC use/access 
organized. 
- 
1 set of CKC manuals, 
protocols, guidelines 
and SOPs developed. 
- 
3 training events on 
CKC 
maintenance/operati
ons organized. 
- 
Improved collection, 
analysis, and 
dissemination of climate-
related information 
leading to the delivery of 
climate-informed 
extension services, 
integration of climate 
change into decision 
making process and 
planning, and to support 
monitoring and 
implementation of 
climate interventions. 
- CKC will be embedded in existing institutions – 
within MoITFE Offices (specifically within the 
Science Environment and Climate Change 
Division). It will support knowledge management 
and learning beyond project closure.  
- Besides investing in the design and development 
of CKC, an emphasis is placed on building the 
capacity of MoITFE staff in each of the provincial 
CKC hubs to operate the CKC.  
- Manuals, protocols and guidelines will be 
developed to guide provincial staff on CKC 
knowledge generation, gathering and 
management, including after project completion. 
This will include the development of Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs), which will be 
agreed with MoITFE to ensure the provincial CKC 
hubs are well operated and maintained beyond 
project closure (ensuring it is fully embedded 
within the institution).  
- MoITFE staff will be trained on the protocols, 
guidelines and SOPs in PY7 to build their capacity 
to continue operating the CKC, and ensure it 
fulfils its role as a repository to support climate-
informed extension services and planning into the 
future.

=== PAGE 122 ===
_ .. i:r	 ..... 
Governll\lqtbf Nepal 
MINISTRY:INANCE 
, . r,1m!;n\ 
-
International Economic'OOQ?.eratrorl Coordina11on OiviSton 
. 
• J - • 
·', •. 
J:EŊCŋ /MoF/ Ōc.Fr100 I 2.018-d/9/tJ04 
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF") 
Songdo International Business District 
175, Art Center-daero 
Yeonsu-gu, lcheon 406840 
Republic of Korea 
SINGHADURBAR 
KATHMANDU, NEPAL 
Kathmandu, 26 November 2018 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations regarding 
Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the project Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal as included in the funding proposal 
submitted by Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to us on 18 September 
2018. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Ministry of Finance, International Economic 
Cooperation Coordination Division, the National Designated Authority of Nepal. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the project {or programme] as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Nepal has no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal;
(b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Nepal's national priorities,
strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project as included in the
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as included in the 
funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
Name: Shreekrishna Nepal 
Title: Joint Secretary 
Tel: Minister 4211809, Secretary 4211332, International Economic Cooperation Coordination Division 4211372, 4211867 
Fax No. 4211164, 4211165, Website: www.mof.gov.np 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 123 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme 
title 
Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN) 
Existence of 
subproject(s) to be 
identified after GCF 
Board approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or 
location(s) of programme 
The selected river systems in Nepal: Kokaha; Gideri Khola; 
Patnali Khola; Thakur Khola; Sun Koshi; Chadaha Khola; 
Kamala-North; Tawa-North; Tawa-South; Kankai Nadi; Ratuwa 
Nadi; Adherei Khola, Baruwa Khola, Duar Khola; Lakhandehi 
Khola; Kamala-South; Biring Khola; Balan Khola; Charnath; 
Bataha Khola; Budhi Khola; Lohandra Nadi; Kamala, Belsot, 
Jogiya; Ratu Nadi; Mechi Khola; Bakraha Khola; Bihul Nadi; and 
Khado Khola 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, October 4, 2019 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Nepali  
Explanation on language 
Nepali is the official language of Nepal. Civil society 
organizations and indigenous people’s representatives 
requested translation into Nepali.  
Link to disclosure 
English:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6456en/ca6456en.pdf  
 
Nepali:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6456ne/ca6456ne.pdf  
Other link(s) 
FAO disclosure portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental-social-
standards/disclosure-portal/en/ 
 
FAO Nepal (country office) website: 
http://www.fao.org/nepal/en/ 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF).   
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, October 4, 2019 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Nepali 
Explanation on language 
Nepali is the official language of Nepal. Civil society 
organizations and indigenous people’s representatives 
requested translation into Nepali.  
Link to disclosure 
English:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6456en/ca6456en.pdf

=== PAGE 124 ===
Nepali:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6456ne/ca6456ne.pdf  
Other link(s) 
FAO disclosure portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental-social-
standards/disclosure-portal/en/ 
 
FAO Nepal (country office) website: 
http://www.fao.org/nepal/en/  
Remarks 
 An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the ESMF.  
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
 N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
 N/A 
Explanation on language 
 N/A 
Link to disclosure 
 N/A 
Other link(s) 
 N/A 
Remarks 
 N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, October 4, 2019 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Nepali  
Explanation on language 
 Nepali is the official language of Nepal. Civil society 
organizations 
and 
indigenous 
people’s 
representatives 
requested translation into Nepali.  
Link to disclosure 
English:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6456en/ca6456en.pdf   
 
Nepali: 
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6456ne/ca6456ne.pdf  
Other link(s) 
FAO disclosure portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental-social-
standards/disclosure-portal/en/ 
 
FAO Nepal (country office) website: 
http://www.fao.org/nepal/en/  
Remarks 
An Indigenous Peoples’ Plan and Framework (IPP/IPPF), Social 
Inclusion Plan and Framework (SIP/SIPF), and Biodiversity 
Management Framework are contained in the ESMF. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, October 4, 2019 
Place 
FAO Nepal (country office) website, as a location closer to the 
project stakeholders: http://www.fao.org/nepal/en/  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
Tuesday, November 12, 2019 
Date of GCF’s Board 
meeting  
Tuesday, November 12, 2019 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 125 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP118 
Proposal name: 
Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN) 
Accredited entity: 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
Country/(ies): 
Nepal 
Project/programme size:  
Small 
I.
Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The level of recipients’ needs is high as the 
project targets Nepal, a least developed 
country and one of the most vulnerable 
countries in the world to climate change. The 
project area is already suffering from 
increasing temperatures and changing 
precipitation patterns caused by climate 
change 
Weak enforcement capacity may cause it to 
be challenging to change the status quo of 
illegal or unsustainable natural resource use, 
especially after the project’s completion 
The project takes an integrated sustainable 
natural resource management and cross-
sectoral approach that takes into 
consideration the inter-connectedness of 
ecosystems and land-use systems  
There is strong stakeholder engagement, 
including with all levels of government and 
community-based organizations 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XVII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 
Project background  
3.
The Churia region of Nepal is characterized by the critical nature of its geophysical
location, its socio-economic marginality, ecological sensitivity, and its sensitivity to climate
change. It provides vital role in maintaining the ecosystem of the heavily populated Terai plains
downstream, including groundwater regulation, prevention of siltation, flood control and the
supply of raw materials for various livelihoods, including fuel and construction materials. For
decades the natural resources of the region have been managed in an unsustainable manner.
This created a vicious cycle of land degradation, causing decreased productivity which in turn

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 126 
 
 
caused further land degradation and the unsustainable extraction of natural resources, resulting 
in sedimentation, landslides and erosion in downstream farmlands. This situation is further 
exacerbated by the effects of climate change – increasing temperatures, changing precipitation 
patterns and more frequent and more intense hazards, such as floods, necessitate adaptation in 
the agriculture and forest sectors to safeguard the ecosystem and products of the land. 
4. 
The proposed project will take an integrated approach to enhancing the resilience of 
ecosystems and vulnerable communities through the promotion of the widespread adoption of 
climate-resilient land-use practices, restoration of ecosystems and forests, confronting the 
challenges of deforestation and forest degradation, and building resilience to more frequent and 
more intense hazards. The proposed interventions are categorized by the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the accredited entity (AE), as a category B project, 
with medium environmental and social risk.  
5. 
The total project cost is USD 47.3 million with a request to GCF to finance USD 39.3 
million (83 per cent) in grant form. The remaining cost will be covered by the Government of 
Nepal through the Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE). 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis  
Component 1: Scaling up climate‐resilient sustainable natural resource management (SNRM) 
(total cost: USD 34.0 million; GCF cost: USD 33.03 million, or 97 per cent) 
6. 
The project will target 26 of the most vulnerable river systems within the selected three 
provinces, where over 3.2 million people live. Under this component, community-based 
organizations (CBOs) and their members, as well as local government, will be provided with 
technical and financial support to scale up sustainable practices, including: 
(a) 
Climate-resilient agricultural practices on 60,965 ha;  
(b) 
The restoration of 202,237 ha of critical forest, wetland and grassland ecosystem; and  
(c) 
Tree planting on 23,800 ha as new forest systems. 
7. 
This support will be delivered in each of the targeted river systems, guided by river 
system-based spatial and operational plans developed under component 2, where specific 
measures are selected considering differentiated vulnerabilities within each river system.  
8. 
Activities in this component will absorb the majority of GCF finance (84 per cent). The 
proposed interventions are deemed to be appropriate and adequate in addressing the 
underlying drivers of land degradation in the project area, leading to further emission 
reductions through reduced deforestation and forest degradation as well as improved carbon 
sequestration. 
Component 2: Strengthening institutions and planning for climate‐resilient SNRM (total cost: USD 
3.31 million; GCF cost: USD 3.04 million or 91.8 per cent) 
9. 
As a precursor to guide investments in component 1, activities in component 2 will 
support provincial and local government stakeholders and CBOs in identifying and assessing 
climate-change risks and resource degradation within the target river basins and in developing 
locally relevant plans to respond to the identified risks.  
10. 
The proposed interventions in this component are critical not only to ensuring 
investments in each target river basin are locally appropriate but also to equipping government 
stakeholders and CBOs to be able to continue investing in climate-resilient SNRM beyond 
project completion. It is particularly necessary, given Nepal’s ongoing political transition, to 
delegate the responsibilities for natural resource management to provincial and local 
governments.

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 127 
 
 
Component 3: Improving knowledge, awareness and local capacity for climate‐resilient SNRM 
(total cost: USD 8.01 million; GCF cost: USD 1.65 million or 20.6 per cent) 
11. 
Component 3 will improve the awareness of climate-change threats and build the 
capacities necessary to continuously monitor climate-change risks and vulnerabilities at the 
provincial, local and CBO levels. This will be achieved by measures that strengthen extension 
materials and guidelines for farmer-field schools, scaling up the reach of extension services, and 
trainings for trainers to implement climate-resilient SNRM practices. An innovative knowledge 
centre will also be established to enhance climate monitoring, knowledge management and 
dissemination. 
12. 
The proposed activities under this component are complementary to components 2 and 
3 in setting a strong enabling environment to sustain and scale up the SNRM interventions 
following project completion. 
Component 4: Project management (total cost: USD 2.04 million; GCF cost: USD 1.58 million or 77 
per cent) 
13. 
Project management costs will be covered by GCF and the Government of Nepal 
proportional to the overall contribution to the project. The total project management cost is 
around 4.2 per cent of the total project cost, which is compliant with the GCF policy on fees. 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria 
3.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
            
       Scale: High 
14. 
The project addresses environmental degradation through multiple angles, leading to 
significantly increased climate-resilient communities and environmental resilience to climate 
change. Climate change is affecting the agricultural production potential of the region and 
increasing the risk of the loss of life and property through natural disasters. The project’s 
interventions will positively impact both issues, leading to direct benefits for nearly 1 million 
people in the project area, and over 3.2 million indirect beneficiaries in the downstream areas of 
the project. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential     
 
 
 
                   Scale: High 
15. 
The project takes an ecosystem-based approach that promotes integrated management. 
The integration of the areas of SNRM is new to Nepal, thus, this project has significant scalability 
potential for other regions in the country and worldwide different with regard to its successful 
practices and lessons learned. 
16. 
Following the adoption of Nepal’s new Constitution in 2010, governance in the country 
has devolved to provincial and local levels of government. Through its institutional capacity-
building component, this project focuses on these lower levels of government, ensuring the 
continued consideration of SNRM beyond the lifetime of the project. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
           
       Scale: High 
17. 
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 1: the project will deliver crucial economic 
benefits through its support for agricultural development. Its direct beneficiaries, which are 
mostly poor, will see improvements in their livelihood support systems through increased 
agricultural productivity, the greater availability of fuelwood and timber, and reduced exposure 
to disasters.

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 128 
 
 
18. 
SDG 15: better management of natural resources, which are currently very degraded, 
will lead to reduced erosion in the project area and reduced associated sedimentation in rivers. 
19. 
SDGs 5 and 7: the support for biogas digesters will lead to significant benefits for 
women, in particular through a reduced need to collect fuelwood and less air pollution during 
cooking. The project has strong gender mainstreaming throughout.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
       Scale: High 
20. 
Nepal is a least developed country and is ranked as the world’s fourth most vulnerable 
country to climate change. Moreover, the project area lies in the Churia hills, which provide vital 
ecosystem functions to the heavily populated plains downstream in Nepal and India. 
21. 
Nepal is also susceptible to natural disasters, such as earthquakes. The most recent 
major earthquake struck the nation’s capital, Kathmandu, in 2015 and led to an estimated total 
damage of USD 10 billion, approximately 50 per cent of nominal gross domestic product. Other 
natural disasters include landslides and glacial lake outburst floods. As a result, susceptibility to 
natural disasters, its fiscal space is very restricted. 
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
             
       Scale: High 
22. 
The project is aligned with key policy frameworks and co-financing is being provided by 
the Nepali Government. 
23. 
The project responds directly to Nepal’s first nationally determined contribution, with 
specific reference to three of the four components of the Pilot Program on Climate Resilience: “i) 
Building climate resilience of watersheds in mountain eco regions, ii) Building resilience to 
climate related hazards, iii) Mainstreaming climate change risk management in development”. 
Apart from that, the project references national policies of forests, biodiversity, ecosystem-
based adaptation and pro-poor strategies. 
24. 
The Government of Nepal has actively engaged in the development of the funding 
proposal, which is one of the key programmes of the MoFE. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
       Scale: High 
25. 
The mitigation impact of the project is estimated at USD 4.24 per tonne of carbon 
dioxide equivalent, with an external rate of return of 81 per cent over 20 years, inclusive of 
ecosystem benefits, and 20 per cent excluding them. The project invests USD 50 per direct 
beneficiary, which is considered competitive.  
26. 
Project co-financing is relatively limited at 17 per cent, being provided by the 
Government of Nepal. FAO, as the AE, will not provide any co-financing. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
27. 
The project aims to enhance the climate resilience of ecosystems and vulnerable 
communities in the Churia region of Nepal through integrated SNRM approaches. The 
interventions will be undertaken in 26 river systems in the region and will provide benefits to 
women, indigenous peoples and marginalized minority groups, including Dalits, through CBOs. 
To achieve its objective, the project will undertake activities organized into the following

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 129 
 
 
components: (1) scaling-up of climate-resilient SNRM; (2) strengthening institutions and 
planning for climate-resilient SNRM; and (3) improving knowledge, awareness and local 
capacity for climate-resilient SNRM.  
28. 
The AE considered the project as having a potential moderate environmental and social 
risk classification. This risk classification takes into consideration the likely adverse 
environmental and social risks and impacts of the project, which it finds to be less adverse and 
fewer in number (compared to high environmental and social risk projects); the risks and 
impacts are considered site-specific, and mitigation measures have been readily designed and 
implemented to address the identified risks and impacts. GCF confirms the risk classification of 
the proposed project as equivalent to category B for moderate environmental and social risks.  
29. 
The AE has submitted an environmental and social management framework (ESMF) 
since the specific locations and interventions still have to be finalized. The ESMF describes the 
processes for integrating environmental and social considerations in the activities. The ESMF 
describes the due diligence process, including screening, assessment, and the management and 
planning of measures to avoid, minimize and mitigate the identified risks and impacts. 
Incorporated in the ESMF are an indigenous peoples planning framework, biodiversity 
management framework, social inclusion planning framework, and stakeholder engagement 
and grievance redress systems that will be established for the project.  
30. 
Key environmental and social risks and impacts. The project involves activities that 
are expected to generate positive environmental and social impacts, such as improving natural 
resources management and ecosystem services as well as the climate resilience of ecosystems 
and vulnerable communities. Potential adverse environmental and social risks and impacts have 
also been identified for the activities that will be supported by the project. 
31. 
Indigenous peoples and other vulnerable groups. Indigenous peoples form 
approximately 31% of the population in the project area, of which 50% are women, and 
according to the project logic will form both 31% of the direct beneficiaries and 31% of the 
indirect beneficiaries. In line with its own Policy on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, and the 
Environmental and Social Management Guidelines, the AE has provided an ‘Indigenous Peoples 
and Social Inclusion Planning Framework’ (IP SIP Framework) as a comprehensive section of 
the ESMF. Including Dalits along with indigenous peoples in their consideration of vulnerable 
groups, IP SIP Framework describes both measures to mitigate potential negative impacts and 
enhance positive benefits. Further participation could be enhanced by identifying links, if any, 
between the AE’s Project Supervision Unit, Executing Unit and existing indigenous-related 
institutions within the AE such as the Interdepartmental Working Group, FPIC Task Force and 
the informal caucus of indigenous peoples’ focal points.  
32. 
Applicable national commitments include the ILO Indigenous and Tribal Peoples 
Convention, 1989 (No. 169), that was ratified in 2007. Both national and AE commitments 
explicitly mention the need to attain free, prior and informed consent (FPIC), and within the 
project framework, outcomes are explicitly conditional on whether FPIC agreements have been 
signed prior to implementation. 
33. 
Indigenous peoples, including national indigenous organizations, and national 
indigenous women’s organizations, were included in the consultations for the development of 
the funding proposal. In the implementation of the project, the representation of indigenous 
peoples is explicitly mentioned at the level of the Provincial Coordination Units, as well as 
representation ‘engaged in the PSC where they will be invited to discuss thematic issues, and 
project progress.’ A budget line is dedicated to ensuring the participation of indigenous peoples 
in the PMC and PCU. 
34. 
The IP SIP Framework envisages the creation of an Indigenous Peoples and Social 
Inclusion Plan as well as separate IP SIMPs in each of the twenty-six river systems. The IP SIP 
Framework discussions impact and mitigation measures including that the project will not be

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 130 
 
 
involved in displacement of indigenous peoples’ social and economic activities, nor in 
challenging traditional use of forest, land and water resources by indigenous peoples. The 
project, via the IP SIP Framework, also explicitly supports the full, effective and proportional 
representation of indigenous peoples, and provides documentation of consultations already 
carried out with indigenous peoples, while acknowledging the requirement for additional 
consultations for key indigenous organizations. The project’s grievance redress mechanism 
respects the inclusion of informal and/or customary conflict management and resolution 
processes. Activities for the development of the IP SIP Framework earmarked to discrete 
financial resources are set aside under the ESMF workplan. This includes the hiring of an 
Indigenous Peoples and Social Inclusion Specialist in the PMU for the lifespan of the project. 
35. 
Biodiversity and natural habitats. The project is expected to improve the 
ecosystemsecosystem services and the overall vegetation cover of the Churia region through 
SNRM.  However, it is likely that some of the project activities will be implemented within an 
established protected area and RAMSAR site, the Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve. To ensure that 
the activities will not reduce the biodiversity value of the area and impair its ecosystem 
services, a Biodiversity Management Framework will be prepared consistent with the 
requirements of the AE and the GCF. While the project will support forest plantations andwas 
prepared consistent with the requirements of the AE and the GCF. The framework presents the 
approach of the project to protect biodiversity resources and manage and mitigate potential 
impacts associated with the activities. Activities will not be implemented in the core protection 
areas or buffer zones of the Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve. Restoration activities in river 
systems and in the buffer zones of public and community-managed forests. These restoration 
activities are expected to generate benefits to the environment and communities by improving 
connectivity and corridors between mosaics and habitats, improving gene pool, and adaptation. 
While the project will support agroforestry systems, these interventions will only be conducted 
on degraded lands, specifically, lands that are not used for agricultural purposes and will not 
require deforestation.  
36. 
Involuntary resettlement. The result of the environmental and social screening 
conducted for the project indicated that the project would not likely lead to any involuntary 
resettlement or displacement of the affected population. Project activities are unlikely to alter 
local people’s access to forest resources on private land. Investments in public lands, either non-
forested land or highly degraded forested land will focus on supporting public land forest users 
to benefit from sustainable management of their forest resources. The participation of public 
land users will be based on participatory processes, voluntary and based on FPIC. Should the 
communities decide to implement protection of degraded areas, which may result in restriction 
of access, these will be designed and implemented based on consultations with the community 
members and the community-based organizations. The ESMF also recognized potential conflicts 
that may be borne from disagreements over changes to land use boundaries and land rights. The 
ESMF presents conflict management measures such as ensuring consents from affected people 
are obtained and broad consultations are undertaken, and the effective enforcement of 
regulations and policies are conducted.   Measures to restore any potential loss of livelihood 
particularly of vulnerable groups, through alternative land uses will be jointly developed. For 
activities on private lands, proof of land ownership must be demonstrated by the beneficiaries, 
and upon establishment, provide certification for private forests following the requirements of 
the Forest Act of 1993. Further due diligence and screening of the activities will be undertaken 
on risks related to physical and economic displacements. As part of the project’s list of excluded 
activities, the project will not support activities that result in a negative change to existing 
legitimate tenure rights as well as activities involving involuntary resettlements of households.   
37. 
Construction‐related environmental and social impacts. The project will support the 
construction of small-scale rural infrastructures such as bunds, small water impoundments, 
slope stabilization and other soil and water conservation structures. The ESMF provides that the 
project will not support the construction of medium to large infrastructure. Given the likely

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 131 
 
 
scale of such infrastructure, the risks and impacts from construction are expected to be limited 
and temporary. Construction environmental management plans will be prepared prior to any 
construction works to ensure that appropriate mitigation measures are prepared and 
implemented. 
38. 
The ESMF includes a list of activities that are excluded from the project’s support. These 
excluded activities are considered to have likely environmental and social risk factors that may 
raise the overall environmental and social risk profile of the project. Among the activities that 
will not be supported by  the project include those that would: (1) result in negative change to 
existing legitimate tenure rights; (2) involve involuntary resettlement; (3) support construction 
of medium to large infrastructure; (4) increase greenhouse gas emissions substantially; (5) 
implemented in protected areas; (6) involve direct supply of agrochemicals; and (7) support 
clearing of native forests and use non-locally adapted species.  
39. 
The ESMF provided the AE’s screening checklist which will be used as the main tool for 
identifying and characterizing the potential risks and impacts of the project. Further 
assessments, follow-ups and developing mitigation measures are provided in the ESMF, 
including the timeframe for undertaking these due diligence activities.  
40. 
The AE, together with the executing entity will implement stakeholder engagement 
during the implementation of the project, building on the extensive consultations that were 
undertaken in the course of preparing the project. Annex 3 presents the documentation of the 
stakeholder workshops and consultations undertaken since 2017. Stakeholder engagement 
measures are integrated into each activity planned for the BRCRN project and include 
continuing awareness-raising, consultations and workshops at various levels, information 
dissemination, and communication and feedback. Annex 1 of the ESMF includes detailed 
overview of planned stakeholder consultation events and workshops. 
41. 
MoFE will serve as the main executing entity (EE), supported by FAO. A project steering 
committee, chaired by MoFE, will be formed to provide overall guidance to project design and 
implementation. The Provincial Project Management Unit (PPMU), the project management unit 
(PMU) within MoFE, will be formed and composed of provincial level supporting units. The 
PPMU will be hosted in the provincial offices of the Ministries of Industry, Tourism, Forests and 
Environment. Within the provinces, provincial coordination units will be created that would 
include representatives from various sectors, including relevant government agencies and civil 
society organizations, including women’s groups, indigenous peoples organizations and 
federations, and representatives.  
42. 
A grievance redress mechanism has been developed to receive and address complaints 
that may arise from the project. This project-level grievance redress mechanism complements 
the AE’s own institutional mechanism and follows established principles of the UN Guiding 
Principles for Business and Human Rights. The detailed steps and procedures are outlined in the 
ESMF and identify the various levels for receiving, resolving, and escalating complaints. 
Traditional or customary dispute management practices are also integrated into the project-
level grievance redress mechanism. 
43. 
The ESMF provides an ESMF workplan that includes well-defined tasks, progress 
indicators, schedules, responsibility assignments, and costs, including budget dedicated to both 
the ESMF and the project activities.  
4.2 
Gender policy  
44. 
 The AE has submitted a comprehensive gender assessment; therefore, it complies with 
the operational guidelines of the GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan. The AE has also provided a 
gender action plan for the project.

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 132 
 
 
45. 
The gender assessment provides a comprehensive overview of the gender situation in 
Nepal, particularly of the Churia region. The assessment was completed through a desk review 
and extensive consultations with women’s representatives, CBOs and communities themselves. 
The assessment provides information on the broader gender issues, the particular issues of the 
region, and the issues that are relevant to the project objective of enhancing climate resilience 
among communities, with special attention to women, Dalits and other vulnerable groups. 
46. 
Nepal has progressively improved its policies to ensure the participation of women in 
politics and decision-making bodies by requiring a minimum 33 per cent participation in 
parliament and water user associations. However there are still gaps in ensuring meaningful 
participation of women and vulnerable groups due to persistent time poverty; lack of capacity; 
lack of access to and control over resources (e.g. in forestry and agriculture sectors); lack of land 
titles; presence of exclusionary institutions; domination of elite men in decision-making; and the 
lower level of education prevalent among women, to name a few. A major challenge to the 
participation of women in decision-making is the issue of time poverty as women often spend 
10.5 to 13 hours a day maintaining their and their family’s livelihoods, particularly in rural 
areas such as the Churia region. Feminization of agriculture with increased male migration has 
added to women’s challenges as they face labour shortages to work on agricultural land, forcing 
them to focus on high value and less intensive crops. This contributes to an increase in land 
abandonment, which has led to a decline in certain agricultural activities and food security. 
Agricultural extension services in Nepal are weak, and women do not get sufficient information 
about extension services or access to labour-saving practices and technologies. Female-headed 
households, particularly those led by women who are widowed or divorced, face additional 
challenges related to access to food, health, nutrition and education due to social discrimination. 
The gender assessment recognizes that women are not a homogenous group, and it has 
identified additional challenges faced by Dalit women, indigenous groups and other 
marginalized groups. 
47. 
The assessment findings and recommendations are included in the gender action plan, 
with activities designed to help women overcome the barriers they face to participate and 
benefit from interventions planned through the project. The gender action plan therefore 
focuses on activities that: (i) promote the membership of women in CBOs in order to enhance 
their empowerment through activities, mainstream gender and inclusion issues in policies and 
regulations, and develop the capacities of different actors; (ii) target women, Dalit women and 
indigenous women to access extension services, make use of efficient technologies, get access to 
forest and resilient agricultural practices, and engage in leadership and other trainings; and (iii) 
make sure the rights of vulnerable and excluded groups are safeguarded through appropriate 
redress mechanisms. The action plan also includes,  as per the gender assessment finding, 
activities aimed at sensitization of men to better understand and support women in the various 
activities, particularly those activities deemed women’s work and that are a constant factor for 
the time poverty faced by women. 
48. 
The proposed action plan has been vetted by the relevant communities, and issues that 
address women’s concerns have been incorporated based on the results of the gender 
assessment. The gender action plan includes sex disaggregated targets (also included in the 
logical framework of the funding proposal) and indicators. The gender action plan has also 
included allocated budgets (exclusively for the gender action plan as well as in the included 
project budget) and timelines for all activities. The gender action plan will establish the baseline 
and confirm targets for groups, including for indigenous women (31 per cent) and Dalits (13 per 
cent), within the monitoring and evaluation framework; it is already aspiring to target 50 per 
cent women in all project activities. The gender action plan has also identified responsible 
persons (a PMU gender and safeguards officer as well as representatives from women’s 
organizations and civil society organizations) for implementation and monitoring of the 
activities.

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 133 
 
 
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall proposal assessment (medium risk): 
49. 
GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 39.39 million for promoting climate-resilient 
land-use practices, addressing the challenges of deforestation and enhancing the resilience of 
ecosystems in Nepal’s Churia region. The government is providing co-financing for the project of 
USD 8.04 million; no co-financing will be provided by the AE.  
50. 
The project will build on experiences from piloted projects in Nepal. One of the lessons 
learned from previous projects in the targeted region was that land rights and encroachment 
issues need to be handled in a holistic manner. The project will place an emphasis on supporting 
community-based organizations and establishing sizable forest plantations on community land.  
51. 
Nepal is a least developed country and has experienced several shocks both natural and 
economic, including the earthquake in 2015, and a fuel crisis subsequent to the disaster, which 
led to government budget constraints.  
4.3.2. 
AE/EE capability to execute the current programme (low risk):  
52. 
The AE, FAO, has worked in Nepal since 1951, completing over 400 projects. FAO will 
establish a Technical Capacity Development Team in the FAO Nepal office, which will serve as a 
secondary EE for the execution of technically specialized activities such as activities 3.2.1. and 
3.2.3. The funding proposal mentioned that FAO will ensure the segregation of the functions of 
the AE and EEs for this project; and 
53. 
The primary EE will be MoFE. The ministry has experience in implementing projects 
related to ecosystem restoration and a forest investment programme (USD 24 million) funded 
by external donors. According to a response from the AE, there were some delays in 
implementing other projects/initiatives due to project design issues and communication with 
different stakeholders. However, the capacity assessment done by an external party determined 
that MoFE is a low-risk partner.  
4.3.3. 
Project‐specific execution risks (medium risk): 
54. 
The project involves interventions on privately owned lands as well as community 
lands. This requires active engagement by government institutions/EEs with the communities 
involved. However, inadequate coordination along with the weak enforcement of regulations 
may lead to implementation challenges. The previous pilot projects indicated that issues related 
to encroachment and land rights were important in this region. To mitigate these issues, the AE 
has proposed to raise awareness and provide capacity-building training for the communities 
and government; 
55. 
Political transitioning: the Government of Nepal is currently decentralizing and is 
establishing a new governance structure. According to the AE, the transition is well under way, 
but in practice capacities and institutions are still being built and established. The roles of the 
AE and EEs to build institutional capacity of the new provincial government ministries will be 
significant to prevent implementation delays during institutional restructuring; 
56. 
Finalization of the locations of interventions: the funding proposal aims to cover large 
geographical areas in 26 different river systems, including 86 upstream locations, dams and 
conservation ponds on 129 sites. However, the specific project sites will be determined 
following a detailed assessment of the needs of each river system and the development of 
critical ecosystem restoration plans. Based on these plans, the project will identify priority 
interventions; and

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 134 
 
 
57. 
Economic and financial viability: as per financial and economic analysis, it results in 
negative net present value during the project implementation period (seven years) due to its 
non-revenue-generating aspects and long-term impacts, such as tree planting and long-term 
land-use practices. However, the economic analysis demonstrates that the project will be 
economically viable over its 20-year lifetime with an external rate of return of 20 per cent. An 
analysis considering the social value of carbon as well as sensitivity analysis (including cost 
increase, benefit reduction, the social value of carbon decrease as parameters) were performed. 
The project is expected to maintain a positive net present value over a 20-year period.  
4.3.4. 
Compliance risk (low risk): 
58. 
The proposed project does not raise major concerns in relation to integrity risks – 
particularly pertaining to money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF) vulnerabilities. 
However, certain elements of the proposed activities may entail a heightened exposure to the 
risk of ML/TF. One of these risk factors is the external sourcing of funds for the community 
forest user group subset of CBOs. Similarly, the provision of benefits to private land user groups 
could also elevate the likelihood of GCF resources being applied to support illicitly acquired 
property; 
59. 
In response to the key risks identified above, the AE has proposed a mitigation strategy 
which includes ensuring that all donations to CBOs are recorded and that anonymous donations 
are not accepted by CBOs. In addition, all donations to CBOs above USD 100 will be made 
through the formal banking system, which is subject to anti-money-laundering/countering the 
financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) regulations. Also, regarding the CBO beneficiaries, the AE has 
confirmed that although the project will work with some private forest owners under activity 
1.3.4, it will not work with private land user groups as a CBO subset. Similarly, in relation to the 
extension of private woodlots, the AE will ensure that sites are proposed by MoFE after 
consultation with local municipalities and private forest owners’ associations, validated by 
MoFE and FAO experts, and finalized through dialogue with private land owners, according to 
the principles of free, prior and informed consent; 
60. 
Overall, the AE confirms that GCF proceeds will be managed solely by MoFE and FAO (as 
primary and secondary EEs, respectively). The project will also engage service providers 
through contracts, which constitute procurement actions and are therefore subject to the 
necessary procurement procedures and controls to ensure compliance with international 
AML/CFT standards. Furthermore, with regard to capacity to comply with AML/CFT standards, 
the AE commissioned a capacity assessment of MoFE by a qualified firm, which identified MoFE 
as a low-risk partner overall, and specifically with regard to procurement. Nevertheless, the 
FAO technical assistance team will also recruit a qualified procurement advisory/support 
service to directly support MoFE with its procurement actions under this project to ensure 
international standards are adhered to for all procurement actions; and 
61. 
These mitigating factors are expected to significantly decrease the risk of ML/TF and 
other integrity risks to a low probability. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk): 
62. 
Should the Board approve this funding proposal, its impact on the GCF portfolio 
concentration in terms of results area and single proposal is immaterial.  
4.3.6. 
Recommendation: 
63. 
It is recommended that the Board take the above factors into account when considering 
this proposal.

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 135 
 
 
 
Summary risk assessment 
Overall programme 
Medium  
Accredited entity (AE)/executing entity (EE) capability to 
implement this programme 
Low 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Low 
 
4.4 
Fiduciary  
64. 
For this project, FAO will be the AE while MoFE will be the EE; an FAO Technical 
Capacity Development Team will support execution of the project as a secondary EE. The 
project includes a grant to fund the enhancement of the climate resilience of ecosystems and 
vulnerable communities in Nepal´s Churia region through integrated SNRM approaches.  
65. 
FAO, as the AE, will be responsible for the overall management of this project and, to 
perform the AE functions, will set up a dedicated FAO-GCF project supervision team comprising 
relevant staff from the FAO Country Office in Nepal, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the 
Pacific, and FAO Headquarters.  
66. 
In its role as AE, FAO (specifically the FAO-GCF project supervision team) will oversee 
and supervise the implementation of this project in accordance with the accreditation master 
agreement signed between FAO and GCF. According to FAO internal procedures and the 
operational partners agreement negotiated with MoFE, FAO will maintain control over any 
funds related to international tenders, provision of expert advisory services, and goods or 
equipment for which technical specifications or quality assurance is required.  
67. 
As per the GCF monitoring and accountability framework, and in accordance with the 
accreditation master agreement, FAO will provide GCF with an inception report, annual 
performance reports, an independent midterm evaluation report, a project closure report and 
an independent final evaluation report. FAO will also provide semi-annual and annual financial 
reports throughout project implementation. 
68. 
As the AE for the project, FAO will ensure that financial management and procurement 
of goods and services using GCF resources will adhere to international standards and good 
practices. This includes financial management and procurement performed by MoFE (as the 
primary EE).  
69. 
The FAO Technical Capacity Development Team will support execution of the project as 
a secondary EE. This team will deliver targeted technical assistance to support delivery of 
project activities by MoFE (as the primary EE) and maintain responsibility and/or controls over 
international tenders and procurement requiring expert/technical oversight.  
70. 
As per the provisions of the FAO Operational Partners Implementation Modality, the 
FAO-GCF project supervision team will undertake regular supervision missions, spot checks and 
audits to ensure financial management and procurement by the PMU and PPMUs are being 
performed in line with agreed standards and practices.

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 136 
 
 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting  
71. 
As a cross-cutting project, the adaptation interventions of the investment expect to 
benefit 963,268 direct and 2,252,980 indirect beneficiaries. The project will deliver benefits 
directly to 30 per cent of the targeted population and indirectly to 100 per cent of the targeted 
population. Of the targeted population, women comprise 481,634 direct and 1.6 million indirect 
beneficiaries as per the gender-disaggregated metrics for the GCF core indicator. Through 
coverage of approximately 167,630 ha under improved management, the mitigation 
interventions of the investment expect to lead to reductions of 2,336,485 tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) with a decrease in the cost per tCO2eq to USD 17.33 per tCO2eq. 
72. 
 Overall the funding proposal and logical framework sufficiently apply GCF Fund-level 
(impact and outcome) results management framework and performance measurement 
framework indicators, and the project has built in baselines and data collection that can inform 
progress reporting on expected results. At the project performance level, as a technical 
assistance/training-based grant project, measurements for behavioural change have been 
integrated that are essential to deliver the expected project results. 
73. 
Regarding section H.1 of the funding proposal, overall the logical framework complies 
with GCF standards and has been cleared through Secretariat review.  
74. 
The funding proposal theory of change would benefit from further details reflecting 
on the causal pathways at the project level and in relation to the climate rationale (which ideally 
are tested in implementation either with project performance management indicators or impact 
data/evidence generated to attribute changes to GCF investment). 
75. 
Under section H.2 of the funding proposal, the Secretariat notes the intention for FAO to 
conduct formative/process evaluations to the interim and final evaluation requirements to 
assess the extent of achievement towards the paradigm shift objectives. The Secretariat also 
notes application of the intention to conduct mixed-methods data collection within the project 
activities to inform the evaluation and try to measure contribution/attribution of changes. 
Additionally, in the detailed budget, the AE needs to ensure that sufficient budget is allocated to 
conduct the data collection/surveys and collect essential project-level data for results reporting 
to enable adaptive management.  
4.6 
Legal assessment  
76. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 8 June 
2018, and it became effective on 4 October 2018.   
77. 
The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of Nepal, country in which 
GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other things, GCF 
is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be 
further assessed. The Secretariat submitted a revised draft privileges and immunities 
agreement to the government of Nepal on 23 May 2019.  
78. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
79. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made subject to the following conditions:

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 137 
 
 
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) 
Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 138 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP118 
Proposal name: 
Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN) 
Accredited entity: 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
   Scale: Medium/high 
1. 
Nepal is a landlocked country in South Asia with an estimated population of 30 million. 
The country lies in the central part of the Great Himalayas, with high mountains, valleys and 
plains. The highland region embraces the Himalayan range with elevations between 4,877 m 
and 8,848 m, where there are 8 of the 14 highest summits in the world, including Mount 
Everest. The midland region accounts for about 64 per cent of the total land area of the country. 
It is formed by the Mahabharat range, with elevations up to 4,877 m, and the lower Churia 
range. The Terai is a lowland range in the southern part of the country. It is the flat river plain of 
the Ganges River with a belt of marshy grasslands, savannas and forests. The Terai range 
occupies about 17 per cent of the total land area of the country. 
2. 
Despite recent economic progress, the country’s per capita income remains as low as 
USD 766 per year, and Nepal is regarded as a least developed country. Although tourism 
contributes largely to the country’s economy, agriculture (including livestock) and forestry are 
key economic sectors responsible for a third of the country’s gross domestic product and 
employing over 70 per cent of the population. This makes the country’s economy dependent on 
natural resources as well as stable and predictable climatic conditions. 
3. 
The Churia range passes through Nepal from west to east, to North India. It provides 
vital ecosystem functions to the heavily populated Terai plains downstream, including 
groundwater regulation, prevention of siltation, flood control, and livelihood services including 
fuel and construction materials. In addition, the Terai-Madhesh area of Nepal is responsible for 
the majority of the country’s agricultural production. Together, the Churia and Terai areas are 
home to about 50 per cent of Nepal’s population. 
4. 
Nepal has been experiencing significant impacts from climate change. Over the past 40–
60 years, average annual temperatures have increased, with annual increases of 0.02–0.05 ℃ 
over the past few decades. The average number of consecutive dry days has increased across 
Nepal in the last 40 years, including in the Churia region. Average precipitation during the post-
monsoon and winter seasons decreased between 1970 and 2012, but extreme precipitation 
events have become more common over the past 40 years. 
5. 
These climate change impacts are projected to intensify in the coming decades 
according to various studies and models. Average annual temperatures could increase by 1.3–
3.8 ℃ by 2060 and 1.8–5.8 ℃ by 2090, compared with 1986–2005. Monsoon precipitation could 
increase by 14–15 per cent by 2021–2050 relative to 1961–1990, while average winter 
precipitation could decrease by around 10 per cent. The average number of dry days and 
consecutive dry days is projected to increase further in the coming decades.

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 139 
 
 
6. 
Communities in the Churia region are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Many 
of them depend on subsistence rain-fed agriculture, so their predominant livelihood requires 
stable climatic conditions and a healthy natural resource base. The agricultural practices 
broadly observed in the region, such as cultivation on steep slopes, are not optimal for the local 
terrain, particularly if climate conditions change as anticipated. 
7. 
The Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN) project promotes integrated 
sustainable natural resource management (SNRM) to enhance the resilience of ecosystems and 
vulnerable communities in the Churia region. The project advances climate-resilient land use 
practices, reforestation and maintenance of the forest ecosystem, and resilience to climate-
induced hazards. The capacity of local government, local communities and other stakeholders to 
understand climate change risks is to be strengthened so that the impacts delivered by the 
project can be sustained and enhanced even after the project’s completion. 
8. 
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) is the accredited 
entity (AE). The Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE) of Nepal acts as the executing 
entity (EE). 
9. 
The total project cost is estimated to be USD 47.34 million, and the project requires USD 
39.3 million in grant financing from GCF. The GCF grant contribution is to be matched with USD 
8.04 million in co-financing from the MoFE.  
10. 
The project focuses on the central/eastern Churia-Terai region where 26 vulnerable 
river systems cover a combined area of 702,011 ha. These river systems span 121 rural 
municipalities in provinces 1, 2 and 3, where there are over 3.2 million people, of which 51 per 
cent are women and at least 77 per cent are considered to have experienced intergenerational 
socioeconomic exclusion. The project will work with 750 community-based organizations 
(CBOs). 
11. 
The project consists of three components. Component 1 (USD 34.1 million) is to support 
activities to scale up proven climate-resilient SNRM to strengthen ecosystem stability and 
resilience in vulnerable river systems. It will implement climate-resilient agricultural practices; 
restoration and sustainable management in ecosystems; and tree planting on non-forested land 
to build resilience and reduce pressure on natural forests, especially in the upstream Terai. This 
support will be delivered to each of the 26 target river systems. 
12. 
Activities in component 1 include (1) the establishment of 120 farmer field schools 
(FFS) to deliver training on climate-resilient farming practices; (2) improvement of sustainable 
forest management in all forest land managed by forestry-related CBOs to ensure silvicultural 
practices are implemented to maximize ecosystem service provision in terms of both climate 
resilience and forest carbon stock enhancement; and (3) creation of 52 multipurpose tree 
nurseries to serve the plantation and restoration needs of CBOs and other forest sector 
stakeholders. 
13. 
Component 2 (USD 2.2 million) supports planning and preparation for the interventions 
proposed in component 1 in the 26 target river systems. It aims to enhance the capacity of 
provincial and local governments and CBOs to understand and apply climate-resilient SNRM.  
14. 
Component 3 (USD 8.0 million) will improve knowledge, awareness and local capacity 
for climate-resilient SNRM. It will enhance FFS, strengthen extension services and improve 
information dissemination to support awareness-raising and the enhancement of adaptive 
capacity. Under this component, the Churia Knowledge Center (CKC) will be established to 
promote systematic knowledge and information sharing and monitoring concerning climate-
resilient SNRM. 
15. 
The project aims to improve the resilience of ecosystems and communities in the Churia 
region. Direct beneficiaries include at least 200,681 households or 963,268 people, equivalent

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 140 
 
 
to about 30 per cent of the inhabitants in the project area in the 26 target river systems. The 
project will support the enhanced resilience of ecosystems on 270,502 ha of land. This will 
indirectly further reduce vulnerability to climate change related risks for other inhabitants in 
the Churia region. According to the Nepalese Central Bureau of Statistics, 3.2 million people live 
in the project area, of which 31 per cent are indigenous peoples and 13 per cent are Dalits. 
16. 
In addition to its adaptation impacts, the project has an impact on greenhouse gas 
emissions from the agriculture, forestry and other land use sector in Nepal. The project is 
expected to reduce deforestation and forest degradation and improve forest management in the 
project area. Assuming an 80 per cent adoption rate, the project is expected to deliver average 
annual emission reductions of 574,180 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) or 11.48 
million tCO2eq over the 20-year lifetime of the project. The methodology for calculating the 
mitigation impact indicators follows the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories principles for land-based accounting.  
17. 
The independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) assesses the impact potential of the 
project as “medium/high”. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
             Scale: Medium 
1.2.1. 
Potential for scaling up and replication 
18. 
The project is the first ecosystem-wide initiative in the Churia region to move beyond 
pilots and institutionalize climate change mitigation and adaptation objectives into 
multisectoral local development planning processes. It enhances the planning and capacity of 
CBOs to scale up climate-resilient SNRM approaches and practices. As a part of the project, CBOs 
will receive support for the development of “critical ecosystem restoration plans”, the 
enhancement of CBO management plans, training on climate-resilient SNRM, and the 
strengthening of forest management operational plans. The extension system will be enhanced 
in order to ensure local communities’ access to the latest knowledge and information critical to 
continue applying climate-resilient SNRM measures. The establishment of the CKC also plays a 
key role in ensuring that the extension system has access to the latest data and information 
about climate change and natural resources. 
19. 
The project integrates a range of aspects of climate vulnerability and adaptive capacity, 
rural livelihoods, and national/subnational governance for enhancing climate resilience in the 
Churia region. The project proposal describes the financial, social and environmental benefits to 
be accrued by communities, local government and other stakeholders that adopt climate-
resilient SNRM at scale to address critical climate change challenges. 
20. 
The project is aligned with existing government strategies and is complementary to 
other ongoing initiatives in the agriculture and forest sectors in Nepal. The project will assist 
government entities to strengthen their planning and capacity to continue to support and 
promote climate-resilient SNRM beyond project closure. Close coordination and collaboration 
with national and subnational (local and provincial) entities is promoted so that local 
ownership and sustainability are ensured.  
1.2.2. 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
21. 
Under the project, provincial and local government authorities will be trained in 
climate-resilient land-use planning and practices, which includes job support to identify critical 
hotspots and conduct a mapping activity in each river system. Such knowledge and learning are 
essential and will be effective, given the new roles that provincial and local governments 
assume in natural resource management.

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 141 
 
 
22. 
The project aims to organize workshops where at least 750 local CBOs will be able to 
raise awareness of climate change risks and climate-resilient land use practices appropriate to 
their local contexts and priorities. By participating in the workshops, communities will be 
trained in climate change risks in their region, risk-reduction measures, and available routes to 
continue to update knowledge and seek technical support, such as CKC, local extension agents 
and radio programmes. Extension support materials and FFS will disseminate knowledge on 
adaptation in water, agriculture and forests, which will consolidate local and indigenous 
knowledge and experience. Trainers (including women, indigenous peoples, Dalits and 
Madheshi people) will be trained and equipped to apply the knowledge in the field. 
1.2.3. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
23. 
The project will establish an institutional and planning framework conducive to 
implementing its activities. Given the Government’s decision to hand over forest and 
agricultural resources to the provincial and local levels, it is essential and effective to support 
the capacity-building of local and provincial authorities on climate-resilient planning, disaster 
risk reduction and SNRM. Strong provincial and local frameworks and strategies on climate-
resilient land use will enhance the Government’s commitment and promote climate-resilient 
land use planning with an integrated approach for upstream and downstream management. The 
capacities of civil society organizations, CBOs and other stakeholders will also be strengthened 
to ensure the adoption and scaling up of climate-resilient practices at the household level. 
24. 
The project ensures that locally adapted practices are promoted in knowledge-
generation and dissemination activities, which can further enhance the enabling environment 
after project completion. 
1.2.4. 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies 
25. 
The project will promote the integration of climate-resilient SNRM into provincial 
strategies and river system action plans. This will enable the Government to orient investments 
and priorities toward climate-resilient land use practices and to encourage local governments to 
implement climate-resilient land use planning aligned with provincial strategies and river 
system action plans. The project’s efforts to build the capacity of local and provincial authorities 
will contribute to the enhancement of the regulatory framework and policies. The project and 
measures to be promoted will contribute to the implementation of Nepal’s nationally 
determined contribution (NDC) as well as various national policies and plans, including the 
President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation and Management Master Plan, the Forest Sector 
Strategy and the Agriculture Sector Strategy.  
26. 
The project will promote the implementation of an integrated climate-resilient SNRM 
approach to all areas, from upstream, hilly terrain to the downstream, upper Terai region in 
Nepal. The iTAP considers that the approach can be considered innovative.  
27. 
The project expects the climate-resilient SNRM approach to be adopted and to continue 
to be implemented after project closure. The project will establish 120 FFS and the CKC, and will 
enhance extension services – all of which are critical for the sustainability of the project impacts 
after project closure. As per the AE analysis, additional funding is not required, because the 
incremental costs required to implement the measures promoted by the project are modest and 
therefore manageable for the communities. The communities will be better off both 
economically and socially if they adopt those approaches. However, the iTAP still views the 
sustainability of the project impacts after project closure as uncertain, in the absence of a 
dedicated funding arrangement.  
28. 
Accordingly, the iTAP regards the paradigm shift potential of the project as “medium.”

=== PAGE 142 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 142 
 
 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
    
                   Scale:  High 
1.3.1. 
Economic co‐benefits 
29. 
The project will realize economic co-benefits by increasing agricultural production and 
income for households through its support for climate-resilient agricultural practices that 
improve soil quality and water availability, and reduce land degradation. The project-supported 
practices strengthen the natural resource base on which productive agriculture depends. The 
benefits will be notable among the poor and vulnerable households and communities targeted 
by the project in the Churia region, where agriculture is the backbone of economic activity. 
30. 
The project will mitigate risks that can have negative impacts on economic development 
in the Churia region. The adoption of climate-resilient land-use practices, as well as measures 
for ecosystem restoration, water conservation, gully stabilization and riverbank stabilization, 
reduce the risk and impact of climate-induced hazards. This will bring important economic 
savings for governments, communities and households that can be invested in local economic 
development.  
1.3.2. 
Social co‐benefits 
31. 
The project aims to deliver social co-benefits, such as the reduction of waterborne 
diseases as a result of better managed water conservation ponds and the reduction of collection 
distances for fuel wood, water and fodder. The frequency of such activities, primarily 
undertaken by women, has increased because of climate change and unsustainable resource 
use. 
32. 
The project aims to achieve proportional representation of indigenous peoples (at least 
31 per cent of direct beneficiaries are indigenous peoples) and to ensure that they are 
empowered and that their rights are safeguarded. Further, the project aims to enhance social 
inclusion and empower marginalized households, thus improving their capacity to adapt to 
climate change. 
33. 
The project will empower women and promote their equality through targeted 
measures (e.g. training sessions on business literacy for women’s groups, ensuring 
representation of women trainers). At least 50 per cent of direct beneficiaries will be women, of 
which proportional representation of indigenous women, Dalit women, and other marginalized 
groups will be ensured.  
34. 
The iTAP considers the sustainable development potential of the project to be “high”. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
                    Scale: High 
1.4.1. 
Vulnerability of the country 
35. 
Communities in the Churia region are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Many 
of them depend on subsistence rain-fed agriculture and have little capacity to manage risks and 
mitigate negative impacts. The 26 vulnerable river systems where the project will be 
implemented are home to more than 3.2 million inhabitants, of which 51 per cent are women 
and 77 per cent are considered to have experienced intergenerational socioeconomic exclusion. 
The project will work with 750 CBOs comprising approximately 200,681 member households or 
963,268 people, of which women make up 51 per cent. At least 31 per cent of the project’s 
beneficiaries are indigenous peoples and 13 per cent Dalits. 
1.4.2. 
Vulnerable groups and gender aspects

=== PAGE 143 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 143 
 
 
36. 
Nepal is regarded as a least developed country with a per capita income of only USD 
766. The population in the project area is over 3.2 million, representing 11 per cent of the 
national population. Diverse cultural, ethnic and caste groups inhabit the project area. At least 
77 per cent of the inhabitants within the area are considered to have experienced 
intergenerational socioeconomic exclusion. 
1.4.3. 
Absence of alternative sources of financing 
37. 
The total project cost of USD 47.34 million is to be financed by a USD 39.3 million grant 
from GCF and USD 8.04 million in co-financing from the EE. 
38. 
GCF is requested to provide funding to the project in the absence of alternative sources 
of financing. Nepal is a low-income country, and the Government, with its limited financial 
budget, lacks the financial resources to direct to climate change adaptation efforts. The 
communities in the target regions are poor and predominantly subsistence households. As the 
project and its activities are not revenue generating, private sector funding cannot be expected. 
1.4.4. 
The need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity 
39. 
Following the Government’s decision to hand over forest and agricultural resources to 
the provincial and local levels, capacity to adapt to climate change and climate-resilient 
development needs to be enhanced at the provincial and local levels. Additional technical and 
financial support is required to support these institutions in building individual and 
institutional capacity. 
40. 
CBOs have demonstrated their ability to responsibly manage natural resources. 
However, many are not yet aware of climate change threats and local-level vulnerability. Thus, 
capacity-building and technical support for CBOs is needed for them to understand climate risks 
at the local level as well as low-carbon and climate-resilient land use management practices and 
disaster risk reduction measures.  
41. 
The iTAP considers the project “high” against this criterion. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
Scale: High 
1.5.1. 
Alignment with national climate strategy 
42. 
The NDC of 2016 highlighted the country’s vulnerability to climate change, water- 
induced disasters and extreme hydro-meteorological events such as droughts, storms, floods, 
inundation, landslides, debris flow, soil erosion and avalanches. The NDC describes adaptation 
priorities, which include climate-resilient sustainable land and forest management, ecosystem 
rehabilitation and restoration, strengthened community-based natural resource management, 
and improved agricultural techniques. It also includes institutional strengthening and 
knowledge management as key activities to address climate change. 
43. 
The National Adaptation Programme of Action of 2010 identifies nine priority actions 
for adaptation, which include (1) promoting community-based adaptation through the 
integrated management of the agriculture, water, forest and biodiversity sectors; (2) building 
and enhancing the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities through improved systems and 
access to services related to agriculture development; and (3) forest and ecosystem 
management for supporting climate-led adaptation innovations. 
1.5.2. 
Coherence with existing policies

=== PAGE 144 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 144 
 
 
44. 
The President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation and Management Master Plan (2017) 
provides the strategic direction for conservation of the Churia area. Its key objectives include 
mitigation of damage likely to be caused by climate change and natural disasters through the 
sustainable management of the natural resources (land, water, vegetation, and biodiversity) of 
the Chure hills and Bhavar region. 
45. 
The Fourteenth Development Plan (2017) of Nepal recognizes the role of forests in 
contributing to both climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts and calls for the 
conservation and sustainable management and use of forests. It further notes the challenges 
faced by the Churia region and the risks posed to downstream communities as a result of 
unsustainable land use and the fragility of the ecosystem. It promotes the implementation of 
integrated conservation activities within river systems, with an emphasis on planning, 
considering the interconnectedness of upstream and downstream natural resource 
management. 
46. 
The project is closely aligned with the country’s national policies and existing plans 
applicable for the region and sectors. 
1.5.3. 
Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver 
47. 
 The AE supports climate adaptation and mitigation projects worldwide. In Nepal, the AE 
has provided technical assistance to the agriculture and forestry sector since 1951. From 2013–
2017, one of the four main priority areas of the country programming framework of the AE in 
Nepal was natural resource conservation and utilization, which included measures to enhance 
sustainable production and land use practices such as climate-resilient agriculture, sustainable 
forest and watershed management, institutional capacity-building for climate change 
adaptation in the land use sector, and climate-resilient value chains. 
48. 
The EE is responsible for the conservation, development, use and sustainable 
management of forests in Nepal. It has supported the implementation of SNRM in the Churia 
and Terai regions. The AE has managed bilateral and multilateral funds for projects within the 
land use sector. The independent assessment undertaken by the AE concluded that the EE has 
sufficient capacity and experience to manage and implement the project. 
49. 
The AE mobilizes the FAO Technical Capacity Development team as a co-EE dedicated to 
providing the EE with technical capacity development services to be implemented by the AE. 
The iTAP considers the AE and EE to have sufficient capacity and experience to deliver the 
project as presented. 
1.5.4. 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
50. 
Since May 2017, the AE has held five bilateral meetings with the Ministry of Finance, the 
national designated authority (NDA) of Nepal, to discuss the development of the project. Five 
technical committee meetings were held between June 2017 and May 2018 and attended by 
government representatives from several sectors, including the NDA and MoFE, to provide 
feedback on the project concept and proposal. Non-governmental experts were also invited to 
the meetings. 
51. 
In addition to the consultations with government authorities, the project was presented 
to diverse stakeholders in consultations to solicit feedback. Over 420 people were consulted 
through various workshops at the national and district levels, through bilateral meetings with 
non-governmental organizations at both the national and local levels, and through engagement 
with local CBOs and communities in the project area. The process included the participation of 
diverse stakeholders, including women, indigenous peoples, Dalits and other marginalized 
minority groups.

=== PAGE 145 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 145 
 
 
52. 
The project intends to maintain regular stakeholder consultations during 
implementation with the engagement of representatives from national, provincial and local 
governments, CSOs (including women’s organizations, indigenous people’s federations and 
organizations, and Dalit organizations), CBOs and the private sector.  
53. 
The provision of USD 8.04 million co-financing by MoFE indicates the Government’s 
support and commitment to the project and its approaches. 
54. 
A no-objection letter was issued by the NDA and is attached to the funding proposal.  
55. 
The iTAP considers the country ownership of the project to be “high.” 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
   Scale: Medium/high 
1.6.1. 
Cost‐effectiveness and efficiency regarding financial and non‐financial aspects  
56. 
The total project cost is estimated at USD 47.34 million to be financed with a USD 39.3 
million grant from GCF and USD 8.04 million in co-financing from the EE.  
57. 
The GCF contribution in the form of a grant can be justified given the fact that Nepal is a 
least developed country and the project’s major beneficiaries are poor communities in the 
regions most vulnerable to climate change. The activities that will be implemented by the 
project are not revenue generating. 
58. 
The AE estimates that the project will directly benefit at least 200,681 households or 
963,268 people. This corresponds to a cost of about USD 49 per direct beneficiary and can be 
considered a competitive cost-per-beneficiary ratio. In addition to the adaptation benefits, the 
project will deliver mitigation benefits. 
59. 
The project will also contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from the 
agriculture, forestry and other land use sector in Nepal. Based on the total project costs, the 
estimated cost per tCO2eq is USD 4.13, which equates to USD 3.43 per tCO2eq for the GCF 
financial contribution. 
1.6.2. 
Amount of co‐financing  
60. 
The EE will provide USD 8.04 million in co-financing for the project, which represents 
about 17 per cent of the total project cost. GCF will therefore achieve a co-financing ratio of 0.2 
against its contribution. 
61. 
During and after the implementation, the project expects additional in-kind 
contributions from farmers and project participants to manage agricultural and forestry 
interventions.  
1.6.3. 
Programme/project financial viability and other financial indicators  
62. 
As per the AE analysis, the financial viability of the climate-resilient agriculture and 
forestry models implemented by the project is assessed as “higher” and therefore more 
profitable than existing practices. This could justify the adoption of the project-supported 
models by the communities.  
63. 
Although the economic return of the project is negative in absolute terms after seven 
years, the incremental economic rate of return (ERR) (i.e. absolute project cash flows minus 
baseline project cash flows) is positive, with an ERR of 97 per cent. The project’s incremental 
benefits outweigh the costs in the long run, achieving an incremental ERR of 114 per cent after 
10 years and 115 per cent after 20 years.

=== PAGE 146 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 146 
 
 
1.6.4. 
Industry best practices  
64. 
The technologies and practices promoted within the framework of the project have been 
effectively implemented and can be regarded as good practices. The measures in component 1 
have all been already piloted in the Churia region within the context of diverse development 
projects (Terai Arc Landscape Programme, Hariyo Ban Program) as well as through district-
level governments, especially those related to water management, forestry, and agriculture and 
soil conservation.  
65. 
The project creates an enabling environment to support the uptake of proven climate-
resilient land use practices. It helps fill information gaps and improve the consolidation of 
relevant information on climate-resilient land use planning and management while also 
improving extension services and training and information dissemination. 
66. 
The iTAP assesses the efficiency and effectiveness of the project as “medium/high.” 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
67. 
The iTAP recommends the Board approve the proposed project as presented. 
68. 
The project strengthens the ability of local communities and ecosystems to adapt to 
climate change and reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation through an 
integrated climate-resilient SNRM approach to all areas, from upstream, hilly terrain to the 
downstream, upper Terai region. The project is congruent with existing government strategies 
and is complementary to other ongoing initiatives in the agriculture and forest sectors in Nepal. 
The project will further promote the generation and dissemination of knowledge that can be 
adapted at the local level to assist the communities and government to promote and 
mainstream climate-resilient SNRM approaches to development plans and strategies.

=== PAGE 147 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.04 
Page 147 
 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel’s assessment (FP118) 
Proposal name: 
Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN) 
Accredited entity: 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
 
Impact potential 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Paradigm shift potential 
FAO takes note of the assessment. FAO would like to reconfirm that the Project is fully aligned 
with existing government strategies and complementary to other ongoing initiatives. Close 
coordination and collaboration with national, provincial and local entities is promoted to 
ensure local ownership and sustainability. The Project impact, after project closure,  is 
ensured through: i) the support for viable, cost-effective and climate-resilient measures; ii) 
the government co-financing that focuses on institutionalisation of extension and impact 
monitoring; and iii) the size  scale of finance required for replication and continuation of 
project activities is within the current annual budget ceiling of the President’s Churia 
Conservation Master Plan, and the project approach is therefore envisaged as a template for 
allocation of domestic finance. 
Sustainable development potential 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Needs of the recipient 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Country ownership 
FAO acknowledges iTAP comment that the Project is closely aligned with the country’s 
national policies and existing plans applicable for the region and sectors. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
FAO thanks the iTAP for its review of the proposal.

=== PAGE 148 ===
1 The lead authors are Laura Kiff, Matthias Seebauer, Dr. Jochen Statz (UNIQUE forestry and land use GmbH), Dr. Jiban 
Paudel (SEEPORT), and Aimee Mori (FAO). Additional contributions were made by Resham Dangi (FAO), Ramu Subedi 
(SEEPORT), Ashwin Dhakal (SEEPORT), Ishwor Neupane (SEEPORT), Arjun Dhakal (SEEPORT), Ganga Dahal 
(Independent Consultant), Janet Zhe Yuan (FAO) and Ben Vickers (FAO). 
Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal
Gender Assessment & Gender Action Plan 
Accredited Entity: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations1 
Gender documentation for FP118

=== PAGE 149 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN 
ii
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Table of Contents .......................................................................................................................... ii 
List of Tables ................................................................................................................................. iii 
List of Figures ................................................................................................................................iv 
List of Abbreviations ...................................................................................................................... v 
1 
Gender Assessment ............................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 
Vulnerability of communities in Churia ......................................................................... 1 
 
Background ............................................................................................................ 1 
 
Project description ................................................................................................ 3 
 
Gender assessment ............................................................................................... 4 
1.2 
Gender inequality in Nepal ........................................................................................... 5 
1.3 
Legal and administrative framework protecting women and promoting gender 
equality .................................................................................................................................... 15 
1.4 
Gender issues in building a resilient Churia region in Nepal....................................... 17 
1.5 
Gender Assessment Recommendations ..................................................................... 26 
2 
Gender Action Plan (GAP) ................................................................................................... 35 
Reference list ............................................................................................................................... 42 
Appendices .................................................................................................................................. 45

=== PAGE 150 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
iii
 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1: Overview of challenges for engaging women in sustainable natural resource 
management and climate change mitigation and adaptation .................................................... 20 
Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal´ ProjectGender 
Action Plan .................................................................................................................................. 36

=== PAGE 151 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
iv
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1: Overview of a) landslide susceptible areas and b) flood susceptible areas in the Churia 
region of Nepal .............................................................................................................................. 1 
Figure 2: Maps demonstrating a) human sensitivity to climate change, b) temperature and 
rainfall risk, c) ecological risk, d) flood risk, e) drought risk, and f) combined risk. ...................... 2 
Figure 3: Project implementation area ......................................................................................... 4 
Figure 4: Women graduates (% of total) by level of education from 1991-2011 in Nepal ........... 7 
Figure 5: a) Adult (15+) female literacy, and b) female-male literacy ratio in Nepal in 2011 ....... 8 
Figure 6: Literacy in Nepal in 2011 ................................................................................................ 9 
Figure 7: Ratio of girls to boy in school level education ............................................................... 9 
Figure 8: Number of NGOs providing support services for gender based violence (per district)15 
Figure 9: Overall illustration of the vulnerability of the project region with multiple climate and 
human induced disasters in view of climate change causing cascading impacts ....................... 18

=== PAGE 152 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
v
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
BAU 
Business as Usual 
BPfA 
Beijing Platform for Action 
BRCRN 
Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal 
CFUG
Community Forest User Group
CEDAW 
Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against 
Women 
DRR 
Disaster Risk Reduction 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
EWS
Early Warning Systems
GAP 
Gender Action Plan 
GCF 
Green Climate Fund 
GEM 
Gender Empowerment Measurement 
GESI 
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion 
GII 
Gender Inequality Index 
HDI 
Human Development Index 
LDC 
Least Developed Country 
MPI 
Multi-dimensional Poverty Index 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
NRM 
Natural Resource management 
NTFP 
Non-Timber Forest Product 
SDG 
SLC 
Sustainable Development Goal 
School Leaving Certificate 
SNRM 
Sustainable Natural Resource Management 
WUA 
Water User Association

=== PAGE 153 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN 
1
 
1 GENDER ASSESSMENT 
1.1 Vulnerability of communities in Churia 
 Background 
1. The Churia hills are located between the mid hill areas to the north and the plains in the south of 
Nepal (Terai), where the Churia hills perform critical ecological and socio-cultural functions both 
upstream and downstream. With more than 50% of its area under forests and riverine areas, the 
Churia hills render hydrological services such as regulating surface water flows and recharging 
groundwater. All major river systems in Nepal pass through the Churia hills before reaching the 
densely populated alluvial plains in the Terai and northern India.  
2. Men and women living in the Churia are highly dependent on natural resources to maintain their 
livelihood. Agriculture is the main form of employment in the region, with 74% of the economically 
active population involved in the sector.2 Forests are an essential resource and safety net for 
communities. In addition to providing key ecosystem and cultural services, forests provide diverse 
products including timber for construction, fuelwood, and other non-timber forest product (NTFPs) 
including plants for fodder, subsistence and medicinal plants. The Churia hills and Bhavar regions 
are an important area for ground water recharge. Thus, households in the Churia region are directly 
dependent on the health of Churia ecosystems to ensure their food, water and energy security. 
3. The region is naturally in a more vulnerable situation, with friable soils, high exposure to flash 
flooding and landslides in the monsoon season, and frequently changing watercourses (Figure 1). 
Climate change coupled with unsustainable natural resource management (NRM) in the region is 
increasing the vulnerability of communities and ecosystems to landslides, flooding and erosion, 
extreme heat, water scarcity and forest fires among other climate-induced natural disasters (Figure 
2).3 In 2017, flooding in Nepal from January to September resulted in the destruction of 43,400 
houses, 191,700 partially damaged houses, the displacement of 20,900 families, and the death of 
at least 160 people.4 In addition, the loss to agriculture production due to floods in 2017 was 
estimated at over US$5.74 million, which has a major impact only rural livelihoods and food 
security.5 
 
Figure 1: Overview of a) landslide susceptible areas and b) flood susceptible areas in the Churia region of 
Nepal 
Source: PCTMCDB 2017 
                                                            
2 UN Women 2016 
3 Yohe et al. 2007 
4 UN Office of the Resident Coordinator Nepal 2017 
5 Ibid.

=== PAGE 154 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
2
 
 
Figure 2: Maps demonstrating a) human sensitivity to climate change, b) temperature and rainfall risk, c) 
ecological risk, d) flood risk, e) drought risk, and f) combined risk.  
Source: MoE 2010 
 
4. Without significant landscape level investments in restoring natural capital and promoting climate-
resilient land use practices, livelihoods and adaptive capacities, the impacts of climate change will 
further exacerbate environmental degradation, and thereby aggravate rural poverty, as well as 
food, water and energy insecurity in the Churia and in downstream regions. For the Churia region 
in particular, therefore, an approach of climate-resilient Sustainable Natural Resource Management 
(SNRM) is crucial for long-term environmental and social stability.

=== PAGE 155 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
3
 
 Project description 
5. The overarching objective of the proposed GCF project is to enhance the climate resilience of 
ecosystems and vulnerable communities in the Churia region through integrated sustainable rural 
development and natural resource management approaches, including the following: 
 
Strengthening capacities of local and provincial government officials on climate change, 
climate-resilient land use planning, SNRM and disaster risk reduction (DRR). 
 
Strengthening the capacities of at least 750 local community-based organizations/ user 
groups6 on recognizing climate threats, climate-resilient land use planning and sustainable 
natural resource management, and supporting them to implement climate-resilient land use 
interventions; 
 
Large-scale adoption and promotion of climate-resilient land and forestry management 
practices on at least 512,499 ha, which specifically respond to climate-related threats, 
including landscape-scale restoration of critical ecosystems in vulnerable river systems;7 
 
Reducing the incidence of sedimentary and flash flooding by improving soil and water 
conservation, and constructing small-scale infrastructure (stone walls, contour bunds, check 
dams, among others);  
 
Reducing deforestation and forest degradation through the implementation of sustainable 
natural resource management (SNRM) practices and other measures that address the direct 
and underlying drivers of deforestation and forest degradation; 
 
Improving water recharge systems by reducing surface run-off water through the adoption of 
water conservation and water management practices/ technologies;  
 
Diversifying livelihoods and enhancing incomes of local communities through the 
strengthening and promotion of climate-resilient value chains;  
 
Strengthening capacities for adaptation, including to scale up DRR measures; 
 
Improving information consolidation, dissemination and monitoring to raise awareness on 
climate change and climate resilient land use practices, and strengthen the utilization of 
climate information in decision making and planning processes.  
6. More detailed project information on the specific activities can be found in the BRCRN project 
funding proposal. 
7. Project implementation will occur in 26 of the most vulnerable river systems in Nepal,8 with a focus 
on the Central and Eastern Region (Figure 3). BRCRN project activities will directly benefit 750 local 
community-based organizations/ user groups, containing at least 200,681 households with approx. 
963,268 people (at least 50% of which are women, of which 77% are from groups that have 
experienced inter-generational socio-economic exclusion9). Together with reduced deforestation 
                                                            
6 Including community-forest user groups, leasehold forestry, private forest users and public forest user groups, water user 
groups, among others. 
7 Note: some activities may be implemented on overlapping parcels of land (e.g. measures to reduce deforestation such as 
controlled grazing, with sustainable forest management practices).   
8 A more detailed description of the vulnerability assessment can be found in the project feasibility study and the project 
funding proposal.  
9 Vulnerable groups are defined as “…groups of people whose disadvantage is situational rather than structural. Their 
depravations are as a result of a particular situation (in some cases only temporarily) that has reduced their ability to 
withstand shocks rather than their more deeply embedded social identity” (GESI Working Group 2017). While all project 
beneficiaries are considered vulnerable to climate change, since they live in highly and moderately vulnerable river systems, 
there is differentiated vulnerability within with river systems, where some inhabitants are considered more vulnerable due 
to their socio-economic situation, location of settlement (e.g. in high risk areas for flooding or landslides), or due to inter-
generational exclusion/ marginalization (see following note on excluded groups), among other factors. Excluded groups are 
defined as “…those who have experienced inter-generational discrimination and have been systematically excluded due to 
economic [situation], caste, ethnicity, gender, disability, sexual orientation, and geographical reasons” (GESI Working Group 
2017). This includes groups including women, poor people, Dalits, Adivasi/ Janajati, Madheshis, Muslims, people with

=== PAGE 156 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
4
 
and forest degradation resulting from project activities, the BRCRN project will result in lifetime 
emission reductions that exceed 11.48 million tCO2eq. Over 206,277 ha of critical ecosystems 
(forests, wetlands and grasslands) will be restored through project implementation. In total, over 
3.2 million inhabitants (51% women) of the BRCRN project area will indirectly benefit from 
improved institutional capacities and strategic planning to support the scaling up of climate-
resilient land use practices within the project area.  
 
 
Figure 3: Project implementation area  
*Note: The red boundary shows the core BRCRN intervention zone within the river systems including the Churia hills, Bhavar, 
Dun and upstream Terai.  
 
 Gender assessment 
8. This Gender Assessment aims to provide an overview of the gender-context in Nepal, with a focus 
on gender issues that are relevant for the proposed project ´Building a Resilient Churia Region in 
Nepal´ (BRCRN). Specifically, this assessment aims to inform project design to ensure that key 
gender considerations have been effectively mainstreamed throughout the project proposal.  
9. The assessment has been conducted based on available data from studies conducted by the 
Government of Nepal, donor agencies, civil society organizations and other stakeholders. Various 
consultations were held from November 2017 to March 2018 with diverse actors,10 including 
women’s associations and organizations at the national and local level (e.g. Feminist Dalit 
Organization (FEDO), National Indigenous Women’s Federation (NIWF), the Himalayan Grassroots 
                                                            
disabilities, third-gender and people living in remote areas. Socially-excluded groups comprise over 77% of the project 
population (including Indigenous Peoples 31%, Terai-Madhesi 28%, Dalits 13% and Muslims 5%, among others; CBS 2014).  
10 The annex of the project´s Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) contains a detailed list of the 
consultations conducted for the elaboration of the GCF proposal. It further includes meeting minutes and organizations 
consulted, along with other pertinent information.

=== PAGE 157 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
5
 
Women´s Natural Resource Management Association (HIMAWANTI), and the Community-based 
Forestry Supporters´ Network (COFSUN), among others), to provide direct feedback on the current 
context and barriers, as well as gender-responsive measures and related monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) considerations. At the local level, 268 local people living within the project area were 
consulted, of which 40% were women. A targeted gender workshop with key actors was held in 
Kathmandu on February 21, 2018 to further discuss the preliminary findings from the consultations 
and gender analysis, and to provide feedback and key insights into the elaboration of a gender 
action plan. In total, 420 people were consulted in the preparation of the feasibility study, gender 
assessment and gender action plan. Detailed meeting summaries and attendance sheets can be 
found in Annex 3 of the BRCRN project´s Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
10. The following sections will focus on the status of gender inequality in Nepal, and the identification 
of challenges, barriers and opportunities for empowering women and promoting their equality 
within the agriculture and forestry sectors. They will develop concrete recommendations to support 
the mainstreaming of gender in the BRCRN project, ensuring gender-sensitive measures that 
overcome key barriers and a gender-responsive monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework, 
which closely monitors the impacts of the project on both men and women, as well as inter-sectoral 
dimensions of inequality including age, caste, social status and inter-generational exclusion, among 
other factors.  
1.2 Gender inequality in Nepal 
11. The population of Nepal in 2016 was just under 30 million people, of which 52% are women.11 While 
Nepal has made substantial progress in enhancing gender equality in the last three decades, gender 
discrimination and inequality are still major problems faced by the country. Inequality among 
women remains a challenge as well, where there are differences in equality based on age, position 
in the family, marital status, religion, caste and ethnicity, among other factors.  
12. The following sub-sections will provide an overview of the main challenges for achieving gender 
equality in Nepal, zooming in where possible on the dynamics and trends experienced in the BRCRN 
project area.  
Poverty & Income 
13. Nepal is one of the world’s least developed countries (LDC) with a per capita income of $766.12 In 
2014, Nepal achieved a score of 0.116 according to the multidimensional poverty index (MPI), 13  
with an estimated 26.9% of the country´s population affected by multidimensional poverty, 
equivalent to around 7.5 million people.14 Focusing on income-related poverty, approximately 15% 
of the population is considered to be living below the poverty line of $1.99 per day.15 
14. The country has experienced rapid development in the last two decades and the government has 
made substantial progress in working toward its goal to graduate from LDC to developing countries 
status by 2022. The government is committed to tackling poverty, and has been committed to the 
implementation of measures to meet the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), in addition to 
                                                            
11 World Bank 2016 
12 MoF 2016 
13 MPI considers three core dimensions as a measure of poverty: i) health (nutrition, child mortality), ii) education (years of 
schooling, children enrolled) and iii) standard of living (e.g. cooking fuel, toilet, water, electricity, floor, assets). Additional 
information can be found at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/multidimensional-poverty-index-mpi 
14 UNDP 2016 
15 Ibid.

=== PAGE 158 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
6
 
national targets. Nepal has made large strides in addressing poverty at the national level; the 
country´s Human Development Index (HDI)16 value has improved from 0.476 to 0.558 from 2005 to 
2015.17 
15. While Nepal has made substantial efforts to advance gender equality and empowerment in the 
country, it is still a major challenge for the country to eradicate poverty and promote equality. 
Women´s HDI values (0.538) continue to lag behind men’s (0.582).18 Another challenge remains to 
address poverty and inequality within ethnic minority and other excluded groups.19In 2015, 
indigenous peoples (Janajatis/ Adivasi, 0.482), Dalits (0.434), and Muslims (0.422) experienced 
lower HDI values in comparison to other high-caste groups such as Brahmins (0.538) and Chhetri 
(0.538).20 While the general trend of inequality is decreasing in the country, it remains a challenge 
to be addressed.  
16. The Churia Terai-Madhesh region faces unique poverty related obstacles. HDI values for groups in 
the Terai-Madhesh region (0.454) are lower than mountain and hill groups (0.511).21 Many poor 
households sell firewood and other forest products in order to supplement their income from other 
sources for meeting their subsistence requirements, and some work for the rich timber traders who 
might be harvesting (formally or informally/illicitly) timber and other products from Churia.22 Thus, 
forests serve as a safety net for many communities in the Churia Terai-Madhesh region.  
17. Female-headed households make up around 20% of households in the project area, lower-than the 
national average of 26%.23 An analysis of a 1991 Agricultural Credit Survey showed the incidence of 
poverty in female-headed households (FHH) compared to male-headed households was 50.7 
percent to 47.2 percent, respectively.24 However, there is a need to disaggregate female-headed 
households between those households that are female-headed due to male migration for 
employment, in which the sending of remittances prevents the household from entering poverty, 
versus households that are female-headed due to widowing, divorce or unmarried.  Considering 
the second group of female-headed households, a much larger proportion of FHH fall below the 
poverty line due to gender discrimination in access to and control over productive resources and 
other economic and political opportunities.25 The disadvantaged position of female-headed 
households can be seen by the fact that landholdings of FHH are consistently and substantially 
lower in all regions; e.g. in 1991 more than 13% of households were female-headed but only 6% of 
farms were owned by women (more information below in the Section on resource access).26 Expert 
analysis also shows that female-headed households often have lower literacy and educational 
rates, high dependency ratios and greater lack of access to information and media.27 Thus, barriers 
                                                            
16 HDI takes into account three dimensions to provide an estimation of to assess the development of a country. It is based on 
three dimensions: long and healthy life (life expectancy at birth, knowledge (expected ears of schooling, mean years of 
schooling), 
a 
decent 
standard 
of 
living 
(GNI 
per 
capita). 
Additional 
information 
can 
be 
found 
at: 
http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human-development-index-hdi 
17 UNDP 2014 
18 UNDP 2016 
19 Excluded groups are those who have experienced inter-generational discrimination and have been systematically excluded 
due to economic, caste, ethnicity, gender, disability, sexual orientation and geographical reasons. Such groups include 
women, poor, Dalit, Adivasi/Janajati, Madhesi, Muslims, people with disabilities (PwD), third gender & people living in remote 
areas, among others (GESI Working Group 2017) 
20 UNDP 2014 in UNDP 2016 
21 UNDP 2014 
22 Chhetri 2004 
23 CBS 2014; Based on district averages. 
24 ADB 1999 
25 JICA 2017 
26 ADB 1999 
27 JICA, 2017.

=== PAGE 159 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
7
 
facing female headed households come in terms of workload and the impacts of social 
discrimination on access to food, health, nutrition and education. 
Gender Inequality Index (GII) 
18. Nepal´s Gender Inequality Index (GII) for 2015 was 0.497, with an overall ranking of 115 out of 159 
countries ranked.28While still lagging internationally, gender empowerment has improved 
substantially from 2001 to 2011 when considering the improvement in the Gender Empowerment 
Measure (GEM)29 from 0.361 to 0.564, due to increased political traction and the strengthening of 
policy frameworks related to gender and social inclusion.30 
Education 
19. Gender gaps in the education sector continue to persist, where girls and women tend to have lower 
levels of education, especially in rural areas. The percentage of women participating in primary 
education has increased substantially in the last two decades, where the number of women 
completing 12 grades rose from 21% to 42% (Figure 4).31 Nonetheless, equality can still be 
promoted in terms of access to education, especially in rural areas where studies have found that 
girls´ education often remains a lower priority.32  
 
 
Figure 4: Women graduates (% of total) by level of education from 1991-2011 in Nepal 
Source: UN Women (2016) 
 
20. Boys´ education is often prioritized over girls’ education in many rural communities in Nepal.33 Girls 
are often taken out of school to support with the maintenance of the family and farm and the 
collection of natural resources (e.g. water, livestock feed, firewood, etc.). Women further 
experience higher dropout rates due to marriage and pregnancy. While there has been a trend 
improving access to education for girls and women, the country still lags behind. In 2011, national 
                                                            
28 UNDP 2016; Additional information can be found at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GII 
29 GEM assesses equality based on three main dimensions: i) public participation and decision-making, ii) economic 
participation and decision making and (iii) power over economic resources. Additional information can be found at: 
http://www.gaportal.org/global-indicators/gender-empowerment-measure 
30 Adhikary 2017 
31 CBS 2014; UNDP 2014; UN Women 2016  
32 CARE 2008 
33 CARE 2008

=== PAGE 160 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
8
 
literacy rates for women were only 57%, whereas 75% of men were considered literate.34 Dalit 
women, especially Dalit women living in the Terai, and Muslim women have literacy rates that are 
substantially below the national average (Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 5: a) Adult (15+) female literacy, and b) female-male literacy ratio in Nepal in 2011 
Source: Gurung and Tamang 2014 in UN Women 2016 
 
21. In the BRCRN project area, similar trends are observed where women are often required to leave 
their schooling early to support with the maintenance of their household and livelihoods. Education 
rates lag behind the national average, especially for women, who are more likely to be illiterate.35 
Based on district averages, around 45% of women in the project area are unable to read or write 
(Figure 6).36 Often there is a lack of leadership and empowerment of women, which is reinforced 
through limited/ lower quality education provided to girls (Figure 7).37 This has been identified as a 
barrier to sustainable development in the region, as they may not have the capacities to actively 
participate in decision making platforms.38 A CFUG member in a study by Lama et al. (2017) gave 
the following statement highlighting the gender-specific challenges faced by CFUGs: 
22. “…even if you put women in the committee, if they have to be sent to some other place for training 
they will not be able to speak and write in front of others. Due to the lack of education they will not 
take advantage of the opportunities that come to them” (p.257).  
23. Thus, education not only has a major impact on capacity building for sustainable development and 
livelihood improvements, but also in women’s engagement in decision making and planning 
processes.  
                                                            
34 UN Women 2016 
35 Shrestha 2015 
36 CBS 2011 
37 CARE 2008 
38 Lama et al. 2017 
a 
b

=== PAGE 161 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
9
 
 
Figure 6: Literacy in Nepal in 2011 
Source: CBS 2011; http://cbs.gov.np/index.php?route=information/gis_maps  
 
 
Figure 7: Ratio of girls to boy in school level education 
Source: CBS 2011; http://cbs.gov.np/index.php?route=information/gis_maps  
 
Health 
24. As with other sectors covered, major improvements in improving gender-equality have been 
observed in Nepal´s health sector, where it has been noted that significant improvements have

=== PAGE 162 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
10
 
been made in improving maternal and children´s health in Nepal in the last two decades. During 
the period from 1996 to 2013, the country´s maternal mortality rate declined from 539 to 170, 
women´s life expectancy rose from 55.5 to 70 years, and the total fertility rate also declined from 
4.6 to 2.6.39 
25. Nonetheless, rural areas continue to lag behind the progress made in urban areas. Rural 
communities in Nepal often have limited access to health services, largely due to poor 
infrastructure, limited access to qualified professionals and other socio-economic and cultural 
barriers, such as limited economic rights of women, lack of empowerment of women, gender and 
caste-based discrimination, poor education of girls, among others.40 Women from poor households 
and marginalized minority groups, especially Dalits and Muslims, often experience additional 
discrimination in accessing health care.41 
26. In the BRCRN project area, many communities have limited access to clean water, especially in dry 
seasons, when water scarcity becomes a major challenge for many.42 As a result, many communities 
rely on contaminated water sources for some parts of the year.43 Other gender-related health issues 
identified by focus groups included goiters, bone and joint issues associated with heavy lifting of 
water jugs, firewood collection, among other physical tasks. With climate change and increasing 
resource degradation, increasing water and natural resource scarcity could exacerbate these health 
impacts through reducing the abundance of safe water resources and by increasing collection time 
(e.g. greater distances), which disproportionately affects women.44 Dalits and other ethnic groups 
may experience additional challenges. Cases of discrimination have been reported at village wells, 
where Dalits were forced to wait until all other castes had filled their water collection vessels first.45 
27. The burning of fuelwood and cow dung, the main sources of energy in the Churia and Terai regions 
respectively, have major impacts on human health. Women are especially exposed to negative 
impacts as they are responsible for cooking for their family and inhale the harmful fumes.  
Political Participation & Decision Making 
28. At the household level, women are often in charge of domestic tasks, and in general have less power 
over decision making within households. Variations in control over decision making exist related to 
regional location, education, employment, region, socio-cultural background and ethnicity, among 
other factors.46  There is a great range of variation in the involvement of women in decisions 
regarding economic activities between ethnic groups and types of household economic activities.  
For example, within Gurung communities, a study found that in 43% of households both men and 
women jointly decided the allocation of family labour to on-farm and marketing activities, but in 
Tharu communities this percentage was higher at 90 percent.47  In general, women’s autonomy in 
household decision making is still disadvantaged due to lack of awareness of opportunities and 
rights. Nonetheless, when it comes to family well-being related activities such as health and 
education, women are generally found to be more actively involved within many ethnic groups.  
                                                            
39 UN Women 2016 
40 CARE 2008; Adhikary 2017 
41 UN Women 2016 
42 Karn 2007; President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation Development Board 2017 
43 Singh Danuwar 2008; Rai et al. 2012 
44 President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation Development Board 2017 
45 CARE 2012 
46 Devkota et al. 1999; Archarya et al. 2010 
47 Devkota et al. 1999

=== PAGE 163 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
11
 
29. Since 2001, women have experienced increased access to economic resources, property and micro-
credit and the percentage of households in which women own land has considerably increased.48 
Women access and control over economic resources plays a critical role in their access to education 
and health and provide the foundation for empowerment and equality.  However, although the 
slight increased ownership of land gives women some leverage in terms household decisions 
regarding property, several barriers still remain. Barriers of limited access to credit and support 
services, curtailed mobility due to threat of violence, perhaps both in the private and public sphere, 
and the lack of recognition by the rest of the community of their potential economic role continue 
to restrict women’s roles in decision making processes.49 Regional differences have been found with 
women in male-headed households within the hills having more freedom of mobility and access to 
household financial resources than women in the Terai.50   
30. While policies have become increasingly advanced in mandating the participation of women in 
political spaces and other decision making bodies, a major gap remains in ensuring meaningful 
participation. The 2015 constitution states that 33% of parliamentary seats in government must be 
filled by women (Article 84, 8), and similar provisions are in place to ensure women´s participation 
in village assemblies and other formal decision making bodies (including within user groups).  
31. At the village level, while Water User Associations require least 33% participation by women and 
CFUGs 50%, it has been highlighted that often women´s full participation is limited due to the 
persistence of barriers such as time-poverty,51 lack of capacities, exclusionary institutions and the 
domination of elite men in decision making spheres.52 Other concerns raised in the consultations 
included that when women are able to participate they are often from elite groups, and that 
marginalized women face more barriers in accessing meaningful decision making platforms within 
user groups. 
32. Time-poverty in Nepal, especially in the Churia, is a major barrier to the participation of women in 
decision making, as many women spend between 10.5 to 13 hours a day on maintaining their 
livelihoods. The Churia experiences high migration of men for work,53 leading to exacerbated time-
poverty, as women need to compensate for the absence of men in their households by taking on 
their chores and responsibilities.54 On the other hand, studies have found that women with migrant 
husbands often have greater autonomy and decision-making authority at the household level.55  
33. Closely linked to time-poverty is the fact that women in the Churia have less access to quality 
education and are more likely to be illiterate. This has greatly limited their capacities to participate 
in such fora, and to make decisions on sustainable natural resource management. A study by Lama 
et al. (2017) noted that this was further exacerbated by exclusionary institutions, where illiteracy, 
low self-esteem and lack of capacities were major barriers for women’s effective and full 
participation in forest user groups´ executive committees. It should be noted that these barriers 
are not only experienced by women, but also impact the participation of indigenous groups and 
ethnic minorities in the BRCRN project area. Executive committees in community forest user groups 
                                                            
48 UN Women 2016  
49 Ibid. 
50 Ibid. 
51 Defined as having over 10.5 hours per day dedicated to maintaining one’s livelihood (e.g. income generation, family care, 
etc.). 
52 Lama et al. 2017; Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management 2017 
53 Shrestha 2015; USAID 2016 
54 Lama et al. 2017; Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management 2017 
55 Kaspar 2006 and Yabiku et al. 2010 in Lama et al. 2017

=== PAGE 164 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
12
 
have a history of being dominated by men from advantaged castes, limiting the participation of 
women, indigenous peoples and ethnic minorities in decision making processes.56 
34. Thus, while it has been an important first step to provide women with the legal basis to become 
engaged in decision making structures and committees within community-based organizations (e.g. 
establishing requirements such as 50% female membership and requiring representation on 
executive committees within community forestry user groups), additional policies, incentives and 
measures are required to empower women, including women from marginalized communities, and 
ensure they have the capacities, time and platform to effectively participate and contribute to 
decision making. Champions are needed to support women in becoming increasingly engaged in 
decision making.57 
Resource Use, Income & Labor Force 
35. Access to and control over resources, especially in the forestry and agriculture sectors, remains a 
major barrier for women’s empowerment and gender equality in Nepal.58 This challenge is further 
exacerbated when looking at women from different castes/ ethnicities, single women, widowed 
women and disabled women.  
36. Women often do not hold land titles, due to customary and statuary laws that have limited land 
ownership in the past. This has created major obstacles for women to access credit, technical 
support and other support services.59 In 2011, female-headed households (FHH) represented 19.7 
percent of the total agricultural landholders in Nepal, representing a 9.7% increase since the last 
decade.60 The disadvantaged position of FHHs can be seen by the fact that landholdings of FHH are 
consistently and substantially lower in all regions; in 1991 more than 13% of households were 
female-headed but only 6% of farms were owned by women.61 
37. Women are highly engaged in the agricultural sector, including in crop production and raising 
livestock. In 2017, it was estimated that 84.3% of women were engaged in agricultural activities, in 
comparison to only 62.2% of men.62 An ongoing trend towards the ´feminization´ of agriculture can 
be observed in rural areas in Nepal, due to men obtaining off-farm work or migrating to urban areas 
or foreign countries for work.63 As a result, women are increasingly responsible for activities that 
were formerly performed by men, such as ploughing or other activities associated with more 
strenuous physical labor, in addition to their normal activities tending to crops and livestock. This 
trend is extremely pronounced in Nepal, where the number of female headed households has more 
than doubled in the last decade.64 
38. Livestock is kept as an asset as well as for manure and draft usage. In rural area, by generating bio-
gas from dung, livestock also serves as a source of energy for lighting as well as cooking.65 With 
regards to livestock, women contribute nearly 70% of the work for livestock reading, especially 
related to forage collection, cleaning stalls, and feeding animals.66 Practices are often time-
intensive, and women spend substantial time cutting grass, collecting fodder and taking animals to 
                                                            
56 Lama et al. 2017; Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management 2017 
57 Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management 2017 
58 UN Women 2016; USAID 2016; Adhikary 2017; Lama et al. 2017 
59 UN Women 2016 
60 CBS 2014 
61 ADB 1999 
62 ILO 2017 
63 Ibid.  
64 CBS 2014b in Adhikary 2017 
65 Adhikary 2017 
66 Adhikary 2017

=== PAGE 165 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
13
 
pasture or forested land. Men are more often responsible for milking animals, and 
commercialization aspects (e.g. selling milk and other livestock products).67 Men are more often 
responsible for larger animals (cows, buffalos), whereas women have more responsibilities over 
smaller ruminants and animals.68 While women are considered “resource poor in terms of raising 
and trading livestock”, Adhikary 2017 notes that programs adopting gender-responsive budgets 
have increased women’s participation in agricultural development programs, and livestock rearing. 
Time-saving activities, including integration of fodder with crops, agroforestry systems, and 
improved housing69 are often not adopted due to the lack of finance/credit, and lack of awareness 
and capacities.  
39. A recent study by World Bank and FAO (2018) found that women in Nepal have” high control over 
agricultural income”, including women from households with men who have migrated for work 
elsewhere as well as women in households where the men have not migrated. They found that 
women in non-migrant households have higher control of non-agricultural income, however they 
are also more likely to engage in off-farm work as well as they often receive remittances and have 
less time-poverty.  
40. The ´feminization´ of agriculture as such has led to numerous environmental, social and economic 
challenges. Women in rural areas are often ´time poor´, with women working over 10 hours more 
per week on average than men when taking unpaid labor into account.70 However, in agricultural 
communities in the Churia and Terai regions, there are cases of women working up to 12 or 13 
hours a day on average.71 Labor shortages are a major challenge for the agricultural sector, and 
have led women to focus on high-value and less labor intensive crops. Increasing land abandonment 
has also been associated with high levels of male migration, the feminization of agriculture and the 
resulting challenges such as time-poverty. Such trends have led to a decline in certain agricultural 
activities that has contributed to food insecurity in some communities. Social impacts include 
increased family stress for both female household heads and their family, as well as health impacts 
due to hard labor and exhaustion due to their household responsibilities (paid and unpaid labor).72 
There is a need to promote time-saving land use practices and technologies, however extension 
services in Nepal are weak, and women do not have sufficient information about and access to 
labor-saving practices technologies (see Feasibility Study for more detailed information on 
extension services).73 Increasingly women are joining community-based organizations, which can 
support them through collective action, investments and ultimately help overcome some of the 
barriers faced by women (e.g. access to knowledge, credit, inputs/ tools, among others). CBOs often 
dedicate a certain percentage of their funds (e.g. CFUGs dedicate at least 35%) to pro-poor 
programs that are dedicated to support the most vulnerable households within CBOs. World Bank 
and FAO (2018) noted that over 56% of women from migrant households (i.e. households with at 
least one family member who has migrated) are members of an agricultural, financial, social and or 
religious groups, compared to 47% of women from non-migrant households. 
41. Rural communities are also highly dependent on local forest resources to maintain their livelihoods. 
Men are often engaged in timber collection, making fire lines, fencing and forest patrolling, 
however, this means that they do not necessarily visit the forest on a daily basis.74 Women on the 
                                                            
67 Adhikary 2017 
68 Adhikary 2017 
69 FAO 2015 
70 Adhikary 2017 
71 USAID 2016 
72 Adhikary 2017 
73 World Bank and FAO 2018 
74 Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management 2017

=== PAGE 166 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
14
 
other hand often have better knowledge about the state of forest resources as they are responsible 
for collecting fodder, firewood, leaf litter and NTFPs from the forest on a daily basis.75Women’s 
tasks are often unpaid or poorly paid, whereas men are more engaged in forest-activities that are 
paid either by the community or through the commercialization of timber and other forest 
products.76 Given the challenges faced by women to participate in decision making and trainings, 
women often have minimal input in forest-related decision making, despite their daily interactions 
and knowledge of the forest. 
42. Forest sector CBOs aim to improve women´s participation in forest-related decision making, and 
have emerged as a key mechanism for enhancing the socio-economic and political status of women 
and disadvantaged groups in rural Nepal.77 Majority of research focuses on Community-forestry 
User Groups (CFUGs), who have developed gender-sensitive guidelines that aim to empower and 
engage women through their institutional structures (described below in the institutional and policy 
chapter), ensuring women´s representation on CFUG executive committees and promoting 
inclusive benefit sharing. Women-led CFUGs have also been promoted (i.e. CFUGs with all-women 
executive committees), and in 2012 there were 1,035 women-led CFUGs.78 Research has found that 
these CFUGs have strong results in improving forest cover, maintaining transparency, and ensuring 
financial accountability. Furthermore, women-led CFUGs also create an empowering environment 
for women, which increases the participation and engagement of women within CFUGs. Women´s 
participation in executive committees has also increased, although this is largely attributed to 
positive discrimination policies. Nonetheless, CBOs still can improve in terms of gender-equality 
and –sensitization, as well as social inclusion and benefit sharing and several organizations have 
developed best practices and recommendations to continue to promote GESI within these 
institutions (see Chapter 1.5 and 2 below).  
Gender Violence 
43. Violence against women and girls has been identified as one of the main barriers that Nepal faces 
towards reaching substantive equality.79 Approximately 22% of rural women reported having been 
subjected to physical violence, in comparison to 19% of women living in urban areas.80 The 
´Domestic Violence and Punishment Law´ was enacted in 2009. However, the actual socialization 
and enforcement of the law is said to be limited, where violent incidences are often not reported 
or investigated.81 
44. Such trends are also evident in the BRCRN project area, where interviews with women’s groups 
confirmed the persistence of gender violence in the region. Women’s lower access to education 
and health care, limited economic rights, lack of empowerment and gender and caste-based 
discrimination are said to contribute to the prevalence of violence against women in rural areas, 
among other factors.82  
45. In 2017 the Government of Nepal set up a hotline for reporting gender based violence, and 
established a network of service providers (including local NGOs and CSOs) to support gender-based 
violence victims, and prevention. This has improved reporting of GBV, and has improved 
                                                            
75 Ibid.  
76 Ibid. 
77 However, various studies have noted that more can be done to improve benefit sharing, social inclusion and gender equality 
within CFUGs. 
78 RECOFT and FAO 2015 
79 UN Women 2016; Adhikary 2017 
80 UN Women 2016 
81 UN Women 2016; Adhikary 2017 
82 CARE 2008; UN Women 2016

=== PAGE 167 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
15
 
information dissemination on legal protections, and support services. Within the project´s districts, 
there are a number of NGOs working in awareness raising, advocacy and support services.83 Various 
working on gender in Nepal have noted the importance of engaging both men and women in gender 
sensitization and social inclusion, including promoting male and female role models, leaders and 
trainers within projects and communities.84 
 
 
Figure 8: Number of NGOs providing support services for gender based violence (per district) 
Source: Asia Foundation, 2010 
1.3 Legal and administrative framework protecting women and 
promoting gender equality 
46. In Nepal, women’s participation in various stages of decision making processes was not 
fundamentally accepted until the 20th century. However, the government of Nepal initiated the 
concept of women in development in national policy since the 1980s by the 6th Five Year Plan, which 
adopted the policy of enhancing the efficiency of women and recognizing the role of women in 
development.  
47. The Local Self-Governance Act, 1999 is the first act which made the provision of 20% representation 
of women on village and ward-level development committees. This was the first step in which 
women’s representation was formally recognized by the government. Currently, this number 
stands at 25% at ward levels, and at least one position (mayor and deputy-mayor) must be filled by 
a woman.  
                                                            
83 The Asia Foundation´s 2010 Publication “Preliminary Mapping of Gender Based Violence” provides maps with an overview 
of 
local 
entities 
providing 
support 
services. 
For 
more 
information 
refer 
to: 
https://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/GBVMappingNepal.pdf  
84 This was discussed within stakeholder consultations for the gender assessment and GAP with representatives from various 
organizations including the Gender Focal Point of MoFE  HIMAWANTI, FEDO, and Forest Action Nepal, among others.

=== PAGE 168 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
16
 
48. The Constitution of Nepal 2015 also makes special legal provision to women in national, state and 
local legislatives, which secures 33% women’s representation in national and state legislatives. The 
irrigation policy (2003) makes the legal provision of 33% representation of women in Water User 
Associations (WUA). Community Forest Guidelines (2015) made mandatory provision of 50% 
representation of women in the executive committee and guarantees that at least one major 
position (president or secretary) should be filled by a woman.85 While setting such targets has 
greatly increased the participation of women in meetings and groups, women’s participation in 
decision making often remains limited due to a patriarchal value system, barriers in accessing 
education and skill training, and time-poverty, among other factors.86 
49. The Legal Code (the Muluki Ain) 1845 is the main document regarding the partition of ancestral 
property. This act was not free from bias against women until 2014. In that year, the government 
passed a bill making amendments to the legal code, giving equal inheritance rights to daughters 
and sons on parental property regardless of their marital status. While this marks a major 
advancement for women’s rights on parental property, it is often not practiced in reality.  
50. The issue of gender equality has been greatly strengthened within Nepalese policy since the 
adoption of the Interim Constitution in 2007 and the promulgated 2015 constitution.87 The interim 
constitution from 2007 made several gender-friendly provisions and socially inclusive laws, 
including guaranteeing the rights of Nepalese women to freedom, equality and social justice. It 
further prohibited the discrimination of people on the basis of gender and banned violence against 
women, amongst other major milestones that strengthened human rights in the country. In sum, 
there are three dimensions of social inclusion in government policies and plans: i) access to 
resources, services and opportunities, ii) empowerment, identity assertions and capacity building, 
and iii) planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation based on policies, laws, values and 
structures.   
51. Since then, policies across sectors have increasingly included provisions designed to empower 
women and promote gender equality through improving access to sector resources and 
engagement in official fora at the national, provincial and local levels. For instance, in 2008 the 
Ministry of Forest and Soil Conservation (MoFSC) adopted an official Gender Equality and Social 
Inclusion (GESI) strategy. The MoFSC GESI strategy aims of to assist government, non-government, 
donor and private sector bodies working in the forestry sector to institutionalize gender and social 
inclusion within their organizations, projects and programs. Furthermore, the strategy aims to 
guide all organizations working in the forestry sector to be responsive and inclusive through 
identifying and addressing four key thematic areas including: i) GESI sensitive policies and 
strategies, ii) good governance and inclusive institutional development, iii) GESI-sensitive 
budgeting, programming and monitoring, and iv) equitable access to resources and benefits. 
MoFSC´s guideline has helped mainstream GESI in the forestry sector through the promotion and 
implementation of gender-sensitive and –responsive policy at the national, regional and local level. 
Nonetheless, the implementation of GESI in community forestry at the local level in practice is still 
challenging due to poor linkage between policy and its implementation in the field due to 
institutional and socio-cultural barriers.  
52. At the international level, Nepal is a signatory to various conventions that aim to support the 
empowerment of women and gender equality in general. Nepal is a signatory member of the 
                                                            
85 Guideline of Community Forestry Development Program 2015 
86 Adhikary et al. 2017; Lama et al. 2017; Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management 
2017 
87 UN Women 2016

=== PAGE 169 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
17
 
Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), and the 
Beijing Platform for Action (BpfA), among others. Nepal is further committed to the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), of which goal number 5 aims to achieve gender equality 
and empower all women and girls.88 
53. In conclusion, Nepal is continuously strengthening its legal framework to increasingly promote 
women’s empowerment and gender equality. However, awareness, implementation and 
enforcement of gender-specific provisions in the legal framework are often not fully realized, 
especially in rural areas. Furthermore, despite having clear targets to ensure the engagement of 
women, the persistence of a patriarchal value system continues to limit the scope of the 
participation and contribution of women to user groups and other public fora.89 Trainings are 
needed to build capacities on SNRM, climate change and DRR, to build adaptive capacities of the 
most vulnerable communities, and to build leadership skills so that women can take on key 
leadership and decision making roles within such platforms and/or decision making bodies. 
Champions are further needed to help support women in taking on new roles and building their 
leadership capacities and skills.90 
 
1.4 Gender issues in building a resilient Churia region in Nepal 
Link between Climate Change and Unsustainable Land Use and Gender in the project area 
54. Men and women living in the BRCRN project area are highly dependent on natural resources to 
maintain their livelihoods. Agriculture is the main form of employment in the area, for both 
commercial and subsistence purposes. Forests are important for communities as a source of timber 
for their houses and for energy consumption; fuelwood remains the main source of energy in the 
Churia region and cow dung in the Terai. Forests also provide local people with NTFPs including 
plants for fodder, medicinal plants, food and other products, as well as other key ecological and 
cultural services. Forests in the Terai have been largely cleared, and thus many of the people living 
in the Terai source timber and NTFPs from forests in the Churia hills and Bhavar regions.  
55. Women and men in the BRCRN project area have cited various causes of degradation and 
deforestation in the Churia hills and Bhavar region, including: illegal harvesting, landslides and 
uncontrolled livestock grazing, among others. These drivers have had differing impacts on men and 
women. Women are especially vulnerable to the impacts of unsustainable resource management 
due to the nature of their responsibilities, including both paid and unpaid labor. For example, forest 
quantity, quality and accessibility has a major impact on fodder and firewood availability. Women 
in the project area reported that walking distances to collect firewood and fodder have increased, 
along with decline of fodder, grasses and firewood. For instance, women in the Bakraha River 
watershed of Morang reported that they used to collect a load of dried firewood within 5-10 
minutes over the last 10 years, but now the same task takes them over than 3 hours. In the Mahuli 
community of Saptari, women reported that it takes about 4 hours to collect a load of ground 
grasses from the forest, however the same task took less than 2.5 hours in the past. The collection 
of NTFPs has also been limited due to over-harvesting, degradation and changes in climatic 
                                                            
88  For more information refer to: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg5 
89 Lama et al. 2017; Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management 2017 
90 Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management 2017

=== PAGE 170 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
18
 
conditions, ultimately leading to declining incomes. The degradation of agricultural soils also leads 
to productivity losses, which can jeopardize food security and family nutrition.  
56. Deforestation and land degradation can increase the risk of natural disasters, erosion and other 
negative environmental impacts, which can create further challenges for local men and women to 
sustain their livelihoods. Inhabitants of the project area are exposed to extreme heat, water 
scarcity, wildfires, landslides and flooding, among other trends. Climate change is expected to result 
in increasing temperatures during the dry season and precipitation in the monsoon season, 
increasing exposure to the aforementioned hazards. Unsustainable natural resource management 
further exacerbates the impacts and exposure to climate change (Figure 9).  
 
 
 
Figure 9: Overall illustration of the vulnerability of the project region with multiple climate and human 
induced disasters in view of climate change causing cascading impacts 
 
57. Climate change further poses a major risk to the livelihoods of women and men living in the BRCRN 
project area. Inhabitants have noted changes in temperature, increased uncertainty of rainfall 
patterns, and the drying-up of seasonal springs, among other changes. Unsustainable natural 
resource management (NRM) will exacerbate climate risks and impacts, having major impacts on 
the overall food, energy and water security of communities living in the region. Many provinces do 
not have DRR plans, and thus are often ill-prepared and vulnerable to natural disasters. Often those 
living in the most vulnerable ´at-risk´ areas (especially in zones that are highly susceptible to flash 
flooding and landslides), are poor and marginalized communities, with low adaptive capacities and 
a high-dependence on natural resources to maintain their livelihoods. Gender-based violence 
(domestic violence and sexual violence) often increases following natural disasters, especially 
affecting displaced and highly vulnerable women.91  
                                                            
91 UNDP 2013; International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 2015

=== PAGE 171 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
19
 
58. Ground water recharge has greatly declined in many communities in the BRCRN project area, where 
many communities have noticed the depletion of such resources. Such a trend has major impacts 
on the water, food security and income of many communities. Women are more vulnerable to such 
trends, as women are responsible for the collection of water. While seasonal changes in water 
availability is not new to the region, the decline of rainfall combined with ground water depletion 
is making women and girls travel longer distances for its collection. For girls, this means there is a 
higher chance they will need to miss school to collect water, whereas for women, it leads to 
increased time poverty, where women in the Churia Terai-Madhesh region may work up to 12-13 
hours a day.92 Women in migrant households (where household members have migrated elsewhere 
for work), single-mothers, divorced women and widows are more likely to suffer from time poverty. 
59. While women and men living in the BRCRN project area are vulnerable to the impacts of 
unsustainable natural resource use and climate change, women, especially women from 
marginalized minority communities, are even more vulnerable. Women comprise 51% of the 3.2 
million inhabitants of the BRCRN project area, of which 77% are from marginalized/ excluded 
groups.93  
60. Four core barriers were identified that women face in adopting sustainable land use practices (Table 
1): 
 
Gender gap in access to resources and land 
 
Gap in mainstreaming gender into climate change and land use planning processes and 
policies, and raising awareness on topics related to GESI, 
 
Gender and social inclusion gaps in education, skills and leadership, and 
 
Gender gap in disproportionate roles and responsibilities in households and communities. 
Gender gap in access to resources and land  
61. A major takeaway from a discussion with women working in the field of women’s rights and other 
women in the Churia area was that the patriarchal values system is seen as rooted in a society. This 
is perceived as the main obstacle for women to their empowerment and restricts their access to 
resources (financial, physical, administrative, etc.). Such barriers ultimately limit the participation 
of women in SNRM, climate change and in decision making processes. Some women in the 
consultations noted that their husbands were not supportive of them attending trainings on 
alternative livelihood opportunities, which greatly limited the participation of women in such 
trainings. One participant noted that many men believe that “training is not for women, but for 
men”, highlighting that women are still marginalized in the Churia and Terai region, and that 
gender-sensitization is needed for both men and women. Extension services also need to be made 
more “gender-friendly”, including mainstreaming GESI into training modules, training extension 
staff on GESI, and hiring more women extension staff.94 Decision making at the local level remains 
largely dominated by men, with limited decision making and engagement of women. CBOs are 
increasingly developing policies and initiatives to strengthen the engagement of women, however 
it is an ongoing process that it not without its challenges.   
 
                                                            
92 USAID 2016 
93 Including: Indigenous Peoples 31%, Terai-Madhesi caste 28%, Dalits 13% and Muslims 5%, among others; CBS 2014. 
94 World Bank and FAO 2018

=== PAGE 172 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN 
20
 
Table 1: Overview of challenges for engaging women in sustainable natural resource management and climate change mitigation and adaptation 
Root causes 
Gender gap in access to resources and land 
due to a patriarchal value system that is 
reinforced through cultural and legal 
measures.  
Poor awareness, implementation and 
enforcement of gender equality and social 
inclusion (GESI) and policy and legislation.  
Policy gaps in promoting climate change, DRR, and 
gender-sensitive development, especially in local 
land use planning practices.  
Gender and social inclusion gap in education, skills and 
leadership. 
Traditional gendered distribution of roles 
and responsibilities in the household 
which affects women and girls 
disproportionately.  
Causes 
Unequal access, control over and 
management of land, which limits womens’ 
ability to invest in appropriate measures to 
improve the resilience of communities 
through SNRM, climate-smart agriculture 
and DRR measures. 
Limited access to technical assistance 
programs/ livelihood support programs and 
formal credit means many women cannot 
register businesses. 
Marginalized minority groups and women 
within them, including indigenous peoples, 
Dalits among others, may experience 
additional barriers due to inter-generational 
discrimination. While policies and initiatives 
are increasingly promoting their inclusion, 
they are still considered marginalized groups.
 
Low participation in technical trainings and limited 
bargaining power in decision making processes 
related to user groups, including measures to 
strengthen climate change adaptation and 
mitigation and DRR. 
Minimal consideration of SNRM and climate 
change in land use planning. 
Marginalized minority groups including indigenous 
peoples, Dalits among others, may experience 
additional barriers due to inter-generational 
discrimination. While policies and initiatives are 
increasingly promoting their inclusion, they are 
still considered marginalized groups.  
 
In general, women and girls´ education is lower priority, 
which limits their ability to learn and become engaged on 
topics such as SNRM, climate change and DRR. 
Girls are regularly taken out of school to support with the 
collection of water, fodder and fuelwood, especially in 
absentee households. This limits their ability to learn and 
become engaged on topics such as SNRM, climate change 
and DRR. Ethnic minorities and other groups of 
disadvantaged women face further barriers in accessing 
education. 
In some instances, the knowledge of Nepali language is a 
barrier for some people, especially women and 
marginalized minority groups living in the Terai. 
Time poverty is a major barrier which limits women and 
girls to participate in education and skill training 
opportunities. Women and girls in the BRCRN project 
area experience time poverty, which is exacerbated by 
current migration trends where around a quarter of 
households have absentee household members. Majority 
of migrants are male, leaving women and girls in charge 
of not only their previous tasks but also those of their 
absentee household members. Single-mothers, divorced 
women, and widows are also often experiencing time 
poverty.  
 
Many women experience time poverty, 
and thus have limited time to even 
maintain past land use activities, let 
alone invest in new practices. This 
further limits women´s availability to 
attend capacity building trainings, or 
participate in user group meetings. 
 
PROBLEM STATEMENT: Women in the Eastern Churia and Terai region are vulnerable to natural disasters and climate change, and face food, water 
and energy insecurity which is further exacerbated through unstainable natural resource use in the region.

=== PAGE 173 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
21
 
Immediate effect 
Limited awareness and uptake or gender-
sensitive SNRM95 and climate change 
adaptation and mitigation, and DRR 
practices. 
Unsustainable natural resource management 
(NRM), leading to land and natural resource 
degradation 
Subsistence farming / low productivity and 
food insecurity  
Limited awareness and uptake of gender-sensitive 
SNRM practices, climate-resilient agriculture, soil 
conservation and DRR measures.  
Unsustainable NRM leading to land and natural 
resource degradation 
High vulnerability to climate change  
Marginalization risk and weak mainstreaming of 
GESI 
Elite capture in resource management decisions,  
Low agricultural yields 
Low participation of women, esp. poor women 
and ethnic minorities, in decision making fora 
Limited awareness and uptake of gender-sensitive SNRM 
practices, climate change adaptation and mitigation and 
DRR measures.  
Land and natural resource degradation 
Low agricultural yields, food insecurity 
Low participation of women, esp. poor women and ethnic 
minorities, in trainings and decision making  
Marginalization and domestic violence risk 
Limited awareness and uptake or 
gender-sensitive SNRM and climate 
change adaptation and mitigation, and 
DRR practices. 
Time poverty for women to be 
exacerbated by unsustainable NRM and 
climate change. 
Unsustainable use of natural resource, 
high vulnerability to climate change 
Low agricultural yields, food insecurity 
Land and natural resource degradation 
Effect 
Low adaptive capacities 
Increased carbon emissions 
Low incomes, informal work and limited 
social security 
Food, water and energy insecurity 
Loss of biodiversity  
Vulnerable to natural disasters and climate 
change 
Low adaptive capacities 
Low incomes, informal work and limited social 
security 
Food, water and energy insecurity 
Loss of Agro-biodiversity 
Increased carbon emissions  
Vulnerable to natural disasters and climate 
change 
Low adaptive capacities 
Low incomes and informal work 
Food, water and energy insecurity 
Vulnerable to natural disasters and climate change 
 
Food, water and energy insecurity 
Increased work burden for women and 
girls 
Low adaptive capacities 
Low incomes 
Health problems (stress, malnutrition, 
physical exhaustion etc.) 
Vulnerable to natural disasters and 
climate change 
                                                            
95 Gender-sensitive sustainable natural resource management focuses on sustainable natural resource management (that balances environment, economy and social elements), whilst 
considering the potential contribution of women and men to societal changes, as well as methods and tools that can be used to: promote gender equity, reduce gender disparities, and measure 
the impact of natural resource management and climate change on men and women.  
Gender-sensitive SNRM is at the core of the project´s approach. It aims to: 
1. 
Apply best practices in SNRM for the positive discrimination and engagement of women of all backgrounds, including Dalit women, indigenous women and others. Best practices have been 
identified based on past project experiences and lessons learned from FAO, the Government of Nepal and other institutions/ organizations, as well as through stakeholder consultations, 
targeted workshops, and through expert interviews (a list of consultations and meetings is provided in ESMF Annex 3)  
2. 
Awareness raising and GESI sensitization are cross-cutting throughout project activities. More targeted interventions are described in the GAP.  
3. 
A gender-responsive M&E framework for the project and GAP have been designed to actively monitor the project´s impact on men and women, ensuring active management and enabling 
learning on the impacts of SNRM and climate change on men and women

=== PAGE 174 ===
Gender Action Plan BRCRN
22
 
62. Many people residing in the Churia region do not have secure land tenure96 and only ~25% 
of women have land entitlements in the Churia region.97 They have been residing and 
cultivating ailani land (non-registered) for decades. Few women in the Eastern Churia and 
Terai region hold formal land titles. Those who have access to formal land titles have often 
received land as an inheritance or gift (daijo) from their parents, especially in households 
without sons, or through the purchase of land in the name of wives by absentee husbands 
who are working abroad.98 
63. Lack of secure access to land and tenure security and the limited control over land use 
decisions and resources limit women’s ability to adapt to climate change, implement 
sustainable natural resource management, and ultimately to improve their livelihoods. 
Women noted that without statutory property rights that they cannot access loans to 
support value adding processes, form businesses or invest in sustainable or improved land 
use practices (e.g. improved plant varieties, animal breeds, etc.).99 Tenure insecurity prevents 
women from making medium- to long-term investments in more sustainable and improved 
practices. It is clear that incentives need to be provided to both men and women to support 
women’s empowerment and gender equality.  
64. Despite these challenges, some programs have found ways to develop incentives that 
encourage men to support women, including Dalits and indigenous peoples, to access 
trainings, and support women’s empowerment in decision making processes and in the 
formal access of resources and land In Nepal, the government initiated tax exemption in land 
registration for women since the Fiscal Year 2008/09. In 2016, they provided a discount of 
25-50% in the cost of land registration for women. Daughters and granddaughters now 
receive 50% tax discounts in land registration, which is 35% for a single woman (especially 
widows), and 25% for other women.100  
65. CBOs have emerged as a key institution for promote collective action, enabling: improved 
information sharing, promoting time saving activities and pooling resources,101 increased 
access to capacity building and extension, strengthened negotiation power, improved access 
to technology, and access to finance, among other benefits. On their own, many households, 
especially women-headed households and landless households, may not be financially and 
technically ready/ able to adopt climate-resilient SNRM due to the lack of capacities, 
awareness and finance. CBOs thus can help them to pool their resources and overcome many 
of these barriers. As described above, many organized user groups have increasingly 
developed GESI policies, e.g. including mandatory minimum participation quotas of women, 
and promoting proportional representation of marginalized groups and equitable benefit 
                                                            
96 During consultations with local communities in Kudunabari & Danabari of the Kankai River Watershed, Kerabari of 
Bakraha River Watershed and Bishnupaduka and Baghakhola of the Pathanli River Watershed, they reported that 
they did not have an official land certificate, although they have been living there for more than three decades. 
97 CBS 2012  
98 Field consultations in the project area (conducted from December 21-28, 2017) 
99 Demetriades & Esplan 2010 
100 USAID 2016; MoF 2016 
101 Consulted communities often discussed the positive environmental, social and economic benefits from joint 
investments, including the alleviation of time-poverty. For example, several communities discussed that community 
water ponds have extremely positive benefits, reducing time poverty for women (less time collecting fuelwood, 
NTFPs, etc.), and increasing participation of girls in school (before they often had to walk several hours in the dry 
season to collect water). Additional health benefits, including reduction in waterborne diseases, were also identified.

=== PAGE 175 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
23
 
sharing. CFUGs also increasingly involve and support landless and poor households, giving 
such groups an opportunity to benefit from the sustainable management of community-
managed natural resources.102 CFUGs dedicate at least 35% of their funds to pro-poor 
programs, supporting highly vulnerable and excluded households within the CFUG. Thus, 
such local community-based user groups, especially CFUGs, represent an important entry-
point for promoting gender equitable and inclusive climate-resilient SNRM. 
66. The project will also improve the access and ownership of natural resources through 
investments in “Public Land Forest User Groups”, which will be primarily composed of 
marginalized households. Management plans for all CBOs will be developed in a participatory 
manner with such user groups, combined with ongoing technical support.  
Gaps in mainstreaming gender in climate change policy and land use planning 
practices 
67. While Nepal´s legal framework related to gender has become strengthened in recent years, 
there is poor awareness of key policies related to gender, and implementation and 
enforcement of policies tend to lag behind, especially in rural areas.103 Policies also may not 
be fully implemented at the local level. For instance, in CFUGs there is a legal requirement 
that at least 50% of the members are women, and at least one woman must sit on the 
decision making committee (i.e. either president or secretary). Many people consulted in 
rural communities highlighted the challenges of operationalizing such policies, and noted 
that many women in the committee attend the meetings but do not fully participate. This is 
due to a myriad of factors linked to education, time poverty, patriarchal values system, 
inability to participate in trainings, among other reasons. Studies have found CFUGs with 
higher representation of women on executive committees may create an enabling 
environment for women´s participation (speaking up at meetings, attendance at meetings 
and participation in executive committees),104 noting the importance of supporting women 
to develop leadership skills. 
68. Gender-mainstreaming in climate policies remains limited in the country.105 Climate change 
has different impacts on women and men, where women are particularly vulnerable in the 
BRCRN project region. Nonetheless, many policies do not take into account differing 
dynamics and the impacts on men and women, and many policies are not designed in a 
gender-sensitive or gender-responsive manner, ensuring the engagement of women on 
topics that are critical for their livelihoods. This goes beyond simply policies, and also 
manifests in land use planning at the local level, where women are largely excluded from 
planning processes in general. Women are greatly involved in the management of forest and 
agricultural resources, with in-depth knowledge about their utilization and status, however 
they have yet to be fully engaged in decision making and planning processes in many user 
groups and communities. Gender must be mainstreamed into climate change and DRR 
policies, as well as in land use planning processes at the local level, to ensure that a gender-
sensitive and –responsive approach is adopted with the potential to address the specific 
                                                            
102 Regmi et al. 2015 
103 UN Women 2016 ; USAID 2016 ; Adhikary 2017 
104 Agrawal 2010 ; Leone 2013 ; FAO and RECOFT 2015  
105 Adhikary 2017

=== PAGE 176 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
24
 
vulnerabilities and necessities of women and men, taking into account differing dynamics 
and impacts.  
69. Nepal is currently undergoing a political transition from a constitutional monarchy to a 
federal democratic republic, involving major restructuring of local level institutions – 
including the establishment of seven provinces and the devolution of power over natural 
resource management to the local level. At the local level, there are the mayor and deputy-
mayor, as well as 5 elected members (one chairperson, two women –of which one position 
is reserved for Dalits- and two others) from each ward, who are each elected for five years.  
70. The Constitution of Nepal (2015) and Local Government Operational Act (LGOA, 2017) state 
that municipalities shall make necessary rules under its defined domains or jurisdictions to 
operate the given responsibilities and to regulate its procedure. However, while these rules 
shall be under the domains of municipalities, they must be consistent with provincial and 
national laws. Thus, the LGOA indicates that local government can effectively implement 
climate change mainstreaming into local plans, including GESI, and build institutional 
capacities through the elaboration of operational guidelines, procedures and criteria. Given 
the diverse impacts of climate change across sectors (including agriculture, health, etc.), 
there is a need for a holistic and coordinated approach for climate change adaptation and 
mitigation.106 Single institutions (in this case, the local government) cannot fight against 
climate change without effective coordination with diverse line agencies, as well as with 
provincial and national governments.  
Gender and social inclusion gap in education, skills and leadership 
71. Women’s participation in formal decision making bodies, but also trainings, schools and 
other learning platforms has been relatively limited due to numerous reasons discussed in 
more detail within previous sections (e.g. time poverty, socio-cultural barriers, among 
others). The lack of engagement of women on educational topics related to SNRM, climate 
change and DRR means that a major segment of the population, which is particularly 
vulnerable to climate risks, cannot access knowledge and learning opportunities. This 
ultimately creates a major gap in adaptive capacities and awareness of SRNM, climate change 
and risk-reduction practices. Further gaps are noticeable among women of different groups. 
Women from ethnic minorities, widows and other disadvantaged women experience greater 
inequality and additional barriers to participate in such trainings or knowledge sharing 
platforms. In some communities in the Terai it was noted that some community members, 
especially women and marginalized minority groups, may have limited knowledge of the 
Nepali language.107 Thus, such groups of women often have lower adaptive capacities.  
72. Many communities consulted noted that while people may understand that the climate is 
changing, people are largely unaware of risk reduction measures. However, some 
communities are piloting their own adaptation measures based on their own observations of 
the changing climate. For example, the Lepach people in the Mechi River watershed noted 
                                                            
106 Paudel 2013 
107 For instance, in Rampatti village, a settlement of Terai origin people of the Balan River System, we began to discuss 
with them in Nepali language. Most of the women present in the consultation could not understand Nepali. Upon 
realizing this we held the discussion in local language which facilitated their participation. Thus it is important to also 
have local people who are able to disseminate information and support local capacity building and extension in such 
communities. Such language-related challenges are more common in the Terai than in hill origin ethnic groups.

=== PAGE 177 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
25
 
that they have begun to grow akabare khorsani (a local variety of chili), and oranges at higher 
altitudes, which has only become possible due to changing climatic patterns. Such 
experiences with local knowledge and the piloting of local solutions are key to strengthening 
adaptive capacities and reducing the vulnerability of communities to climate change. 
However there is currently no effective knowledge hub or network which allows 
communities to share local knowledge, nor access information about climate change, DRR, 
or SNRM within the BRCRN project area. While substantial measures have been piloted, there 
is a major gap in disseminating lessons learned, best practices and other key experiences to 
communities.  
73. Measures are needed to encourage the full engagement of women in knowledge platforms, 
especially at the local and provincial levels, and strengthen the capacities of women on 
SNRM, climate change and disaster risk reduction. Women and girls´ education is not 
prioritized, meaning that many women may not have the capacity to take on formal 
leadership roles or to participate in technical trainings. Extension services need to be made 
more ´gender-friendly´ and accessible to women,108 Trainings on SNRM, climate change and 
DRR need to ensure that they are targeted for women given their educational backgrounds 
and typical land use responsibilities and activities, and that they also further promote skill 
building on topics related to education, decision making and leadership. Such trainings need 
to be designed in an inclusive manner, ensuring the engagement of women from different 
groups (e.g. ethnic backgrounds, ages, marital status, etc.). It is further important that local 
resource persons and trainers include women and people who are familiar with the cultural 
and local language, to facilitate information dissemination and ensure the full engagement 
of women and other marginalized minority groups. The accessibility of trainings for women 
needs to be improved, as women will often not travel long-distances to attend a training. 
Gender-sensitization of men and women also should be further strengthened, noting the 
benefits associated with training women.  
Gender gap in terms of disproportionate roles and responsibilities in households and 
communities 
74. Women in the Churia and Terai region are often faced with time-poverty, where women are 
working up to 13 hours a day, taking care of their household and livelihoods, considering 
both paid and unpaid labor.109 Men tend to be in charge of cash crops, commercialization of 
agricultural and forest products and staple cereal crops, whereas women are often involved 
in crops for household subsistence, livestock, the collection of NTFPs, fuelwood, fodder, 
grasses and water. Women are further responsible for the maintenance of the household 
(cleaning, cooking, caring for the elderly, among other tasks), in addition to supporting the 
aforementioned tasks. As the Churia and Terai regions are experiencing strong migration 
patterns of men to urban areas or foreign countries, women´s time poverty is becoming more 
critical, as women are taking on additional responsibilities while not being fully empowered 
to make decisions on their own. 
75. Thus, in addition to the other barriers previously discussed, time poverty, compounded by 
lack of confidence and lower levels of literacy, is a major barrier to engage women in trainings 
                                                            
108 World Bank and FAO 2018 
109 USAID 2016

=== PAGE 178 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
26
 
on SNRM or climate change, as many women may not have the time to participate in 
trainings, user group meetings, etc. Women have little awareness of time-saving land use 
practices, and limited access to time-saving technologies.  
76. Also, for women to adopt improved land use practices, often it may require more time, 
especially if they include new practices. Limited awareness and knowledge may result in 
additional time needed to pilot such practices, however limited time availability may 
negatively impact the adoption of such practices. Again, such a barrier may be even greater 
for women from more marginalized communities, where financial and time poverty limit 
their engagement in potential trainings, practices and other activities. Support is needed to 
improve the awareness and adoption of time-saving SNRM practices and technologies that 
not only promote low-carbon and climate resilient development, but also provide social, 
environmental and economic benefits to women, whilst also reducing time poverty. This 
includes providing technical and financial support in an accessible and culturally-appropriate, 
gender equitable and socially inclusive manner.  
1.5 Gender Assessment Recommendations 
77. The gender assessment has provided insight into gender challenges in Nepal, zooming in on 
the specific context of the BRCRN project area, beneficiaries and interventions. The 
assessment has combined the recollection of information from diverse studies and literature 
as well as with stakeholder consultations on gender in Kathmandu as well as in the project 
area. The findings of this analysis have been described in the sections above, and have helped 
identify opportunities and challenges to empower women and promote gender-equality in 
the BRCRN project. The results from this assessment will help form the basis of the GAP, 
where clear and feasible recommendations will be integrated into the plan to ensure that 
the project empowers women and helps to overcome gender-specific barriers through the 
promotion of gender-sensitive measures and a gender-responsive M&E framework. 
Summary of Recommendations from Stakeholder Consultations 
78. Stakeholder consultations during project development were designed to engage diverse 
actors, where gender was viewed as a cross-cutting topic. Women’s organizations, including 
organizations for indigenous women and ethnic minorities, were engaged early on to provide 
insight into the gender-specific challenges faced in the BRCRN project area as well as 
feedback into the proposed project activities to strengthen gender empowerment and 
equality. Meetings have been conducted both at the national level with key stakeholders in 
the capital (including FEDO, NIWF, HIMAWANTI, Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities 
(NEFIN), Federation of Community Forestry Users,  among others), as well as with women in 
the project area (see ESMF Appendix 3 for meeting summaries and attendance sheets). Key 
issues highlighted by the consultations include: 
 
Gender needs to be better mainstreamed into climate change and local land use 
planning at the local level, where women’s knowledge needs to be taken into 
consideration and their voices considered in decision making and land use planning 
processes 
 
Many women, especially Dalit women, don´t have access to formal property rights or 
land use rights, despite their key role in managing the agricultural land, primarily due to

=== PAGE 179 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
27
 
a patriarchal value system. This is a major barrier for women to invest in long term SNRM 
as it is extremely difficult for women to access credit, trainings and additional support 
without formal land tenure. Community-based user groups can support women to 
develop skills, manage natural resources and develop business models, as there are 
provisions to support landless families and poor households within user group 
guidelines and policies. Additional measures could focus on improving business literacy 
and incentivizing women to form cooperatives or women’s groups to help access finance 
and develop sustainable businesses on topics related to climate-resilient value chains.  
 
Access and quality of forest and water resources is negatively impacted by climate 
change and unsustainable NRM. Villagers noted that the time needed to collect 
resources (water, firewood, fodder, NTFPs, etc.) is increasing, ultimately increasing time 
poverty for women and girls, and limiting educational opportunities for girls.  
 
Women´s participation in decision making is often limited, although this depends on the 
community. There is a need for additional training to support women to take on 
leadership roles and to raise awareness and capacities on climate change and 
sustainable natural resource management. It was mentioned that awareness raising 
should not only be targeted at women but also girls to help them develop capacities at 
a young age. 
 
Gender-sensitive trainings are not only needed for women, but also for men to 
encourage men/ boys to encourage women to become empowered and take on 
leadership roles and to build their capacities.  
 
Engagement of boys and girls in schools on topics related to climate change and SNRM, 
but also on topics related to gender. Schools represent an important platform to engage 
the youth. 
 
There is a need for targeted support to help women develop skills related to alternate 
livelihoods, business development and income generating activities to strengthen their 
income and livelihoods. Support is needed along entire value chains (not just 
production/ 
harvesting, 
but 
also 
business 
administration, 
marketing 
and 
commercialization). Additional support is required to help strengthen women´s income 
and improve their livelihoods. 
79. A gender-specific workshop in Kathmandu was conducted on February 21, 2018 to 
validate the gender assessment and receive early feedback on the proposed gender 
action plan. Stakeholder comments from the workshop have been integrated into 
the final version of this assessment and the GAP. In general the GAP was well 
received, noting the importance of providing targeted measures for women within 
the project, and ensuring that differentiated vulnerabilities and contexts are taken 
into account. The Gender Action Plan was presented at the BRCRN Validation 
workshop on March 25, 2018, where the project was validated by diverse 
stakeholders from the public sector, CSOs and private sector.  
Recommendations for Project Design and Implementation 
80. The BRCRN project aims to enhance the climate resilience of ecosystems and vulnerable men 
and women in the Churia region through integrated sustainable rural development and 
natural resource management approaches. It is recommended that the project design takes 
into account the following recommendations to help overcome existing gender gaps, while 
promoting gender-sensitive and equitable development:

=== PAGE 180 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
28
 
81. Promote membership in CBOs, and empower women to actively participate and take on 
leadership roles, and strengthen access to and control over resources 
 
Work with community-based organizations (CBOs) as a main beneficiary for the project, 
as they are a proven model in Nepal for social engagement and empowerment, and 
sustainable natural resource management (see Feasibility Study for additional 
information).  
 
Disseminate information on benefits for women associated with CBOs, include (a more 
comprehensive list of the social, environmental and economic benefits is provided in 
the Feasibility study): 
- 
Improve environmental conditions to reduce exposure to extreme weather events 
and hazards, improve agricultural productivity (reduced land degradation), and 
improve biodiversity and seasonal water availability. This will also contribute to 
strengthened resilience to climate change, especially for rural vulnerable and 
excluded men and women. Reduced vulnerability to extreme weather events and 
hazards can also reduce the vulnerability to gender-based violence, which often 
increases with natural hazards (taking advantage of hazard-affected women).110  
- 
Enhance opportunities for social empowerment and political engagement through 
CBO management structures (targets for membership and participation in plenary 
meetings, and mandatory.111  
- 
Alleviate time poverty by supporting an improved natural resource base (e.g. time 
spent collecting grasses, fodder, NTFPs, firewood, and water), and through 
promoting collective action and pooling of resources.112 CBOs can also help 
women access gender-sensitive technical assistance, knowledge and credit.113 
- 
Improve access to technical assistance, finance/ credit, market information and 
knowledge 
- 
Support measures to increase incomes of the rural poor, women and Dalits114 
- 
Provide targeted livelihood support for vulnerable households from CBOs pro-poor 
programs115  
 
Advocate for an approach that promotes gender equality and is socially inclusive, taking 
into account the differentiated vulnerability of women and men from diverse socio-
economic and cultural backgrounds. Women should make up at least 50% of project 
                                                            
110 World Health Organization 2005; International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 2015 
111 E.g. CFUGs require 50% membership of women, and have further provisions related to ensure women occupy 
leadership positions. Studies have shown that social inclusion and empowerment should still be improved in CBOs, 
with recommendations to promote leadership and GESI (see following recommendations). 
112 One case study found that women saved 2.5 hours a day by joining a CFUG and reducing the collection time for 
various forest products. They also found that cash-incomes rose by 24% in a 3 year period.  FAO and IFAD 2015 
113 IFAD 2001 in FAO  
114 FERN 2015; FAO and IFAD 2015. Recommendations from stakeholder consultations noted the importance of the 
following measures for Dalit women: disaster risk reduction, climate change and food security support (technical 
support, capacity development, financial support), education and capacity development, economic empowerment 
and access to resources, leadership training, and increasing access to government services (including extension 
services). 
115 Many CBOs, including CFUGs, require that at least 35% of the CBO´s funds are used for pro-poor programs targeting 
vulnerable households.

=== PAGE 181 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
29
 
beneficiaries,116 with proportional participation of indigenous peoples, Dalits and other 
excluded and/or marginalized groups.117  
 
Strengthen access to and control over resources through the establishment of public 
land forest user groups, especially engaging and empowering marginalized households, 
including Dalit women and landless women, and implement trainings to build skills along 
key value chains (esp. those with high potential to support women), including improved 
production practices, trainings on climate change, SNRM and DRR, and trainings on 
business literacy, including trainings targeted towards women and women’s groups. 
USAID and IFAD have successfully implemented business literacy trainings in the Churia, 
which have further been mainstreamed into Nepal´s Emission´s Reduction Program for 
the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility. Public land forest user groups will help improve 
access to land and control over resources for vulnerable, excluded and marginalized 
households.  
82. Mainstream GESI in policy, regulatory and institutional frameworks, and strengthen 
institutional and individual capacities on GESI 
 
Ensure all project management staff and project partners (including extension agents 
are trained on GESI in the context of the BRCRN project. This will include training on 
gender-responsive and –sensitive planning, M&E and mainstreaming GESI into land use 
planning and local policies.  
 
Institutionalize gender-responsive measures and social Inclusion in the forest and 
agricultural sector by ensuring that the processes, policies and activities are sensitive to 
gender-considerations, are socially inclusive and take into consideration potential social 
and environmental impacts. 
 
Develop a strategy and action plan to promote mainstreaming of climate resilient land 
use planning into river-system and local planning processes, ensuring that GESI 
considerations are mainstreamed, including the link between GESI and climate change. 
 
Strengthen the institutional capacities of local community based organizations/ users 
groups to sustainably plan and manage their resources, as well as to integrate GESI into 
planning processes and empower women members, including indigenous women, Dalit 
women and other marginalized minority groups, within these organizations. In trainings 
and workshops, information should be provided on complementary government 
services and initiatives, including, for example, the Government´s hotline to report 
gender-based violence incidences, among other GESI initiatives.  
83. Build the capacity of women, especially Dalit women, indigenous women and women from 
vulnerable and/or excluded households, and enable them to fully benefit from project 
activities 
                                                            
116 The 50% participation of women target was selected for the following reasons: 
Nepal´s CFUG guidelines state that 50% of CFUG members should be women 
Women make up over 50% of the population in the project area. Women are active members of organized groups, 
and stakeholder consultations with women’s groups, CBOs, government officials, and other institutions found the 
50% target to be a realistic and suitable target for the project. 
117 In terms of targets, the project aims to have 50% of the beneficiaries within CBOs as women. Proportional 
representation of Dalits and IPs is also encouraged, however the specific targets will be established during the FPIC 
process. While in the project area IPs form 31% of the population and Dalits 13%, there are substantial differences 
between districts, and also geographically in the Churia hills and Terai. Thus, for now “proportional representation” 
is applied, however once the specific CBOs and locations are selected, specific targets will be set.

=== PAGE 182 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
30
 
 
Adopt strategies and incentives to target the full participation and engagement of 
women, ensuring the inclusion of women from indigenous groups, Dalits, and other 
´excluded´/ marginalized groups.  
 
Conduct leadership trainings for men and women in user groups, with a focus on how 
to promote leadership that enables GESI – ultimately empowering women, including 
indigenous peoples, ethnic minorities and other marginalized or historically excluded 
groups. The trainings also aim to identify and build capacities of ´champions´ and local 
resource persons within user groups, communities, civil society and government to 
advocate for the engagement of women in decision making processes, and to actively 
support the empowerment and capacity building of women, including landless women, 
indigenous women, Dalit women, among others, to take on leadership roles and 
become increasingly engaged in SNRM, climate change adaptation and mitigation and 
DRR.118 Encourage women to actively participate in CBO plenary meetings and executive 
committees to place women’s-issues on the agenda, including key issues such as time-
poverty.  
 
Improve extension services including providing tailored extension services to female 
farmers. Improve access to extension services and training, mainstream GESI in training 
modules, train trainers and extension agents on GESI (including key issues such as time 
poverty and the identification of time saving activities), and hire more female extension 
agents (including Dalit and indigenous women, among others). 
 
Trainings designed explicitly to strengthen participation of women in decision making, 
land use planning, SNRM, DRR, climate change mitigation and adaptation, and income-
generating activities along key value chains. Such trainings should:  
- 
Ensure the utilization of different learning tools, taking into consideration that many 
women may not have as much formal education as men.119 User-friendly extension 
picture books could be utilized, along with videos, manuals and guidelines, among 
other approaches (refer to the Feasibility Study for more detailed information).  
- 
 Mainstream GESI into training modules and materials (considering time-poverty, 
women’s roles and responsibilities, and other gender-considerations) 
- 
Train extension staff and trainers on GESI.  
- 
Improve the accessibility of women to trainings, including local trainings, 
transportation, and coordination with CBOs and women on suitable training times.  
- 
Hire and train female extension staff, including indigenous and Dalit women 
- 
Support the sensitization of men and women on gender issues, including raising 
awareness about the importance of training and educating women. This should 
highlight that training and educating women represents a key strategy to build the 
capacity of communities in the long-term.120 
 
Support the elaboration of guidelines and consolidation of practices on climate-resilient 
land use practices, ensuring that local knowledge and women’s priorities and 
experiences are taken into consideration for the elaboration of such guidelines 
(mainstreaming GESI into training modules). Ensure that key information is 
disseminated to women. This should further build on the existing work of local 
                                                            
118 FERN 2015; FAO and IFAD 2015.  
119 E.g. they may have limited supporting knowledge, are more likely to be illiterate 
120 Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management (2017)

=== PAGE 183 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
31
 
organizations, including women’s groups, to ensure that women are aware of climate 
change risks and practices to reduce risks and improve their adaptive capacities (see the 
following recommendation on communication and knowledge dissemination).  
 
84. Improve communication and knowledge dissemination 
 
Improve knowledge sharing and data collection on climate change, NRM and DRR in the 
BRCRN project area through the establishment of a climate knowledge center (CKC). 
Ensure the integration of knowledge from diverse groups of people, including women, 
ethnic minorities, indigenous peoples and marginalized groups. Promote the use of 
traditional knowledge (see IPPF for more detailed information). Ensure local resource 
persons who manage the Churia knowledge center include women, indigenous peoples, 
Dalit and other marginalized minority groups. Women should be engaged in the 
monitoring, analysis and dissemination of key data and information.  
 
Knowledge dissemination should take into consideration the variation in literacy rates, 
where certain groups of women within the project area, especially Terai-Dalits and 
Muslims, have literacy rates below the national average. Thus, it is important to engage 
local resource persons and trainers with a strong understanding of local communities 
and cultures, and ensuring trainings are available in local languages and in a variety of 
formats (i.e. not only written documents).  
 
Ensure regular communication between CBOs and supporting entities (government, civil 
society) to ensure that continuous support and communication channels are 
maintained. Awareness raising and information dissemination on such practices should 
clearly communicate to women additional benefits to adopting such activities (e.g. 
improved health, education, reduced time-poverty, water/energy/food security, among 
other factors). 
 
Develop and coordinate partnerships and collaborative mechanisms amongst 
governments, civil society organizations, and private sector and donor partners to 
respond to GESI needs in the land use sector and climate change aspects, including 
knowledge sharing, trainings, implementation support, etc. 
 
85. Enable participatory processes and ensure flexibility to identify suitable activities 
 
Implement activities that improve the food, water and energy security of communities, 
that are jeopardized under current business as usual (BAU) practices in the context of 
unsustainable NRM and climate change.  
 
Ensure the flexibility for CBOs and their members to decide what activities they want to 
adopt: The project´s approach of promoting a ´menu´ of SNRM activities is a positive 
approach, which allows CBOs and their members to select the most suitable activities 
for their context (priorities, resources, time availability, etc.). Extension agents, 
informative materials and training modules should communicate potential risks 
associated with technologies and practices, as well as gender-implications. If a potential 
activity could exacerbate time-poverty it should be clearly communicated, and 
discussed how this can be mitigated (creating clear plans with responsibilities for various 
people in the household, pooling resources and responsibilities with other CBO 
members, etc.).  
 
Provide targeted technical and financial support to promote the adoption of measures 
to increase the resilience of local communities to climate change, and/or that will 
mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. The project should especially promote time-saving

=== PAGE 184 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
32
 
practices and technologies (related to GESI mainstreaming in training modules, and 
training extension trainers on GESI). This should include measures such as (see Appendix 
1 for more detailed information on the gender benefits, challenges and targeted 
measures): 
- 
Climate-resilient agriculture practices, such as reduced impact tillage, improved 
varieties, organic inputs, among other activities.121 Livestock activities 
including integrating fodder production in cropping systems, agroforestry 
systems with fodder, and improved housing may alleviate time poverty, 
whereas other activities including intensive stall feeding could increase time 
poverty if clear roles and responsibilities of women and other household 
members are not discussed. It is thus important that extension agents are 
trained in GESI, and that GESI issues are mainstreamed into training materials 
and guidelines. In addition, to the greatest extent possible, extension agents 
and project staff will look to pool resources, promote discussions on sharing 
responsibilities between men and women (using culturally appropriate 
approaches), and identify potential ways to promote cooperation and collective 
action within CBOs to reduce time-poverty.  
- 
Promotion of biogas, which can reduce fuelwood collection by women and 
alleviate time poverty, in addition to other benefits (see Feasibility study for 
more detailed information)  
- 
Restoration and sustainable management of degraded natural forests, critical 
river systems and wetlands to avoid emissions to restore forest quality and 
improve the provision of key ecosystem services 
- 
Tree planting on private, public and community lands to reduce pressure on 
natural forests for fuelwood, timber and forage. If activities such as free grazing 
will be limited, sustainable alternatives that are accessible to all beneficiaries 
should be established, based on a participatory and inclusive decision making 
process.  
- 
On-farm planting of fodder, fuelwood and food-producing tree and grass 
species to reduce time spent by women in off-farm fodder collection. 
 
86. Safeguard the rights of vulnerable and excluded groups 
 
Ensure that vulnerable and excluded groups are not ´taken advantage of´. Participation 
in the project is voluntary and based on the principles of free, prior and informed 
consent (the project´s ESMF provides a detailed description of the FPIC process). It is 
further recommended to: 
- 
Clearly communicate the rights of beneficiaries throughout project implementation 
- 
Hire project gender and safeguard specialists to oversee project monitoring and 
address related issues/ concerns and complaints 
                                                            
121 For a full-list of activities please refer to the feasibility study and project funding proposal. Compared to the 
baseline scenario in Nepal, many conservation agriculture practices can be time saving and provide additional benefits 
to women, such as increased productivity, diversified income streams, improved soil fertility and reduced erosion, 
among others. E.g. FAO 2015

=== PAGE 185 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
33
 
- 
Designate local resource persons within communities, including men and women 
from different socio-cultural backgrounds to support information dissemination and 
improve communication 
- 
Support leadership training and capacity developing, whilst ensuring the 
participation of women, including indigenous and Dalit women, landless women, 
poor women, among others. 
- 
Conduct GESI training for all project staff and partners. 
- 
Where necessary, ensure information is disseminated using local languages and 
culturally appropriate formats 
- 
Utilize a gender-responsive M&E framework to support active management, regular 
monitoring and improved learning (including gender disaggregated data) 
 
Ensure the gender redress mechanism is known, accessed and trusted by women, 
including indigenous and Dalit women, as well as women from other excluded or 
marginalized groups. The project´s grievance redress mechanism has been designed to 
ensure that no individual or group are financially impacted by making a grievance or a 
complaint (see the project´s ESMF for a more detailed description of the grievance 
redress mechanism). 
 
Communicate and distribute Information regarding the project´s grievance mechanism 
to all stakeholders via : 
- 
The inception workshops for the BRCRN project at the national and provincial levels 
- 
FPIC meetings 
- 
Information sessions and community meetings, including the provision of 
information both orally and through hard copies 
- 
Brochures regarding the projects grievance redress mechanism (produced in Nepali 
and local languages) will also be distributed to diverse stakeholders, including local 
and provincial CSOs (including FEDO, NEFIN and NIWF, as well as other organizations 
representing Dalit people, indigenous people, and other stakeholders).  
- 
FAO Nepal Webpage, and 
- 
Included as part of any other communication material that is designed and 
distributed during project implementation.  
 
87. Develop a Gender-Responsive and Socially Inclusive Monitoring and Evaluation System 
 
Design a gender-responsive M&E system to monitor the impacts from the project on 
women, and to support the achievement and monitoring of gender-specific targets. 
Include the collection of gender disaggregated data, including quantitative and 
qualitative data. 
 
Develop a gender action plan, based on stakeholder input, to help overcome gender-
barriers, empower women and to strengthen the adaptive capacity of men and women. 
The GAP should include detailed indicators to monitor the implementation of gender-
related measures within the BRCRN project, which will be integrated into the project´s 
M&E. 
 
Within the PMSU, the project´s gender and safeguards specialists will be responsible for 
overseeing the implementation of the Gender Action Plan, ensuring regular monitoring, 
evaluation and reporting. The gender officer from MoFE will serve as the gender focal

=== PAGE 186 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
34
 
point within the Project Steering Committee, and will provide support as needed for the 
implementation of the GAP. They will maintain close communication with the 
monitoring and reporting specialist and the national project director. 
 
A baseline to support the monitoring and evaluation of the proposed project will be 
established, which will be designed in a gender-responsive manner, ensuring that 
gender-specific and disaggregated statistics are included within the M&E framework.

=== PAGE 187 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN
35
 
2 GENDER ACTION PLAN (GAP) 
88. This Gender Action Plan (GAP) has been elaborated to mainstream gender-related measures 
into the BRCRN, ensuring that gender-related risks are avoided or mitigated, and to maximize 
climate and development co-benefits. It pays special attention to women, considering that 
women are not a homogenous group, and the additional challenges that women from 
indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste and other marginalized groups may face. It further has 
identified gender-performance indicators and sex-disaggregated targets to be integrated 
into the project´s gender-responsive results framework. 
89. This GAP is informed by the Gender Assessment conducted for the BRCRN project, available 
literature on gender-assessments of related projects and activities in the Churia region of 
Nepal, interviews with key experts and stakeholders working on gender empowerment in the 
Churia region of Nepal, and stakeholder consultations with local communities, community-
based organizations and local women’s groups in the proposed project area. In addition, a 
gender workshop was held in Kathmandu on February 21, 2018 to discuss and validate the 
results of the gender assessment and GAP. Feedback from this workshop and from other 
stakeholder consultations has been integrated into this document. Meeting minutes and 
attendance sheets for the consultations are available in Annex 3 of the project´s ESMF.

=== PAGE 188 ===
Gender Action Plan BRCRN 
36 
 
Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 
Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP 
Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity 
GAP Activity 
Indicator 
Targets 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Year 7 
Responsibility 
 
 
 
Project component 1 – Scaling up climate-resilient sustainable natural resources management (SNRM) 
 
Expected contribution of gender activities to results under the component: Component 1 focuses on implementing and scaling up of climate-resilient SNRM practices to increase the resilience of ecosystems and local households within 26 climate vulnerable river 
systems. Gender activities under this component will ensure that (i) women from diverse social-cultural background (including indigenous women’s groups and Dalit women’s groups, among others) duly participate in the Project activities (trainings, Farmer Fileld 
Schools,  implementation of climate resilient SNRM practices) benefit from them; and (ii) the climate-resilient SNRM practices (sustainable land use, climate resilient agriculture, restoration and sustainable management of forests, watersheds and wetlands, etc.) 
are gender inclusive and gender sensitive, ensuring women’s role, capacity and leadership; improving their access and right (to information, to land) and that the practices take due consideration of specific challenges women face in the Churia region such as  time 
poverty and domestic violence. As the ultimate aim of Component 1 is to increase resilience of local households, increasing resilience of women is critical and the Project tackles this through women’s participation, capacity and leadership to build their own 
resilience, resilience of their family and community. 
 
PMC 
Ensure training and 
engagement of women in 
adopting climate-resilient 
land use practices. Time 
and locate trainings taking 
into account women’s work 
schedules and accessibility 
to ensure maximum 
participation and outreach, 
coordinate with local 
women’s organizations to 
build on existing networks 
and best practices for 
outreach 
Percentage of 
women extension  
staff and women 
beneficiaries 
participate in 
training and are able 
to access extension 
services  
At least 50% of 
beneficiaries are 
women* 
 
At least 50 % 
extension staff are 
women* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 
87,312 
87,312 
1.1.1-
1.13 
Women adopt and benefit 
from climate-resilient 
agricultural practices. 
Number of CBOs and 
CBO Beneficiaries 
adopt climate-
resilient agricultural 
practices 
At least 250 CBOs 
 
50% of beneficiaries 
are women* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 
1,463,760 
2,927,520 
1.2.1-
1.2.2 
Women adopt and benefit 
from restoration and 
sustainable management 
of degraded natural 
forests, critical watersheds 
and wetlands to avoid 
emissions, enhance 
sequestration and improve 
other ecosystem services 
(incl. biodiversity 
conservation). 
Areas of land (ha),  
and number of CBOs  
with restoration 
activities 
implemented  
206,227 ha 
 
at least 750 CBOs  
 
at least 50% of 
beneficiaries will be 
women* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 
2,143,804 
4,287,608 
1.3.2 
Women benefit from tree 
planting on private and 
public lands to release 
pressure on natural forests 
for fuelwood, timber and 
forage 
Number of forests 
owned by women 
registered by local 
government 
 
Percentage of public 
forests registered by 
women user groups* 
At least 50 private 
forests owned by 
women registered 
 
At least 100 public 
land forests 
registered, of which 
50% are established 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 
5,608 
11,215,633

=== PAGE 189 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN 
37 
 
Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 
Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP 
Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity 
GAP Activity 
Indicator 
Targets 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Year 7 
Responsibility 
 
 
 
Areas (ha) plantation 
forests established 
and percentage of 
beneficiaries are 
women* 
by women user 
groups* 
 
24,958 ha of 
plantation forests 
established, where 
at least 50% of 
beneficiaries are 
women* 
 
 
Project Component 2 – Strengthening institutions and planning for climate-resilient SNRM 
 
Expected contrition of gender activities to results under the component:  Component 2 is designed as a precursor for the investments in Component 1, and will support the necessary planning for interventions within each of the 26 targeted river systems while 
equipping government officials and CBO members with the capacities to understand and apply climate-resilient land use. Gender activities will ensure that capacity (in the form of assigned gender focal point) exists within the institutional structure to mainstream 
gender in the planning process, development of strategies and action plans and  in awareness raising and building capacity on climate-resilient SNRM and agriculture at all level, from federal to CBOs and for multi-stakeholders. Ultimately, the Project will raise 
awareness on gender related drivers of climate vulnerability and risk and build capacities to integrate this knowledge in strategies and plans for climate change adaptation and mitigation including through partipcation of the women’s organizations.  
PMC 
Gender focal points 
assigned in multi-
stakeholder project 
coordination entities 
Number of 
coordination entities 
with assigned 
Gender Focal Point  
 
 
 
 
Gender Focal Point 
assigned at least in 
PSC and PCU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National 
Project 
Director (NPD) 
in coordination 
with gender 
focal point 
from Ministry 
of Forests and 
Environment 
(MoFE) and 
federal and 
PPMU 
safeguard 
officers 
1,070 
21,400 
PMC 
Invitation of CSOs 
representing women 
(including indigenous 
women’s groups and Dalit 
women’s groups, among 
others) to participate on 
PCUs 
Number of  women´s 
groups participate in 
provincial PCU* 
 
At least one 
women´s group 
participates in each 
provincial PCU* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU Gender 
and Safeguard 
Officer 
1,070 
23,112 
2.1.2 
Engagement of women and 
women’s organizations in 
identifying vulnerable 
areas, critical ecosystems 
and integration of women's 
issues in sub-river system 
level SNRM planning; 
Number of multi-
stakeholder 
workshops on GESI 
topics  
 
Number of women’s 
organizations attend 
the workshops 
At least 26 multi-
stakeholder 
workshops 
 
At least one 
women’s 
organization 
participate in each 
workshop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU Gender 
and Safeguard 
Officer 
21,347 
408,633 
2.1.2 
Identification of female 
beneficiaries who are 
Number of female 
beneficiaries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU Gender 
and Safeguard 
21,347 
408,633

=== PAGE 190 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN 
38 
 
Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 
Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP 
Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity 
GAP Activity 
Indicator 
Targets 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Year 7 
Responsibility 
 
 
working with existing 
SNRM projects and / or 
those who are interested in 
introducing SNRM and DRR 
practices as ´champions´ 
 
identified as 
champions for SNRM 
Female beneficiaries 
as champions for 
SNRM identified for 
activity 2.2 and  
Outputs 1 and 3 
(exact number will 
be determined upon 
identification of 
Project beneficiaries) 
Officer with 
support from 
representatives 
from women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 
2.1.2 
Provincial climate-resilient 
land use planning 
strategies and river-system 
level action plans include a 
sub-section on gender 
Gender included in 
the climate-resilient 
land use planning 
strategies and river-
system level action 
plans 
3 provincial 
strategies and 26 
action plans include 
sub-section on 
gender 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
5,500 
54,998 
2.2.2 
Strengthen outreach to 
women, including women 
from indigenous 
nationalities and 
marginalized groups. 
 
Number of Project 
trainings targeted for 
women* 
10 trainings on 
leadership, rights, 
climate risks and 
climate-resilient land 
use planning 
targeted for women 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
6,420 
374,500 
2.2.2 
Mainstreaming adaptation 
and mitigation measures at 
the community level, with 
a focus on forests, water 
and land management  
practices/ operation 
guidelines through active 
participation of women, 
indigenous peoples and 
marginalized groups; 
Level of participation 
of women, 
indigenous peoples 
and marginalized 
groups in Project 
training on 
adaptation and 
mitigation measures 
 
At least 50% of 
participants of 
trainings for 750 
community based 
management 
organization are 
women* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
187,250 
374,500 
Project Component 3 – Improving knowledge, awaress and local capacity for climate-resilient SNRM 
 
Expected contribution from gender activities to results under the component: Component 3 aims to establish a systematic knowledge and information sharing and monitoring mechanism concerning climate-resilient SNRM: The Churia Knowledge Centre (CKC). 
CKC will serve as a comprehensive resource including a database of natural resources – including soil, water, ecosystems and forests – to support informed policy-/decision-making and planning, and knowledge-sharing mechanisms. The CKC will play a crucial role 
in enabling local stakeholders to continue delivering (and even scale up) climate-informed extension services to farmers and other land users after project closure, and in areas in Provinces 1, 2 and 3 that are beyond the Project Area. Within this aim, gender 
activities will ensure the respect to and documentation of local knowledge, including from women from indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste, and other marginalized groups, the engagement of women groups and women networks in knowledge consolidation and 
dissemination and monitoring and evaluation as well as the inclusion of gender-specific initiatives. Capacity building to ensure the appropriate number of local women trainers and resource perrsons will be vital for sustainaing the gender sensitive approach in 
climate-resilient SNRM in Churia. 
 
3.1.1 
Respect and document 
local knowledge from 
women, including women 
from indigenous 
nationalities, Dalit caste, 
and other marginalized 
groups 
 
Number of women’s 
organizations invited 
to Project workshops 
Women 
organizations invited 
to at least 6 
provincial 
consultation 
workshops and 
validation 
workshops 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
4,815 
142,711

=== PAGE 191 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN 
39 
 
Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 
Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP 
Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity 
GAP Activity 
Indicator 
Targets 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Year 7 
Responsibility 
 
 
3.1.1 
Respect and document 
local knowledge from 
women, including women 
from indigenous 
nationalities, Dalit caste, 
and other marginalized 
groups 
 
Percentage of 
women participants 
including women 
from indigenous 
nationalities, Dalit 
caste and other 
marginalized groups 
in Project 
consultations 
At least 50% of 
people consulted in 
Project 78 
community 
consultations (~3 per 
river system) should 
be women* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 
69,550 
142,711 
3.1.2 
User group associations as 
well as women’s groups, 
indigenous peoples, Dalits, 
marginalized minority 
organizations engaged in 
info documentation, and 
dissemination (networks). 
Women’s networks 
support awareness raising 
campaigns to engage 
women. 
Number of 
broadcasts regarding 
Churia Conservation 
related news and 
views, with 
engagement/support 
of women’s groups 
and women’s 
networks 
125 broadcasts 
including broadcasts 
in local languages 
disseminated  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
346,145 
346,145 
3.2.2 
Trainers trained on GESI 
within the context of the 
BRCRN project, and 
measures to improve the 
engagement of women, 
indigenous peoples and 
marginalized groups in 
knowledge consolidation, 
dissemination and 
extension. 
 
Trainings on GESI 
include measures to 
improve the 
engagement of 
women indigenous 
peoples and 
marginalized groups  
 
Availability of 
translation services 
for trainings or 
consultations in local 
languages.  
 
At least 80% of 
Project trainings on 
GESI 
 
100% local (CBOs 
and CBO 
Beneficiaries) 
trainings and 
consultations are in 
local languages.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
22,727 
227,268 
3.1.2 
Support establishment of 
130 eco-clubs, with 
participation from boys and 
girls to become engaged on 
topics related to climate 
change and climate-
resilient land use 
Number of eco-clubs 
established and 
percentage of girls 
participation 
130 eco-clubs 
established, with 
50% girls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
80,250 
160,500 
3.2.2 
Trainers should include 
people from diverse socio-
cultural backgrounds, and 
translation services should 
be available for trainings or 
consultations in local 
languages.  
Number of trainers 
as women and from 
diverse socio-
cultural background  
At least 50% of 
trainers should be 
women* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
113,634 
227,268 
3.2.1 
Training modules and 
guidelines for extension 
Number of training 
modules include sub-
10 training modules  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
20,330 
95,765

=== PAGE 192 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN 
40 
 
Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 
Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP 
Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity 
GAP Activity 
Indicator 
Targets 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Year 7 
Responsibility 
 
 
and technical assistance to 
be designed taking into 
account GESI. Extension 
modules each include a 
section on i) gender and ii) 
social inclusion 
sections on i) gender 
and ii) social 
inclusion 
3.1.2 
Exposure visits for trainers 
and government staff 
include participation of 
women 
Number of women 
in visits for trainers 
and government 
staff 
50% of beneficiaries 
should be women* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
7,244 
14,488 
3.2.3 
Engagement of women in 
the design and operation of 
the Churia Knowledge 
Center 
 
Number of  
Women’s 
organizations invited 
to workshops on the 
CKC 
Women 
organizations 
participate in at least 
3 CKC workshops 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
10,700 
88,275 
3.2.3 
Engage women in 
monitoring and knowledge 
management activities 
Percentage of 
women engaged in 
the monitoring of 
environmental and 
social characteristics 
in the BRCRN project 
area 
At least 50% of 
resource persons 
trained are women* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
8,828 
88,275 
3.2.3 
Integrate information on 
GESI into CKC knowledge, 
and communicate gender-
related issues linked to 
climate change and 
unsustainable natural 
resource management 
Availability of GESI 
materials 
GESI portal 
established within 
online CKC, and GESI 
materials available in 
regional hubs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
8,828 
88,275 
3.2.3 
Engage youth, boys and 
girls, in learning 
opportunities related to 
climate change, SNRM, and 
DRR through the Churia 
Knowledge Center 
Number of eco-clubs 
in schools receiving 
learning 
opportunities and 
percentage of girls 
participation 
CKC presented to 
130 eco-clubs in 
schools, with 50% 
participation of girls 
in clubs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
16,050 
160,500 
3.1.2 
Raise awareness of women 
in vulnerable communities 
about climate-induced 
disasters and risks and the 
link with unsustainable 
NRM, as well as SNRM, DRR 
measures 
Number of 
awareness raising 
events for 
community women  
 
 
At least one 
awareness raising 
event specifically 
targeting community 
women in each of 
the 26 vulnerable 
river systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist in 
cooperation 
with women’s 
organizations/ 
CSOs 
175,266 
175,266 
2.1.3 
Engage women including 
indigenous peoples and 
marginalized groups in the 
development of provincial 
DRR plans.  
Number of 
workshops for 
provincial DRR plans 
with women’s 
3 consultation 
workshops and 3 
validation 
workshops 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CSOs to 
support 
participation of 
women in 
consultation 
10,700 
175,266

=== PAGE 193 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan BRCRN 
41 
 
Table 2. Gender Action Plan for the ´Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal´ ProjectGender Action Plan 
 
Costs 
Exclusively 
dedicated for 
GAP 
Included in 
Project 
Activities 
Project 
Activity 
GAP Activity 
Indicator 
Targets 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Year 7 
Responsibility 
 
 
organizations 
invited/participated 
workshops 
(awareness 
raising). 
2.1.3 
Integrate women´s, 
including, indigenous 
peoples and marginalized 
minority groups, priorities´ 
into disaster risk 
management plans and 
guideline development 
through consultations with 
women in local-community 
based organizations, and 
through engaging with 
local networks 
Gender included in 
the Provincial DRR 
plans 
 
 
Provincial DRR plan 
(03) includes a 
section on i) gender 
and on ii) social 
inclusion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU M&R 
specialist 
7,565 
75,649 
*promoting proportional representation of highly vulnerable groups including indigenous women (31%) and Dalits (13%)

=== PAGE 194 ===
REFERENCE LIST 
ADB, Asian Development Bank. 1999. Country Briefing Paper: Women in Nepal.  
ADB. 2014. Real-Time Evaluation of ADS’s Initiatives to Support Access to Climate Finance. 
Linked Document 4c: ADB Support for Climate change Adaptation and Mitigation in Nepal. 
Thematic Evaluation Study, Manila, Philippines.  
Adhikary, M. 2017. Country Gender Assessment, Agriculture and Rural Development in Nepal. 
FAO Report [unpublished], Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Archarya, D., Bell, J., Simkhada, P., Teiljingen, E., Regmi, P. 2010. Women’s autonomy in 
household decision-making: a demographic study in Nepal. Reproductive Health. 7:15. 
CARE. 2008. Empowering women in the Churia to improve their livelihoods: SHAKTI. 1st Interim 
Report, CARE Nepal, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
CARE. 2012. Women Empowerment for Transformation in the Churia Area SAKCHAM II (2010-
2012). Final Evaluation Report, Kathmandu, Nepal. 
CBS. 2012. Population Monograph of Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
CBS. 2014. Population Monograph of Nepal. Vol. II (Social Demography). Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Chhetri, R. B. 2004. Relationship between Income Generating Activities: Conservation of Forest 
Resources: A Study in the Churia Forest Development Project Area. A Report submitted to 
Churia Forest Devlopment Project, Kathmandu. 
Demetriades J. and Esplen E. 2010. Gender Dimension of Poverty and Climate change 
Adaptation. In R. Mearns and A. Norton (Eds), Social Dimension of Climate Change: Equity 
and Vulnerability in a Warming World: World Bank, Washington DC 
Devkota, D., Rauniyar, G.P., Parker, W. J. 1999. The role of gender and ethnicity in household 
decision-making Evidence from rural Nepal. Annual Conference of the Australian Agricultural 
and Resource Economics Society. Christchurch, New Zealand.  
DFRS/FRA. 2015. State of Nepal's Forests. Forest Resource Assessment (FRA) Nepal, Department 
of Forest Research and Survey (DFRS). Kathmandu, Nepal. 
FAO and RECOFT. 2015. Understanding Women´s Participation in Forestry in Nepal. Policy Brief. 
Bangkok, Thailand.  
FAO. 2015. Running out of time, the reduction of women´s work burden in agricultural 
procution. Rome, Italy.  
IFAD and FAO. 2015. Regenerating Forests and Livelihoods in Nepal. Rome, Italy. 
GESI Working Group. 2017. A Common Framework for Gender Equality and Social Inclusion. 
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Working Group, International Development Partners 
Group, Nepal.  
Gurung, O., Tamang, M.S. 2014. Poverty and Exclusion in Nepal. Central Department of Sociology 
and Antrhopology. Tribhuwan University, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. 2015. Unseen, unheard: 
Gender-based 
violence 
in 
disasters. 
Retrieved 
from: 
https://www.ifrc.org/Global/Documents/Secretariat/201511/1297700_GBV_in_Disasters_E
N_LR2.pdf

=== PAGE 195 ===
ILO, International Labour Organization. 2017. Nepal Labour Market Update. ILO Country Office 
for Nepal, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
Leone, M. 2013. Women as Decision Makers in Community Forest Management: Evidence from 
Nepal. Retrieved from: https://www.uab.cat/Document/658/267/Leone_JMP.pdf  
Karn, P.K. 2007. A Study Report on Economic Valuation of the Churia Region. Published by IUCN.  
Kühhas, B., Silawal-Giri, B., Barton, T. 2016. SAKCHAM and Women Empowerment in Nepal: 
Stories and strategies – lessons and guidelines. CARE Nepal and CARE Austria.  
Lama, A.S., Kharel, S., Ghale, T. 2017. When the men are away: Migration and women´s 
participation in Nepal´s community forestry. Mountain Research and Development, 37(3): 
263-270 
Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Government. 2017. Local Government Operational Act, 
2017. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoE, Ministry of Environment. 2010. Climate Change Vulnerability Mapping for Nepal. Ministry 
of Environment. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoF, Ministry of Finance. 2012. Economic Survey – Fiscal Year 2011/12. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
MoF. 2016. Economic Survey—Fiscal Year 2015/16. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Paudel N S. 2013. Integrating climate change adaptation with local development: Exploring 
Institutional options. Journal of Forest and Livelihood, 11(1): 1-13 
PCTMCDB, President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation Development Board. 2017. President 
Chure- Satyal Pravat, P., Humphreys, D. 2013. Using a multilevel approach to analyse the case 
of forest conflicts in the Terai, Nepal. Forest Policy and Economics, 33: 47-55. 
President Chure-Tarai Madhesh Conservation Development Board. 2017. President Chure-Tarai 
Madhesh Conservation and Management Master Plan. Kathmandu, Nepal 
Rai, S.K., Ono, K., Yanagida, J.I., Ishiyama-Imura, S., Kurokawa, M., Rai, C.K. 2012. A large-scale 
study of bacterial contamination of drinking water and its public health impact in Nepal. 
Nepal Med. Coll. J., 14(13): 234-240. 
Regmi, U., Bhusal, P., Bhandari, K., Karki, J., Paudel, N.S. 2015. Landlessness and Forest 
Management: What can Community Forestry Offer? Forest Action, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
Shrestha, S.K. 2015. Chura Forest Management. MA Dissertation, Tribhuwan University, Nepal.  
Singh Danuwar, B.K. 2008. Inclusion/ Exclusion of River-Affected People in Conservation and 
Management of Watershed and Natural Resources in Churia Hills. Kathmandu, Nepal.  
UN 
SDG 
Website. 
2017. 
Progress 
of 
Goal 
5 
in 
2017. 
Retrieved 
from: 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg5  
UN Women. 2016. Progress of Women in Nepal (1995-2015). Kathmandu, Nepal. 
UNDP. 2013. Overview of linkages between gender and climate change. Retrieved from: 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/gender/Gender%20and%20Environment
/TM1_AsiaPacific_Capacity.pdf 
UNDP, United Nations Development Programme. 2014. Nepal Human Development Report 
2014: Beyond Geography: Unlocking Human Potential. Kathmandu, Nepal. 
UNDP. 2016. Human Development Report 2016. New York, USA.

=== PAGE 196 ===
UNDP. N.d. Gender empowerment Measure Website. Governance Assessment Portal. Retrieved 
from: http://www.gaportal.org/global-indicators/gender-empowerment-measure 
United Nations Office of the Resident Coordinator Nepal. 2017. Nepal: Flood 2017. Kathmandu, 
Nepal.  
USAID. 2016. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment Report: Developing a Demonstration Site 
in Nepal on Community Forestry, Gender and Climate Change Adaptation. Kathmandu, Nepal 
WHO. 
2005. 
Violence 
and 
Disasters. 
Retrieved 
from: 
https://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/publications/violence/violence_disasters.
pdf  
Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management. 2017. Gender 
Integration in REDD+ and the ERPD in Nepal: Assessment Report and Gender Action Plan. 
Report for the FCPF, Kathmandu, Nepal.  
World Bank and FAO. 2018. Male outmigration and women´s work empowerment in agriculture. 
The 
case 
of 
Nepal 
and 
Senegal. 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/653481530195848293/pdf/Male-
outmigration-and-womens-work-and-empowerment-in-agriculture-the-case-of-Nepal-and-
Senegal.pdf   
World Bank, 2012. Climate Risk and Adaptation Country Profile: Vulnerability, Risk Reduction, 
and Adaptation to Climate Change Nepal.  
World 
Bank. 
2016. 
World 
Bank 
Data 
2016. 
Retrieved 
from: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL.FE.IN?locations=NP

=== PAGE 197 ===
APPENDICES 
Appendix 1: Gender challenges and benefits of specific project investments 
In the project region, women are highly engaged in land use activities, as described in the 
previous chapters. The feasibility study provides a detailed description of the different activities 
within Component 1 (Annex 2), including the detailed actions, and benefits associated with each 
of the measures.   
 
The following paragraphs summarize the gender benefits and challenges, as well as the project´s 
targeted measures associated with the main investments: 
 
Farmer Field Schools 
Current situation: Women are less likely to participate in FFS than men. 
 
Expected situation: Women participate in FFS and build their capacities on climate-resilient 
SNRM. 
 
Gender-benefits:  
1. 
Strengthened capacities and awareness for implementing climate-resilient SNRM 
2. 
Improved access to information  (production information, marketing information) 
3. 
Empowerment of women 
4. 
Engagement of women in higher earning livelihood activities 
5. 
Improved mainstreaming of gender-issues in extension and effective targeting of 
women in extension. 
 
Gender-specific Challenges:  
1. 
Lack of extension services tailored to women (critical due to the feminization of 
agriculture) – lack of access, lack of female extension workers 
2. 
Women are often less educated than men (lack of complementary knowledge) 
3. 
Extension services have insufficient budget to maintain a field presence, and women are 
often unable to travel long distances to access such services 
4. 
Women´s productive work is not targeted by extension services 
5. 
Time poverty 
 
How the project addresses this: 
1. 
Awareness raising for extension services, targeting women 
2. 
Mainstreaming GESI in all trainings 
3. 
Hiring and training of female extension agents, including Dalit women, indigenous 
women, among others 
4. 
Training all extension workers on GESI, and key issues related to many women (e.g. time 
poverty)

=== PAGE 198 ===
5. 
Supporting extension services to extend their reach (need for capacity building) 
6. 
Designating local resource people (men and women) to encourage women´s 
engagement in climate-resilient SNRM and FFS 
7. 
Taking into account suitable times and locations for trainings, taking into account 
women’s work schedules and accessibility to ensure maximum participation and 
outreach, coordinate with local women’s organizations to build on existing networks 
and best practices for outreach 
8. 
Respecting and documenting local knowledge from women, including women from 
indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste, and other marginalized groups 
 
Climate-resilient agricultural Practices 
Current situation: Men and women do not adopt climate-resilient agricultural practices. 
Feminization trends in the agricultural sector increase time poverty for women and has resulted 
in the abandonment of some areas where there was insufficient labor.  
 
Expected situation: Men and women adopt climate-resilient agricultural practices, with multiple 
social, environmental and economic benefits. 
 
Gender-benefits:  
9. 
Strengthened capacities and awareness for implementing climate-resilient SNRM 
10. 
Improved access to information  (production information, marketing information) 
11. 
Empowerment of women, engagement of women in higher earning activities 
12. 
Improved resilience of ecosystems and local people to climate change (see Feasibility 
study) 
13. 
Increased productivity, livelihood diversification (e.g. agroforestry), economic benefits 
14. 
Improved supply of different products (fuelwood, fruit, NTFPs, etc.), which can 
substitute supplies that are over-used, degraded or critical habitat (e.g. agroforestry). 
 
Gender-specific Challenges:  
1. 
Challenges associated with FFS (see above) 
2. 
Lack of awareness of climate-resilient farming best practices (including time-saving 
practices and activities) 
3. 
Physical challenges (with heavy lifting, use of tools) 
4. 
Inability to invest in inputs (seeds, materials) 
5. 
Lack of awareness of marketing/ value adding opportunities 
6. 
Lack of land (landless households) 
7. 
Commercialization activities often overseen by men (esp. cattle, cash crops) 
8. 
Time poverty could be exacerbated by some activities, especially if roles are not clearly 
divided between men and women 
 
How the project addresses this:

=== PAGE 199 ===
9. 
Developing CBO management plans in a participatory manner for shared community 
resources, ensuring the active engagement of women 
10. 
Promoting membership in CBOs to improve the management of shared resources (e.g. 
forests), with additional benefits (incl. time-saving benefits, e.g. reduced time spent by 
women and girls to collect natural resources (e.g. fuelwood, fodder, NTFPs, ) 
11. 
Improving accessibility and targeting of extension for women (see above) 
12. 
Promoting climate-resilient SNRM (reduced tillage, etc.), with a focus on time-saving 
practices and activities.  
13. 
Providing a flexible ´menu´ of climate resilient SNRM options, allowing the selection of 
practices that are suitable for the local context – supported by extension agents trained on 
GESI and best practices for climate-resilient SNRM 
14. 
Promoting smart investments in suitable equipment (e.g. hand tools), practices and activities 
that can benefit CBO users 
15. 
Establishing public land forest user groups that improve access to. and use of land for highly 
vulnerable and marginalized households 
16. 
Implementing gender sensitization training for men and women in CBOs, including 
information on time poverty (sharing roles and responsibilities) 
17. 
Mainstreaming GESIin all training modules and FFS, all project staff and partners trained on 
GESI 
18. 
Designating local resource people (men and women) to encourage women´s engagement in 
climate-resilient SNRM and FFS 
19. 
Ensuring that the time and location of trainings consider women’s work schedules and 
accessibility to ensure maximum participation and outreach, coordinate with local women’s 
organizations to build on existing networks and best practices for outreach 
20. 
Respecting and documenting local knowledge from women, including women from 
indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste, and other marginalized groups 
21. 
Raising awareness on climate-induced disasters and risks and the link with unsustainable 
NRM, as well as SNRM, DRR measures 
 
Restoration, maintenance and sustainable management of natural forest ecosystems 
Current situation: Deforestation and forest degradation is accelerating in natural forest 
ecosystems.  
 
Expected situation: Forest ecosystems are better maintained and protected resulting in reduced 
emissions from degradation and deforestation and increased resilience to climate change. 
Women adopt and benefit from restoration and sustainable management of degraded natural 
forests, critical watersheds and wetlands to avoid emissions, enhance sequestration and 
improve other ecosystem services (incl. biodiversity conservation). 
 
Gender-benefits:  
22. 
Strengthened capacities and awareness for implementing climate-resilient SNRM 
23. 
Improved access to information  (production information, marketing information)

=== PAGE 200 ===
24. 
Empowerment of women 
25. 
Engagement of women in higher earning activities 
 
Gender-specific Challenges:  
26. 
Challenges associated with FFS (see above) 
27. 
Lack of awareness of climate change and lack of information on alternative land use 
systems: Lack of alternative sources of forest products, lack of alternative livestock 
systems 
28. 
Inability to invest in inputs (seeds, materials, fencing) 
29. 
Lack of land (landless households) 
30. 
Insufficient tree nurseries to support restoration needs (in highly degraded areas) 
31. 
Time poverty 
 
How the project addresses this: 
32. 
Developing CBO management plans in a participatory manner for shared community 
resources, ensuring the active engagement of women 
33. 
Promoting membership in CBOs to improve the management of shared resources (e.g. 
forests), with additional benefits (incl. time-saving benefits, e.g. reduced time spent by 
women and girls to collect natural resources (e.g. fuelwood, fodder, NTFPs, ) 
34. 
Promoting climate-resilient SNRM (reduced tillage, etc.), with a focus on time-saving 
practices and activities.  
35. 
Providing a flexible ´menu´ of climate resilient SNRM options, allowing the selection of 
practices that are suitable for the local context – supported by extension agents trained on 
GESI and best practices for climate-resilient SNRM 
36. 
Improving accessibility and targeting of extension for women (see above) 
37. 
Promoting smart investments in suitable equipment (e.g. hand tools), practices and activities 
that can benefit CBO users 
38. 
Establishing public land forest user groups that improve access to. and use of land for highly 
vulnerable and marginalized households 
39. 
Implementing gender sensitization training for men and women in CBOs, including 
information on time poverty (sharing roles and responsibilities) 
40. 
Mainstreaming GESI in all training modules and FFS, all project staff and partners trained on 
GESI 
41. 
Designating local resource people (men and women) to encourage women´s engagement in 
climate-resilient SNRM and FFS 
42. 
Ensuring that the time and location of trainings consider women’s work schedules and 
accessibility to ensure maximum participation and outreach, coordinate with local women’s 
organizations to build on existing networks and best practices for outreach 
43. 
Respecting and documenting local knowledge from women, including women from 
indigenous nationalities, Dalit caste, and other marginalized groups

=== PAGE 201 ===
44. 
Raising awareness on climate-induced disasters and risks and the link with unsustainable 
NRM, as well as SNRM, DRR measures 
 
 
Establishment and operation of multi-purpose tree nurseries  
Current situation: Insufficient nurseries (in terms of production and quality) to support forest 
restoration, and other forest sector investments in woodlots, agroforestry, horticulture  
 
Expected situation: Establishment and operation of multi-purpose tree nurseries. 
 
Gender-benefits:  
45. 
Strengthened capacities, preparation of high quality seedlings 
46. 
Improved seed quality, yields/ promoted qualities that can in turn support men and 
women to reduce the reliance on forests and/or support forest restoration that in turn 
increases their resilience to climate change 
47. 
Empowerment of women 
48. 
Employment in nurseries 
 
Gender-specific Challenges:  
49. 
Challenges associated with FFS (see above) 
50. 
Time poverty 
 
How the project addresses this: 
51. 
Hiring women in nurseries 
52. 
Mainstreaming GESI in nursery guidelines and protocols 
53. 
Ensuring gender-responsive monitoring and evaluation 
 
Investments in soil and water conservation 
Current situation: Many river systems, and the communities living within them, are vulnerable 
to climate-induced erosion, sedimentation and flooding risks.  
 
Expected situation: Investments in soil and water conservation enhance the resilience of 
ecosystems and local men and women to climate-induced erosion, sedimentation and flooding 
risks.  
 
Gender-benefits:  
54. 
Strengthened capacities on climate-resilient land use planning, ecosystem-based 
adaptation, and soil and water conservation 
55. 
Increased resilience to climate-induced erosion, sedimentation and flooding risks, which 
in turn reduces damages, safeguards land/ infrastructure, and even reduces the risk of 
GBV due to displacements/ damaged infrastructure associated with natural disasters 
and hazards

=== PAGE 202 ===
Gender-specific Challenges: 
56.
Challenges associated with FFS (see above)
57.
Time poverty
How the project addresses this: 
58.
Developing river system-level action plans to improve coordination of upstream and
downstream investments through participatory processes that engage women, ensuring
GESI is mainstreamed in each action plan.
59.
Engaging women and women’s organizations in identifying vulnerable areas, critical
ecosystems and integration of women's issues in sub-river system level SNRM planning; CBO
management of shared resources (e.g. water conservation ponds, check dams, etc.) can
reduce the burden of maintenance, labor, etc.
60.
Developing provincial disaster risk reduction plans, ensuring GESI is mainstreamed
61.
Applying participatory land use planning processes to develop CBO management plans,
ensuring the engagement of women
62.
Improving accessibility and targeting of extension for women (see above)
63.
Conducting gender sensitization trainings
64.
Mainstreaming GESI in all training modules and FFS,
65.
Training all project staff and partners on GESI
66.
Designating local resource people (men and women) to support communication, knowledge
dissemination and encourage women´s engagement in climate-resilient SNRM and FFS
67.
Respect and document local knowledge from women, including women from indigenous
nationalities, Dalit caste, and other marginalized groups
68.
Supporting awareness raising for women in vulnerable communities about climate-induced
disasters and risks and the link with unsustainable NRM, as well as SNRM, DRR measures.
Engage women including indigenous peoples and marginalized groups in the development
of provincial DRR plan
____________
