=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: hahn
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20040
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20040
creationDate: D:20191017180400+09'00'
modDate: D:20191018142814+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
12 – 14 November 2019 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 14 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
22 October 2019 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum III 
Funding proposal package for FP117 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled “Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions 
Programme through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape 
management”; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
99 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
102 
Secretariat’s assessment 
105 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
124 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
137 
Gender documentation 
138

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project Title: 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme 
through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape 
management 
Country: 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
Accredited Entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) 
GmbH 
Date of first submission: 
2019/03/02  
Date of current submission:  
2019/09/25 
Version number: 
V.010

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 0 OF 95 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[Dates]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 1 OF 95 
 
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or private 
sector 
Public 
 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
Not applicable  
 
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets. 
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it. 
The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.   
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: 
 
☐Energy access and power generation:  
☐Low-emission transport:  
☐Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:  
☒Forestry and land use:  
Adaptation: Increased resilience of: 
 
☐Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:  
☐Health and well-being, and food and water security: 
☐Infrastructure and built environment:  
☐Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 
GCF contribution:  
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
100% 
 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
Enter number% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
impact  
Project 1 (4 years) 
5.6 million t CO2 eq 
 
Programme (9.5 years) 
57.9 million t CO2 eq 
A.6. Expected adaptation 
impact  
Project 1: 
- Direct rural beneficiaries: 
120,000 (60,000 men and 
60,000 women) 
- Indirect rural 
beneficiaries: 235,800 
 
Programme: 
- Direct rural beneficiaries: 
254,800 (127,400 men and 
127,400 women) 
- Indirect rural 
beneficiaries: 412,650 
Project 1:   
- Direct beneficiaries: 2% 
of national population 
- Indirect beneficiaries: 3% 
of national population 
 
Programme: 
- Direct beneficiaries: 4% 
of national population 
- Indirect beneficiaries: 5% 
of national population 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  
Project 1: 
65.2 million Euros 
 
(Anticipated total 
programme financing: 
162.7 million Euros) 
 
A.9. Project/Programme 
size 
Project 1: 
Medium (Up to USD 250 
million) 
 
Total programme: 
Medium (Up to USD 250 
million) 
 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
Project 1:  
15.2 million Euros 
 
(Anticipated total 
programme financing: 
62.6 million Euros)

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 2 OF 95 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒ Grant 15.2 million Euros 
☐ LoanEnter number 
☐ GuaranteeEnter number 
☐ Equity  Enter number 
☐ Results-based  
     paymentEnter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
Project 1: 
Start: 01/06/2020 
End: 30/06/2024 
(Duration: 4 years, 1 
month) 
 
Programme:  
Start: 01/06/2020 
End:  31/12/2029 
(Duration: 9 years, 6 
months) 
A.12. Total lifespan 
Programme lifespan: 
20 years 
 
Implementation period: 
Programme: 9 years 6 
months 
Project 1: 4 years 1 month 
Project 2: 8 years 0 months 
Project 3: 5 years 6 months 
 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
2/15/20191 
A.14. ESS category  
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has Readiness or 
PPF support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐       No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP included 
in the country 
programme? 
Yes ☒       No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, 
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
Executing Entities: 
- GIZ 
- Government of Lao PDR 
- JICA 
A.21. Executive summary 
A.21.1 Programme Executive Summary 
 
1. Project 1 is envisaged to be embedded in a broader programme (see Section A.22), providing a strategic 
opportunity to achieve a paradigm shift in the forest and land-use sector of Lao PDR. 
 
2. Laos has embraced REDD+ as a way to address its principal source of GHG emissions. Laos has been working 
on REDD+ readiness preparation since it was selected as one of 47 participants in the Forest Carbon Partnership 
Facility (FCPF) in 2007. Lao PDR was accepted as one of the eight pilot countries of the Forest Investment 
Programme (FIP), under the umbrella of the Climate Investment Fund (CIF), in March 2010. In August 2014, the 
Department of Forestry received a USD 3.6 million grant from the FCPF to implement approved readiness 
preparation proposal (R-PP) activities, including the preparation of a National REDD+ Strategy, a benefit-sharing 
mechanism and safeguards (Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment). Two prominent bilateral assistance 
programmes are those supported by the Government of Germany – the Climate Protection through Avoided 
Deforestation (CliPAD) programme (GIZ) – and the Government of Japan’s Sustainable Forest Management and 
REDD+ Programme (F-REDD). F-REDD and CliPAD, together with FAO, supported the Department of Forestry 
throughout the process of seeking – and ultimately achieving - acceptance into the FCPF Carbon Fund. 
 
3. In recent years, Laos has progressed substantially towards REDD+ readiness, notably through the acceptance of 
the FRL/FREL, the finalised REDD+ Strategy, the Strategic and Social Environmental Assessment (SESA) and 
the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), as well as the final acceptance of the Emission 
Reductions Programme Document (ER-PD). The government has introduced bold policies and reforms, including 
ambitious NDC targets (70% forest cover), a timber export ban and a new Forest Law. Lao PDR is now strategically 
 
1 The GIZ Letter of Internal Approval is provided in Annex 15.

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 95 
 
well-placed for Phase 2 of REDD+ (implementation) in order to reduce forest-sector emissions and to achieve true 
paradigm shift. 
 
4. To achieve such a paradigm shift, the programme in which Project 1 is embedded: 
 
 
Strengthens the enabling environment for REDD+ through 3 principal means: enhancing the availability of 
financing for a deep transformation in the way Laos manages its forest landscapes – including through 
supporting a REDD+ Funding Window; revising and strengthening the legal and regulatory framework for 
forestry; and improving the enforcement of the new regulatory framework. 
 
Supports deforestation-free agriculture and agroforestry by enhancing productivity, increasing farmers’ 
integration into agricultural value chains, and improving access to finance and private sector participation in 
economic activities that reduce pressure on forests. 
 
Supports the implementation of sustainable forest landscape management (SFM) and forest landscape 
restoration (FLR) on over 1.5 million ha of degraded lands. 
 
5. The programme consists of 3 projects: Project 1 (mid-2020 to mid-2024) addresses the three provinces of 
Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang, which contain the highest rates of deforestation and forest degradation 
within the programme area; Project 2 (mid-2024 to end-2029) scales-up the number of participating communities 
in the same geographical area; and Project 3 (2022 to end-2029) extends the geographical reach of the programme 
to the 3 additional provinces of Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay. 
 
6. The programme structure offers considerable flexibility through its constituent projects to gather data and learn 
iteratively for more effective and adaptive design; potential for crowding-in more sustainable financing from 
diversified sources (more emission reductions, additional domestic revenues, larger endowment for the REDD+ 
Funding Window), thereby increasing long-term financial sustainability; and better linkage with the programmatic 
approach of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) Emissions Reduction Programme in Laos, which the 
programme complements and supports. 
 
7. This Funding Proposal presents a stand-alone GCF project (Project 1) for Board approval. Two subsequent 
stand-alone projects, embedded in the same programmatic context and theory of change as this project, 
will be submitted at a future date for Board approval. Board approval for the project presented in this 
Funding Proposal is wholly separate from, and does not pre-judge, Board approval for future related 
projects. 
 
A.21.2 Project 1 Executive Summary 
 
8. Project 1 mitigates 5.6 million tCO2eq during its 4-year implementation period, at a cost to the GCF of Euro 
2.7/tCO2eq. It benefits 355,800 people (120,000 directly) in 3 provinces of rural northern Laos by promoting 
sustainable management of forests, landscapes and agricultural resources. It represents the first project of a 
programme that will ultimately mitigate 144.7 million tCO2eq over its 20-year lifetime (influence period, 2020-2039), 
at a cost to the GCF of Euro 0.4/tCO2eq. 
 
9. Project 1 mobilises Euro 50.0 million of co-financing and will, during its 4-year implementation period, unlock 
REDD+ results-based payments of Euro 23 million from the FCPF Carbon Fund. 
 
10. Project 1 will have significant socio-economic and gender-positive co-benefits in disadvantaged rural areas. Lao 
PDR, a landlocked least developed country (LLDC), is unable to bear the full project cost alone. Although the 
government is contributing significant co-financing, surpassing its NDC commitments, the GCF’s contribution is 
essential for Project 1 to proceed.

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 95 
 
A.22. Programme summary 
A.22.1 Programme structure 
 
11. Although Board approval is sought solely for Project 1 and not for the overall programme (i.e. not for constituent 
Project 2 or constituent Project 3), a summary of the overall programme, in which Project 1 is embedded, is 
provided below for reference. 
 
12. The programme, in which Project 1 is embedded, combines a sectoral and geographical scope: 
 It is sectoral in the sense that it supports the Government of Lao PDR in achieving its policy goals, as 
defined in the NDC as well as the National REDD+ Strategy and Socio-Economic Development Plans. 
 It is geographical because it operates in the defined accounting area of six northern provinces selected on 
the basis of their mitigation potential under the ER Program. The programme applies a geographical 
upscaling strategy by means of constituent projects (Projects 1-3) that address provinces that are connected 
at ecosystem level and that are linked through other factors such as synergies among co-financing activities. 
 
13. The programme design consists of: 
 
 Three Projects: 
o Project 1: Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang provinces. Mid-2020 to mid-2024. 
o Project 2: Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay provinces. 2022 to end-2029. 
o Project 3: Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang provinces. Mid-2024 to end-2029. 
 
 
Each Project contains three Outputs: 
o Output 1: Creation of an enabling environment for REDD+ 
o Output 2: Market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation 
o Output 3: Climate mitigation action through forestry 
 
14. Project 1 addresses a number of national-level interventions that will also serve to support Projects 2 and 3 (subject 
to separate GCF funding approval for Projects 2 and 3). The most notable example is the creation of the REDD+ 
Funding Window, which will be undertaken in Project 1 but whose structure and functionality will also be utilised in 
Projects 2 and 3. 
 
15. At the core of the project are performance-based payments to participating communities and institutions to 
incentivise and fund those types of land-use practices that yield the highest emission reductions. The programme 
ties its performance to MRV-able milestones, providing GIZ and GCF with the necessary information for the design 
of Project 2 and Project 3, for which additional funding may be approved subsequently by the GCF Board. 
 
Figure 1: Phased Approach to Implement the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme 
 
 
 
A.22.2 Benefits of the programmatic approach

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 5 OF 95 
 
 
16. The Feasibility Study (Annex 2a) recommends a programmatic approach instead of a static project approach. The 
programmatic approach will allow: 
 Phased geographical upscaling of activities through a sequenced series of interlinked projects for different 
regions/provinces in the ER-P accounting area. 
 A REDD+ Funding Window as a common financial mechanism at the centre of the programme. 
 Common objectives aligning the constituent projects and contributing to the strategic goals of the forestry element 
of Lao PDR’s NDC. 
 A stronger emphasis on performance-based financing. 
 A longer total duration of the programme compared to a single project. 
 Scaling-up project activities while building up the capacity of Lao institutions. 
 Taking advantage of synergies with other development programmes in the country. 
 
17. The benefits of a programmatic approach include: 
 Impact: Greater flexibility through constituent projects to gather data and learn iteratively for more effective and 
adaptive design and to achieve higher impact in subsequent projects (build up know-how and gather lessons 
learned). 
 Sustainability: Higher potential for crowding-in more sustainable financing from diversified sources (more 
emission reductions, additional domestic revenues, larger endowment for the REDD+ Funding Window), utilising 
a hybrid financing mechanism for the entire programme and thereby increasing long-term financial sustainability. 
 Paradigm shift: More time for communities, businesses, civil servants and regulators to adjust to the desired 
paradigm shift in the land-use sector though the extended duration of the programme. 
 Efficiency: Greater flexibility to improve project management and reduce transaction costs over time, in particular 
through the common financing mechanism (the REDD+ Funding Window). 
 Integration: Better linkage with the programmatic approach of the FCPF ER Program. 
 Convergence: A more open platform for coordination and harmonisation of existing co-financing contributions 
(ADB, IFAD, KFW, JICA) towards the NDC forestry objectives, as well as a vehicle for attracting additional co-
financing. 
 
Table 1: Programme Core Indicator Targets 
 
 
A.22.3 Coherence among constituent projects 
 
Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided 
(mitigation only) 
Annual 
6 million t CO2 eq 
Lifetime 
144.7 million t CO2 eq 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, 
defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime 
emission reductions (mitigation 
only) 
(a) Total project financing 
162.7 million  Euros    
(b) Requested GCF amount  
62.7   million  Euros 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions2  
144.7 million  t CO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
1.12   Euros / t CO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq 
removed (e = b / c) 
0.69   Euros / t CO2eq 
 
Expected volume of finance to 
be leveraged by the programme 
as a result of the Fund’s 
financing (mitigation only) 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
747 million   Euros 
(g) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
7.5 
 
Expected total number of direct 
and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
254,800 rural beneficiaries 
50% female 
Indirect 
412,650 rural beneficiaries 
50% female 
Number of beneficiaries relative 
to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
4% of national (4% of women) 
Indirect 
5% of national population (5% of women) 
 
2 20-year programme influence period.

=== PAGE 10 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 6 OF 95 
 
18. All three constituent projects of the programme contribute to reducing emissions and increasing carbon 
sequestration in forest ecosystems of the accounting area. All funded activities in each project have the purpose 
of contributing to this goal directly or to improving the framework conditions to implement, sustain and safeguard 
those activities that contribute directly to this goal. 
 
19. The constituent projects complement each other to achieve outcomes beyond those that could be achieved by 
isolated, one-off interventions, including through: 
 Combining the mitigation potential, and therefore the potential for accessing results-based payments, at the 
scale necessary to sustain mitigation activities without subsequent programme support.  
 Preventing leakage. 
 Exchange and learning between participating stakeholders. 
 
The constituent projects apply common implementation arrangements, including a: 
 Joint, inclusive governance structure. 
 Centralised national financial mechanism (the REDD+ Funding Window) to allocate project financing and 
results-based payments according to the FCPF benefit-sharing plan. 
 Common Environmental and Social Framework, including a Management Plan and an Ethnic Groups 
Engagement Plan. 
 Common monitoring framework. 
 
       A programme is, therefore, more efficient and effective in terms of both its costs and impacts. 
 
A.22.4 Programme Area 
 
20. The envisaged programme, in which Project 1 is embedded, serves as the cornerstone instrument for successful 
implementation of the Laos Emission Reduction Programme (ER-P). Both cover the same six provinces in northern 
Laos: Houaphan, Luang Prabang, Sayabouri, Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay (see Figure 2 below and the 
maps in Annex 16). The programme location constitutes 35% of the national territory and 32% of the country’s 
forest cover. Because the programme operates in precisely the same target area as the ER-P, its mitigation 
outcomes can be accounted for using the same MRV institutions and processes that have been built up for the 
ER-P and will directly unlock FCPF results-based payments. 
 
 
Project 1 and Project 3 address the three provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang. These 
provinces contain the districts with the highest rates of deforestation and forest degradation within the ER-P 
accounting area and contain the remaining forest areas most at risk of deforestation / forest degradation. In 
addition, the geographical locations of these three provinces enable connectivity of forest ecosystems at a 
landscape level. 
 
Project 1 (mid-2020 to mid-2024) and Project 3 (mid-2024 to end-2029) will be implemented consecutively. 
This back-to-back structure will: enable the establishment and testing of the institutional and operational 
arrangements for the programme, including, for example, the REDD+ Funding Window at central level and 
the FPIC process at local level; facilitate implementation of local investments and mitigation actions at a 
more manageable, smaller scale (200 communities in Project 1); avoid overstretching the available 
implementation capacities of partners before scaling-up the number of communities to 400 in Project 3; 
generate sufficient emission reductions in time for the FCPF Carbon Fund sunset date of 2024; and set-up 
the programme in which the Projects are embedded to be in a position to access additional results-based 
payments from other sources after 2025 by taking the lessons learned of Project 1 into account and scaling-
up the number of participating communities to 400 in the same geographical area (Project 3) as well as 
expanding the geographical area (Project 2). 
 
Project 2 (2022 to end-2029) addresses the three remaining provinces of Luang Namtha, Bokeo and 
Oudomxay. Introducing Project 2 at a later date will enable the programme in which the Projects are 
embedded to benefit from lessons learned in Projects 1 when expanding the geographical scope of the 
programme. It will also align with KfW’s investments, which will produce useful preparatory outputs, including 
land use plans in 103 villages in Bokeo and Luang Namtha provinces up to 2021, when KfW support is 
scheduled to phase out. These villages are target villages for Project 2. 
 
21. The combined area of deforestation and forest degradation in the programme area is approximately 20,000 
ha/year. Approximately 40% of total national deforestation and degradation takes place within the selected six 
provinces – 65% (13,000 ha/year) in the three provinces included in Projects 1 and 3 and 35% (7,000 ha/year) in 
the three provinces included in Project 2. Each of the six provinces has developed Provincial REDD+ Action Plans

=== PAGE 11 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 7 OF 95 
 
(PRAPs – see Annex 22), which analyse key drivers of deforestation, major barriers, and proposed actions and 
measures to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. 
 
Figure 2: The Programme Area in the Lao PDR Context 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22. Selection of districts. Of the 50 districts in the six provinces, 28 districts have been selected for programme support. 
The selected districts cover 72% of the remaining high-carbon-stock area in the six target provinces (3.1 million 
ha out of 4.3 million ha). Projects 1 and 3 contain 16 districts and Project 2 contains 12 districts. The selection 
process for the districts combined detailed quantitative and qualitative considerations, which are described in 
Chapter 2.5 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a) and shown in Annex 16b. 
 
Table 2: Project Coverage of Programme Districts 
 
23. For each selected district, a deforestation risk assessment was conducted to prioritise GCF investments and to 
ensure the highest possible impact. The risk assessment estimated the probability of deforestation and forest 
degradation due to agricultural expansion in the selected districts. Factors such as elevation, distance to roads 
and current land use classes were taken into account in classifying the risk and identifying potential target villages.3 
The programme in which the Projects are embedded will serve approximately 700 villages – 400 in Houaphan, 
Sayabouri and Luang Prabang provinces (200 in Project 1 and the full 400 in Project 3) and 300 in Luang Namtha, 
Bokeo and Oudomxay provinces in Project 2. (For environmental, social, FPIC and gender considerations, see 
Section G). 
Projects 1 and 3 
Project 2 
Houaphan Province: Hiem, Houameung, Viengxai, Xam 
Nuea, Xamtai, Xone , Sopbao 
Luang Namtha Province: Long, Luang 
Namtha, Nalee, Viengphouka 
Sayabouri Province: Hongsa, Phaklai, Phieng, 
Sayabouri, Thongmixai 
Bokeo Province: Houayxai, Mueng, Paktha, 
PhaOudom 
Luang Prabang Province: Nan, Phonthong, Phonxai, 
Viengkham, XiengNgeun 
Oudomxay Province: Beng, NaMo, Nga, Xai 
 
3 The 28 district-level deforestation and degradation risk maps are provided in Annex 16. 
Project 2 
Projects 1 and 3

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 8 OF 95 
 
 
 
4 Lao Housing and Population Census, 2015 
5 World Bank: https://data.worldbank.org/country/lao-pdr?view=chart  
6 HDI takes into account three dimensions to assess the level of development of a country: a long and healthy life (life expectancy at birth), 
knowledge (expected years of schooling, mean years of schooling), and a decent standard of living (GNI per capita). Additional information 
can be found at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human-development-index-hdi 
7 UNDP (2018), Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update: 
http://www.hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2018_human_development_statistical_update.pdf  
8 World Bank: https://data.worldbank.org/country/lao-pdr?view=chart 
9 GIZ (2018), Towards Responsible Agricultural Investment in Lao PDR: A Study of Agribusiness Experiences. 
10 NAFRI (2006), Improving Livelihoods in the Uplands of Lao PDR – A Sourcebook, http://www.mekonginfo.org/assets/midocs/0001773-
environment-improving-livelihoods-in-the-uplands-of-the-lao-pdr.pdf  
11 See https://www.cepf.net/our-work/biodiversity-hotspots/indo-burma and MAF (2010), Fourth National Report to the Convention on 
Biological Diversity 
12 FCPF Carbon Fund (2018), Emission Reductions Programme Document: Promoting REDD+ through Governance, Forest Landscapes 
and Livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR, https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2018/May/LaoPDR_ER-
PD_FinalDraftMay.2018-Clean.pdf 
13 Thomas, I. L. (2015), Drivers of Deforestation in the Greater Mekong Sub-region - Lao PDR Country Report 
14 FCPF Carbon Fund (2018), Emission Reductions Programme Document: Promoting REDD+ through Governance, Forest Landscapes 
and Livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR, https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2018/May/LaoPDR_ER-
PD_FinalDraftMay.2018-Clean.pdf 
15 WRI CAIT database (2014 data), https://www.climatewatchdata.org/countries/LAO?source=31  
16 Lao PDR Second National Communication to the UNFCCC (2013), https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/Laonc2.pdf 
PROJECT INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate rationale and context 
B.1.1. Context 
 
24. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR) is a landlocked least developed country (LLDC) in Southeast 
Asia. The country covers an area of 24 million hectares, has a population of 6.9 million4 and an average per capita 
income of USD 2,270.5 The country has a human development index (HDI)6 of 0.601, ranking it 139th (out of 189) 
globally.7 The country’s economy is dependent on natural resources, especially forestry, agriculture, electricity 
generation (especially hydropower) and mining. Agriculture, forestry and fisheries account for 16% of GDP and 
employ 64% of the Lao workforce.8 
 
25. The agricultural sector consists primarily of subsistence farmers and is characterised by low yields due to limited 
use of high-quality inputs such as seeds and fertilizer, low soil quality, limited irrigation and insecure land tenure.9 
Significant crops include rice, maize, sugarcane and cassava. Some 80% of the population are heavily reliant on 
forests for timber, food, fuel, shelter, medicines and spiritual protection10. Lao forests are at the heart of the 
globally-recognised Biodiversity Hotspot Indo-Burma.11 Forest cover accounts for 58% of the country’s surface 
area, significantly lower than the 70% forest cover of the mid-1960s. In the past fifteen years, net forest loss has 
amounted to approximately 680,000 ha, the equivalent of losing 175 soccer fields per day.12 The situation 
regarding forest degradation – which encompasses reductions in forest stocking, changes in species composition 
and size structure, and loss of wildlife and plant habitats – is as concerning as deforestation.13 
 
26. Lao PDR’s historical GHG emissions due to deforestation and forest degradation amounted to 34.1 million 
tCO2eq/year in the period 2005-2015, with an increasing trend in 2010-2015. Carbon removals due to reforestation 
and forest restoration (-7.53 million tCO2eq/year) are a small fraction of carbon emissions, resulting in net annual 
average GHG emissions of 26.6 million tCO2eq from land use change and forestry in the period 2005-
2015.14 Overall, the forestry and land use change sector is responsible for 67% of Lao PDR’s emissions, and 
agriculture contributes a further 28%.15 
 
27. In its Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC)16, Lao PDR identifies itself as an LDC with limited adaptive capacities that is highly vulnerable to 
climate change impacts. The country is considered to have a high risk of river flooding, landslides, cyclones and 
wildfires, a medium risk for extreme heat, and a low risk for water scarcity. Within Lao PDR, poor and marginalised 
groups disproportionally face climate risks, among them temperature increases and erratic rainfall, given that they 
are more exposed to such changes and generally have a lower capacity to adapt given their reliance on the 
immediate environment. Although this GCF proposal is a mitigation (REDD+) initiative, the proposal incorporates 
interventions that will promote climate change adaptation – notably enhanced land-use planning, improvements 
to irrigation infrastructure, reforestation in catchment areas and climate-smart agriculture.

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 9 OF 95 
 
 
 
17 https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/NDCStaging/Pages/Search.aspx?k=Lao%20People%27s%20Democratic%20Republic 
18 https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/carbon-fund-eighteenth-cf18-june-20-22-2018-paris  
19 The PRAPs are provided in Annex 22. 
20 Prime Minister Order No. 13 (2012): Moratorium on New Concessions for Mining, Rubber and Eucalyptus Plantations 
B.1.2. Policy Framework 
 
28. The importance of forest resources and their sustainable management is enshrined in the country’s highest-level 
policies, including the 8th National Socio-Economic Development Plan (8th NSEDP, 2016-2020), the Green 
Growth Strategy (currently being drafted), the Central Party Resolution on Land (2017), the Forestry Strategy 
2020, as well as in Lao PDR’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC).17 
 
29. Laos’s NDC places significant weight on the forestry sector, establishing a forest cover target of 70% as well as 
activities for regeneration of degraded forests. The underlying Forestry Strategy 2020 identifies the following 
sector targets: 
 
 
To improve the quality of forests by naturally regenerating up to six million ha and planting (including through 
assisted natural regeneration) trees in unstocked forest area of up to 500,000 ha as an integral component 
of a rural livelihood support system encompassing stable water supplies and prevention of natural disasters 
(floods and landslides). 
 
To provide a sustainable flow of forest products for domestic consumption and to generate revenue through 
wood processing sales and exports, contributing to livelihood improvement, fiscal revenue and foreign 
exchange earnings whilst increasing direct and indirect employment. 
 
To preserve the many species and unique habitats which are, for different reasons, under threat. 
 
To conserve the environment, including protection of soil, conservation of watersheds and combating climate 
change. 
 
30. In 2018, the government complemented the NDC and Forestry Strategy with the National REDD+ Strategy (NRS) 
to 2025 and National REDD+ Vision to 2030 as the official government documents for guiding REDD+ 
implementation. The National REDD+ Strategy and Vision aim to improve the quality and extent of forests 
nationwide to provide economic, social and environmental benefits. The policies require all stakeholders, including 
households, communities and the private sector, to actively participate in the reduction of deforestation and 
degradation, and the promotion of forest restoration and reforestation. 
 
31. Laos has been a partner country in the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) since 2008. Its Readiness 
Preparation Proposal (R-PP) was accepted in late 2010, its Emission Reductions Programme Idea Note (ER-PIN) 
was approved in March 2016 and its Emission Reductions Programme Document (ER-PD) was accepted into the 
FCPF Carbon Fund without conditions at the 18th Carbon Fund Participants Meeting in June 2018.18 A key 
component of the ER-PD is the articulation of the government’s comprehensive strategy to reduce GHG emissions 
and increase removals from the forest sector in the six target provinces – Houaphan, Luang Prabang, Sayabouri, 
Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay – that comprise the Laos Emission Reductions Programme (ER-P) area. 
Project 1 and the following projects of the envisaged programme form a cornerstone of ER-P implementation and 
shares an identical target area (and accounting system) as the ER-P. This six-province strategy of the ER-P is an 
aggregation and synthesis of Provincial REDD+ Action Plans (PRAPs) developed for each target province in the 
period 2016-2018.19 
 
32. The government, together with development partners, has put in place an extensive institutional framework at 
national and sub-national levels to implement REDD+, including the ER-P. This framework includes the 
establishment of a National REDD+ Task Force, representing diverse economic sectors, including forestry, 
agriculture, mining, energy and land use planning, as well as including representatives from the Ministry of Justice, 
Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Planning and Investment, the Lao Front for National Development (LFND), the Lao 
Women’s Union (LWU) and the Lao Chamber of Commerce; six Technical Working Groups covering the legal 
framework, land tenure, MRV/REL, safeguards, benefit-sharing, and enforcement and implementation of 
mitigation activities; REDD+ Offices and REDD+ Task Forces at provincial level; and the development of the 
National REDD+ Strategy, the Forest Reference Emission Level (FREL) and Forest Reference Level (FRL), the 
National Forest Monitoring System (NFMS) and the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA). 
 
33. In parallel, the government has, in recent years, embarked on a number of reforms that provide a platform for 
launching GCF project interventions. In 2012, the government issued a suspension on granting of new 
concessions for mining, eucalyptus and rubber investments, which remains in effect today. 20  A national

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 10 OF 95 
 
 
 
21 Prime Minister Order No. 31 (2013): Temporary Ban on Logging in National Production Forests 
22 Prime Minister Order No. 15 (2016): Enhancing Strictness in the Management and Inspection of Timber Exploitation, Timber Movement 
and Timber Businesses 
23 The 28 district-level deforestation and degradation risk maps are provided in Annex 16. 
24 https://redd.unfccc.int/files/2018_frel_submission_laopdr.pdf 
25 FCPF Carbon Fund (2018), Emission Reductions Programme Document: Promoting REDD+ through Governance, Forest Landscapes 
and Livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR, https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2018/May/LaoPDR_ER-
PD_FinalDraftMay.2018-Clean.pdf 
moratorium on logging in production forests has been also in effect since 2013 in order to protect natural forests 
from unsustainable exploitation.21 In 2016, the government put in place measures to halt illegal logging and illegal 
timber exports; this is already demonstrating significant impact and underlies the ongoing FLEGT Voluntary 
Partnership Agreement (VPA) negotiations with the EU.22 The adoption of the Central Party Committee Resolution 
on Land in 2017, indicating the need for reform in land management, is paving the way for a new Land Law in 
2019. The Forestry Law (2007), which determines the basic principles, regulations and measures for the use of 
forest and forestland, is currently under revision to address emerging domestic and international challenges facing 
the sector. Moreover, since 2016 all responsibilities for forestry have been returned to one ministry, the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF), thereby promoting ‘joined up’ policy development and implementation. 
 
34. In summary, Lao PDR is positioned to embark upon an ambitious transformation of its forest sector. The NDC 
establishes the government’s climate action framework and accords forestry and agriculture prominent roles. The 
National REDD+ Strategy establishes REDD+ as the national organising framework for climate mitigation in the 
forestry sector. The ER-P is the key government initiative to operationalise the National REDD+ Strategy. And 
Project 1, which is part of a broader programme, will form the cornerstone instrument for implementing the ER-P. 
As outlined below, the project is explicitly designed around the ER-P, sharing the same target geographical area 
and accounting and MRV methodologies, and building the capacity of the country to generate REDD+ results-
based payments from the ER-P and to channel the revenues from these payments back to stakeholders for 
reinvestment in sustainable forestry practices. 
 
B.1.3 Project Area 
 
35. The northern region of Laos is characterised by hilly topography, remote accessibility and limited public and 
industrial infrastructure, unique ethnic communities and a persistent prevalence of poverty. Project 1 addresses 
the three provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang (see Figure 2) since they contain the districts 
with the highest rates of deforestation and forest degradation within the ER-P accounting area and contain the 
remaining forest areas most at risk of deforestation and forest degradation. In addition, the geographical locations 
of these three provinces enable connectivity of forest ecosystems at a landscape level. 
 
36. Within these provinces, the project will serve approximately 200 villages in the following 16 districts: 
 
 
Houaphan Province: Hiem, Houameung, Viengxai, Xam Nuea, Xamtai, Xone, Sopbao 
 
Sayabouri Province: Hongsa, Phaklai, Phieng, Sayabouri, Thongmixai  
 
Luang Prabang Province: Nan, Phonthong, Phonxai, Viengkham, XiengNgeun 
 
37. The selection process for the districts combined detailed quantitative and qualitative considerations, which are 
described in Chapter 2.5 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a) and are shown in Annex 16b. For each selected 
district, a deforestation risk assessment was conducted to prioritise GCF investments and to ensure the highest 
possible impact. The risk assessment estimated the probability of deforestation and forest degradation due to 
agricultural expansion in the selected districts. Factors such as elevation, distance to roads and current land use 
classes were taken into account in classifying the risk and identifying potential target villages. 23  (For 
environmental, social, FPIC and gender considerations, see Section G). 
 
B.1.4 Baseline Scenario: Emissions from, and Drivers of, Deforestation and Forest Degradation 
 
38. The baseline greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions scenario has been analysed thoroughly as part of Lao PDR’s 
engagement with REDD+ (the UNFCCC Forest Reference Emission Level (FREL))24 and the FCPF Carbon Fund 
(the Reference Level (RL) of the ER-P).25 The RL estimates net GHG emissions of 7.9 million tCO2eq per year 
from the forest sector in the six northern provinces that constitute the programme area, driven primarily by forest 
degradation (6.8m tCO2eq/year) and deforestation (3.8m tCO2eq/year), which are only partially offset by slight 
gains from reforestation (-1.4m tCO2eq/year) and forest restoration (-1.3m tCO2eq/year).

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 11 OF 95 
 
 
 
26 Ibid.  
27 Linquist, B., Saito, K., Keoboualapha, B., Phengchan, S., Songyikhansutho, K., Phanthaboon, K., Vongphoutone, B., Navongsai, V., 
Horie, T. (2005), ‘Improving Rice-Based Upland Cropping Systems for the Lao PDR’, in: Shifting Cultivation and Poverty Eradication in the 
Uplands of the Lao PDR: Proceedings, National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute (NAFRI): p.299-313. 
28 Wildlife Conservation Society and GIZ (2015), Report on the Assessment of Drivers of Deforestation and Forest Degradation in 
Houaphan Province, https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/Houaphan-Drivers-of-Deforestation-Report.pdf 
29 FCPF Carbon Fund (2018), Emission Reductions Programme Document: Promoting REDD+ through Governance, Forest Landscapes 
and Livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR, https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2018/May/LaoPDR_ER-
PD_FinalDraftMay.2018-Clean.pdf 
39. Shifting cultivation is the greatest single proximate driver of deforestation and forest degradation in the project area, 
responsible for 22% of forest disturbances greater than 5 hectares in size. Agricultural land expansion (19%) and 
plantation agriculture development (13%) are also significant contributors. Other drivers include road construction 
(12%), selective logging (10%) and the establishment of tree plantations (7%).26 
 
40. Shifting cultivation, if managed properly (including control of fires), can be sustainable. However, a number of 
underlying factors are transforming it into an unsustainable, and highly damaging, practice in northern Laos: 
 
 
Economic factors: With increasing competition for land from cash-crops, combined with a growing population, 
fallow periods are becoming shorter, leading to lower productivity, increased soil degradation and the need to 
clear more forests for subsistence purposes. Expanding agriculture – notably upland rice, an important 
subsistence crop – into forest areas through slash and burn practices is typically a last resort among poor 
families with no other livelihood options. In this respect, shifting cultivation practices act as a safety net for poor 
and vulnerable groups.  
 
 
Agro-technological factors: Upland rice yields are often limited by seasonal precipitation, as the crop is highly 
susceptible to drought, weed infestations and a lack of soil conservation practices to limit erosion. Continual 
planting of upland rice without intercropping can lead to significant reductions in soil fertility – as much as 80% 
over 5 years.27 This reduction of yields drives villagers to clear new forest land that is more productive after 
clearance. After a few years, the productivity declines again and places pressure on other forest areas.   
 
 
Policy and institutional factors: Insufficient and inappropriate land use planning is a major underlying cause of 
deforestation, either because of the complete absence of plans or through a lack of compliance with plans 
(which, in the past, have often been designed in a top-down manner involving limited consultation with 
villagers). The absence of integrated spatial planning, and village-level participatory land use planning in some 
villages, is a major underlying cause of deforestation from pioneering shifting cultivation. Uncertainty regarding 
land uses and border demarcation can lead to unclear rules and gradual encroachment into forests. Even when 
village land use plans have been developed, without adequate incentive mechanisms to encourage 
implementation, or sanctions discouraging non-compliance, plans often are ignored. Monitoring the overall 
compliance with land use plans is weak in many villages and districts, and often areas under cultivation are 
under-reported, as many areas are illegally cleared.28 Unclear land and resource rights and land allocation 
remain a challenge. Land allocation processes, especially in rural areas, have been hindered by a lack of 
government capacities, resources and equipment.29  
 
41. The expansion of agricultural land (permanent agriculture) and plantation agriculture in the project area is driven 
by: 
 
Economic factors: Strong regional markets, especially in neighbouring countries, continue to drive the 
production of key agricultural export commodities such as rubber, sugar cane, maize and cassava. Demand 
from Chinese and Vietnamese markets is increasing and incentivises the clearing of forests for agriculture. Lao 
SMEs play an important role in these supply chains, as they typically act as traders between Lao producers 
and Chinese and Vietnamese markets. A further analysis of the role of markets and SMEs can be found in 
Chapter 2 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). Cultivation of cash crops is seen as a direct route out of poverty 
for households and as an important economic pillar for provincial governments. While such commodities and 
markets are important for economic development in Lao PDR, weak land use planning, law enforcement and 
agro-technological factors contribute to unsustainable conversion of forested land for agricultural cultivation. 
 
 
Agro-technological factors: The use of low-yield crop varieties, a lack of appropriate management practices 
and nitrogen loss in soil due to continual planting of crops lead to additional forest being cleared for agriculture. 
While yields have improved with the adoption of contract farming systems, which have provided farmers with 
improved maize varieties and agricultural inputs, challenges associated with mono-cropping on steep slopes 
are still common.

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 12 OF 95 
 
 
 
30 Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade. 
 
 
Policy and institutional factors: Land use plans and targets established in provincial and district Socio-Economic 
Development Plans (SEDPs) are often unaligned, and lead to an inability to monitor and enforce compliance 
with plans, policies and regulations. For instance, the SEDP for Houaphan province has established an official 
target for the agricultural area of 70,545 ha by 2020; however, aggregation of the constituent district SEDP 
targets results in a total agricultural area that is three times larger than the provincial target. Inconsistencies in 
master planning and zoning are a major underlying cause of deforestation, as these plans are not reflective of 
the actual land use activities that are implemented.  
 
42. The primary barriers to sustainable forestry management and reforestation include gaps in forest governance and 
regulation, poor land use planning, lack of long-term financing for forest management, and insufficient skills and 
experience in sustainable forest management. Detailed analysis of these barriers can be found in Chapter 2 of 
the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). 
 
B.1.5 Baseline Projects 
 
43. A number of projects have been, and continue to be, implemented in the Project 1 target region. Extensive 
consultations have been undertaken with these projects: the design of Project 1 builds upon their lessons learned 
and seeks to complement their interventions. A detailed analysis of all relevant baseline initiatives is provided in 
Chapter 1.10 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). Key initiatives include: 
 
44. Climate Protection through Avoided Deforestation (CliPAD): Government of Germany (BMZ, through GIZ and 
KfW), 2009-2021. The CliPAD project objective is to meet the key conditions for Lao PDR to receive FCPF REDD+ 
performance-based payments. The four components are: (i) national REDD+ support, (ii) Provincial REDD+ Action 
Plan (PRAP) development, (iii) access to climate finance, and (iv) implementation of village forest management. 
CliPAD is closely linked to Activities 1.2, 1.4 and 3.1 of the Project 1 design (see below, Section B.3). The fourth 
phase of CliPAD (2019-2021), funded by BMZ, will provide co-finance for Project 1. 
 
45. Protection and sustainable use of Forest Ecosystems and Biodiversity (ProFEB), including its component 
Support to the Lao-EU FLEGT30 process (ProFLEGT): Government of Germany (BMZ, through GIZ), 2013-
2021. The objective of ProFEB/ProFLEGT is to improve governance in the forestry sector and to support the 
government of Lao PDR in its efforts to conclude a bilateral voluntary partnership agreement (VPA) with the EU 
on the trade in timber products whose provenance is legally verified. The VPA will set out the legal obligations and 
the measures to be undertaken by both parties to combat illegal logging. ProFLEGT includes the development of 
timber legality definitions (TLDs) and a timber legality assurance system (TLAS) for timber from different sources; 
it represents an essential contribution to Activities 1.4 (forest law enforcement), 2.1 (deforestation-free agricultural 
practices and agroforestry), 3.1 (village forestry) and 3.2 (sustainable forest management) of Project 1. The TLDs 
and TLAS define what constitutes legally-produced timber, how to control the supply chain, how to verify legally-
sourced timber and how to issue licences. 
 
46. Village Forestry Management (VFM): Government of Germany (BMZ, through KfW), 2019-2025. The objective 
of the VFM project is the improvement of forest ecosystems and the livelihoods of the people living in the project 
area through the sustainable management of village forests. The project commenced in July 2019 and close 
cooperation within Activity 3.1 of Project 1 is foreseen. The VFM pilot districts are also Project 1 target districts: 
Phiang district in Sayabouri province and Phonexay district in Luang Prabang province. The VFM project’s 
commitment in the districts of Phonexay and Phiang is reflected in the budget for Project 1, since no budget from 
the GCF is allocated to those two districts for Village Forest Management Planning or for the implementation of 
annual operational plans. Furthermore, no equipment will be procured through the GCF budget for forest officials 
in these two districts, with those costs being covered by the KfW VFM project. 
 
47. Land Management and Decentralised Planning (LMDP): Government of Germany (BMZ, through GIZ), 2015-
2019. The LMDP project objective is to improve policies, practices and planning processes in relation to land use 
in Lao PDR, particularly among investors, village authorities and villagers. The five components are: (i) provision 
of policy and technical advice to the Lao government on improving land governance, (ii) land use and spatial 
planning, (iii) land registration, tenure security and improved knowledge of villages on land issues, (iv) 
decentralised development planning, and (v) promoting high-quality investment promotion. The LMDP project is 
closely linked to Activity 1.5 of the Project 1 design. The LMDP project also focuses on registration of plots of land

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 13 OF 95 
 
 
 
31 National MRV (2019) and ER-Programme MRV are expected to be the opportunities for developing knowledge for FREL enhancement. 
JICA, in collaboration with other partners, will technically support this process. For example, inclusion of other carbon pools (e.g. 
deadwood) and non-CO2 gases could be considered. Degradation monitoring is another area to be further explored (both refinement of the 
current methodology and application of different methodologies). 
32 See World Bank SUFORD project (2016), Integrated Spatial Planning, Socio-Economic Development Planning, Awarding of Concessions 
and Lessons Learned for Forest Landscape Management. Provided in Annex 21b. 
and Project 1 complements this by addressing boundary demarcation. Two of the four LMDP project provinces 
overlap with Project 1 target areas – namely Houaphan and Sayabouri. 
 
48. Integrated Conservation of Biodiversity and Forests (ICBF): Government of Germany (BMZ, through KfW), 
2015-2022. The ICBF project objective is the effective management of selected target landscapes (comprising 
national protected areas (NPAs) and corridors) that sustain biodiversity in forest ecosystems, while supporting 
livelihoods of forest-dependent villages. The project is active in two NPAs in two GCF Project 2 provinces – Luang 
Namtha and Bokeo – and will continue activities there until 2022. The components are: (i) improved planning and 
management of NPAs, (ii) improved law enforcement in two project biodiversity conservation landscapes, and (iii) 
sustainable land and forest management, including livelihood activities based on participatory land use planning 
(PLUP) established within the conservation landscapes. Activity 3.3 (national conservation forest management) 
of Project 1 builds upon the ICBF project and its approaches on capacity building, strengthening data/information 
quality and availability, awareness creation, institutional development and support, border demarcation and 
biodiversity monitoring. Other Project 1 Activities will benefit from the ICBF project’s experience, notably the ICBF 
project’s engagement with the private sector (which links particularly to Activities 2.1 and 2.2), law enforcement 
(Activity 1.4) and coordination with village development funds (Activity 2.1).  
 
49. Incentive Mechanisms for Private Sector Engagement Under REDD+ in Lao PDR: FAO-implemented GCF 
readiness project, 2018-2020. The project addresses a number of focus areas, including: (i) private sector 
engagement for implementing REDD+ measures that contribute directly to Project 1 – notably Activities 1.3, 2.1, 
2.2 and 3.1, and (ii) a systemic approach to GCF investment in the Lao forestry sector. Policy options and models 
that incentivise deforestation-free agriculture (including agroforestry) investments will be generated from this work 
that inform the implementation of Project 1. 
 
50. Sustainable Forest Management and REDD+ Support Project (F-REDD): Government of Japan (JICA), 2014-
2025. The F-REDD project aims to strengthen the capacity of the Lao forestry sector through strengthening 
policies, effective incorporation of REDD+ and improvement of forest resource information as the foundation of 
sustainable forest management. The four components are: (i) enhanced capacity of the government for policy 
development, implementation and sector coordination, (i) enhanced quantification of emission reductions and 
removals resulting from the implementation of REDD+ activities at a national scale using the National Forest 
Monitoring System (NFMS), (iii) enhanced institutional development, management and coordination of the national 
REDD+ process, and (iv) enhanced REDD+ readiness in a pilot site. The F-REDD activities are closely linked to 
Project 1 Activity 1.6 and Outputs 2 and 3. JICA is an Executing Entity of Project 1 (alongside GIZ and the 
Government of Lao PDR – see Section B.4) and will be responsible for the implementation of Activity 1.6 in close 
coordination with the Forest Inventory and Planning Division (FIPD) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 
(MAF) and the GCF National Project Management Unit (NPMU). JICA will also co-finance the implementation of 
Project 1 in the province of Luang Prabang. As part of its contribution to Project 1, JICA also anticipates supporting 
interventions to enhance the FREL.31  
 
51. Sustainable Forestry for Rural Development (SUFORD): IDA/Government of Finland, 2003-2013. The 
SUFORD project objective was to support Lao PDR to achieve sustainable management of production forests to 
alleviate rural poverty in project provinces by implementing forest policy reform actions and policies. The four 
components were: (i) support services for SFM, (ii) SFM and village development, (iii) forestry sector monitoring 
and control, and (iv) project management. Specific GCF Project 1 Activities and Actions build upon the SUFORD 
approach and key lessons learned from the implementation of the project. Informing Activity 1.4, for example, is 
the fact that in SUFORD-supported provinces (Sayabouri, Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay) it was noted 
that while law enforcement staff had established basic skills and a systematic enforcement programme, a major 
challenge was to ensure sufficient funding given budget constraints. While the use of new tools was initiated (e.g. 
a national forestry reporting system, an internal monitoring system, a document management system, a budget 
planning system and a Department of Inspection information management system), it was noted that further 
support was needed to ensure that the use of these management tools became a routine activity.32 The design of 
Actions 1.4.1 (Strengthening procedures, standards and systems for law enforcement) and 1.4.2 (Training for 
implementation of enhanced law enforcement) have been informed by these SUFORD findings. Activity 3.1 builds 
on the substantial experience generated by the SUFORD project in actively involving villagers in forest

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 14 OF 95 
 
 
 
33 An overview of the legal and regulatory framework governing the forest sector in Lao PDR is provided in Annex 22v. 
34 Dwyer, M. and Dejvongsa, V. (2017), Forest and Agricultural Land Use Planning: A Strategic Analysis of the TABI Approach in Lao PDR. 
A review of The Agro-Biodiversity Initiative commissioned by the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation. 
management. The data for the production forests targeted under Activity 3.2 partially comes from SUFORD forest 
assessments.  
 
52. The project is also fully aligned with the GCF Country Programme (updated in February 2019). The GCF Country 
Programme identifies REDD+ as one of four mitigation priorities. The increase and maintenance of forest cover is 
identified as one of five short-term priorities (mitigation and adaptation). The Country Programme specifically 
identifies the GIZ GCF project as a programming priority. Synergies with other GCF proposals that are planned or 
under development – including integrated food systems (UNDP), climate-friendly agribusiness (ADB) and climate-
resilient smallholder farmers (WFP) – are noted, as well as synergies with a number of GCF readiness activities 
(notably, GIZ’s work supporting the Environmental Protection Fund to become an Accredited Entity and FAO’s 
support to private sector engagement with REDD+).  
 
53. Past forestry and REDD+ projects have aimed at helping Lao PDR to become ‘ready’ in the context of the Warsaw 
Framework for REDD+. All past REDD+ interventions have been REDD+ readiness activities, explicitly designed 
to take Lao PDR through REDD+ Stage 1 of readiness, leading to the current situation where Lao PDR is, in 
principle, able to engage in Stage 2 (implementation) and receive results-based payments (Stage 3). Examples 
of past REDD+ readiness activities include: JICA setting up the MRV system and supporting the FRL/FREL, and 
BMZ (through CliPAD) supporting the ERPD process, safeguards and some piloting of mitigation actions. The 
FCPF Readiness support helped to develop the REDD+ Strategy. All of these initiatives ultimately helped Laos to 
be accepted into the FCPF Carbon Fund and, with project support, to be able to generate REDD+ payments. 
B.2. Theory of change 
B.2.1 Barriers 
 
54. While the government is fully committed to implementing the Laos ER-P and the broader National REDD+ 
Strategy, there are barriers that need to be addressed with GCF support to ensure the success of the planned 
initiatives. Full details are provided in Chapter 2.2 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). In summary, the barriers in 
the project area can be categorised as follows: 
 
 
Lack of long-term sustainable financing for forest management and enforcement: Government budgets are 
constrained and highly dependent upon donor support, partly because collection levels of legally-mandated 
forest-sector fees and taxes (e.g. income tax, timber harvesting taxes, land taxes) are low. While there is 
potential to expand and diversify sources of income for forest management (e.g. payment for ecosystem 
services linked to hydropower schemes and road tolls associated with infrastructure development), such 
measures have not been formalised or tapped at scale.  
 
 
Gaps in forest governance and regulations: REDD+ is not fully mainstreamed into Socio-Economic 
Development Plans (SEDPs), and gaps and inconsistencies in forest regulations limit the effectiveness of forest 
governance. Notably, Prime Minister Order 31 (2013) prohibits logging within production forests but does not 
explicitly make an exception for participatory sustainable forest management; and Prime Minister Order 9 
(2018) includes inconsistent incentives for smallholder engagement in village-based agroforestry.33 
 
 
Insufficient land use planning and weak implementation and monitoring of land use plans: Ineffective land use 
planning is contributing to deforestation through unclear land use rules, inconsistent (or absent) boundary 
demarcations, and weak monitoring and enforcement. Even where land use planning is applied, different 
planning processes pertain to agricultural land and forested land, resulting in disconnected strategies and 
monitoring.34  
 
 
Insufficient law enforcement: There is currently weak policy coherence and cross-sectoral coordination: policies 
continue to place emphasis on land use activities that support economic growth (e.g. cash crop cultivation, 
energy, etc.), while policies to safeguard forests are not given the same prominence and are not widely 
enforced. Law enforcement agencies such as the forest inspectorate are under-staffed and under-equipped, 
lacking up-to-date maps and GPS equipment, for example, and even lacking vehicles and budgets to travel to 
the field.

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 15 OF 95 
 
 
 
35 For further information on ‘good agricultural practice’, see the dedicated Chapter on this in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). 
 
Insufficient practical experience and skills for implementing good agricultural practices: Land use practices 
commonly applied in the Project 1 area are characterised by low productivity and cannot typically be considered 
‘good agricultural practice’.35 Increased competition for commercial agricultural lands is shifting subsistence 
agriculture (upland rice, vegetables, etc.) and certain cash crops (e.g. maize, Job’s tears and cassava) to less 
suitable forested upland areas. Tree-cutting and increasing land degradation are leading to lower productivity 
and producers seeking out more productive land, which is leading to further deforestation and forest 
degradation. Poor access to irrigation exacerbates the low productivity of agricultural production, as does the 
limited availability of government agricultural extension services.  
 
 
Insufficient practical experience and skills for implementing sustainable forest management: Weak policy 
coherence and limited coordination between competing policy priorities is a key barrier to the sustainable 
management of Lao PDR’s forest resource, as is the illegal clearing and degradation of forested lands driven 
by inappropriate agricultural practices, insufficient land use planning and weak law enforcement (see above 
barriers).  
 
 
Limited access to finance for local villagers and small and medium enterprises: Poverty and lack of alternative 
livelihood opportunities (e.g. off-farm employment) have resulted in a high dependence on land and forests for 
household income in the project area. Nonetheless, there is a notable absence of financing opportunities for 
villagers and for small and medium-sized enterprises to invest in sustainable forestry and agro-forestry 
activities, because: (i) many Lao financial institutions have poor penetration in rural areas, making it physically 
difficult for remotely-located individuals and businesses to reach a bank branch; (ii) the available interest rates 
(typically around 10% in annualised terms) are high and act to discourage lending; (iii) financial institutions 
perceive lending to the agricultural and forestry sectors as risky; and (iv) many enterprises lack the capacity to 
prepare business plans or provide proper accounting, thereby discouraging financial institutions from lending 
to them.  
 
B.2.2 Theory of Change 
 
55. The project’s theory of change is presented in the figure below, illustrating the causal progression from Inputs and 
Activities to Outputs, Outcomes and Impacts. Programme and constituent Project 1 interventions will target the 
barriers to REDD+ application and scale-up identified above.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 16 OF 95 
 
 
Figure 3: Theory of Change

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 17 OF 95 
 
 
 
36 UNDP (2012), National Climate Funds: Learning from the Experience of Asia-Pacific Countries, available at: http://www.asia-
pacific.undp.org/content/dam/rbap/docs/Research%20&%20Publications/environment_energy/ncf/APRC-EE-2012-NCF-DiscussionPaper-
Asia-Pacific.pdf  
37 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/104251468179365818/Lao-People-s-Democratic-Republic-Second-Phase-of-Lao-
Environment-and-Social-Project-LENS2-Implementation-support-mission-May-4-to-27-2015  
38 GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support (2018-2019), Support for the Accreditation of the Lao PDR Environment Protection Fund to the 
GCF. Implemented by GIZ.  
B.3. Project description  
 
B.3.1 Structure of Project 1 
 
Output 1: Enabling environment for REDD+ implementation 
 
56. Output 1 will support the creation of an enabling environment for REDD+ implementation through three principal 
means: enhancing the financing environment for forest sector transformation; revising and strengthening the legal 
and regulatory framework for forestry; and improving the enforcement of the new regulatory framework. 
 
57. Activity 1.1: REDD+ Funding Window and sustainable finance. There is significant – but hitherto untapped – 
potential for Lao PDR to raise substantial, long-term climate finance. Project 1 is specifically designed to help Lao 
PDR to unlock REDD+ results-based payments from the FCPF. Additional sources of finance could include 
alternative REDD+ results-based payments (e.g. through the UNFCCC), domestic government revenues (fees, 
royalties, fines and taxes) and international impact investment, attracted by the combination of climate and social 
benefits that the Lao forestry and agriculture sectors offer. In this context, establishment of a Lao PDR REDD+ 
Funding Window will offer significant benefits for blending international, national, public and private sources of 
finance; for ensuring funds are earmarked for specific REDD+/land use actions; for channelling funds to intended 
beneficiaries (including communities, civil society and private sector actors); for ensuring the management of 
REDD+ finance meets defined fiduciary and safeguards criteria; and for providing a platform for multi-stakeholder 
coordination.36 
 
Two existing Lao funds, the Forest and Forest Resource Development Fund (FFRDF) and the Environmental 
Protection Fund (EPF), are good candidates to host the REDD+ Funding Window. The FFRDF (under the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Forestry, MAF) has a legal mandate to collect and disburse forest sector financing to the district 
and village levels. It funds forestry activities, including conservation and protection of watersheds and protected 
areas, tree planting, wildlife conservation and training. However, the FFRDF currently has limited capacity to 
manage and disburse significant amounts of financing that meet international fiduciary standards (see the Capacity 
Needs Assessment, Annex 22c). The KfW Integrated Conservation of Biodiversity and Forests (ICBF) project has 
initiated capacity development of the FFRDF and channels small grants through the FFRDF to village groups 
located close to National Protected Areas (NPAs). The EPF (under the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment, MoNRE) has a less forest-specific mandate to finance environmental protection, sustainable natural 
resources management, biodiversity conservation and community development, and it can provide financial 
support by means of non-refundable grants, preferential loans and interest rate subsidies. Currently, the main 
source of financing that the EPF channels to various Sub-project Delivery Agencies (SDAs) is from the World Bank 
Second Lao Environment and Social (LENS2) project.37 The EPF is currently receiving technical support from a 
GIZ-implemented GCF readiness project to become a GCF Accredited Entity.38 
 
The FFRDF has a natural legal and sectoral mandate to operate the REDD+ Funding Window but is currently 
unable to exercise this capability, whereas the EPF has a broader (environmental) mandate but a proven track-
record of disbursing finance according to international standards (more than USD 50m to date). GCF Project 1 will 
provide support to both institutions and will adopt a phased approach. The project will work with the EPF to set up 
and operationalise the REDD+ Funding Window, which will be used to channel GCF grant resources to target 
beneficiaries (see Outputs 2 and 3 below) and will also be used as the distribution channel for FCPF results-based 
payments and other sources of REDD+ finance. In parallel, the capacity of the FFRDF will be built up through 
technical assistance and through operational participation in the REDD+ Funding Window. If and when the FFRDF 
meets specified performance milestones (for example, passing a GIZ due diligence assessment), the FFRDF will 
assume progressively more responsibility, until eventually the entire REDD+ Funding Window is transferred from 
the EPF to FFRDF. An alternative scenario under consideration by the Government involves an eventual merger 
of the EPF and FFRDF. 
 
Under the REDD+ Funding Window, it is anticipated that the FFRDF will receive grant resources from the EPF and 
will, in turn, channel small grants to local village communities. In order to be able to receive such grant payments,

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 18 OF 95 
 
 
 
39 GIZ (2018), Rural Finance in Northern Laos: Opportunities and Limitations for Green Finance. Provided in Annex 22z. 
villages will need to have appropriate systems in place. Community-managed financial institutions, such as Village 
Development Funds (VDFs), offer considerable potential for outreach and financial inclusion.39 If managed well, 
they can effectively assume a large part of local financial intermediation with minimal set-up and running costs. 
Accordingly, each of the Project 1 target villages will, upon request, be supported in starting and operating a Village 
Development Fund. GIZ has more than a decade of experience in supporting the establishment of VDFs. Project 
1 will build on this work by assessing the current situation in terms of VDFs in 200 villages (and subsequently 
scaling up to 400 villages in Project 3). Of the 200 target villages, approximately 70 are believed to already have 
well-functioning VDFs, but this number – and their levels of functionality – will be verified in the assessment. Based 
on the assessment, an approach will be formulated to address current needs (i.e. the need for new VDFs and the 
need to support existing VDFs) and to outline suitable approaches to channel funding to villages. This assessment 
and concept development will be financed by BMZ (i.e. it will not require GCF financial assistance). Where needed, 
Project 1 will strengthen the capacities of VDFs and will provide financial support to expand into target villages not 
yet covered. 
 
As in many low-income countries, individuals and small and medium-size enterprise (SME) agribusinesses in Lao 
PDR typically face multiple constraints on growth. A key barrier is access to finance and, specifically, limited lending 
from commercial banks to agribusinesses. Many SMEs have poor financial management skills, such as accounting 
and the ability to prepare business plans. This makes banks hesitant to lend to these SMEs, for fear that poor 
management will result in non-repayment. Another factor is the poor geographical coverage of many banks in the 
country; many financial institutions do not have branches in district capitals, let alone in rural areas. Moreover, high 
interest rates available to the sector (typically 10% or higher) further discourage lending. These factors result in a 
low level of commercialisation of the agricultural sector, and the lack of enterprises’ access to external markets.  
 
Activity 1.1 consists of 4 Actions: 
 
o 
Action 1.1.1: Mobilising sustainable forest sector financing. Project 1 will assist the government in developing 
a common vision and strategy for long-term REDD+ financing, based on a detailed situation analysis of forest 
sector production, private sector activity and financing streams. The assessment will outline recommendations 
for actions to increase forest sector financing from existing legally-approved sources, such as timber fees; 
potential new domestic sources such as payments for ecosystem services (PES) from the hydropower 
industry; international climate finance from donors, foundations and market mechanisms; and international 
private sector finance from, for example, impact investors seeking ‘double bottom line’ social and financial 
returns from deforestation-free agriculture. An action plan to increase revenue generation will be prepared 
together with the responsible government entities (notably, the Department of Planning and Finance under 
MAF, MoNRE and the Ministry of Finance).      
 
o 
Action 1.1.2: Enabling the EPF and FFRDF to establish and operate the REDD+ Funding Window  
 
The EPF will receive GCF funds for a number of defined Project 1 activities – see the Activity 
descriptions below, particularly relating to Outputs 2 and 3. With the input of the National Project 
Management Unit (NPMU), the EPF will, through the REDD+ Funding Window, then disburse and 
monitor funds to Project 1 beneficiaries, including national and sub-national government entities, Village 
Development Funds (VDFs) via the FFRDF, CSOs and SMEs. The EPF’s roles and responsibilities in 
this regard are outlined in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM, Annex 22e). Additionally, a Project 
Operational Manual (POM) will be developed within the first few months of Project 1 commencement. 
Figure 4 below provides a graphical overview of the financial flows and beneficiaries associated with 
the REDD+ Funding Window. 
 
The FFRDF will be supported in redesigning its governance structure and developing standard 
operating procedures (SOPs), manuals and internal guidance documents that meet international 
fiduciary and safeguards standards. This will also require the introduction of IT infrastructure that allows 
FFRDF to operate professionally and to undertake financial transfers managed on an electronic basis.  
 
Based on its newly-developed standard operating procedures, FFRDF staff will be provided with training 
and capacity development support to build the needed skills. FFRDF staff will also work closely with 
EPF counterparts (with formal secondments being considered) to provide them with on-the-job 
exposure to the operations of the REDD+ Funding Window.  
 
The EPF, through the REDD+ Funding Window, will transfer small grants to the FFRDF and slowly 
increase their size based on performance. The FFRDF will be responsible for intermediating village-
based grants for activities in target villages in the framework of Activities 2.1 and 3.1-3.3 of Project 1, 
and in compliance with the eligible activities of FFRDF Decree PMO No 38 (2005).

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 19 OF 95 
 
 
 
40 GCF support to the green credit line will be confined to technical assistance – institutional coordination, fundraising support, etc. GCF 
funds will not be used to capitalise the green credit line and the credit line will be run as a separate GIZ project, outside of the framework of 
the programme. Green credit line capital is considered to be leveraged finance and is not included as GCF co-finance. 
 
o 
Action 1.1.3: Identification of existing and/or establishment of new Village Development Funds to channel 
climate finance to target villages  
 
Assessment of existing VDFs in Project 1 target villages. 
 
Concept development to address the needs identified in the assessment – with a focus on channelling 
of climate finance to the target villages. 
 
Support to existing or to-be-established VDFs, including technical assistance and capacity building. 
 
o 
Action 1.1.4: Fundraising to finance a structured green credit line for deforestation-free agriculture value 
chains. In parallel with preparation of Project 1, GIZ is investing in the development of a green credit line that 
will be linked with the in-depth value chain studies and identified zero-deforestation business models 
supported under Action 2.2.1, which will boost agricultural productivity and reduce pressure on existing 
forests. The green credit line will be specifically targeted at the SMEs (with a particular focus on women-led 
SMEs) that participate in Action 2.2.5 and are supported in structuring business plans and investment 
proposals. The green credit line will provide concessional debt finance to the SMEs. In 2020, the financing 
will need to be mobilised for the green credit line. GIZ will not use GCF funds to finance lending under the 
green credit line. Instead, the Project 1 team will assist in fundraising activities to mobilise international public 
and private finance to capitalise the green credit line.40   
 
Discussions with the Lao financial institutions, including Bank of Lao (BoL), ACLEDA Bank Lao Ltd. and 
Banque Pour Le Commerce Exterieur Lao (BCEL) are currently underway. BoL is interested in supporting the 
proposed green credit line and would likely act to channel funds to a smaller finance institution (e.g. ACLEDA 
or BCEL). A final decision (expected in the second half of 2019) on selection of a partner financial institution 
to operate the green credit line will be based upon: its fiduciary management capacity and financial health, its 
experience implementing credit lines with similar selection and monitoring requirements, its geographical 
relevance and presence in selected districts, and its experience lending to the agricultural sector. A mapping 
of selected financial institutions’ geographical (district-level) coverage can be found in the Feasibility Study 
(Annex 2a). The green credit line will mobilise concessional international climate finance of (initially) USD 10-
15 million (anticipated from sources such as the NAMA Facility, private sector impact investment funds, etc.). 
The development of the credit line will carefully consider the barriers to agribusinesses accessing finance and 
investing in green activities, and the concessional aspects of the green credit will directly address the identified 
barriers. Capacity building for financial institutions on how to roll out the green credit line (e.g. marketing 
materials) and how to monitor impacts will be an integral element of GCF support. The process for financial 
institutions to approve investments in agribusinesses is described in Chapter 3.3 of the Feasibility Study and 
will be further elaborated upon in a funding manual developed with the financial institutions. This manual will 
be available within six months of project start.

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 20 OF 95 
 
 
Figure 4: Outputs, Beneficiaries and Financial Mechanism under Project 1

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 21 OF 95 
 
 
 
41 Braeutigam, D. (2015), Integrated Conservation of Forests and Biodiversity ICBF – Introduction, KfW and MoNRE, Lao PDR. 
42 The PRAPs are provided in Annex 22. 
43 Lestrelin, G., Trockenbrodt, M., Phanvilay, K., Thongmanivong, S., Vongvisouk, T., Pham, T.T., Castella, J.C. (2013), The Context of 
REDD+ in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic: Drivers, Agents and Institutions. CIFOR Occasional Paper 92.  
   
58. Activity 1.2: Mainstreaming REDD+ into the NDC and socio-economic development plans (SEDPs). SEDPs at the 
province and district levels are prepared as 5-year plans and are the primary strategic reference for government 
entities to fulfil their work. SEDPs and sectoral plans provide the basis for government budgeting, and thus it is 
vital that REDD+ interventions and associated NDC measures are prominently incorporated into them. Measures 
linked to the National REDD+ Strategy and the NDC can be mainstreamed and strengthened within provincial- 
and district-level SEDPs, thereby addressing policy gaps and inconsistencies and improving implementation of 
REDD+ policies and measures (e.g. strengthening cross-sectoral coordination, monitoring, transparency and 
compliance in key sectors, protected area management plans41, etc.). Such mainstreaming is currently limited or 
entirely absent in SEDPs at all levels. Activity 1.2 will be financed exclusively by BMZ and by the Government of 
Lao PDR (i.e. Activity 1.2 will not require GCF financial support) and will consist of 3 Actions: 
 
o 
Action 1.2.1: Mainstreaming of REDD+ into the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). Provision of 
technical and logistical support to government staff to integrate the National REDD+ Strategy into the updated 
NDC, to ensure REDD+ interventions are fully considered and budgeted. The current NDC (submitted to the 
UNFCCC in September 2015) contains a prominent forestry and REDD+ component but does not explicitly 
reference the National REDD+ Strategy. 
 
o 
Action 1.2.2: Mainstreaming of REDD+ into provincial socio-economic development plans (SEDPs) (2021-
2025). Provision of technical and logistical support to government staff for the integration of Provincial REDD+ 
Action Plans (PRAPs) into 3 provincial SEDP planning processes (Project 1 provinces). The PRAPs were 
developed in 2017/201842 and reflect the provincial SEDP planning horizon. 
 
o 
Action 1.2.3: Mainstreaming of REDD+ into district socio-economic development plans (SEDPs) (2021-2025). 
Provision of technical and logistical support to government staff to integrate REDD+, PRAP and NDC elements 
into district-level SEDP preparation in the 16 target districts of Project 1. 
 
59. Activity 1.3: Strengthening the regulatory framework. The Forestry Law (No.06/NA, 2007), like the Land Law, is 
currently under revision. Many implementing decrees and regulations fall beneath the Forestry Law, meaning that 
extensive updating of regulations will be needed following revisions to the Law. Although this represents a 
considerable challenge, it also represents a considerable opportunity, as the body of regulations is currently 
internally inconsistent (contradictory in some respects), complex and not easy for local authorities to understand.43 
Support is needed to address the gaps and inconsistencies in the regulatory framework to create an enabling 
environment that incentivises investments that conform with land use plans (including deforestation-free 
commitments), act responsibly in the context of local regulatory frameworks and that will sustain positive relations 
with local communities. Financed exclusively by BMZ and the Government of Lao PDR (i.e. not requiring GCF 
financial support), Activity 1.3 consists of 2 Actions: 
 
o 
Action 1.3.1: Creating an enabling environment for SFM and private sector investment in village-based 
agroforestry development. Revision, modification and drafting of relevant decrees and regulations that 
incentivise investments that conform with land use plans (including deforestation-free commitments), which 
act responsibly in the context of local regulatory frameworks and which sustain positive relations with local 
communities. The strengthened regulatory framework will also enable and strengthen the adoption of SFM, 
FLR and village forestry: 
 
Assessment of financial and regulatory incentives and barriers for smallholders to improve smallholder 
engagement in village-based agroforestry. Based on the assessment, Project 1 will support the revision 
of relevant implementation decrees, regulations and guidelines to enable smallholder and private sector 
engagement in sustainable forestry activities. (The FAO-implemented GCF readiness project is 
expected to contribute options that will be integrated into this Action.) 
 
Revision of the regulatory framework for participatory sustainable forest management (SFM) in 
production forests based on sustainable forest management plans, and targeted measures to support 
forest recovery and regeneration in production forests. 
 
Revision and support to the legal adoption (in the form of implementing decrees and regulations under 
the Forestry Law and Land Law) of village forestry to enable sustainable harvesting of timber and 
NTFPs for commercial purposes based on forest inventories and approved sustainable management

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 22 OF 95 
 
 
 
44 Many CSOs are interested the development of a mechanism for management of non-commercial timber from Village Use Forests, with 
the expectation that communities will protect the forests best when they have clear rights to benefit from them. The Lao CSO FLEGT 
Network has received funding from GIZ and the EU to conduct research on the topic of village-use forest timber in order to provide 
recommendations on how to address this topic in the framework of FLEGT. Thus, the Network’s insight will be important for the 
implementation of this Action. 
45 A kumban is a cluster of villages. 
46 WSC and CliPAD (2013), A Law Enforcement Action Plan for Reducing Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Houaphan Province, 
and Annex 6 of the LEAP: ‘Standard Operating Procedures for Forestry Protection Task Forces and Rapid Response Teams’. 
47 STEPP is a performance-based operational enforcement model based on international best practices. It involves the creation of 
enforcement plans by POFI managers based on an assessment of levels of threat and risks to forests and wildlife in their areas of 
responsibility. The programme is audited at regular intervals (typically monthly) to ensure the operational focus is directed at places of 
highest risk (‘hotpots’) of illegal activities. See https:/www.illegal-logging.info/sites/files/chlogging/STEPP_English.pdf 
48 SMART (www.smartconservationtools.org) is an interactive, spatially-explicit system for managing and analysing law enforcement 
monitoring data. It provides a low-cost, site-based tool that can provide rapid feedback to managers for use in adaptive management of 
enforcement operations. In the context of the GCF project, SMART has the potential to be useful for managers of production, conservation 
and protection forests for monitoring threats to forests and wildlife, and for planning and evaluating enforcement operations. 
49 See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rQhqdVLg-Ak and World Bank (2015), Information and Communication Technology for Forest 
Law Enforcement and Governance – Case Study: Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 
https://www.profor.info/sites/profor.info/files/Profor_Lao_WrkingPaper%20%283%29_0.pdf  
50 World Bank (2018), Lao People´s Democratic Republic – Sustainable Forestry for Rural Development Project. Independent Evaluation 
Group, Project Performance, Assessment Report 125929. Washington, DC. 
plans. Insight will be sought from diverse stakeholders, including CSOs. Representatives from the 
FLEGT Lao CSO Core Committee will be consulted, among others.44  
 
o 
Action 1.3.2: Capacity building and awareness-raising on the forest sector legal framework. Provision of 
awareness-raising and capacity development on the revised regulations to government authorities (national, 
provincial, district and kumban level45), civil society organisations (CSOs, including members of the FLEGT 
Lao CSO Core Committee, among others) and villagers. This will ensure that all government authorities, 
villages and broader stakeholder groups understand the key regulations related to forest management and 
apply them consistently. 
 
60. Activity 1.4: Law enforcement and monitoring. Strengthened law enforcement is a key measure needed to support 
Lao PDR’s commitment to REDD+, as well as other high-level initiatives including PMO 15 and the FLEGT-VPA. 
Illegal logging and unauthorised clearing of forest land still exist and are a challenge for provincial and district 
authorities to address due to limited budgets, limited technical capacities and understaffing, but also due to a partly 
unclear legal framework.  
 
A number of donor projects have supported improved law enforcement in Lao PDR. The GIZ CliPAD project, in 
cooperation with the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) and counterparts, developed a provincial Law 
Enforcement Action Plan (LEAP) 46 to reduce deforestation and degradation in Houaphan Province with the 
following elements: (i) strengthening effective coordination, communication and exchange mechanisms, (ii) 
strengthening operational structures for enforcement implementation, (iii) implementation of enforcement strategy 
and tactics, (iv) increasing capacity for law enforcement through training, (v) upgrading enforcement policy, and 
(vi) monitoring performance and effectiveness. The LEAP also incorporated the experience built up by the 
SUFORD project in four provinces (Sayabouri, Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay), where law enforcement 
staff have established basic skills and have developed a systematic enforcement programme – the Strategic and 
Tactical Enforcement Patrol Programme (STEPP)47 and the Spatial Monitoring and Reporting Tool (SMART)48. 
The SUFORD project has also supported the development of a Smart Phone Information Reporting and Intelligence 
Tracking (SPIRIT) system in conjunction with the Department of Forest Inspection (DOFI), which facilitates the 
reporting of forest and wildlife crime using smart phone GPS and camera capabilities.49 While the use of these and 
other tools has been initiated, further support is needed to “ensure that the use of these management tools 
becomes a routine activity”.50 
 
Activity 1.4 consists of 2 Actions: 
 
o 
Action 1.4.1: Strengthening procedures, standards and systems for law enforcement 
 
Revision of standard operating procedures (SOPs) for Forestry Law enforcement that are aligned with 
the revised regulatory framework (Activity 1.3), including improvement of investigative procedures, 
establishing whistle-blower systems and improvement of anti-corruption safeguards, among others.  
 
Improvement of coordination among, and the establishment of mixed rapid response teams consisting 
of, key actors (PAFO, DAFO, POFI, DOFI, PONRE, DONRE, P-WEN (Provincial Wildlife Enforcement 
Network), military, police, customs officials) to improve Forestry Law enforcement by establishing clear

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 23 OF 95 
 
 
 
51 GIZ (2015), Systematic Land Registration in Rural Areas of Lao PDR, https://www.donorplatform.org/publication-land-
governance/systematic-land-registration-in-rural-areas-of-lao-
pdr.html?file=files/content/Media/Land_Governance/Publications/Systematic_Land_Registration/Systematic_Land_Registration.pdf  
52 Ling S. (2017), Developments in Land Use Planning in Lao PDR Since 2009, 
https://www.mediafire.com/file/q5borsb95ku7vbh/LIWG%20LUP%20study%20English.pdf  
53 UN-REDD (2017), Land and Forest Tenure in Laos: Baseline Overview 2016, 
https://www.uncclearn.org/sites/default/files/inventory/vftenure_dwyer_fao-final_2_405493.pdf  
54 https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/31066.html  
55 In some district and target villages, donor-funded initiatives such as the GIZ LMPD project have supported land use planning. These land 
use plans will not require a new land use planning exercise and the programme will build upon and support their implementation and 
monitoring. 
communication and exchange procedures and clarification of roles and responsibilities between 
different government authorities. 
 
Introduction and use of near-real-time remote sensing data (LANDSAT or Sentinel) as a basis for 
controlling deforestation / forest degradation (e.g. detection, investigating and monitoring illegal 
activities, awareness-raising in hotspots). SMART, STEPP and SPIRIT will be implemented at district 
level and reported to the province and national levels, and will be used to prioritise patrolling activities.  
 
o 
Action 1.4.2: Training for implementation of enhanced law enforcement 
 
Training on strengthened standard operating procedures, anti-corruption safeguards, and STEPP and 
SMART for national, provincial and district authorities and rapid response teams. 
 
Training for targeted individuals (with intermediate experience of GIS/mapping) on the use of remote 
sensing and generated maps to support Provincial Offices of Forestry Inspection (POFIs) and District 
Offices for Forestry Inspection (DOFIs) with monitoring deforestation and forest degradation. 
 
Dissemination of regulations and guidelines on permitted and prohibited clearing and utilisation of forest 
(timber and non-timber) products, as well as streamlined, accessible and effective reporting channels. 
 
61. Activity 1.5: Land use planning and improved tenure security. In order to improve tenure security, the government 
has put land registration and land titling high on its agenda. The government’s principal objective is to secure the 
land rights of villagers in rural areas through registration of individual and communal land and through the issuance 
of respective land titles. Land tenure security has a direct correlation with the food security of smallholders and 
family farmers; it also contributes to improving land governance while creating a favourable environment for 
investment in land.51 However, the associated land use planning has typically been developed with a focus on a 
specific sector of interest or, at times, a specific commodity, and has been restricted to a specific jurisdiction. 
Moreover, local land use plans are not well synchronised with higher-level plans that may take a more integrated 
and landscape approach (if they exist at all).52  
 
Land use planning in Lao PDR builds on over 20 years of experience of donor-funded projects (e.g. KfW, GIZ, 
German AgroAction, SIDA, TABI, AgriSud and others) as well as national initiatives to conduct land use planning. 
Such planning has typically focused on three elements: (i) mapping the outlines of village territories with 
representatives of the villages and neighbouring villages, (ii) internal zoning of these village territories into forest, 
agricultural and other land use categories, and (iii) formally allocating agricultural land at the plot scale to village 
households.53 Together, these elements form the basis of Participatory Land Use Plans (PLUPs).54 
 
Subsequent implementation and monitoring of the PLUPs have typically not formed part of these donor initiatives, 
however, with the result that many well-designed PLUPs are not being (and have never been) implemented. 
Project 1 will use these existing PLUPs and will support their implementation (including augmenting them with 
short- and long-term financing plans) and monitoring. Based on the developed PLUPs, the Department of Land 
will – using government co-finance – develop and implement a programme of systematic land registration. Activity 
1.5 consists of 3 Actions: 
 
o 
Action 1.5.1: Mainstreaming FLR guiding principles into land use planning manuals and guidelines 
 Revision of existing manuals and guidelines relating to land use planning in order to integrate a 
landscape approach, promoting multi-sectoral planning that can promote forest and landscape 
restoration through a range of forestry and non-forestry sector actions.  
 Stakeholder feedback and consultation on the proposed changes to manuals and guidelines. 
 Awareness-raising and capacity building on the revised manuals and guidelines at province and district 
levels. 
 
o 
Action 1.5.2: Participatory village land use planning (PLUP) in target project districts (linked with Activity 1.4 
and Outputs 2 and 3) in hotspot areas55

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 24 OF 95 
 
 
 
56 http://www.openforis.org/tools/collect-earth.html  
57 FAO is currently developing a review of all the local finance sources and modalities that can be applied to FLR. Webinars hosted by FAO 
on this topic are currently ongoing: see http://www.fao.org/in-action/forest-landscape-restoration-mechanism/news-and-events/events-
detail/en/c/1164439/.  
58 FAO is hosting a global working group (involving IUCN, WRI, UNEP and CIFOR, among others) and communities of practice on FLR 
Monitoring. Indicators on FLR implementation will be tested from 2019 in at least 5 projects in Africa and Asia. See http://www.fao.org/in-
action/forest-landscape-restoration-mechanism/knowledge-base/monitoring-evaluation/en/.  
59 The MRV of the ER Program will be focused on MRV of emission reductions, as a prerequisite to unlocking FCPF Carbon Fund 
payments. The MRV of the programme – including Project 1 – will cover implementation of activities (e.g. workshops held, trainings 
conducted, number of beneficiaries reached, etc.) AND, in conjunction with the ER Program, of emission reductions. Thus, the ER Program 
and the programme (including Project 1) will share a common MRV framework for emission reductions, but GCF MRV will extend more 
broadly. The fact that the ER Program and the programme (including Project 1) will share MRV processes for emission reductions will 
ensure consistent GHG accounting and cost efficiencies for both initiatives. 
 Planning preparation (notifying villages, gathering materials, GIS data, SEDPs, statistics, data 
management system preparation – potentially applying FAO’s OpenForis Collect Earth tool56, for which 
the PAFOs of the three Project 1 target provinces have already received training. 
 Land and forest categorisation and zoning (boundary demarcation, land use mapping based on current 
land use, land and forest zoning, agriculture and forest production data collection, socio-economic data 
collection). 
 Agricultural management planning (agricultural land zoning, land management planning [soil testing, 
verification of suitability for planned land use], action plan for proposed agricultural projects and needed 
support from extension services). 
 Updating and integration of PLUP data (GPS data, maps, reports, etc.) into data management and 
record-keeping (digital record-keeping systems, storage of paper-based copies in all offices). 
 Developing short- and long-term financing plans for the PLUPs to ensure implementation and 
monitoring.57 
 Establishing or strengthening village land use and forest management committees. 
 Developing and implementing systematic land registration – individual, entity, communal/collective and 
State ownership – in rural areas based on up-to-date PLUPs (to be undertaken by the Department of 
Land). 
 
o 
Action 1.5.3: Monitoring and enforcement of land use plans58   
 Ongoing monitoring (forest-related enforcement linked with Activity 1.4), supported by technical 
assistance, capacity building and equipment procurement, closely aligned with the implementation of 
Activities under Outputs 2 and 3. 
 
62. Activity 1.6: Implementation of the measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) system. Since 2014, the JICA 
Sustainable Forest Management and REDD+ Support (F-REDD) project has been supporting the government to 
develop and execute the national forest inventory and preparation of the MRV-related components of the Emission 
Reductions Programme (ER-P). JICA also supported the preparation of the UNFCCC Forest Reference Emissions 
Level (FREL). In order to ensure consistency in MRV approaches, GCF Project 1 will work closely with JICA and 
the Forest Inventory and Planning Division (FIPD) of the Department of Forestry (DoF) on a harmonised 
approach.59 JICA has committed co-finance to support Activity 1.6 implementation. Activity 1.6 consists of 7 
Actions: 
 
o 
Action 1.6.1: Support to the fourth (2020/2021) national forest inventory 
 
In 2020/2021, the fourth national forest inventory will be undertaken, following the methods and design 
of the third national inventory (2015-2017). This will include the re-measurement of 730 plots within 
different forest-types and 120 plots within regenerating vegetation. The Lao PDR National Forest 
Inventory Standard Operating Procedures Manual for Terrestrial Carbon Measurement will be used, 
which is fully consistent with the methodology used in the development of the Emission Reductions 
Programme (ER-P) Reference Level. This forest inventory will provide the data needed for the 
estimation of GHG benefits of Project 1 (including leakage effects), as well as supporting other REDD+ 
processes (such as reporting to the UNFCCC and claiming results-based payments from the FCPF 
Carbon Fund). 
 
o 
Action 1.6.2: Assessment and development of the forest-type map for 2021/2022. The same land classification 
system will be applied as has already been used for the FREL and the ER-P Reference Level, and which is 
fully aligned with the IPCC land use categorisation system.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 25 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
60 UN-REDD (2018), Reducing Deforestation and Forest Degradation through Sustainable Land-Based Investments: A Focus on the Lower 
Mekong Region, draft project concept note.  
o 
Action 1.6.3: Calculation of emission and removal factors. Based on the data from the forest inventory, the 
emission/removal factors for the different forest and non-forest classes will be revised and modified, reflecting 
the changes over recent years. Emission factor development will focus on the reported carbon pools: above-
ground biomass and below-ground biomass.   
 
o 
Action 1.6.4: Assessment of leakage effects. This Action will specifically assess the GHG emissions and 
removals within and outside of the project area. To do so, a national forest inventory (Action 1.6.1) and 
assessment approach are required to ensure consistency and comparability of the MRV system. The 
assessment will compare to what extent deforestation, forest degradation and carbon removal patterns have 
increased/decreased within the project area compared with other parts of the country. This Action will also 
coordinate closely with a regional UN-REDD programme currently under development that will analyse 
international (cross-border) displacement of unsustainable forestry practices in the Lower Mekong region.60  
 
o 
Action 1.6.5: Reporting on reduced GHG emissions and enhanced carbon stocks. The reporting of achieved 
GHG emission reductions and enhanced carbon stocks will be conducted for different purposes and will 
ensure that Lao PDR REDD+ data is consistently used for GCF reporting, for FCPF Carbon Fund reporting 
to receive results-based payments, for reporting on the NDC, and for Biennial Update Reports (BURs) and 
National Communications (NCs) to the UNFCCC. The reporting will be subject to a technical assessment by 
the FCPF Carbon Fund to ensure compliance with the five IPCC accounting principles (transparency, 
consistency, comparability, completeness and accuracy).   
 
o 
Action 1.6.6: Implementation of the national forest monitoring system  
 
Development of a Web-based national forest management system (NFMS). 
 
Design and set-up of a carbon registry. 
 
Operation of the NFMS and improvement to address new requirements. 
 
Capacity building for localisation of system operation and maintenance. 
 
o 
Action 1.6.7: Digital solutions for community-based monitoring. To support monitoring and reporting of 
activities, a mobile app and Web-based management information system (MIS) will be developed with an 
interface available in both Lao and English. The MIS will serve two principal functions:  
 
To facilitate information flow from the field to the project: community-based data collection using activity 
surveys, relating to agricultural production and monitoring, forest management and monitoring, 
reporting illegal activities such as forest clearing and logging, and other activity monitoring. Monitoring 
support staff (at the kumban – village cluster – or district level) will support the data aggregation and 
activity monitoring process. 
 
To facilitate information flow from the project to the field: to inform villagers, farmers groups and project 
management staff, among other stakeholders, on topics such as: land use plans (boundaries, geo-
location mapping), market information, extension services and targeted training.  
 
A training curriculum will be developed that allows the extension team to train local communities in standardised 
monitoring procedures. This training will be integrated into Project 1 activity implementation on the ground. 
Ultimately, the MIS is expected to improve engagement in, and ownership of, local communities in project 
implementation and monitoring, and strengthen knowledge management. 
 
63. Activity 1.7: Knowledge management, FPIC, safeguards and gender. This Activity will facilitate comprehensive 
communication and exchange of information about topics of relevance for land users, policy-makers and the 
broader public to understand the purpose and benefits of REDD+ and the need for behavioural change of business-
as-usual land use (see the knowledge management plan, Annex 22u). 
 
o 
Action 1.7.1: Knowledge management and communication 
 
Coordination with the Designated National Authority (DNA) at MoNRE (the same institution as the GCF 
NDA) for provision of relevant information to the DNA for the BUR and National Communication. The 
M&E system and Activity 1.6 (MRV) will provide key information in this context.   
 
Lessons learned and information sharing will be conducted at the political level to inform national 
stakeholders and policy-makers on Project 1 progress and the key lessons learned that can support 
the implementation of national REDD+.

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 26 OF 95 
 
 
 
3 campaigns – on awareness-raising of laws and the regulatory framework pertaining to the forestry 
and agricultural sectors (closely linked to Activity 1.4), on REDD+ awareness in local media (local 
newspapers in all 16 Project 1 districts), and on forestry and land use awareness in schools. 
 
Communication and collaboration with national universities on key lessons and relevant education 
materials, and to support the universities in developing/acquiring research projects related to REDD+.   
 
Development and management of a project website. 
 
o 
Action 1.7.2: Implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Gender Action 
Plan (GAP) and ensuring compliance with FPIC and safeguards. The ESMP is provided in Annex 6b; the 
gender assessment is provided in Annex 8a; the GAP is provided in Annex 8b. 
 
Output 2: Market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation 
 
64. Output 2 will target the agricultural sector (including agroforestry) as a key driver of deforestation and will lower 
targeted barriers, enhance productivity, increase farmers’ integration into agricultural value chains, and improve 
access to finance and private sector participation in deforestation-free agriculture. Deforestation-free value chains 
are those that can demonstrate that deforestation has not occurred throughout the value chain – from primary 
production through to sale to the consumer. The Output consists of three Activities relating to promotion of good 
agricultural practices and agroforestry in identified deforestation hotspots (in the 16 Project 1 districts) to reduce 
expansion pressure into forested landscape. 
 
65. Activity 2.1: Local incentives for good agricultural practices (GAP) and agroforestry  
 
o 
Action 2.1.1: Capacity building on good agricultural practices and agroforestry 
 
Agriculture specialist(s) in the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) and the Provincial Project 
Management Units (PPMUs) will deliver Project 1 technical assistance (capacity building, training and 
continuous coaching) to agricultural extension staff of District Agriculture and Forestry Offices (DAFOs) 
and Technical Service Centres (TSCs), using a training-of-trainers approach. Training materials on 
agronomy, livestock production, agribusiness development and agroforestry will be used. Close 
cooperation with agricultural universities/colleges will be sought. Target villages will be selected using 
the district committee structure already in place and the deforestation hotspot analysis undertaken 
during GCF project preparation, whereby areas with high remaining forest cover and high deforestation 
risk will be prioritised.  
 
After awareness-raising activities provided by PPMU/DAFO staff, farmers interested in participation will 
be identified. Women’s collectives will receive specific support on production, processing and marketing 
of new agricultural products. 
 
A District Activity Plan (DAP) for outlining activities, participants, inputs and an annual budget plan (by 
TSCs) will be developed, subject to approval by DAFO and PPMU, based on land use plans from 
Activity 1.5 and village consultations. 
 
The capacity of farmers will be built on good agricultural practices, on-farm production and 
commercialisation. Farmers interested in value chain development (input and service provision, trading, 
value addition) will be supported with technical assistance and continuous coaching on business plan 
development, negotiation skills, access to markets, credit and processing. Youth and women will be 
specifically targeted. 
 
Note: Measurement, monitoring and reporting (MRV) of adjacent forest areas will be conducted in 
Activity 1.6. Avoidance of deforestation and degradation will be enforced, as supported by Activity 1.4 
and implementation of enforcement in different forest categories in Output 3. 
 
o 
Action 2.1.2: Investment in good agricultural practices and agroforestry  
 
Good agricultural practices: 
 
Action 2.1.2 will invest in village development funds (VDFs) with a combination of upfront and 
performance-based payments. DPMUs and Village Communities will agree upon appropriate 
‘white lists’ of good agricultural practice activities eligible for project support. 
 
Good agricultural practice activities will be financed partially upfront and partially on a performance 
basis. Funds will be managed by the REDD+ Funding Window. 
 
Based upon successful completion of a participatory land use plan (PLUP) under Action 1.5.2 and 
a District Activity Plan (DAP) under Action 2.1.1, VDFs will be eligible for grants covering the 
establishment and management costs of good agricultural practices. Village Communities, with the 
support of the DPMU, must develop a brief investment plan and a budget needs plan to be eligible 
to receive funding from VDFs.

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 27 OF 95 
 
 
 
61 Technical advisory input to align approaches on commodity value chain analysis may be received from FAO. 
62 A gender assessment will be undertaken as part of each value chain assessment, including detailed consideration of the risk of domestic 
violence arising from disruption to men’s and women’s traditional roles in relation to each value chain. See the Gender Action Plan in Annex 
8b. 
63 Criteria aligned with the IFAD-funded Partnerships for Irrigation and Commercialisation of Smallholder Agriculture (PICSA) project. 
 
Performance-based payments will be disbursed after two years based upon adherence to the 
PLUP that has been developed, particularly the protection of forest cover according to the PLUP. 
If forest cover is 95% or more of the forest cover stipulated in the PLUP, VDFs will be eligible to 
receive the remainder of the funds. If forest cover is between 75-95% of the forest cover stipulated 
in the PLUP, VDFs will be eligible to receive 50% of the agreed-upon funds. If forest cover is less 
than 75% of the PLUP, VDFs will not be eligible to receive funds. 
 
Agroforestry: 
 
Based on the formalised and approved private-sector village partnership agreements (PSVPAs) 
developed under Action 2.2.3, private sector enterprises will be eligible for grants from the REDD+ 
Funding Window covering 50% of the establishment costs for village-based agroforestry (up to 
Euro 200/ha, approximately 50%). The remaining 50% will be financed by the enterprises, as per 
the PSVPA. Splitting costs 50% / 50% with the private sector is stipulated in order to encourage 
businesses to invest in activities that are innovative and which they would otherwise consider to 
be too risky. Grants will be provided following the regulations and conditions of the REDD+ Funding 
Window. 
 
In parallel with GCF investment support, the private sector enterprises will have their own inherent 
incentive to train the participating villagers in good forest management practices due to their own 
financing at stake and the need to maximise yields and product quality. The enterprises will pay 
for the work provided by villagers, generating income for local households. The enterprises will 
also pay for the land registration costs and ensure that all land subject to reforestation is registered, 
which will allow enhanced land tax collection by the government. 
 
Action 2.1.2 will strengthen villagers’ interest in agroforestry, with clear market linkages and 
strengthened capacities of village groups. It will lead to improved management of village-based 
agroforestry systems and strengthen village ownership of forest resources and the ability to market 
products and negotiate with companies. 
 
This Action is anticipated to be implemented with technical advisory inputs from FAO, based on its work 
through the GCF readiness project as well as its global expertise on forest landscape restoration. 
 
o 
Action 2.1.3: Knowledge management and sharing of successful experiences for replication. According to the 
cropping calendar, exchange workshops between villages in each kumban and district will be organised. The 
exchange workshops will contribute to knowledge exchange and sharing of lessons learned by each of the 
villages. Successful experiences and lessons learned will be documented and disseminated for promotion 
and upscaling within the provinces and Lao PDR.  
 
66. Activity 2.2: Catalysing private sector investment in value chains. Project 1 will support value chain analysis to 
identify (the absence of) linkages between value chain actors, quantify value-added along the value chain, and 
identify gaps, potential efficiency and profitability gains, and thereby contribute to inclusive value chain 
competitiveness. Value chain analysis at the provincial level will analyse existing as well as potential new value 
chains. Activity 2.2 consists of 5 Actions:  
 
o 
Action 2.2.1: In-depth value chain assessment of key agricultural commodities61 
 
In-depth value chain studies for key existing and alternative agricultural commodities (~3 commodities 
per province) will be implemented at the provincial level. The specific role of women will be assessed 
to promote enhanced participation of women in agricultural production and trade.62 Further criteria for 
the assessment and selection of key agricultural commodities will include: (i) potential for 
competitiveness; (ii) potential for growth (by quality or quantity); (iii) potential for value addition, (iv) 
potential for upscaling; and (v) cross-cutting issues such as GHG mitigation impacts.63 
 
Following the in-depth value chain studies, a workshop will be organised to share and agree study 
results with the NPMU, PPMUs, PAFO, DAFO and TSC staff, and selected lead farmers. Results of the 
in-depth value chain studies will inform, and will be linked with, outreach activities (Activity 2.1). 
 
o 
Action 2.2.2: Establishment of public-private dialogue to promote village-based agroforestry 
 
Building on related efforts under the GCF readiness project implemented by FAO, Action 2.2.2 will 
establish private-public sector dialogue platforms to improve communication and coordination of actors 
on village-based agroforestry in Lao PDR. The dialogue platforms will be implemented at the national

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 28 OF 95 
 
 
 
64 GIZ Laos, as a Project 1 Executing Entity, will act as an intermediary between private sector entities, village groups and others, but will 
not be party to contractual relationships for this Action. 
65 Aligned with the MSP activities within the IFAD-funded PICSA project. 
and provincial levels and will support the identification of strategic investment areas (e.g. considering 
availability of land, market access, regulatory issues, etc.). Support will be provided to match-making 
between private sector companies, districts and villages (developing private sector-village 
partnerships). This will entail awareness-raising of villages on the potential of village-based agroforestry 
as a business case and building villages’ capacities to negotiate with the private sector. 
 
CSOs will also be invited to participate in the dialogue platforms, including representatives from the 
FLEGT Lao CSO Core Committee, among others, who can bring long-standing insight to support local 
villages to sustainably manage forest resources and strengthen local livelihoods. 
 
o 
Action 2.2.3: Formalisation support for village and private sector partnerships 
 
Building on the discussions under Action 2.2.2, contracts – private sector-village partnership 
agreements (PSVPAs) – between reputable private sector enterprises and Village Communities will be 
negotiated and signed. Enterprises will then be eligible for grants from the REDD+ Funding Window 
under Action 2.1.2 covering 50% of the establishment costs for village-based agroforestry (up to Euro 
200/ha, approximately 50%).64  
 
o 
Action 2.2.4: Multi-Stakeholder Platforms (MSPs) on value chain development65 
 
Identification and mobilisation of private sector companies (traders, input suppliers, processors, farmer 
organisations, financial institutions, etc.) and other value chain actors (e.g. farmer representatives, 
farmers’ organisations, government representatives) to participate in district-level multi-stakeholder 
platforms (MSPs). The platforms will contribute to improved networking and coordination across the 
value chain of each target commodity identified under Action 2.2.1. The design and functions of the 
platforms will be informed by the lessons-learned from a series of public-private dialogues that are being 
organised by the ongoing GCF readiness project for REDD+ implemented by FAO. 
 
o 
Action 2.2.5: Business development support to agribusiness SMEs  
 Significant time will be invested in canvassing businesses, building interest and buy-in in Project 1 
activities. Agribusiness SMEs will be selected for training and business development support based 
upon: their demonstrated long-term interest, their relevance to locally-relevant value chains, their 
proximity to producers, their activities in selected districts, and the likelihood that they receive 
subsequent financing via the green credit line supported by Action 1.1.4. Female-led SMEs will be 
specifically targeted.   
 Selected SMEs will be trained on identified issues relating to business management and financial 
literacy, notably business plan development – for instance, estimating production costs, assessing risks, 
comprehensive book-keeping, use of credit products and financial management.  
 
67. Activity 2.3: Sustainable rural infrastructure watershed management. Activity 2.3 builds on the planned ADB 
project, Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector (SRIWSM) project, which has been 
designed in conjunction with Project 1 (see Section B.1.5). The SRIWSM project’s principal focus is on investment 
in 11 small-scale irrigation scheme upgrades (all of them in the geographical scope of Project 1) to secure farmer 
access to water during the dry season. Activity 2.3 will ensure that the forested landscapes in the catchment areas 
remain intact through improved land management (including good agricultural practices) and reduced pressure 
from drivers of deforestation and degradation by addressing key underlying causes: lack of alternative livelihood 
opportunities, 
poverty, 
low 
agricultural 
productivity, 
lack 
of 
value-additional 
activities 
and 
weak 
negotiation/marketing skills. Reducing deforestation and improving forest management will protect watershed 
health and, ultimately, the water flowing through ADB irrigation investments. 
 
Financed exclusively by ADB/EU, IFAD and the Government of Lao PDR (i.e. without requiring GCF financial 
support), Activity 2.3 consists of 3 SRIWSM co-financed Actions that will reduce the need for local people to clear 
forested land for other activities that are inefficient, with low yields, require substantial labour, and are characterised 
by low profitability: 
 
o 
Action 2.3.1: Irrigated and upland farmer income generation from high-value crops and livestock. Farmers will 
be assisted with planning and producing their dry season crops and livestock in the upgraded irrigation 
schemes (Action 2.3.2) based upon improved information about market demand, quality requirements and 
prices, and then better linked to markets through support to logistical services, information flows, post-harvest 
processing, and trader and retailer relationships.

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 29 OF 95 
 
 
 
66 EU and IFAD co-finance will also support the implementation of this Action. No GCF financial support is required. 
67 Specifically, Activities under Output 3 that are subject to Output 1 deliverables are: 
 For Activity 3.1: Activity 1.1, Action 1.1.3: Identification of existing and/or establishment of new Village Development Funds to channel 
climate finance to target villages – VDFs have to be in place after Village Forest Management Planning is concluded, to provide funds 
for the implementation of annual plans; Activity 1.5, Action 1.5.2: Land use planning and improved tenure security – Land Use Plans 
have to be in place as a precondition for VFM; Activity 1.7, Action 1.7.2: Knowledge management, FPIC, safeguards and gender – 
FPIC has to be completed as a precondition. 
 For Activity 3.2: Activity 1.1, Action 1.1.3: Identification of existing and/or establishment of new Village Development Funds to channel 
climate finance to target villages – VDFs have to be in place after Production Forest Management Planning is concluded, to provide 
funds for the implementation of annual plans; Activity 1.7, Action 1.7.2: Knowledge management, FPIC, safeguards and gender – 
FPIC has to be completed as a precondition. 
 For Activity 3.3: Activity 1.1, Action 1.1.3: Identification of existing and/or establishment of new Village Development Funds to channel 
climate finance to target villages – VDFs have to be in place after National Protected Area (NPA) management planning is concluded, 
to provide funds for the implementation of annual plans; Activity 1.7, Action 1.7.2: Knowledge management, FPIC, safeguards and 
gender – FPIC has to be completed as a precondition. 
68 For further information about REDD+ implementation at the village forest level, see GIZ (2018), Forest Governance, REDD+ and Village 
Forestry in Laos, provided in Annex 22x. 
69 Smith, H. and Alounsayath, O. (2015), Forest Legality Compendium, Department of Forestry Inspection and Department of Forestry, Lao 
PDR, p.242. Provided in Annex 22v. 
 
o 
Action 2.3.2: Productive rural infrastructure upgraded to be climate-resilient and sustainable. SRIWSM project 
investment in irrigation scheme upgrading will provide secure access to water during the dry season. This will 
provide: (i) farmers with better opportunities to grow higher-value crops and finish cattle; (ii) increased, and 
more reliable, farm household incomes; and (iii) improved affordability of operating the irrigation scheme.   
 The modernisation of irrigation infrastructure in 11 irrigation schemes in Project 1 to enable water 
management within the command area during the dry season and to support crop diversification.  
 The provision of infrastructure and strengthening the irrigation schemes’ operational capacity to provide 
reliable and controllable water within the entire command area throughout the dry season in three small 
riparian zones in Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang. Limited upgrading will be provided within 
the main canal and damaged sections to reduce water losses. Additional water control measures will 
be applied through buried secondary distribution pipes and offtake points for piped, hand-held hose or 
sprinkler/trickle/drip applications.  
 Technical assistance to strengthen irrigation operation capacities, and the development and 
introduction of sustainable irrigation service fees to ensure the longevity, effectiveness and efficiency 
of the irrigation schemes.  
 
o 
Action 2.3.3: Nutrition-sensitive agriculture in targeted communities66. The Action will strengthen the nutritional 
status of targeted villages in 3 districts of Houaphan province.  
 District Nutrition Teams (DNTs) will be formed in each of the target districts, consisting of 4 members 
of the District Department of Health and 4 members of the Lao Women’s Union (LWU). Each DNT will 
be responsible for working with 10-15 villages.  
 Village Nutrition Teams (VNTs) will be formed to support follow-up with households on progress and 
challenges. VNTs and communities will discuss key nutrition indicators, such as the number and 
diversity of crops produced, the number and percentage of latrines, the knowledge of nutrition and 
hygiene concepts, the percentage of children with malnutrition and the dietary diversity for different 
household members. Actions Plans will then be developed and implemented.  
 
Output 3: Climate change mitigation action through forestry 
 
68. Output 3 will build upon Output 1 (enabling environment)67 and will reduce emissions through sustainable forest 
landscape management and the promotion of forest landscape restoration (FLR), especially on degraded lands. 
Activity 3.1 focuses on village forests, Activity 3.2 on production forests and Activity 3.3 on conservation forests. 
 
o 
Village forests are forests located within a village area, which the government has allocated to the village to 
manage, preserve and use in a sustainable manner in accordance with the legal and regulatory framework. 
Village forests may be characterised as production, protection and conservation forest (see below).68  
 
o 
Production forests are natural and planted forests classified for the purpose of timber and NTFP production.69 
Production Forest Areas (PFAs) are forest and forestland areas allocated to the State for management and 
which are managed in accordance with the Forestry Law. The forest in PFAs may be harvested for natural 
timber under the management of the Department of Forestry (in MAF), although PMO 31 has imposed a ban 
on such harvesting since 2013.

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 30 OF 95 
 
 
 
70 Ibid, p.242. 
71 Ibid, p.113. 
72 Ibid, p.113. 
73 http://www.fao.org/sustainable-forest-management/toolbox/en/  
74 For more information on currently permitted activities, refer to the VFMP Guidelines: https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/Village-Forest-
Management-Planning-Guideline.pdf. It should be noted that Activity 1.3 aims to revise these guidelines, and include commercial harvesting 
based on sustainable management plans and sustainable forest management principles to strengthen additional income streams for 
villagers and provide incentives for the sustainable management of forest resources.  
o 
Protection forests are forests classified for the function of protecting water resources, river banks, road sides, 
preventing soil erosion, protecting soil quality, strategic areas for national defence, protection from natural 
disasters and environmental protection.70 In protection forests, individuals and villages have certain rights with 
respect to the harvesting of timber and forest products for their own consumption.71 They are managed by the 
Department of Forestry. 
 
o 
Conservation forests (also referred to as National Protected Areas, NPAs) are forests classified for the 
purposes of conserving nature, preserving plant and animal species, forest ecosystems and other sites of 
natural, historical, cultural, tourism, environmental, educational and scientific value. Within conservation 
forest, individuals and villages have certain rights with respect to the harvesting of timber and forest products 
for their own consumption.72 They are managed by the Department of Forestry. 
 
69. Activity 3.1: Village forest management. Village forest management will be implemented in three forest categories 
(production forest without any commercial harvesting potential in the short-term, and protection and conservation 
forest) as well as in unclassified forest, following a landscape approach (see Chapter 1.3 of the Feasibility Study, 
Annex 2a). In total, there is high-carbon-stock forest area of 2.3 million ha in the three Project 1 provinces. Village 
forest management can be supported in 1.5 million ha of high-carbon forest area. Activity 3.1 consists of 2 Actions:  
 
o 
Action 3.1.1: Development of village forest management plans (VFMPs). Based on the PLUPs developed 
under Action 1.5.2, VFMPs will be designed using a combination of spatial planning and participatory land use 
planning with villagers as a precondition of Project 1 support to the sustainable management of village forests. 
Planning will be undertaken using a landscape approach, taking into account multiple land uses and benefits 
across the project area. Among others, tools developed by FAO for planning Forest and Landscape 
Restoration (FLR) will be used in this respect.73 These guidelines include the following key stages:  
 
 
Stage 1: Demarcation of forest areas and preparation of detailed village forest map 
 
Stage 2: Participatory Forest Resources Assessment (PFRA) and basic forest inventory 
 
Stage 3: Preparation of five-year village forest management plan (VFMP) 
 
Stage 4: Preparation of annual forestry operation plan 
 
Stage 5: Village forest management agreement  
 
The VFMP guidelines (CliPAD/GIZ 2016) provide the following examples of permitted activities: forest 
patrolling for protection against encroachment; fire prevention (e.g. digging fire breaks, ploughing firebreaks, 
controlled burning of fire breaks, etc.); building check dams or small water reservoirs to provide water for 
firefighting and water for watering planted tree seedlings; identification and marking of trees to be left as 
mother trees for seed production; selective cutting (in small quantities in different diameter classes in 
accordance with the sustainable forest model to improve forest structure and provide timber and fuelwood for 
villages); close parts of forest temporarily and protect young regeneration trees, fencing off of some parts to 
encourage regeneration; conduct weeding around valuable tree seedlings; marking of trees to be cut every 
year; enrichment planting; promotion of natural regeneration (e.g. in case of fire damage, shifting cultivation, 
excessive degradation/tree cutting); direct seeding in barren, highly degraded areas; and NTFP management 
and development.74 
 
Each VFMP establishes the geographical demarcation of village forestry, the allowable cut, where villagers 
can harvest, allowable practices and prohibited practices. The baseline in each case varies from village to 
village. 
 
o 
Action 3.1.2: Implementation and monitoring of VFMPs. As with the development of the VFMPs, the 
implementation of the VFMPs will follow the best-practice guidelines and procedures outlined in the Village 
Forest Management Guidelines, including the following stages:

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 31 OF 95 
 
 
 
75 World Bank (2018), Sustainable Forestry for Rural Development Project: Project Performance Assessment Report: 
https://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/sites/default/files/Data/reports/ppar_laosustainableforestry.pdf  
76 Lestrelin, G., Trockenbrodt, M., Phanvilay, K., Thongmanivong, S., Vongvisouk, T., Pham, T.T., Castella, J.C. (2013), The Context of 
REDD+ in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic: Drivers, Agents and Institutions. CIFOR Occasional Paper 92. 
 
Stage 6: Implementation of the village forest management activities, following the annual plan of 
operation and financed by annually-approved grants.   
 
Stage 7: Monitoring and evaluation  
 
Resources will be transferred to village development funds (VDFs) using mechanisms similar to those used 
in the Integrated Conservation of Biodiversity and Forests (ICBF) project. In summary, the EPF and NPMU 
will receive budget requests (annual work plans) from Village Communities and will check them against set 
criteria. Approved requests will be administered by the FFRDF. More details on transfer modalities are 
available in the REDD+ Funding Window Project Implementation Manual (PIM, Annex 22e).  
 
70. Activity 3.2: Sustainable management of production forests. There are 51 production forest areas (PFAs) in Lao 
PDR. The scale of degradation in PFAs is immense: only 15% of the total area in production forest (465,000 
hectares) is of a – more or less – satisfactory quality (contains at least 60 m³ per hectare of commercial standing 
stock).75 In the three Project 1 provinces, this forest category covers a total area of 700,000 ha. Regenerative 
vegetation accounts for 0.2 million ha and agricultural land for 32,000 ha in the Project 1 area, which could be used 
for restoration and reforestation. 
 
There is a ban on timber harvesting within production forest areas in response to widespread unsustainable 
harvesting (legal and illegal). However, in the Project 1 area, commercial logging is no longer a major driver of 
deforestation due to the absence of marketable tree species with minimum harvestable diameters – largely due to 
over-harvesting in the past.76 But many production forests in the project area are, however, highly degraded, and 
in need of natural regeneration and sustainable management. While the ban on timber harvesting has had positive 
impacts, including reduced deforestation, it has also substantially reduced the incomes generated from production 
forests. Provincial and district authorities have noted that budgets for government authorities, including those 
responsible for managing these forests, have been negatively affected due to reduced revenues from commercial 
forestry. 
 
In 3 districts in the Project 1 area (Sayabouri Province – Phiang, Sayabouri and Hongsa districts), there is 
commercial potential for sustainable harvesting and the project will work with the government on a new/revised 
regulation that allows harvesting if the forest management entity can demonstrate long-term sustainability. Activity 
3.2 consists of 2 Actions: 
 
o 
Action 3.2.1: Forest inventory and forest management planning in production forests 
 
Designation of villages, and mobilisation and organisation of villagers: MAF will present the project 
concept to existing village land use and forest management committees (VLUFMCs) led by a district 
villages forest committee (DVFC). 
 
Preparation of Forest Management Plans (FMPs): participatory land use zoning, marking boundaries 
and taking an inventory of trees and NTFPs. The focus of the management planning will be to identify 
potential zones for restoration and reforestation in the production forests. The identified areas will be 
linked to Activity 2.2, the establishment of a public-private dialogue to promote private sector 
partnerships and sustainable investments.   
 
Definition of degraded forest and forest access rules (rules governing forest access and benefit-sharing 
are clearly defined together with villagers), and ensure villagers understand and uphold these rules. 
 
Assessment and identification of eligible and promising village-level development investments based 
on SUFORD’s positive experiences with village development funds.   
 
Capacity building for VLUFMCs and managing inclusive DVFCs, and training for villagers on SFM, 
forest management plans and monitoring. 
 
Capacity building for provincial and district officials to support forest management planning and eventual 
FMP implementation (especially focused on provision of support to villagers).  
 
o 
Action 3.2.2: Implementation of Forest Management Plans (FMPs) with associated monitoring 
 
Support VLUFMCs and DAFOs in the development of annual work and budget plans to implement 
forest restoration activities under the Forest Management Plans (FMPs), including village-based 
forestry development and assisted natural regeneration in degraded forests.  
 
Provision of grants by the REDD+ Funding Window to support FMP implementation: 
 
Grants to VDFs to support the implementation of annual FMPs.

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 32 OF 95 
 
 
 
77 Information provided by MAF and MoNRE representatives; PRAP consultations; MOF/DOF 2018. 
78 This project supports the “effective management of 2 target landscapes comprising NPAs and corridors contributing to sustaining 
biodiversity in forest ecosystems, while supporting livelihoods of forest-dependent communities”: Braeutigam, D. (2015), Integrated 
Conservation of Forests and Biodiversity ICBF – Introduction, KfW and MoNRE, Lao PDR. 
79 More information on WCS activities within this protected area are available online: https://laos.wcs.org/Saving-Wild-Places/Nam-Et-Phou-
Louey-NPA.aspx. WCS has recently received World Bank LENS2 funding of USD 3 million (2019-2021) to continue its work under the sub-
project ‘Strengthening the capacity and management of the Nam El Phou Louey National Protected Area in the face of expanding 
infrastructure development’. 
80 Protected Area and Wildlife Project:   
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/862811468266173148/pdf/IPP6840V20REV000Box382157B00PUBLIC0.pdf and 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/710021468278697087/pdf/PAD2430P128393010Box382156B00OUO090.pdf ; Developing and 
Demonstrating Replicable Protected Area Management Models at Nam-et-Phou Louey National Protected Area Project (NEPL Project): 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/296761446543710814/pdf/Lao-NEPL-AM-ISM-May-2015-pdf.pdf  
81 http://newgenerationplantations.org/multimedia/file/574d9156-8098-11e6-ab1e-005056986313    
82 KfW (2017), Village Fund Disbursement and Management Guideline. 
 
Grants to support forest establishment using the same modalities as for Action 2.1.2 (50% 
matching grant with a private sector investor). 
 
Village development grants to VDFs for livelihood activities. 
 
On-the-job capacity development and training of village organisations in implementation of assisted 
natural regeneration and forest development. 
 
Enforcement of forest access rules (sanctions applied to those who break the rules, and redress 
available for those whose rights are infringed). 
 
Capacity building for provincial and district authorities, as well as DVFCs, on monitoring (e.g. forest 
inventory revision, remote-sensing and ground truthing) and enforcement (patrolling techniques). 
 
Annual monitoring of overall achievement in implementing the annual plan of operation, and preparation 
of new annual plan of operation. 
 
After 4 years, in the final year of Project 1, conduct monitoring and evaluation of the overall achievement 
of the management plan, and prepare a new management plan for Project 2. 
 
71. Activity 3.3: National Protected Area management. The Project 1 area contains 3 National Protected Areas (NPAs) 
– Nam Sam and Nam Et Phou Louey in Houaphan province and Nam Pouy in Sayabouri province. They span 12 
Project 1 districts, which have all deliberately been selected for GCF project implementation. These protected 
areas account for 670,000 ha in the Project 1 area. Approximately 96% of this protected area is classified as 
forest.  
 
A lack of management plans and availability of financing are major barriers to addressing deforestation and forest 
degradation in these NPAs.77 Activity 3.3 aims to build on the extensive experience generated by the KfW 
Integrated Conservation of Biodiversity and Forests (ICBF) project.78 Prior to its implementation, extensive pre-
feasibility and feasibility studies were conducted that informed the design of the project (2012-2015, 
implementation until 2022). In Houaphan, experiences in strengthening NPA management will also build on 
experiences from Nam Et Phou Louey NPA (Wildlife Conservation Society – WCS79; World Bank80) and Nam Xam 
NPA (USAID and SNV)81; in the context of WCS, close exchange and cooperation is envisaged regarding the 
Nam Et Phou Louey NPA.   
 
Villages will be able to access village-based grants for a set of eligible agricultural and forestry activities that 
support villages’ livelihoods and forest protection. Guidelines developed by the ICBF project will be followed 
(Village Fund Disbursement / Management Guidelines), which permit activities such as the following:82 
 
Natural and enhanced forest restoration. 
 
Improved forest use through bamboo management for income generation. 
 
Agroforestry for food security and income generation. 
 
Non-timber forest products for income generation. 
 
Aquatic conservation zones for livelihood benefits. 
  
These grants will reduce the pressure on deforestation and reliance of unsustainable forest use, and will improve 
household incomes. The application process is described in the Project Implementation Manual (Annex 22e). 
Activity 3.3 consists of 3 Actions: 
 
o 
Action 3.3.1: Development or revision of National Protected Area (NPA) management plans. The development 
of NPA management plans and revision of existing (outdated) plans in the Project 1 area will help to strengthen 
the management of NPAs and reduce deforestation and forest degradation, while improving livelihoods of 
villagers living within or adjacent to the NPAs. This Action will include the following measures:

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 33 OF 95 
 
 
 Assessment of key forest areas and the quantification of current and potential threats as a key element 
of developing NPA management plans.  
 Zonation: Identifying land use categories and Participatory Land Use Planning (PLUP). 
 Assessment and identification of alternative livelihood opportunities for which villages will be eligible to 
receive village-level livelihood grants through voluntary co-management agreements (VCMAs – 
essentially village conservation contracts – under Action 3.3.3). 
 Development of National Protected Area (NPA) management plans. 
 Awareness raising and establishment of co-management agreements with villages inside or adjacent 
to the NPA in NPAs where this has not already been done. Voluntary co-management agreements will 
be based on a participatory process applying FPIC principles. 
 Development of Law Enforcement Action Plans (LEAPs) for NPAs. 
 
o 
Action 3.3.2: Improved law enforcement in NPA conservation landscape.  
 Construct/reconstruct law enforcement infrastructure, provision of patrolling equipment and ensure 
operation. 
 Implementation of Law Enforcement Action Plans (LEAPs) for NPAs, regular monitoring and 
enforcement of management plans and NPA management, including targeting high-risk areas by 
Provincial Office of Forestry Inspection (POFI) staff. 
 Development and implementation of a forest monitoring strategy aimed at evaluating the effectiveness 
of NPA management actions. 
 Implementation of the SMART law enforcement data management system to standardise the 
monitoring of enforcement efforts, threats and results across all NPAs. 
 Capacity development for NPA and POFI staff, and provision of equipment to support improved 
monitoring and enforcement. 
 Village engagement by PPMU and DAFO staff for participating villages within and adjacent to NPAs. 
 
o 
Action 3.3.3: Implementation of sustainable land and forest management by villages living within and adjacent 
to NPAs. Support will be provided to villages living within and adjacent to NPAs to implement sustainable land 
use activities that are aligned with the voluntary co-management agreements and the NPA management 
plans.   
 
Financing for Actions 3.3.2 and 3.3.3 will be provided from the REDD+ Funding Window to government entities 
and to villages. Government entities will be supported by the PPMUs in their annual work planning and budgeting. 
Work plans and budgets will be submitted to the NPMU, and approved funds will then be disbursed by the EPF in 
accordance with the REDD+ Funding Window Project Operational Manual (POM). 
 
 
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements  
B.4.1 Project Steering Structure 
 
72. The National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) will provide administrative oversight of the project, ensuring 
coordination across ministries – initially for Project 1 and subsequently (contingent upon separate GCF funding 
approval) for Project 2 and Project 3. The NPSC will provide strategic implementation guidance to the National 
Project Management Unit (NPMU) and Provincial Project Steering Committees (PPSCs, the Provincial REDD+ Task 
Forces), whilst ensuring compliance with the NDC, the National REDD+ Strategy and national socio-economic 
development objectives. The National Project Steering Committee will meet 4 times per year throughout the project 
implementation period, as well as on an ad hoc basis as and when required.  
 
73. The structure of the NPSC builds upon the existing institutional structure for REDD+ in Lao PDR. Thus, the REDD+ 
Task Force, as the responsible government entity for REDD+, will serve as the NPSC. The REDD+ Task Force 
was established by Government Decree No. 1313 (2008) as a multi-sector body. It is headed by a Vice Minister of 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and contains representatives of the Department of Forestry (DoF, 
under MAF), the Department of Agricultural Land Management and Development (under MAF), the Department of 
Climate Change (under the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment MoNRE), the Department of 
Environmental Quality Promotion (under MoNRE), the Land Department (under MoNRE), the External Finance 
Department (under the Ministry of Finance), the Ethnic Groups Department (under the Lao Front for National

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 34 OF 95 
 
 
Development), the Department of International Cooperation (under the Ministry of Planning and Investment), the 
Division of International Law and Administration Law (under the Ministry of Justice), the Energy Conservation and 
Saving Division (under the Ministry of Energy and Mines), the Central National Lao Women’s Union, the Faculty of 
Forestry Science of the National University of Laos (NUOL) and the Lao National Chamber of Industry and 
Commerce. 
 
74. GIZ, as the GCF Accredited Entity and one of three Executing Entities, will maintain observer status on the NPSC 
in order to provide strategic guidance and ensure that GCF-related guidance and compliance is provided to the 
national actors. 
 
75. The Provincial Project Steering Committees (PPSCs, one for each participating province) will be led by the 
provincial REDD+ Task Force in each province. At the provincial level, the PPSCs will review project implementation 
progress and provide support to address potential bottlenecks related to implementation. For Project 1 and Project 
3, the provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang will each have a PPSC; for Project 2, the provinces 
of Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay will each have a PPSC.   
 
B.4.2 Project Management, Implementation and Execution Structure 
 
Role of GIZ as Accredited Entity and Executing Entity 
 
76. GIZ head office (in Germany) will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE). The GIZ office in Lao PDR will fulfil the role 
of an Executing Entity (EE) of Project 1, together with the Government of Lao PDR (represented by MAF and 
MoNRE) and JICA. The two GIZ roles will be strictly separated and will be accountable to different management 
structures within GIZ.  
 
GIZ as Accredited Entity  
 
77. As the Accredited Entity (AE), GIZ will assume oversight responsibility for Project 1, as defined in the Accreditation 
Master Agreement between GCF and GIZ. As AE, GIZ will administer project funds on behalf of the GCF and will 
provide oversight guidance and quality assurance of the three Executing Entities through its relevant head office 
units. The GCF AE unit based at GIZ head office will be responsible for: 
 
 
Overall responsibility for, and oversight of, Project 1, including project preparation and implementation 
 
Continuous communication with the GCF 
 
Receiving GCF proceeds as well as disbursing, administering and processing the funds (financial 
management) 
 
Ensuring the proper use of the GCF proceeds 
 
Assessing the integrity and capacity of the EEs 
 
Setting up subsidiary agreements with the EEs 
 
Monitoring the subsidiary agreements and the performance of EEs 
 
Ensuring EEs’ procurement activities comply with GIZ’s rules and policies 
 
Maintaining adequate documentation and reporting to the GCF 
 
Establishing internal control routines 
 
Ensuring continuous project risk assessment 
 
Evaluation (commissioning of independent mid-term and final reviews) 
 
78. In order to implement Project 1, GIZ will need to establish legal arrangements with the Executing Entities (the 
Government of Lao PDR and JICA), Implementation Partners and Contributing Partners. 
 
79. For Project 1, the following agreements will be necessary: 
 
 
BMZ Commission 
 
Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) between GIZ (as the Accredited Entity) and the GCF 
 
Lao PDR-Germany bilateral agreement with the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) 
 
Executing Entities: 
o 
A subsidiary agreement (grant agreement) between GIZ Head Office (AE) and the Government of Lao 
PDR (represented by MAF and MoNRE) relating to the REDD+ Funding Window. This agreement will, 
among other things, also address the implementation of those activities co-financed by IFAD, KfW and 
ADB.

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 35 OF 95 
 
 
o 
A subsidiary agreement between GIZ Head Office (AE) and JICA. 
 
Implementing Partners: 
o 
An implementation agreement between GIZ Laos (Executing Entity) and the Government of Lao PDR 
(MAF). 
 
Contributing Partners: 
o 
A co-operation agreement between GIZ AE and ADB  
o 
A co-operation agreement between GIZ AE and IFAD 
o 
A co-operation agreement between GIZ AE and KfW 
 
80. These agreements will be negotiated upon Board approval of Project 1 and in accordance with the term sheet. 
Similar agreements will be required for Projects 2 and 3.  
 
 
Figure 5: Cooperation and Contractual Arrangements 
 
 
 
GIZ as an Executing Entity 
 
81. GIZ has been operating in Lao PDR since 1993 and employs approximately 250 staff members, most of them Lao 
nationals. GIZ technical assistance in the Lao forestry sector amounts to Euro 21 million, with Lao PDR ranking 
among the top 15 recipient countries of forestry-related German development assistance worldwide.  
 
82. In its capacity as an Executing Entity, GIZ will lead, and provide overall management of, the Technical Assistance 
(TA) to Project 1 at national and sub-national levels: 
 
 
Managing the project budget of GIZ as Executing Entity that is spent in the country.

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 36 OF 95 
 
 
 
Liaising with the GIZ Country Office regarding budget and finances, monitoring and reporting, staff and 
appraiser contracts. 
 
Reporting to the German Embassy and BMZ regarding their financial contributions to the project as well the 
overall progress of project implementation. 
 
Coordinating project implementation with the co-financing development partners and their projects and 
counterparts as well as other bi- and multilateral institutions operating in the same technical and/or 
geographical area. 
 
Liaising with, and reporting to, the National Project Steering Committee and Provincial Project Steering 
Committees. 
 
Coordinating with, and reporting to, line ministries involved in the project (MAF, MoNRE) as well as the MPI. 
 
Representing the project in national working groups and stakeholder forums. 
 
83. GIZ will be responsible for the establishment and operation of the National Project Management Unit (NPMU). The 
NPMU will be established within the Department of Forestry (in MAF); associated provincial (PPMU) and district 
(DPMU) units will be similarly managed – PPMUs will be situated in Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Offices 
(PAFOs) and DPMUs in District Agriculture and Forestry Offices (DAFOs). The NPMU will have the following 
responsibilities under Project 1: 
 
 
Providing sub-beneficiaries with guidance on developing annual work plans and budgets. The NPMU and 
associated PPMUs will work with DAFOs, PAFOs, other government agencies and Village Development 
Funds to prepare the required materials to submit budget requests to the REDD+ Funding Window. 
 
Approval of work plan budgets will be the responsibility of the NPMU. The NPMU – and, by extension, GIZ as 
the Executing Entity responsible for the NPMU – will evaluate operational plans and budgets against criteria 
to be developed and will determine the appropriateness of each proposed plan (preliminary, indicative criteria 
are described in the Project Implementation Manual – Annex 22e). Approval will also be dependent upon 
appropriate due diligence of the recipient entity by the EPF supported – if necessary – by the NPMU and 
PPMUs. Assuming that a work plan is approved, the NPMU will request the EPF to disburse funds according 
to the plan, provided there are no fiduciary concerns. 
 
The NPMU will also have a role in providing guidance to the EPF on monitoring the implementation of the 
work plans. 
 
The NPMU will provide guidance to the EPF in terms of fiduciary responsibility, monitoring and reporting, and 
compliance with safeguards.  
 
84. GIZ as an Executing Entity will be responsible for a GCF budget for Project 1 of Euro 4.1 million. 
 
NPMU, PPMUs and DPMUs 
 
85. A National Project Management Unit (NPMU) will be established within the Department of Forestry (DoF) of MAF. 
The NPMU’s physical location in DoF is expected to foster local ownership of Project 1, to build institutional capacity 
and to ensure continuous linkage with Government policy-making and implementation of other initiatives. As an 
Executing Entity, the GIZ Country Office in Lao PDR will be responsible for the establishment and management of 
the NPMU, as well as the establishment and management of Provincial Project Management Units (PPMUs) in 
each of the 3 target Project 1 provinces and District Project Management Units (DPMUs) in each of the 16 Project 
1 districts. The same NPMU structure will be used for the implementation of GIZ-managed BMZ financing and 
activity implementation. The NPMU will closely coordinate with the responsible government agencies on relevant 
activities and will provide technical and financial management support. In order to ensure capacities remain at DoF 
after project completion, capacities are being built to enable a transformational change and enable income-
generation from sustainable forestry during the course of the project. After project completion, DoF will be prepared 
to make use of the knowledge and experiences, generate revenues and manage those through the Forest and 
Forest Resource Development Fund. 
 
86. PPMUs and DPMUs, under the instruction of the NPMU, will assist the NPMU in executing the above 
responsibilities. In addition to mirroring national-level responsibilities at the local level, PPMUs and DPMUs will have 
an additional responsibility at the provincial and district levels. In the event that project beneficiaries (e.g. Village 
Development Funds) are not able to independently prepare adequate annual operational plans and budgets, 
PPMUs and DPMUs will assist beneficiaries to complete appropriate plans.

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 37 OF 95 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Project Organisation Chart 
 
The Government of Lao PDR as an Executing Entity 
 
87. The Government of Lao PDR, represented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and the Ministry of 
Natural Resources and Environment (MoNRE), will serve as Executing Entity. The government’s role in this 
respect is driven by two considerations: 
 
 
The mandates and functions of the two ministries, notably their sectoral relevance and the fact that MoNRE 
is the GCF National Designated Authority (NDA) of Lao PDR and is responsible for the EPF; and that MAF 
serves as the Chair of the REDD+ Task Force and is (together with the Ministry of Finance) the contract-
signing party with the FCPF Carbon Fund to sell GHG emission reductions and receive results-based 
payments. MAF is further responsible for the FFRDF, which will have two roles as: a) a beneficiary receiving 
capacity building support; b) once its capacities are satisfactorily built to channel funds to beneficiaries. The 
specific role of FFRDF, as well as the implementation of activities co-financed by IFAD, KfW and ADB, will 
be elaborated in the Subsidiary Agreement with the Government of Lao. 
 
The Government of Lao PDR possesses the legal personality to sign a subsidiary agreement with GIZ 
regarding the role that the EPF will play in establishing and operating the REDD+ Funding Window (see 
below). While the legal agreement with GIZ (as the Accredited Entity) will be signed with the Government, 
the GCF funding will flow from GIZ direct to the EPF, which will be responsible for the financial management 
and disbursement of grants to other beneficiaries. 
 
JICA as an Executing Entity 
 
88. In its capacity as an Executing Entity, JICA will provide technical assistance (TA) to departments within the 
participating ministries and to sub-national agencies. JICA will use its own funds (Euro 1.6 million co-finance) in 
the context of its F-REDD II project to: 
 
 
Support law enforcement and land use planning (Activities 1.4 and 1.5) 
 
Set up the MRV system and support knowledge generation for the FRL/FREL under Activity 1.6 in close 
coordination with the Forest Inventory and Planning Division (FIPD) of MAF and the National Project 
Management Unit (NPMU) 
 
Support the implementation of Activities 2.1 and 3.1 in the province of Luang Prabang

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 38 OF 95 
 
 
 
83 http://www.thegef.org/country/lao-pdr  
84 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/104251468179365818/Lao-People-s-Democratic-Republic-Second-Phase-of-Lao-
Environment-and-Social-Project-LENS2-Implementation-support-mission-May-4-to-27-2015  
85 For more information, see https://laoepf.org.la/, which provides documents such as the EPF corporate annual report and EPF strategy 
papers. 
86 UNDP-GEF project, ‘Sustainable forest and land management in the dry dipterocarp forest ecosystems of Southern Lao PDR’: 
https://www.thegef.org/project/sustainable-forest-and-land-management-dry-dipterocarp-forest-ecosystems-southern-lao-pdr  
87 The EPF is currently receiving GCF readiness support. With GCF readiness assistance, the EPF has conducted a gap assessment. 
Currently, the EPF – with support from external specialists – is revising (among others) its gender policy, its fiduciary standards and its 
safeguards policy. These will all be completed by autumn 2019.  
88 Provided in Annex 22y. 
REDD+ Funding Window project cycle and fund disbursement process 
 
89. The EPF will channel funds under the REDD+ Funding Window. A detailed capacity assessment of the EPF is 
provided in Annex 22d and a due diligence assessment is provided in Annex 20a. The EPF was established in 
2005 by the Government of Lao PDR to strengthen environmental protection, sustainable natural resources 
management, biodiversity conservation and community development in the country (under the Environmental 
Protection Law (EPL) and the EPF Decree 2005). The EPF serves as the GEF Operational Focal Point for Lao 
PDR.83 The EPF provides financial support by means of non-refundable grants, preferential loans, interest rate 
subsidies or a combination of these. Currently, the main source of financing that the EPF channels to various Sub-
project Delivery Agencies (SDAs) is from the World Bank Second Lao Environment and Social (LENS2) project.84 
The LENS2 project supports Policy Implementation and Capacity Enhancement (PICE) and Biodiversity and 
Community Investment (BCI) financing windows, as well as building the EPF’s capacity and support for project 
administration. Additionally, the EPF channelled finance for the first LENS project.85 
 
90. There are three considerations underlying the EPF’s role operating the REDD+ Funding Window. First, it is 
desirable that a local, capable entity is involved in project financing in order to increase country-ownership of 
activities. The EPF has proven itself capable of managing similar funds in the past (e.g. through LENS2 and 
through a UNDP-implemented GEF project86). Second, Project 1 aims to increase the capacity of government 
institutions so that the benefits of GCF support outlive its lifespan. By giving the EPF significant responsibility in 
project execution, the government and GIZ anticipate that local capacity will increase – facilitating, amongst others, 
the EPF’s ambition to become a GCF Accredited Entity.87 Third, the EPF’s mission and mandate are well aligned 
with the goals of the GCF project. The EPF is operationally and legally capable of managing the REDD+ Funding 
Window. Its by-laws (updated in 2018) allow it to manage funds coming from: the State budget, contributions from 
concessions, direct grants from national and international organisations, contributions from individuals and 
organisations, interest and profits coming from investments, environmental rehabilitation fees, payment for 
ecosystem services, and fines and indemnities.  
 
91. The REDD+ Funding Window will be established and operationalised under Project 1, and will also be utilised as 
a financial delivery mechanism for Project 3 and for the three additional provinces under Project 2 (if Projects 2 
and 3 receive future GCF funding approval). Annex 22zb provides a description and budget of the REDD+ Funding 
Window under Project 1. 
 
92. The REDD+ Funding Window will consist of 4 sub-windows, one for each of four different beneficiary groups: 
government agencies at national, provincial and district levels; villages (Village Development Funds, VDFs); civil 
society organisations (CSOs); and private sector enterprises (SMEs). Precise eligibility criteria will be developed 
in a future Project Operational Manual. Nonetheless, it is anticipated that the Funding Window will have the 
following eligibility criteria, based upon those used in the World Bank LENS2 Project Implementation Manual:88 
 
 
Funds support a government policy, strategy or official plan linked to the NDC, a PRAP, the ER-P or the GCF 
Funding Proposal. 
 
The operational plan contributes to at least one intermediate outcome indicator that is relevant to the GCF 
Activity supporting the beneficiary. 
 
Aligns with the project’s geographical scope (i.e. the accounting area of the Emission Reductions Programme. 
 
The beneficiary is relevant to one of the four REDD+ Funding Windows. 
 
93. The EPF will sign grant agreements with a range of sub-grantees, including government entities, villages, CSOs 
and private sector entities. The EPF will use its own contractual forms developed under the World Bank LENS2 
project for these arrangements. As the FFRDF is envisaged to be an intermediary between the EPF and some 
project beneficiaries, the FFRDF will also need to sign similar agreements with these entities.

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 39 OF 95 
 
 
94. Grant payments channelled through the REDD+ Funding Window will be of three types: operational funds, upfront 
payments and performance-based payments. Operational payments ensure the implementation of planned 
activities (for instance, capacity development measures, equipment procurement, etc.). Upfront payments are ex 
ante payments issued to beneficiaries to support defined activities (outlined in a written budget request submitted 
by the beneficiary to the NPMU). Performance-based payments are ex post payments issued by the REDD+ 
Funding Window to support defined activities that have been achieved according to a pre-defined performance 
metric. 
 
95. The choice of payment modality for particular project elements has been made primarily on the basis of 
beneficiaries’ capabilities and incentives (i.e. a realistic assessment of their ability to implement activities using 
pre-existing skills and financial resources). Note, however, that in some respects the distinction between upfront 
payments and performance-based payments is somewhat artificial. Upfront payments will be issued on an annual 
basis. This means that, if continued funding is required, the beneficiary will be required to submit a new funding 
request. This provides an opportunity for the NPMU to assess beneficiary performance to date and, if needed, to 
stipulate corrective actions or to withhold subsequent payments. Thus, even for upfront payments there is a 
performance-based element. 
 
96. Grant payments to beneficiaries through the REDD+ Funding Window will range between approximately Euro 
2,000 to Euro 15,000, with most clustering in the Euro 5,000-10,000 range. The value of each grant payment will 
be determined by the amount requested by the beneficiary for specific activities (in the form of an ex ante written 
funding request), the amount subsequently agreed with the NPMU and the beneficiary on the basis of the 
beneficiary’s initial request, and – if there is an ex post performance element – on the verified performance of the 
implemented activities. The basis for all payments are detailed annual workplans for national, provincial and district 
(including village) levels. Workplans will be developed during joint planning meetings and through the 
participation/involvement of all concerned stakeholders (government, CSOs, private sector, etc.). Within those 
plans, the timelines, budgets, concerned organisations, implementing agencies, performance metrics (if relevant), 
etc. will be noted and agreed on. 
 
97. Through the REDD+ Funding Window, the EPF will channel Euro 11.1 million of the GCF grant to Project 1 
beneficiaries. As laid out in the figure below, EPF roles relating to the REDD+ Funding Window will include: 
 
 
Disbursement of funds directly to SMEs, CSOs, the FFRDF and province-level (PAFOs, PONREs, POFIs) 
and district-level (DAFOs, DONREs, DOFIs, DFIUs) government institutions will be the responsibility of the 
EPF. The EPF will not, however, have responsibility to approve the technical eligibility of funds to be disbursed. 
Instead, the NPMU will approve operational plans and budgets from sub-grantees. The EPF may approve or 
reject disbursement requests based on its fiduciary judgement. In many cases, particularly relating to the 
FFRDF, the sub-grantee will have additional responsibilities in terms of disbursing to small entities (e.g. village 
groups) due to its presence in the districts. 
 
Procurement of goods and services will be the responsibility of the EPF. 
 
Monitoring of financial flows under the GIZ-Government of Lao PDR subsidiary agreement and ensuring 
regular auditing and reporting to GIZ in its capacity as the AE will be the responsibility of the EPF.  
 
Reporting to GIZ in its capacity as AE against project milestones and evaluations will be the responsibility of 
the EPF. Results will be collected at the provincial and district levels and fed up to the EPF. The EPF will then 
ensure that reporting is undertaken according to the GCF’s requirements and will submit monitoring reports 
to GIZ as the Accredited Entity. 
 
Ensuring compliance against GCF environmental, social and governance safeguards will be the responsibility 
of the EPF.  
 
In order to deliver against these responsibilities, the EPF will hire new staff and devote significant resources to 
managing the project activities. The fees for the EPF to accomplish these responsibilities will be agreed after GCF 
project approval. 
 
98. Coordination between the EPF and the Executing Entities – and, in particular, with GIZ and the Government of 
Lao PDR – will be ensured through regular coordination meetings. Furthermore, GIZ will steer capacity building 
measures for the EPF and will provide technical support to the EPF. GIZ will also work with the EPF to address 
the gaps identified in the EPF’s capacity assessment (Annex 22d). GIZ will assist the EPF to: establish an internal 
control system, including an internal Audit Committee, Ethics Committee and risk register; introduce a uniform 
accounting system, and elaborate and implement manuals, training and advisories to financial staff prior to and 
during REDD+ Funding Window implementation; improve the IT infrastructure so that it complies with international

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 40 OF 95 
 
 
standards; and comply with Environmental & Social Safeguards through setting up a Code of Conduct, and anti-
fraud-, anti-money laundering and anti-corruption policies. 
 
Figure 7: Fund Flow Structure 
 
 
Table 3: Beneficiary Eligibility Criteria for the REDD+ Funding Window  
Beneficiary Category 
Activities Supported through the 
REDD+ Funding Window 
Eligibility Criteria to receive Funding 
through the REDD+ Funding Window 
Government agencies (at national, 
provincial and district levels) 
Policy and regulatory reform; law 
enforcement; land use planning; 
agriculture and forestry; MRV; 
safeguards implementation 
Approval of budget requests submitted 
to the NPMU 
Village Development Funds 
Incentives for good agricultural practices 
and sustainable forestry 
Approval of budget requests submitted 
to the NPMU; establishment of a VDF 
committee in beneficiary villages; 
activities seeking funding conform with a 
white list of eligible activities 
Private sector enterprises (primarily 
agribusiness SMEs) 
Incentives for good agricultural practices 
and agroforestry 
NMPU approval of funding proposals 
submitted via a public tender process. 
Enterprises must: 
 
Be legally registered in Lao PDR 
 
Work in the agricultural and/or 
forestry sector 
 
Already have a track-record of 
engagement with good agricultural 
and forestry practices 
 
Be able to demonstrate in-kind or 
cash contributions

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 41 OF 95 
 
 
 
Have demonstrable links with the 
selected project villages 
 
Be party to a private sector-village 
partnership agreement (PSVPA) 
with the relevant village(s) 
Civil Society Organisations  
Monitoring and evaluation; FPIC 
support; safeguards implementation 
Selection through a competitive tender 
process, with a focus on Lao CSOs. 
Suitable CSOs have to: 
 
Be legally registered 
 
Demonstrate relevant 
experience 
 
Have demonstrable capacities 
and resources to implement 
activities 
 
Have local presence in relevant 
provinces and/or districts 
 
 
 
 
Table 4: REDD+ Funding Window Grant Allocations 
 
REDD+ Funding Window Sub-
Window 
Total Operational 
funds  
(Euro) 
Total Upfront 
Payments (Euro) 
Total 
Performance-
Based Payments 
(Euro) 
Total 
Payments 
(Euro) 
Government & Civil Society 
Organisations 
5,796,039 
 
 
 
 
5,796,039 
Villages  
40,400 
2,962,500 
2,000,000 
5,002,900 
Private sector enterprises 
 
 
300,000 
 
 
300,000 
Total 
 
11,098,939 
 
99. Government sub-window. Government agencies at the national and sub-national levels will be required to submit 
annual work plans and associated budget requests to the NPMU in order to receive resources from the REDD+ 
Funding Window. The PPMUs and DPMUs may guide and assist government agencies to prepare work plans, 
and the NPMU will approve them. The following Project 1 Activities are relevant to government agencies: 
 
 
1.1: REDD+ Funding Window and sustainable finance  
 
1.4: Improved law enforcement and monitoring1.4: Improved law enforcement and monitoring 
 
1.5: Land use planning and improved tenure security 
 
1.6: Implementation of the Measurement, Reporting and Verification system 
 
1.7: Implementing knowledge management, the ESMP and Gender Action Plan, FPIC and safeguards 
 
2.1: Local incentives for good agricultural practices and agroforestry 
 
2.2: Catalysing private sector investment in value chains 
 
3.1: Village forest management.1: Village forest management 
 
3.2: Sustainable management of production forests 
 
3.3: National Protected Area (NPA) management 
 
4.1: Project management, coordination, monitoring and reporting 
 
100. Villages sub-window. Villages are a key project beneficiary, as local inhabitants are often most directly involved in 
deforestation and forest degradation. Shifting villagers’ activities from degrading practices to sustainable activities 
is critical to the success of the project. Village Development Funds (VDFs) will be the primary entities representing 
villages. VDFs will be eligible to receive grants for the following Project 1 Activities:  
 
 
2.1: Local incentives for good agricultural practices and agroforestry 
 
3.1: Village forest management  
 
3.2: Sustainable management of production forests 
 
3.3: National Protected Area (NPA) management  
 
Village Communities will be required to submit work plans to the EPF/FFRDF in order to receive resources for 
VDFs from the REDD+ Funding Window. Certain preconditions – establishment of a VDF committee with 4-5 
members, at least 2 of them women, with the right to withdraw funds; activities screened against a ‘white list’ of 
eligible interventions; etc. – must be met. PPMU and district-level coordination staff will support villages in 
preparing funding work plans, and the NPMU will approve them.

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 42 OF 95 
 
 
Figure 8: Village Engagement, Contracts and Financial Transfers 
 
 
101. Private enterprises sub-window. Agribusiness SMEs are the primary targeted enterprises. Private enterprises will 
be required to submit funding proposals via a public tender process to the REDD+ Funding Window in order to 
receive grants. To be eligible, enterprises must be legally registered (paying taxes) in Lao PDR, must work in the 
agricultural and/or forestry sector, must already have a track-record of engagement with good agricultural and 
forestry practices (including compliance with land use plans and applicable laws and regulations), must be able to 
demonstrate in-kind or cash contributions, and must have demonstrable links with the selected project villages. 
PPMUs and DPMUs may guide enterprises in preparing funding proposals, and the NPMU will approve them on 
the basis of their technical quality and their prospects for successful implementation. Issuance of subsequent 
grants to a particular SME is conditional upon satisfactory performance relating to prior grants. Agribusinesses 
may receive grants for the following Project 1 Activities: 
 
 
2.1: Local incentives for good agricultural practices and agroforestry 
 
102. Civil Society Organisations sub-window. CSOs receive funds for contributing to local monitoring and evaluation of 
the project process as well as contributing to local implementation of the ESMP and Gender Action Plan. Moreover, 
CSOs facilitate and/or participate in FPIC processes and local consultation. Selection of CSOs will take place 
through a competitive tender process, with a focus – but not exclusive focus – on Lao CSOs. Suitable CSOs have 
to be legally registered, have to demonstrate relevant experience (e.g. in REDD+, in project monitoring and 
evaluation, in gender, etc.), have demonstrable capacities and resources to implement activities, and have local 
presence in relevant provinces and/or districts. Decisions relating to the selection of CSOs are made by the NPMU; 
the EPF is responsible for financial and safeguard monitoring. CSOs may receive grants for the following Project 
1 Activities: 
 
 
1.4: Improved law enforcement and monitoring 
 
1.7: Local incentives for knowledge management, FPIC, safeguards and gender 
 
2.1: Local incentives for good agricultural practices and agroforestry 
 
2.2: Catalysing private sector investment in value chains 
 
3.1: Village forest management 
 
3.3: National Protected Area (NPA) management

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 43 OF 95 
 
 
 
89 MAF = Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry; MoNRE = Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment; MoF = Ministry of Finance; 
PAFO = Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office; DAFO = District Agriculture and Forestry Office; POFI = Provincial Office of Forest 
Inspection; DFIU = District Forest Inspection Unit; DoL = Department of Land; DoF = Department of Forestry; DoFI = Department of Forest 
Inspection, VDF = village development fund.  
90 The Government and CSOs sub-windows are presented in combined form here because they closely complement each other. For 
example, under Activity 1.7 CSOs will provide support regarding the Gender Action Plan, FPIC, etc.; Activity 3.1 – village forest 
management trainings by PAFO/DAFO or CSOs (for example, for NTFP by GRET); Activity 3.3 – international service contract to support 
the preparation / revision of management plans for 2 NPAs (WWF / WCS). Details will be worked out during the preparation of annual 
workplans at all levels. 
 
Table 5: Purposes of REDD+ Funding Window Grants 
 
Project 
Element 
Purpose of REDD+ Funding Window Grants 
Grant 
Recipients89 
Type of Grant 
(operational funds / 
upfront- / 
performance-based 
payments) 
Total Grant 
Amount 
(Euro) 
 
Government & CSOs Sub-Windows (financed by GCF)90 
Activity 1.1: 
REDD+ 
Funding 
Window and 
sustainable 
finance 
Scoping study and action plan to mobilise 
long-term REDD+ financing; establishment 
and operationalisation of the REDD+ Funding 
Window 
MAF, MoNRE, 
MoF 
Operational funds 
400,000 
Activity 1.4: 
Improved law 
enforcement 
and monitoring 
Revised standard operating procedures for law 
enforcement; improved coordination between 
law enforcement agencies; training for law 
enforcement agencies 
DOFI, PAFOs, 
DAFOs, 
POFIs, DFIUs, 
CSOs 
Operational funds 
367,1300 
Activity 1.5: 
Land use 
planning and 
improved 
tenure security 
Design, preparation, implementation and 
monitoring of participatory land use plans 
(PLUPs) 
DoL, PAFOs, 
DAFOs, 
PONREs, 
DONREs 
Operational funds 
618,900 
Activity 1.6: 
Implementatio
n of the MRV 
system 
Support to the fourth national forest inventory; 
forest-type map; emission and removal factors; 
assessment of leakage; national forest 
management system; management 
information system 
DoF 
Operational funds 
686,100 
Activity 1.7: 
Implementing 
knowledge 
management, 
the ESMP and 
Gender Action 
Plan, FPIC 
and 
safeguards 
Ensuring the project complies with safeguards 
and best practices; Local monitoring and 
evaluation of project implementation; local 
implementation of the ESMP and the Gender 
Action Plan 
MAF, MoNRE, 
CSOs 
Operational funds 
471,500 
Activity 2.1: 
Local 
incentives for 
good 
agricultural 
practices and 
agroforestry 
Capacity building; district activity plans; 
knowledge exchange workshops for villages 
DAFOs, CSOs 
Operational funds 
790,600 
Activity 2.2 
Catalysing 
private sector 
investment in 
value chains 
Establishment of public-private dialogue and 
match-making platform to promote village-
based agroforestry; Formalization support for 
village and private sector partnerships; Multi-
Stakeholder Platforms (MSPs) on value chain 
development; Business development support 
to farmers / value chain actors / SMEs 
PAFOs, 
DAFOs, CSOs 
Operational funds 
283,000 
Activity 3.1: 
Village forest 
management 
Development, implementation and monitoring 
of village forest management plans 
DoF, PAFOs, 
DAFOs, 
POFIs, DFIUs, 
CSOs 
Operational funds 
833,400

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 44 OF 95 
 
 
 
91 Commercial agroforestry companies will provide the same amount of investment in village plantation establishment, as outlined in the 
Private-Sector Village Partnership Agreements (PSVPAs). 
Activity 3.2: 
Sustainable 
management 
of production 
forests 
Preparation and implementation of forest 
management plans 
DoF, PAFOs, 
DAFOs 
Operational funds 
99,200 
Activity 3.3: 
National 
Protected 
Area (NPA) 
management 
Development of NPA management plans; 
improved NPA law enforcement 
DoF, PAFOs, 
DAFOs, CSOs 
Operational funds 
976,000 
Activity 4.1: 
Project 
management 
Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring 
and Reporting 
EPF 
Operational funds 
270,208 
Villages Sub-Window (financed by GCF) 
Activity 2.1: 
Local 
incentives for 
good 
agricultural 
practices and 
agroforestry 
 
Payments for ‘white list’ good agricultural 
practices 
(GAPs) 
such 
as 
intercropping, 
mulching, no-tillage, etc. specified in the village 
participatory land use plan as well as matching 
grants for agroforestry development 
VDFs 
Combination of upfront 
(200 villages X 7,500 
EUR) and 
performance-based 
payments (200 villages 
X 10,000 EUR) after 2 
years based upon the 
PLUP forest cover 
target 
3,500,000 
 
Travel cost for villagers to training events 
 
Villagers 
Operational funds 
16,000 
Activity 3.1: 
Village forest 
management 
Development, implementation and monitoring 
of village forest management plans 
(implementation of 615 annual plans in 4 years 
x 1,500 EUR) 
VDFs 
Upfront 
922,500 
Travel cost for villagers to training events 
Villagers 
Operational funds 
20,400 
Activity 3.2: 
Sustainable 
management 
of production 
forests 
Grants to support the implementation of annual 
forest management plans; village development 
grants for livelihood activities  
(only for Hongsa, other 2 x PFA covered under 
2.1.4) 
VDFs 
Upfront 
60,000 
Travel cost for villagers to training events 
Villagers 
Operational funds 
4,000 
Activity 3.3: 
National 
Protected 
Area (NPA) 
management 
Implementation of sustainable land and forest 
management by villages living within and 
adjacent to NPAs – (Village conservation 
grants to NPA adjacent communities (40 
villages x 3 NPAs x 4,000 EUR) 
VDFs 
Upfront 
480,000 
Private Sector Enterprises Sub-Window (financed by GCF) 
Activity 2.1: 
Local 
incentives for 
good 
agricultural 
practices and 
agroforestry 
Matching grants for village-based agroforestry 
activities (1,500 ha x 200 EUR) 
Private sector 
enterprises 
Upfront (but (a) on a 
per hectare basis, so 
that subsequent tree-
planting on additional 
land attracts additional 
project payments; and 
(b) subject to proof of 
private enterprise 
finance accounting for 
at least 50% of the 
agroforestry costs) 
300,00091 
 
103. The initial size of the REDD+ Funding Window is Euro 11.1 million. As a result of GCF project implementation, 
additional financial resources will be unlocked and leveraged for reinvestment in REDD+ activities. Annex 3c 
provides a detailed breakdown of financial sources and amounts that will be leveraged by Project 1 and by the 
subsequent projects. Sources of leveraged finance include carbon results-based payments, forest taxes and fees, 
protected area fees, agricultural production, etc. Project 1 is expected to leverage Euro 227 million, a significant 
fraction of which (anticipated to be 75%+) will be reinvested in activities supportive of REDD+. It is not currently 
known what fraction will flow through the REDD+ Funding Window specifically – this will be a result of, for example,

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 45 OF 95 
 
 
the ongoing benefit-sharing agreement discussions between the Government and the FCPF, future Government 
fiscal decisions, etc. With regard to FCPF Carbon Fund results-based payments, it is anticipated in the ER-PD 
(Annex 20b) that 80% of the revenues will be channeled through the REDD+ Funding Window.  
 
B.4.3 Regulation, taxation and insurance 
 
Privileges, immunities and taxation 
 
104. The Federal Republic of Germany has concluded Framework Agreements on Technical Cooperation under 
international public law with the Government of Lao PDR, which provide for certain privileges and immunities to 
be applied in projects and programmes of technical cooperation, including exemptions for taxes, customs, duties 
and fees. GIZ will endeavour to reach arrangements to have these privileges and immunities also applied to 
Project 1, including GCF proceeds. However, formal agreements will only be entered into after the project has 
been approved. 
 
Approvals, permits, licences and land 
 
105. At the time of submitting this Funding Proposal, GIZ is not aware of the project requiring specific approvals, 
permits, licences or land to allow for the implementation of planned activities. 
 
Currency 
 
106. The local currency in Laos is the Lao KIP (code: LAK). The project’s local transactions will use LAK. The AE will 
manage GCF proceeds in Euro. GIZ will apply its standard rates for the conversion of currency. 
 
Insurance 
 
107. GIZ, as the AE, will ensure that project activities are adequately insured as per GIZ standard operating procedures 
and common practices. GIZ standard operating procedures require contractors to ensure required insurance 
cover. GIZ policies provide insurance cover for GIZ staff. At the time of submitting the Funding Proposal, GIZ does 
not anticipate additional insurance in order to cover special risks in this project. 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request 
108. After decades of losing tropical forest, Lao PDR is actively seeking to implement an ambitious REDD+ emission 
reductions programme. Laos has committed substantial domestic resources, and has worked closely with bilateral 
and multilateral donors, to reach its current level of REDD+ readiness and ability to transform its forest sector. But 
capacity and funding gaps remain. Building on, and coordinating with, complementary initiatives, Laos will deploy 
GCF support to remove investment barriers to unlock future results-based payments, domestic taxes and fees, 
and to create a sustainable environment for scaling-up REDD+. 
 
109. No developing country anywhere in the world has ever managed to achieve sustainable management of its forests 
and landscapes alone. The degree and complexity of the necessary change is high. The need for financial and 
technical assistance is high. In its NDC, Lao PDR has apportioned USD 12.5 million of domestic resources for the 
implementation of mitigation and adaptation actions (the equivalent of approximately 0.14% of GDP). For forestry 
sector mitigation and adaption actions, the government is seeking international NDC financing of USD 220 million. 
 
110. Lao PDR needs GCF support that goes beyond the potential of the government or its development partners: 
 
 
More public financing: The Government of Lao PDR has already committed to contributing a substantial 
amount of co-finance (Euro 11.8 million) to Project 1. The project, specifically Activity 1.1, will itself devote 
resources to mobilising additional public (and private) domestic finance to support REDD+. 
 
 
More grants from other development partners: All of Lao PDR’s current development partners in the forest 
sector already support the GCF project. Germany and Japan have both committed grant financing to Project 
1, and ADB and IFAD have committed loan packages for the implementation of improved agricultural 
practices and to reduce the pressure on expansion into forested landscapes. The World Bank (FCPF 
Carbon Fund) is offering Lao PDR REDD+ results-based payments. Additionally, the FCPF has worked 
closely with GIZ and the government to support the development of the project by scheduling the ESMF

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 46 OF 95 
 
 
 
92 IMF (2018), Article IV Consultation: Lao PDR, https://www.imf.org/~/media/Files/Publications/CR/2018/cr1884.ashx 
93 Lao PDR Poverty Line Definition from the 2017 Lao PDR Human Development Report (MPI and UNDP 2017): “The national poverty line 
is calculated on a nutritional basis. An adult must be able to consume an equivalent of 2,100 kilocalories a day to be above the poverty line. 
S/he should also have access to some non-food necessities. First, the monetary equivalent of 2,100 kilocalories of food (from a defined 
basket) is calculated, and then allowances for non-food items are calculated. The sum of these two is the poverty line. Each time a survey is 
conducted, the poverty line is adjusted for inflation. No new poverty line has been defined for over two decades. Lao PDR follows the World 
Bank’s method of measuring poverty.” 
94 Pimhidzai, O., Fenton, N. C., Souksavath, P. and Sisoulath, V. (2014), Poverty Profile in Lao PDR: Poverty Report for the Lao 
Consumption and Expenditure Survey 2012–2013. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/868521467998508506/pdf/100120-WP-P146141-PUBLIC-Box393225B-Poverty-Profile-in-Lao-
PDR-publication-version-12-19-14.pdf  
95 UNDP (2018), Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update: 
http://www.hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2018_human_development_statistical_update.pdf 
96 World Bank (2018), The World Bank in Lao PDR: Overview, available at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/lao/overview  
97 World Bank (2018), Lao PDR Economic Monitor,  http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/418261529002464394/pdf/127222-
REVISED-Lao-PDR-Economic-Monitor-Report-June-2018-for-Website.pdf 
98 IMF (2018), Article IV Consultation: Lao PDR, https://www.imf.org/~/media/Files/Publications/CR/2018/cr1884.ashx  
and gender work streams to match the project’s needs. The FCPF has also provided key data for the 
development of the project. 
 
 
Additional loans for the Government of Lao PDR: Lao PDR is a landlocked least developed country (LLDC) 
that is ranked 139th out of 189 on the Human Development Index. According to the IMF’s recent Debt 
Sustainability Analysis92, “Lao PDR’s risk of external debt distress remains high, suggesting the urgent need 
to tighten fiscal policy, strengthen public financial management, and develop a comprehensive medium-
term debt management strategy.” Despite these constraints, the government is willing to borrow Euro 12.3 
million from ADB and Euro 7.7 million from IFAD to complement Project 1. The fiscal space for additional 
borrowing for Project 1 is exhausted and additional borrowing would be at the expense of future generations 
and lead to greater indebtedness of Lao PDR. 
 
 
Loans for households: The beneficiary groups - village foresters and subsistence farmers - are among the 
poorest population groups in Lao PDR, with a high dependence on natural resources and poor access to 
markets and financial services, and they have insufficient assets for the repayment of loans. Approximately 
28% of inhabitants in the Project 1 area live below the poverty line,93 higher than the national average of 
23%.94 Grant financing combined with technical assistance has been determined to be the only appropriate 
financing instrument for these beneficiary groups. The GCF’s added value will be to support the poorest 
population groups of the country in the transformation towards more sustainable land use practices.   
 
111. The GCF grant for Project 1 will be used to overcome the government’s constraints to source public funding or 
assume additional debt to invest in measures needed to reduce deforestation and forest degradation. Lao PDR is 
a landlocked least developed country (LLDC) that is ranked 139th out of 189 on the Human Development Index.95 
Northern Lao PDR, the region targeted by the programme and its constituent projects, has historically been the 
poorest and most rural region of the country. The average annual income in that area is approximately USD 1,200 
per capita, compared with a national average of USD 2,330.96 The fiscal deficit was 4.4% in 2017. Government 
income declined during 2017/18 and is projected to continue below targets. Lower-than-expected revenues have 
been accompanied by reductions in government spending. The persistent fiscal deficit has led to an increase in 
public debt and an elevated risk of debt distress. Total public debt was nearly USD $9 billion in 2016, or 59% of 
GDP. Management of the debt is a constraint on the Lao PDR economy, inhibiting the government from spending 
on its development agenda.97 According to the IMF’s recent Debt Sustainability Analysis98, “Lao PDR’s risk of 
external debt distress remains high, suggesting the urgent need to tighten fiscal policy, strengthen public financial 
management and develop a comprehensive medium-term debt management strategy.” 
 
112. Project 1 will devote resources to mobilising additional public and private domestic finance to support REDD+. In 
particular, the project will support and strengthen the capacities of two national financial institutions: the 
Environmental Protection Fund (EPF) and the Forest and Forest Resource Development Fund (FFRDF). They 
will be enabled to jointly operate a new REDD+ Funding Window and thereby manage and disburse domestic and 
international sources of finance (including FCPF results-based finance), both for the GCF initiative specifically and 
for broader sectoral needs. The government is committed to progressively increasing its contributions to the 
REDD+ Funding Window, thereby over time replacing the GCF financing. 
 
113. As a result of the significant value of emission reductions generated over the implementation period of Project 1 
and, more substantially, over the 20-year lifetime (influence period) of the entire programme, coupled with 
economic co-benefits associated with the transition to deforestation-free agriculture and sustainable forest

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 47 OF 95 
 
 
 
99 FCPF Carbon Fund (2018), Emission Reductions Programme Document: Promoting REDD+ through Governance, Forest Landscapes 
and Livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR, https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2018/May/LaoPDR_ER-
PD_FinalDraftMay.2018-Clean.pdf 
100 After the successful acceptance of the Lao PDR into the FCPF Carbon Fund in June 2018, an ER-PA workshop took place which 
resulted in the establishment of a legal and technical ER-PA negotiation team. The FMT shared a default initial ER-PA term sheet. An 
appraisal mission to Lao PDR is planned in October 2019 and ER-PA negotiations will be concluded by December 2019. Government 
authority for ER-PA signature is planned for February 2020 and the ER-PA will come into effect by March 2020. 
management, the programme is expected to have a very high economic net present value (ENPV). The GCF grant 
for Project 1 will only be spent on public good activities that do not generate financial reflows to the project and on 
technical assistance and capacity building activities that, while benefiting the private sector, are essential to 
remove critical barriers to the transition to more sustainable agricultural and forestry management practices. 
Significant co-finance, in the form of both grants and loans, will be mobilised.  
 
B.5.1 GCF Added Value through Complementary Financing of REDD+ Implementation  
 
114. Lao PDR has committed substantial domestic resources to participate in REDD+ and to transform its forest sector 
from a net GHG emission source into a net carbon sink. Lao PDR has been engaged in the REDD+ readiness 
process since 2008, demonstrating genuine commitment from the government and civil society stakeholders. In 
2017, the government completed its NDC and its Forestry Strategy: both build upon the National REDD+ Strategy 
(NRS) to 2025 and National REDD+ Vision to 2030 as the official government documents for guiding REDD+ 
implementation. 
 
115. As part of the national REDD+ process, the government has designed an ER-P under the Forest Carbon 
Partnership Facility (FCPF) Carbon Fund.99 The government is currently in negotiations regarding the Emission 
Reductions Payment Agreement (ERPA), through which it expects to receive up to USD 42 million of REDD+ 
results-based payment by 2025.100 
 
116. The FCPF represents the most immediate and concrete source of REDD+ results-based payments. However, 
other sources may materialise in the future, notably through the UNFCCC Warsaw Framework, At UNFCCC COP 
19 in Warsaw (2013), the Parties to the UNFCCC finalised the negotiations on what was subsequently referred to 
as the ‘REDD+ rulebook’ or the ‘Warsaw Framework for REDD+ (WFR)’. It collates all relevant decisions on 
specific REDD+ agenda items and guides countries seeking to implement REDD+. Compliance with the WFR is 
a prerequisite for accessing results-based payments, both from the FCPF Carbon Fund but also from other 
potential UNFCCC sources. The WFR stipulates that REDD+ will be implemented in three phases and indicates 
that developing countries implementing the five eligible REDD+ activities in phase III have to comply with the rules 
related to MRV as a basis for receiving results-based payments. With the assistance of the GCF, these conditions 
will be met, thereby opening up, in principle, future REDD+ payments for Lao PDR through not only the FCPF but 
also potential alternative channels. 
 
117. In order to receive this results-based financing, investment in the enabling environment, deforestation-free 
agriculture and sustainable forest landscape management are required. The project is fully aligned with, and 
explicitly supportive of, the ER-P. 
 
118. Figure 9 shows the forest transition curve for the programme in which Project 1 is embedded. The BAU scenario 
is given by the Reference Level developed for the ER-P. The GCF scenario captures the impact of avoided GHG 
emissions and enhanced carbon sequestration associated with activities implemented with GCF support. The 
figure provides a graphical illustration of the programme’s added-value and paradigm shifting potential, as it shows 
not only a significant reversal in forest cover in northern Lao PDR (an increase of approximately 100,000 ha by 
2030) but also a sustained post-programme increase thereafter. Such a reversal follows sustained, uninterrupted 
and precipitous forest decline over the preceding 20+ years.

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 48 OF 95 
 
 
Figure 9: Forest Transition Curve for the Programme 
 
 
 
B.5.2 GCF Added Value through Broad Stakeholder Engagement and Inclusive Design 
 
119. The project applies an innovative approach that aims to empower local villagers, including women and members 
of different ethnic groups, by strengthening their capacities on REDD+ and sustainable land use management, 
and supports them not only in planning but also in the implementation, monitoring and enforcement of activities.  
 
B.5.3 GCF Added Value through Social Sustainability 
 
120. Social inclusion is a cross-cutting theme within the GCF-supported Outputs, Activities and Actions. Project 1 aims 
to promote an inclusive approach, ensuring beneficiaries from diverse ethnic groups and marginalised villages are 
included and empowered. Specific measures are included that target their participation and promote their 
empowerment.   
 
B.5.4 GCF Added Value through Environmental Sustainability 
 
121. In addition to supporting GHG emission reductions through REDD+, Project 1 will generate substantial additional 
environmental benefits. Examples include, among others, enhanced biodiversity and conservation in protected 
areas, reduced watershed soil erosion and sedimentation, and strengthened ecosystem resilience to climate 
change through improved land management. 
 
B.5.5 Financial Analysis 
 
122. The financial analysis focuses on the two Outputs that are amenable to the generation of financial reflows, namely 
Outputs 2 and 3. The Activities of Output 1 are entirely of a public good nature and will not generate financial 
reflows. 
 
123. Output 2 promotes the transition to sustainable agricultural practices that do not put additional strain on existing 
forest resources. Most of the GCF funding for Output 2 is concentrated in Activity 2.1, ‘Local incentives for good 
agricultural practices and agroforestry’. Over the course of the 9.5-year programme implementation period, the 
objective of Activity 2.1 is to shift 60,900 hectares of land away from two unsustainable agricultural practices: (i) 
shifting cultivation of upland rice (‘rice baseline’) and (ii) unsustainable maize cultivation (‘maize baseline’). With

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 49 OF 95 
 
 
regard to rice, Activity 2.1 promotes the transition from the baseline to a sustainable model of sequential cropping, 
in which rice farming is sequenced with sesame/ginger and soybean/peanuts in different years. This model is 
financially attractive. Farmers would more than cover their labour costs, generating a positive NPV of USD 276 
per ha and financial IRR of 47% over the 20-year programme lifetime. With regard to maize, Activity 2.1 promotes 
the transition from the baseline to one of two sustainable models: (i) inter-cropping (maize, soybean, peanuts or 
other cash crops) and (ii) sequential cropping on 2-year rotations (maize, soybean, peanuts or other cash crops). 
Both models generate a significantly higher NPV than the maize baseline, estimated at USD 2,338/ha for 
intercropping and USD 1,513/ha for sequential cropping over 20 years.   
 
124. While, in theory, the sustainable rice and maize farming models promoted by Activity 2.1 are financially more 
attractive than the baseline agricultural practices, a GCF grant is still deemed the most efficient and effective 
financial instrument. This is because subsistence farmers in the target areas face, in practice, very substantial 
barriers that prevent them from capturing any financial upside from sustainable farming. In particular, farmers lack 
knowledge, awareness and expertise on sustainable farming, and lack access to downstream markets for any 
crops other than rice and maize. Technical assistance and capacity building funded by the GCF grant address 
these crucial barriers. 
 
125. Output 3 aims at the large-scale adoption of sustainable forest management practices across forest-types. 
Specifically, it aims to:  
 
 
Restore 25,300 ha of completely depleted forest to production forest, by implementing sustainable forest 
management and harvesting of firewood, construction timber and large-diameter timber. Sustainable 
management and sustainable harvesting are estimated to have a positive NPV of USD 155 per ha over 20 
years. This compares positively with the baseline situation where no economic value whatsoever is extracted 
from the forest. 
 
Promote sustainable forest management and non-timber forest product (NTFP) utilisation in three categories 
of forest. In total, by 2027, approximately 1.1 million ha of forest will be transitioned to sustainable NTFP 
utilisation. The sustainable forest management and utilisation of NTFPs ensures that the forest is never 
depleted, extending the period over which economic value can be extracted; as a result, the NPV of 
sustainable NTFP utilisation is positive (approximately USD 451/ha over 20 years). 
 
126. As with Output 2, while in theory the SFM models promoted by Output 3 are financially more attractive than the 
baseline practices, a GCF grant is still deemed to be the most efficient and effective financial instrument. This is 
because beneficiaries in the target areas face, in practice, very substantial barriers that prevent them from 
capturing any financial upside from SFM. In particular, they lack knowledge, awareness and expertise – barriers 
that the GCF grant will address.  
 
B.5.6 Economic Analysis 
 
127. The following environmental and socio-economic benefits can be expected from GCF-supported interventions: (i) 
reduction of CO2 emissions, (ii) economic value-added captured by project beneficiaries, and (iii) the value of 
restored forest ecosystem. The first two factors are quantified in the economic model (Annex 3a). While there is 
considerable research evidence that ecosystem services have significant value (e.g. avoided erosion, watershed 
protection, flood protection, availability of water resources, biodiversity habitat, pollination and tourism revenues), 
estimates of ecosystem value vary significantly and are therefore not expressly quantified in the model. Assuming, 
as a base case, a carbon price of Euro 25/tCO2eq (the EU-ETS price as of June 2019) and the economic value-
added derived from applying the per-hectare findings of the financial analysis above to the entire target area of 
Outputs 2 and 3, the programme in which Project 1 is embedded produces a very high NPV of Euro 1,485 million 
(over a 20-year period and a 10% discount rate). Since the programme produces a positive economic value from 
year 1, the economic IRR is not meaningful in the model. 
 
128. Sensitivities were run assuming: (i) lower carbon prices (down to the ultra-conservative but unrealistic scenario of 
0 carbon price), and (ii) lower economic value-added (% reduction applied to each year in the implementation 
period). Even at carbon prices of Euro 5/tCO2eq (approximately the lowest reached in the EU-ETS in recent years), 
the programme has a positive economic NPV, ranging from Euro 277 million to Euro 464 million. Only by 
disregarding emission reductions altogether (i.e. assuming a carbon price of 0) and reducing the economic value-
added by 60% versus base-case estimates does the economic NPV move closer to zero, with the programme 
yielding an EIRR of 13%.

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 50 OF 95 
 
 
 
101 Double counting of emission reductions – understood to involve an emission reduction being counted more than once towards a 
mitigation pledge – will be avoided through the transparent reporting and accounting of emission reductions using UNFCCC (e.g. BUR 
technical annex), NDC and FCPF accounting protocols. Once the Government of Lao PDR receives FCPF payments for emission 
reductions, those emission reductions will be retired so that they cannot be ‘re-used’. 
129. These findings are supportive of the very high relevance and positive cost/benefit analysis from an economic 
standpoint of the programme in which Project 1 is embedded. Adding the value of restored ecosystems would 
further improve the economic attractiveness of the programme. 
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability  
B.6.1 Financial Exit Strategy 
 
130. GCF grant financing will:  
 
 
Enable access to REDD+ results-based payments: Project 1 will close the initial structural funding gap for 
transforming the forest sector through the provision of GCF grant finance and will deliver emission reductions 
that enable the country to access REDD+ results-based payments – initially, and most concretely, through 
the FCPF Carbon Fund and later through other potential (e.g. UNFCCC) channels.101   
 
 
Mobilise national and international sustainable forest sector finance: With GCF support, the structural funding 
gap will be closed by unlocking and increasing additional national and international financing streams for the 
forest and agricultural sectors. Activity 1.1 of Project 1 is specifically devoted to the mobilisation of an array 
of forest sector financing options, including existing and new ones to be introduced and operationalised. The 
total leverage impact of Project 1 is estimated to be Euro 227 million: this includes carbon results-based 
payments, the green credit line, agricultural production, protected area fees, forest fees and taxes, and others 
(see Annex 3c for details). 
 
 
Attract private sector investment: The project is designed to facilitate greater private sector investment in the 
forestry and sustainable agriculture sectors. Project 1 Activities specifically devoted to private sector 
development (Activities 2.1 and 2.2) will mobilise new and additional investment.  
 
 
Support the strengthening of national financial institutions to operate a REDD+ Funding Window: Project 1 
will support and strengthen the capacities of two national financial institutions: the Environmental Protection 
Fund (EPF) and the Forest and Forest Resource Development Fund (FFRDF). They will be enabled to jointly 
operate a newly-established REDD+ Funding Window and thereby manage and disburse domestic and 
international sources of finance (including FCPF results-based finance), both for the GCF project specifically 
and for broader sectoral needs. The project will channel GCF grant finance (in a tranched, performance-
based manner) through the EPF and the FFRDF, accompanied by capacity development support, that will 
disburse funds to participating villages and stakeholders for implementing SFM, FLR and deforestation-free 
agriculture (Activity 1.1 is specifically devoted to this, as well as Activities under Outputs 2 and 3). The 
government commits to progressively increase its contributions to the REDD+ Funding Window, thereby over 
time replacing the GCF financing. The government’s contributions will come from different sources:  
 
o 
Public budget: this includes the provision of financial and in-kind resources from the public budget of 
Lao PDR to the REDD+ Funding Window, beginning in year 1 of the GCF project. GCF interventions are 
expected to increase tax returns as a co-benefit (agriculture, commercial, forestry, mining and 
hydropower). These revenue flows will be monitored using EPF and FFRDF financial reports. 
o 
Fees and other revenues: the FFRDF is already legally mandated to receive payments from different 
forest sector sources. Project 1 will expand these revenue streams by increasing the capacity of FFRDF 
to collect payments and by demonstrating the value of such payments to the government. 
o 
Results-based payments: The GCF project will help to unlock FCPF Carbon Fund payments of 
approximately USD 42 million in the first accounting period (anticipated mid-term payment in 2023 and 
final payment in 2025), with FCPF payments under Project 1 amounting to approximately Euro 23 million. 
The Benefit Sharing Plan (BSP) governing the distribution of revenues from results-based payments is 
currently being negotiated by the Government of Lao PDR and the FCPF, but it is expected that the vast 
majority of payments will flow directly to the REDD+ Funding Window, which will then channel the funds 
to communities in order to implement similar activities. The ER-PD (Annex 20b) provides an indicative 
breakdown of the flow of results-based payments of 7% to the government budget and 93% to local 
REDD+ activities, 86% of which would be channelled through the REDD+ Funding Window. The ER-PD 
also outlines some general principles of benefit-sharing that the government plans to adopt. It notes that

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.0 | PAGE 51 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
102 For further information on FCPF benefit-sharing guidelines, see FCPF (2019), Note on Benefit Sharing for Emission Reductions 
Programmes Under the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility and BioCarbon Fund Initiative for Sustainable Forest Landscapes, 
https://www.biocarbonfund-isfl.org/sites/biocf/files/documents/FCPF_ISFL_Benefit%20Sharing%20Note_Jan%202019.pdf  
“RBPs from the ER Program, together with other sources of funds, will be reinvested into a host of 
REDD+ interventions as well as costs for directly facilitating the ER Program.” One explicit criterion for 
distributing monetary and non-monetary (e.g. agricultural extension) benefits is the degree to which such 
benefits will sustain successful REDD+ interventions and thereby reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
The BSP will likely include guidance on eligible and ineligible uses (positive and negative lists) of 
benefits.102     
 
131. Post-Project 1 funding requirements are anticipated to be relatively small – approximately 13% of annual Project 
1 costs (see Annex 4c). 
 
B.6.2 Exit through Complementing the Government’s Engagement with REDD+ and Alignment with National 
Policies and Development Plans 
 
132. The project is closely aligned with, and explicitly supportive of, government policies and plans (see Section B.1.2). 
By aligning the project with key national climate policies, priorities and commitments, including Lao PDR’s NDC, 
the 8th National SEDP, Vision 2020 and the ER-PD, the chances of continuity of impacts and activities after the 
GCF investment ends are very high.  
 
B.6.3 Exit through Alternative Livelihood Opportunities and Private Sector Mobilisation 
 
133. Additional income and livelihood opportunities, in conjunction with participatory land use planning and reasonable 
law enforcement, will create a cascading effect and maintain the low-emission development trajectory triggered 
by the project. The Project 1 financial and economic analysis (Annex 3) demonstrates that the proposed 
interventions are viable in the long-run, with positive net present values as well as many other social, economic 
and environmental co-benefits. Measures focused on strengthening REDD+ business models, FLR and 
deforestation-free value chains will help leverage private sector resources for REDD+ and, ultimately, low-GHG 
development.

=== PAGE 56 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 52 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
15.2 
million euro (€)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
  
  
Enter  
  
(ii) 
Subordinated loans 
  
  
  
  
(iii) 
Equity 
  
 
  
  
(iv) 
Guarantees 
  
  
  
  
(v) 
Reimbursable grants 
  
  
 
  
(vi) 
Grants 
15.2  
  
 
  
(vii) 
Result-based payments 
  
  
 
  
(b) Co-financing information 
Total amount 
Currency 
50.0 
million euro (€) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Government of Lao PDR 
In kind 
11.8 
million 
euro (€)  
 
 
 
BMZ (implemented through 
GIZ) 
Grant 
5.2 
million 
euro (€)  
 
 
 
ADB 
Senior 
Loan and 
grant 
12.3 
million 
euro (€)  
 
 
 
IFAD 
Senior 
Loans 
7.7 
million 
euro (€)  
 
 
 
BMZ  
(implemented through KfW) 
Grant 
4.8 
million 
euro (€) 
 
 
 
JICA 
Grant 
1.6 
million 
euro (€) 
 
 
 
Private sector103 
In kind 
0.9 
million 
euro (€) 
 
 
 
Private sector104 
Equity 
5.7 
million 
euro (€) 
 
 
 
(c)Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
65.2 
million euro (€)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max 0.5 page) 
Co-financing letters are provided in Annex 13. 
 
Co-Financiers for Project 1: 
 
The Government of Lao PDR will contribute co-finance of Euro 11.8 million towards the 
implementation of Project 1. Key government inputs will be staff time contributions by national-, 
provincial- and district-level staff. Financial estimates of staff time value are based on an 
average government salary of Euro 330/month. The government co-financing contribution also 
includes Euro 2 million to implement land registration and land titling. 
 
The beneficiaries of Project 1 (related to village-level farmer and household time inputs as 
well as SME financial investments) will devote significant time and financial resources to the 
implementation of activities and participation in training in Outputs 2 and 3. Villagers’ time input 
is valued using a Euro 2.6/day rate. This equates to a total labour input of approximately Euro 
980,000 to Project 1. SME inputs equate to Euro 5.7 million. In total, therefore, beneficiary 
inputs amount to Euro 6.6 million. 
 
103 Beneficiary / villager in-kind contributions. 
104 SME financial support to/investment in Project 1 activities.

=== PAGE 57 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 53 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
BMZ financing: The total BMZ financing for the project amounts to Euro 10.0 million. Of this, 
Euro 5.2 million will be implemented through GIZ as an Executing Entity in Lao PDR. GIZ 
(Executing Entity) will finance part of the project management team (Activity 4.1) and the 
implementation of Activities 1.1, Activity 1.2 and 1.7, as well as parts of Activities 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 
2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. The remaining Euro 4.8 million of BMZ financing will be implemented 
by KfW through its Village Forest Management Programme (VFMP) in 2 districts of two Project 
1 target provinces (Sayabouri and Luang Prabang).   
 
JICA will provide Euro 1.6 million co-financing, in the context of its F-REDD II project, for 
technical assistance to support law enforcement and land use planning (Activities 1.4 and 1.5), 
to support the implementation of the MRV system under Activity 1.6, and to support the 
implementation of Activities 2.1 and 3.1 in the Project 1 province of Luang Prabang.   
 
ADB and the EU will provide co-financing of Euro 12.3 million to implement Activity 2.3 (in 
conjunction with the Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector 
project, SRIWSM), which will be implemented in 4 provinces. The co-financing contribution is 
based on the implementation overlap of Project 1 and SRIWSM in seven districts in three of 
the provinces (Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang), where the project and SRIWSM will 
work together. 
 
The IFAD PICSA loan project with the Government of Lao PDR will co-finance Project 1 with 
Euro 7.7 million to support the implementation of Output 2 activities in 10 target districts in the 
Project 1 area. IFAD will provide loans direct to the Ministry of Agriculture. The IFAD loan is a 
stand-alone, sovereign loan to the Government, which will be supervised on technical and 
fiduciary aspects. IFAD will also supervise procurements. IFAD supervision will involve field 
missions to the project area to check compliance with procedures.  
 
Co-Financing Flows 
IFAD, KfW and ADB sign loan contracts with the Lao Government (MoF/MAF) to channels 
funds to MAF and then onwards to the Departments in the Ministry and to sub-national 
agencies; BMZ channels funds to GIZ and GIZ then provides mainly technical assistance to 
local partners; JICA provides technical assistance to local partners (ministries and sub-national 
government agencies) using its own funds. See Figure 7. 
 
Monitoring of Villagers’ Contributions 
Action 4.1.2 will set up a monitoring and reporting M&E system for tracking project Actions, 
Activities, Outputs and Impacts in line with the logical framework, and will ensure that data – 
including villager contribution data – is collected and reported in project districts and villages. 
Types of evidence for contributions will include, for example, produced standard operating 
procedures (SOPs), lists of participants relating to workshops, trainings, FPIC consultations, 
implemented activities of Annual Village Forest Operational Plans, and others. 
C.2. Financing by component  
Table 6: Project Budget 
Output 
Activity 
Indicative 
cost 
million euro 
(€) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million euro 
(€) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million euro 
(€) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Output 1: 
Enabling 
environment for 
REDD+ 
implementation 
Activity 1.1 
1.6 
0.8 
Grants 
0.8 
In-kind, 
Grants 
Gov’t, BMZ 
Activity 1.2 
0.1 
0 
 
0.1 
In-kind, 
Grants 
Gov’t, BMZ 
Activity 1.3 
0.8 
0 
 
0.7 
In-kind, 
Grants 
Gov’t, BMZ 
Activity 1.4 
0.6 
0.4 
Grants 
0.2 
In-kind, 
Grants 
Gov’t, BMZ, 
JICA 
Activity 1.5 
3.4 
0.9 
Grants 
2.5 
In-kind, 
Grants, 
Equity 
Gov’t, 
Beneficiaries
, BMZ, JICA

=== PAGE 58 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 54 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1.6 
1.8 
0.7 
Grants 
1.2 
In-kind, 
Grants 
Gov’t, JICA 
Activity 1.7 
1.5 
1.0 
Grants 
0.5 
In-kind, 
Grants 
Gov’t, BMZ 
Output 2: Market 
solutions for 
agricultural 
drivers of 
deforestation 
Activity 2.1 
17.2 
6.0 
Grants 
11.2 
In-kind, 
Grants, 
Equity,  
Senior Loan 
Gov’t, 
Beneficiaries
, BMZ, JICA, 
IFAD 
Activity 2.2 
5.1 
 
0.5 
Grants 
4.5 
In-kind, 
Grants, 
Equity,  
Senior Loan 
Gov’t, 
Beneficiaries
, BMZ, IFAD 
Activity 2.3 
16.7 
0 
 
16.7 
In-kind, 
Grants, 
Senior Loan 
Gov’t, 
ADB/EU, 
IFAD 
Output 3: Climate 
change 
mitigation action 
through forestry 
Activity 3.1 
8.7 
2.2 
Grants 
6.5 
In-kind, 
Grants, 
Equity 
Gov’t, 
Beneficiaries
, BMZ, JICA 
Activity 3.2 
0.7 
0.2 
Grants 
0.6 
In-kind, 
Grants, 
Equity 
Gov’t, 
Beneficiaries
, BMZ 
Activity 3.3 
2.9 
1.5 
Grants 
1.4 
In-kind, 
Grants 
Gov’t, BMZ 
Project 
management, 
coordination, 
monitoring and 
reporting 
Activity 4.1 
3.8 
0.7 
Grants 
3.1 
In-kind, 
Grants, 
Senior Loan 
Gov’t, BMZ, 
JICA, IFAD 
Total financing, Outputs 1-4 
64.9 
14.9 
50.2 
Taxes, legal capacity, customs, 
etc. 
0.3 
0.3 
 
Indicative total cost (€) 
65.2 
15.2 
50.2 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer 
C.3.1 Does GCF financing fund capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF financing fund technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☐      No ☒ 
The long-term sustainability of project interventions is enhanced by the project’s focus on individual and institutional 
capacity building, both of the project’s implementing entities and the key beneficiaries. Measures focused on 
institutional strengthening at the provincial, district and local levels form an essential element of the individual activities, 
given local capacities and the general low level of awareness of sustainable practices. Government entities and the 
rural population (agents of deforestation and forest degradation) will have improved skills and awareness of sustainable 
land use management and REDD+, and it is likely that they will continue to support such measures after project 
completion. Such interventions will further enhance the sense of ownership of provincial and district governments during 
the project life-cycle, as well as the ongoing implementation of such activities after project closure.

=== PAGE 59 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 55 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential 
D.1.1 Mitigation  
 
134. Detailed GHG calculations are provided in Annex 22t. The calculations are informed by the detailed analysis 
undertaken as part of Lao PDR’s engagement with REDD+ (the UNFCCC Forest Reference Emission Level 
(FREL))105 and the FCPF Carbon Fund (the Reference Level (RL) of the ER-P).106 
 
135. The methodological approach is based on the methodology used for the preparation of the Reference Level (RL), 
which was submitted and approved (in June 2018) by the FCPF Carbon Fund and is compliant with the Carbon 
Fund Methodological Framework 107. The approach equates to a highly-detailed Tier 3 approach in IPCC 
terminology. GIZ will replicate the same methodology for the ex-post assessment of the achieved GHG emission 
reductions and removals within Project 1 Activity 1.6. The FCPF Carbon Fund will also use it for the determination 
of results-based payments for the period 2019-2024, for which the RL is valid. The validity of the RL beyond 2024 
is subject to further international guidance by the UNFCCC and whether the FCPF Carbon Fund will continue its 
operations beyond 2025.   
 
136. The ER-P Reference Level accounting area covers precisely the same 6 provinces (Bokeo, Houaphan, Luang 
Namtha, Luang Prabang, Oudomxay and Sayabouri) as are covered by the programme: the geographical 
footprints of the ER-P Reference Level and the programme are identical. Correspondingly, the ER-P Reference 
Level for Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang equates to the reference level for Project 1. 
 
D.1.2 Forest impacts 
 
137. As a result of the direct and the enabling implementation activities, over its 4-year implementation period Project 
1 is estimated to achieve (relative to the baseline): 
 
 
A reduction of deforestation of 6%, equivalent to 9,900 ha. 
 
A reduction of forest degradation of 10%, equivalent to 9,030 ha. 
 
An increase of restoration and reforestation of 8% and 1%, respectively – equivalent to 3,160 ha of forest 
restoration and 1,850 ha of reforestation.  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential 
D.2.1 Potential for scaling-up and replication 
 
138. There is substantial potential for scaling-up and replicating the programme and its activities. If Projects 1, 2 and 
3 are considered together, the programme will be implemented in 6 provinces in Lao PDR (out of 17 provinces 
and 1 municipality), covering 28 out of 50 districts. Thus, within the country, the programme could be replicated 
in other districts and provinces. If replicated to the remaining 22 districts in the six provinces, this would represent 
a scaling factor of 140%. The integration of REDD+ into national and provincial development planning will 
contribute to the mainstreaming, and hence intrinsic scaling-up and replication, of the programme interventions. 
 
139. Project 1 will enable paradigm shift across different sectors and business activities. Agriculture, forestry and 
financial sectors in particular will be targeted as key sectors for transformation. Within these sectors, the project 
will work throughout the supply chain, including input suppliers, producers, traders, and processors. The project 
will target sectors and commodities where there is strong and consistent demand in order to ensure the 
profitability of the supported sectors. Job’s tears, maize, rice, cardamom, tea, green beans and other vegetables 
have been identified as commodities where demand has existed historically and is expected to increase. More 
information on the market and demand analysis can be found in Chapter 3 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). 
 
140. At the national level, capacities will be built in the main environmental funds (the EPF and FFRDF), which will 
facilitate the replication and scale-up of the project as well as the broader distribution of REDD+ finance beyond 
 
105 https://redd.unfccc.int/files/2018_frel_submission_laopdr.pdf 
106 https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/lao-people%E2%80%99s-democratic-republic 
107 FCPF (2016), available at: 
https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2016/July/FCPF%20Carbon%20Fund%20Methodological%20Framework%20revised
%202016.pdf

=== PAGE 60 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 56 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
the GCF project target groups as the funds’ capacities are built and they become fully operational and capable 
of managing funds for REDD+. In addition, new finance streams for forests will be mobilised: this will serve as a 
model for the rest of the country. 
 
141. Internationally, the project will provide key lessons learned for supporting private sector development, the 
adoption of good agricultural practices and sustainable forest management. A similar upland landscape exists in 
neighbouring Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam and China, and such lessons-learned and key activities/actions can 
be transferred to these countries as well as other similar regions within Southeast Asia.   
 
D.2.2 Potential for knowledge and learning 
 
142. Comprehensive communication and exchange of information about topics of crucial relevance for land users, 
policy-makers and the broader public will be provided by the project, so that they understand the purpose and 
benefits of REDD+ and the need for behavioural change of business-as-usual land use. Coordination with the 
Designated National Authority (DNA) at MoNRE (the same institution as the GCF NDA) will ensure the provision 
of relevant information to the DNA for its BUR and National Communication. Communication and collaboration 
with national universities will be sought to provide the project with key lessons learned and relevant education 
materials, as well as to support these universities in acquiring research projects related to REDD+. Ensuring the 
development of necessary job skills is critical to the success of the project; training will be implemented via a 
training-of-trainers approach and delivered by the extension staff of DAFO, at the district level. The knowledge 
management plan is provided in Annex 22u. 
 
D.2.3 Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
 
143. Project 1 contains a strong enabling environment element, including policy and regulatory reform (notably, 
Activities 1.2 and 1.3), support to regulatory enforcement (Activity 1.4) and improved land use planning (Activity 
1.5), as well as community-level support in the form of capacity building and strengthening of the DAFO 
agricultural extension system (e.g. Activity 2.1, among others). Project 1 also seeks to support the financing 
environment for REDD+ by helping to establish, operationalise and finance a REDD+ Funding Window (Activity 
1.1) and by providing technical assistance to a new green credit line for deforestation-free agriculture that is being 
set up outside the framework of the GCF project (Activity 1.1). The project also explicitly aims to ‘enable’ REDD+ 
results-based payments through support to the FCPF Emission Reductions Programme. 
 
D.2.4 Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
 
144. As described in Section B.3, Output 1 of Project 1 is focused on strengthening the policy and regulatory 
framework. Activity 1.2 will mainstream REDD+ into socio-economic development plans (SEDPs); Activity 1.3 
will strengthen the regulatory framework (revision, modification and drafting of relevant laws, decrees and 
regulations) to enable sustainable forest management and private sector investment in village-based agroforestry 
development; Activity 1.4 will strengthen law enforcement and compliance monitoring; Activity 1.5 will support 
land use planning and measures to improve tenure security; and Activity 1.6 will strengthen the forest and forest 
carbon MRV system. 
 
D.2.5 Summary 
 
145. The identified paradigm shifters – scale-up and replication, knowledge and learning, creation of an enabling 
environment, contribution to the regulatory framework and policies – apply at both the constituent project and the 
programme levels. Project 2 will replicate the approach in 3 additional provinces in northern Lao PDR. 
Considerable scope exists to scale-up / replicate in the remaining 11 provinces of Laos, as well as in neighbouring 
countries with similar landscape/forestry contexts.Project 3 will scale-up the activities and impacts of Project 1, 
while  
D.3. Sustainable development 
146. GCF-supported interventions will produce significant development benefits, which will accrue to different 
beneficiary groups: the ‘global beneficiary’ and to the people of Lao PDR: 
 
147. The ‘global beneficiary’ will receive a net present value benefit from the programme worth almost Euro 1.5 
billion108 in the form of 144.7 million tCO2eq in GHG savings accrued thanks to the creation of the enabling 
 
108 At 10% discount rate over the 20-year programme lifetime.

=== PAGE 61 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 57 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
environment for REDD+ implementation over the 20-year programme lifetime.109 It can be said that the 1.6 million 
ha of forest landscapes, which would otherwise be subject to deforestation and degradation pressures, will 
instead benefit from sustainable management practices and will therefore be ‘rented’ to the ‘global beneficiary’ 
for 20 years, with the effect that 144.7 million tCO2eq in emissions are prevented over the 20-year programme 
lifetime. This is a significant success in terms of opportunity cost and benefit analysis. The Euro 1.5 billion 
estimate assumes that the ‘global beneficiary’ would have to procure this quantity of emission reductions through 
carbon markets (e.g. from the EU Emissions Trading Scheme, where credits trade at Euro 25 per tonne110). See 
Annex 3b for the assumptions and methodology used. 
 
148. The ‘local beneficiary in Laos’, notably 250,000 direct beneficiaries and a further 420,000 affected indirectly, 
will benefit from the programme (and 120,000 directly and 235,800 indirectly from Project 1 specifically). The 
programme, through its promotion of shifts in cultivation to more forest-friendly approaches, provides a just 
transition by creating better incomes, jobs and skills. Among other benefits, these will help to prevent brain drain 
and work emigration to neighbouring countries. The economic net present value (ENPV) provided to the local 
beneficiary is estimated as Euro 312 million. See Annex 3b for the assumptions and methodology used. 
 
149. SMEs create multiplier effects. The companies will not only invest in better crops, education and equipment. 
They will also need the services of accountants, suppliers of office space, and related services, which create 
additional economic activity and, therefore, economic transition in the poorest regions. Under Activity 2.1 of 
Project 1, for instance, 160 SMEs will receive training in good agricultural practices and business management, 
leading to nearly USD 9 million in investment. These 160 SMEs will, in turn, support and provide markets to 
approximately 16,000 producers and provide employment to approximately 1,600 people. 
 
150. Gender-sensitive development benefits. In addition to avoiding the continuation of existing gender stereotypes 
and norms which are of disadvantage to Lao women (see the Gender Assessment, Annex 8a), the programme 
in which Project 1 is embedded offers significant potential to contribute positively to gender equality. Project 1 
will work closely with the Lao Women’s Union to ensure the effective engagement of women. Inclusive 
awareness-raising measures targeting women as carriers of traditional knowledge and change agents within their 
families have great reach, especially when presented in different ethnic languages and tailored to lower education 
levels. Whenever possible, project-supported awareness-raising, village consultations, training and 
dissemination meetings will proactively involve empowerment elements for village women.111 The project will 
promote improved participation of women and empower them to take on more leadership roles in local structures, 
including, for instance, supporting the elaboration of guidelines for village forest management committees, which 
will include a quota of at least 30% female committee members. Project 1’s promotion of Village Development 
Funds was positively perceived in the stakeholder consultations, as VDFs have been quite effective in the past 
at supporting joint decision-making and benefiting women and poor households.112 To support women to fully 
utilise and benefit from VDFs, the project will include training on business skills development for women that will 
help to address common participation gaps and barriers. The project will further expand new economic 
opportunities for women related to agroforestry, forest management and agricultural activities through integrating 
gender assessments in value chain studies, and providing targeted technical and financial support (within the 
context of Outputs 2 and 3) to women. All extension staff and trainers supporting Project 1 will be trained on 
gender equality and social inclusion, including time-saving activities. 
 
151. Ethnic-sensitive development benefits. Specific needs of ethnic and indigenous groups include (see the Ethnic 
Group Development Planning Framework in the Feasibility Study, Annex 2a): the need for a strengthened voice 
in the context of village decision-making; access to land, forest and natural resources for livelihood purposes; 
respect for customary use of land, including for ancestral and spiritual uses; and appropriate access to 
information, including use of ethnic languages and simple imagery to accommodate lower literacy rates. Project 
1 will address these needs in a number of ways, including: meaningful consultations at village level (including 
small group meetings with appropriate translators or ethnic language speakers) on proposed activities – leading 
to FPIC; ensuring that ethnic- and income-differentiated risks (including climate change risks) associated with 
land access are incorporated in Participatory Land Use Plans (PLUPs); sensitivity to customary uses of land; 
 
109 The economic NPV for Project 1 alone is Euro 580.9 million, meaning that Project 1 1 will, by itself, have a positive impact, even if the 
two subsequent projects that make up the programme do not materialise. 
110 European Energy Exchange (EEX) spot carbon price on 12 June, 2019, from: http://www.eex.com/en/  
111 As noted above, the Benefit Sharing Plan governing the distribution of revenues from results-based payments is currently being 
negotiated by the Government of Lao PDR and the FCPF. Gender is a key consideration, and the mechanism is expected to promote 
equitable benefit sharing mechanisms. 
112 Prochaska et al (2012), Rural Finance in Laos: https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2014-en-rural-finance-loas.pdf

=== PAGE 62 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 58 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
preserving and respecting indigenous knowledge; and information campaigns calibrated to the needs of ethnic 
groups. 
 
152. Project contributions to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): 
 
 
SDG-13: Climate Action – By reducing significant amounts of GHG emissions, implementing NDC actions at 
scale, supporting the deep integration of climate change into national policies, building climate-related 
capacity, and raising awareness on climate change mitigation. 
 
 
SDG-1: No Poverty – Through generating improved livelihoods and income for rural poor population groups. 
 
 
SDG-2: Zero Hunger – By improving agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in 
particular women, members of various ethnic groups and family farmers, including through improved access 
to productive resources and inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value-
addition and non-farm employment. 
 
 
SDG-5: Gender Equality – By promoting women’s participation and decision-making concerning 
opportunities in land-use and natural resources, as well as economic and entrepreneurial activities. 
 
 
SDG-6: Decent Work and Economic Growth – By promoting private sector-oriented policies that support 
productive activities, decent job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encouraging the 
formalisation and growth of micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises, including through access to 
financial services. 
 
 
SDG-12: Sustainable Production and Consumption – By supporting the sustainable management and 
efficient use of natural resources (mainly forests and land). 
 
 
SDG-15: Life on Land – By contributing to the implementation of sustainable management of all types of 
forests, halting deforestation, restoring degraded forests and substantially increasing afforestation and 
reforestation. 
 
 
SDG-17: Partnerships for the Goals – By strengthening domestic resource mobilisation, including through 
international support to a developing country, to improve domestic capacity for tax and other revenue 
collection; and mobilising additional financial resources from multiple sources. 
 
153. Project contributions to the 3 pillars of sustainable development:  
 
 
Economic pillar: improved livelihoods and income for rural poor population groups; support to SMEs; and 
strengthened domestic resource mobilisation. 
 
 
Social pillar: reduced hunger and improved nutrition and health through improved agricultural productivity; 
improved employment opportunities, including for women and ethnic groups; and improved gender 
equality through economic, training and entrepreneurial activities. 
 
 
Environmental pillar: reduced GHG emissions from the forestry sector and increased carbon sequestration 
from the atmosphere; and sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources (notably, forests 
and land). 
D.4. Needs of recipient  
D.4.1 Climate vulnerability  
 
154. The project is a mitigation (REDD+) initiative. Nonetheless, it will serve to address climate vulnerabilities in Lao 
PDR. In its Second National Communication to the UNFCCC, Lao PDR identifies itself as an LDC with limited 
adaptive capacities that is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts.113 The Economy and Environment 
Programme for Southeast Asia (EEPSEA) ranks Lao PDR as one of the most climate-vulnerable countries in the 
 
113 Lao PDR Second National Communication to the UNFCCC (2013), https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/Laonc2.pdf

=== PAGE 63 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 59 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
region, where vulnerability is defined as a function of exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity.114 Forestry and 
agriculture are two of four key sectors highlighted by Lao PDR’s National Adaptation Programme of Action 
(NAPA), submitted to the UNFCCC in 2009, as well as two of five key sectors identified in the NDC as being 
highly vulnerable to climate change. Poor and marginalised groups disproportionally face climate risks, among 
them temperature increases and erratic rainfall, given that they are more exposed to such changes and generally 
have a lower capacity to adapt given their reliance on the immediate environment. 
 
155. The annual mean temperature in Southeast Asia consistently increased between 1970-2010.115 From 1951 to 
2000, mean annual temperatures increased by 0.1 to 0.3oC per decade in Lao PDR. Historical analyses also 
reveal increased seasonal (2,046 mm/year) and annual (2,741 mm/year) rainfall rates.116 These trends are due 
to increased frequency of extreme rainfall events. Probability analyses reveal that monthly rainfall events with 
more than 600 mm precipitation have increased while those with 300-500 mm precipitation have decreased in 
the same time period.117 During the last century, a slight delay has been observed in the rainy season, indicating 
that rainfall variability and uncertainty remains a “critical issue”.118 Other studies indicate that the dry season is 
becoming longer and that climate change will result in increasing droughts, especially within the dry season.119 
 
156. From 1966-2009, about three-quarters of national disasters were climate-related (flood 50%, storm 14%, drought 
14%). The frequency of natural disasters has increased from once every two years before 1992 to once per year 
or even twice per year after 1992.120 The country is considered to have a high risk of river flooding, landslides, 
cyclones and wildfires, a medium risk for extreme heat, and a low-risk for water scarcity.121 Fourteen out of 
seventeen provinces have experienced significant floods since 1995, and severe droughts have occurred in 1996, 
1998 and 2003.122 
 
157. By 2100, mean annual temperatures are projected to increase by 1.4-4.3oC.123 Under high emissions scenarios, 
the number of days of extreme rainfall are projected to increase by about 7 days from 1990 to 2100, and the days 
of heat waves to increase from fewer than 10 in 1990 to about 170 days on average in 2100. Also, under high 
emissions projections the number of drought days is projected to increase from 55 days in 1990 to about 65 in 
2100.124 
 
158. In northern Laos specifically, high-resolution (50 km2) climate modelling using interpolation of observed values, 
and utilising mid-range IPCC emissions scenarios and analysis of the findings of 24 Global Climate Models 
(GCMs), applied to major catchments in the north of the country predicts a temperature increase of 0.8-0.9 oC 
relative to the historical average) by 2030. Precipitation may increase slightly (11-15 mm annual average) but 
with greater temporal variability.125  
 
159. The project design responds to these climate changes in a number of ways: 
 
 
Inclusion of drought-resilient crops and varieties, and support to dry-season irrigation schemes, in Output 2. 
 
114 EEPSEA (2010), Hotspots: Mapping Climate Change Vulnerability in Southeast Asia, 
http://www.eepsea.net/pub/book/Coffee_Book_Final_29Sep10.pdf  
115 FCPF Carbon Fund (2018), Emission Reductions Programme Document: Promoting REDD+ through Governance, Forest Landscapes 
and Livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR, p.101, https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2018/May/LaoPDR_ER-
PD_FinalDraftMay.2018-Clean.pdf 
116 Lao PDR (2009), National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/laos01.pdf  
117 Lao PDR (2009), National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/laos01.pdf 
118 Lefroy, R., Collet, L., Grovermann, C. (2010), Study on the Potential Impacts of Climate Change on Land Use in the Lao PDR, Available 
online: https://landportal.org/si0tes/default/files/june_2010_cc__land_use_change_ciat-gtz_-_j.pdf 
119 World Bank Climate Portal 2018 
(http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportalb/home.cfm?page=country_profileandCCode=LAOandThisTab=Overview) 
120 Lefroy, R., Collet, L., Grovermann, C. (2010), Study on the Potential Impacts of Climate Change on Land Use in the Lao PDR, Available 
online: https://landportal.org/si0tes/default/files/june_2010_cc__land_use_change_ciat-gtz_-_j.pdf 
121 ThinkHazard! Tool: http://thinkhazard.org/en/report/139-lao-peoples-democratic-republic  
122 FAO-implemented Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) project PIF, ‘Climate-smart agriculture alternatives for upland production 
systems in Lao PDR’. 
123 World Bank Climate Portal 2018 
(http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportalb/home.cfm?page=country_profileandCCode=LAOandThisTab=Overview) 
124 World Health Organisation (2016), Climate and Health Country Profile – 2015 Lao People´s Democratic Republic. Available online: 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246139/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.39-
eng.pdf;jsessionid=449060C1FA8148FFBA3AEC5A496FA09B?sequence=1  
125 Eastham, J., F. Mpelasoka, M. Mainuddin, C.Ticehurst, P. Dyce, G. Hodgson, R. Ali and Kirby M., (2008), Mekong River Basin Water 
Resources Assessment: Impacts of Climate Change, CSIRO: Water for a Healthy Country National Research Flagship. For similar climate 
forecasts for northern Laos, see also: the Climate Change Data Distribution System (SEA START) of the Greater Mekong Subregion Core 
Environment Programme: www.gms-eoc.org.

=== PAGE 64 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 60 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
Capacity building and training on sustainable water harvesting techniques, risk mitigation processes 
(including good agricultural practices with strong climate change adaptation co-benefits that can reduce risk): 
for example, reducing shifting cultivation and increasing vegetative cover in upland areas can help reduce 
erosion and sedimentation that contribute to riverbank cutting and riverbed rise downstream, as well as 
landslides in steep areas.  
 
Capacity building for farmers on sustainable pest and disease management. 
 
Land use planning will help improve land use practices, including reducing exposure to risk (e.g. identifying 
high-risk areas for landslides, flooding, etc.), and will support the planning, adoption and monitoring of 
sustainable land use processes that can help reduce risk.  
 
The timing of project activities will be conducted considering seasonal conditions, climate, etc. (e.g. tree 
planting in the dry season). 
 
Regular monitoring conducted within the framework of the project will lead to early detection, follow-up and 
the identification of suitable management practices/adjustments as necessary. The NPMU will include a staff 
member dedicated to monitoring the impact of the project and implementation of the Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP). 
 
D.4.2 Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
 
160. Lao PDR is a landlocked least developed country (LLDC) that is ranked 139th out of 189 on the Human 
Development Index. Northern Lao PDR has historically been the poorest and most rural region of the country. 
The average annual income in the target area is approximately USD 1,200 per capita, compared with a national 
average of USD 2,330.126 
 
161. In total, over 1.8 million people live in the target provinces. Over the past decade, the provinces’ population has 
been growing at an average rate of 1.1%. On average, 28% of the population in the target area lives in urban 
centres127, which is below the national average.128 In northern Lao PDR, poverty rates are among the highest in 
the country. Substantial efforts have reduced the number or people living below the poverty line from 52% to 26% 
between 1993 and 2013.129 Despite this notable progress, poverty levels in the northern region still exceed the 
national average (23%). HDI values are lower in the target region than the national level (0.44 compared to 0.61). 
Bokeo and Houaphan have particularly low HDI values. Food security is a major challenge for many households 
in rural areas in the northern region of Lao PDR. An estimated 25% of rural households in the region are food-
poor130, and households in the agricultural sector are twice as likely than non-farm households to fall back into 
poverty, as they are highly vulnerable to shocks.131  
 
162. The project seeks to remove barriers that currently prevent Lao stakeholders from accessing climate and REDD+ 
finance to help address their financial, economic, social and institutional needs: 
 
Barrier: Government budgets are constrained and highly dependent upon donor support, partly because 
collection levels of legally-mandated forest-sector fees and taxes (e.g. income tax, timber harvesting taxes, 
land taxes) are low. 
Response: The GCF project will build the legal/regulatory, enforcement and institutional capabilities of 
Government entities – notably the EPF and FFRDF – to collect forest fees and taxes, to diversify revenue 
sources and to unlock an entirely new revenue stream in the form of REDD+ results-based payments. 
 
 
Barrier: Lao PDR is a landlocked LDC (LLDC) that faces a high risk of external debt distress. The fiscal 
space for additional Government borrowing is extremely limited. 
 
126 World Bank (2018), The World Bank in Lao PDR: Overview, available at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/lao/overview  
127 Urban is classified as a town with more than 5,000 inhabitants.  
128 Government of Lao PDR (2015), Results of Population and Housing Census 2015, https://lao.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/PHC-
ENG-FNAL-WEB_0.pdf 
129 Pimhidzai, O., Fenton, N. C., Souksavath, P. and Sisoulath, V. (2014), Poverty Profile in Lao PDR: Poverty Report for the Lao 
Consumption and Expenditure Survey 2012–2013. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/868521467998508506/pdf/100120-WP-P146141-PUBLIC-Box393225B-Poverty-Profile-in-Lao-
PDR-publication-version-12-19-14.pdf 
130 Pimhidzai, O., Fenton, N. C., Souksavath, P. and Sisoulath, V. (2014), Poverty Profile in Lao PDR: Poverty Report for the Lao 
Consumption and Expenditure Survey 2012–2013. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/868521467998508506/pdf/100120-WP-P146141-PUBLIC-Box393225B-Poverty-Profile-in-Lao-
PDR-publication-version-12-19-14.pdf 
131 Government of Lao PDR (2018), Voluntary National Review on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 
http://www.la.undp.org/content/dam/laopdr/docs/Reports%20and%20publications/2018/VNR%20web%20very%20low%20resolution%20.pd
f

=== PAGE 65 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 61 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
Response: The GCF project will channel considerable co-finance to the forestry sector, including grant 
support from the Governments of Germany and Japan, and concessional loans from ADB and IFAD. 
 
 
Barrier: The beneficiary groups - village foresters and subsistence farmers - are among the poorest 
population groups in Lao PDR, with a high dependence on natural resources and poor access to markets 
and financial services, and they have insufficient assets for the repayment of loans. 
Response: The GCF project will channel grant resources to rural beneficiaries and will build their capacities 
to apply for, deploy and report on financial resources. 
 
 
Barrier: Limited exposure of domestic institutions to the rigours (e.g. fiduciary, MRV, etc.) of managing 
international climate finance. 
Response: The GCF project will set up and operationalise a REDD+ Funding Window as the key national 
funding channel for the forestry sector, in compliance with international fiduciary, technical and management 
standards. The REDD+ Funding Window will be operated by the EPF and, progressively, the FFRDF, 
thereby building their capacities and exposure to climate finance. 
D.5. Country ownership 
D.5.1 Coherence with national climate strategy and plans and policies 
 
163. The GCF project is fully aligned with, and supportive of, the country’s climate policies, including the 8th National 
Socio-Economic Development Plan (8th NSEDP, 2016-2020), the Green Growth Strategy (currently being 
drafted), the Central Party Resolution on Land (2017), the Forestry Strategy 2020, the REDD+ Strategy and 
Vision132, the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) and the FCPF Emission Reductions Programme – see 
Section B.1.2 and Chapter 1 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a) for further details. 
 
D.5.2 Coherence with GCF country programme 
 
164. The GCF project has formed part of Lao PDR’s GCF project pipeline since 2017 and has been formally 
prioritised by both the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (see Annex 1b) and by the NDA, as reflected in 
the Lao PDR Country Programme presented in February 2019 at the GCF/GEF Coordinated National 
Dialogue meeting.    
 
D.5.3 Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver 
 
165. See Section B.4.2 for details of the three Executing Entities’ experience and track-record. 
 
D.5.4 Engagement with the NDA, civil society organisations and other relevant stakeholders 
 
166. Stakeholder engagement has formed a central element of project design: over one thousand stakeholders 
have taken part in GCF project consultation meetings. Stakeholders have played an important role in 
providing inputs and feedback on project design and have validated the proposed project (and broader 
programme). Extensive engagement with stakeholders has also been conducted for the elaboration of the ER-
PD and National REDD+ Programme, which laid a strong foundation for the design of GCF Project 1.  
 
Stakeholder engagement within the framework of the GCF project 
 
Preliminary scoping missions 
 
167. Preliminary scoping missions were conducted by GIZ staff and project development experts to assess the 
possibility of developing a GCF concept note and potential funding proposal from April 3-7 and April 23-30, 2018. 
Missions focused on fact-finding, meeting with key actors and determining country interest in developing a 
proposal, whilst ensuring the relevance of the concept selected. A high-level meeting with government 
representatives was held to ensure commitments to project development from the main project partners and 
supporting partners interested in providing co-finance.  
 
132 The National REDD+ Vision establishes the strategic objective for Lao PDR to engage in forest protection and expansion; the National 
REDD+ Strategy provides the implementation details to achieve this objective. The Strategy identifies 5 key forest stressors: expansion of 
agricultural land; infrastructure and mining; timber harvesting; shifting cultivation and forest fires; and commercial tree plantations. The 
Strategy presents 5 strategic programmes to address these stressors: 1) sustainable agriculture; 2) infrastructure and mining development; 
3) sustainable timber harvesting; 4) sedentary cultivation and forest restoration; and 5) sustainable commercial forestry. The programme 
addresses 4 of the key forest stressors and is aligned primarily with strategic programmes 1, 4 and 5, with a contribution to 3.

=== PAGE 66 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 62 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
Inception workshop 
 
168. An inception workshop for national government partners was held on October 5, 2018, where the initial project 
structure was presented, as well as key considerations for activities and actions, institutional arrangements and 
potential co-financing sources. A major topic of this workshop was discussing the plan for feasibility study and 
proposal development, as well as planning for upcoming provincial consultations. In total, 17 officials attended 
the workshop. 
 
Engagement with the NDA 
 
169. The project has been developed with regular engagement from the NDA (MoNRE) in Lao PDR. The idea to 
develop a GCF proposal to support the Emission Reductions Programme (ER-P) was taken up by the NDA and 
officially presented at the GCF Structured Dialogue in Bali in April 2017.133 Since then, the project has formed 
part of Lao PDR’s GCF country programme. Representatives of the NDA have attended cross-sectoral multi-
stakeholder workshops to provide feedback on the project and the broader programme. A letter of no-objection 
has been provided by the NDA (Annex 1a), confirming the project conforms to the country’s national priorities, 
strategies and plans, and that it is in accordance with relevant laws and regulations. 
 
Engagement with government focal points for REDD+ and the UNFCCC 
 
170. In addition to maintaining ongoing communication with the NDA, the project has been designed with the 
continuous engagement of government focal points from key ministries, where the government has demonstrated 
strong ownership of the project concept. The head of the country’s REDD+ Division and the National REDD+ 
Focal Point have been major proponents of the project and have been consistently involved in project design and 
stakeholder consultations. The UNFCCC Focal Point within MoNRE has also been kept informed about the 
project, and representatives from MoNRE have regularly participated in project consultation events and 
workshops.  
 
Engagement with development partners 
 
171. A multi-donor working group exists to support the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry on REDD+ issues. The 
working group consists of GIZ, the World Bank (including representatives of the SUFORD project and the FCPF 
Technical Assistance team), JICA and FAO. The working group has assisted MAF with the development of the 
FCPF ER-PIN, the ER-PD, the PRAPs and the national REDD+ Strategy. GIZ has worked closely with the World 
Bank – both the Lao Country Office and the FCPF – throughout the REDD+ development process, starting in 
2015 and continuing through the GCF project preparation period. In December 2017, MAF Vice Minister H.E. 
Thongpath Vongmany wrote a letter to BMZ Minister Dr. Gerd Mueller to request GIZ support to design and 
implement the GCF proposal, identifying other development partners as potential co-financiers.  
 
Engagement with Civil Society Organisations 
 
172. CSOs have been consulted extensively, and at frequent intervals, during the project preparation process. CSOs 
involved in the design of the project have included the Lao Women’s Union (including at national-, provincial- and 
district-levels), Village Focus International, The Centre for People and Forests (RECOFTC), the FLEGT CSO 
Network and the National University of Laos (NUOL). CSOs represent a central beneficiary of project support at 
the local level. All village-level activities, including, for example, Participatory Land Use Plans (PLUPs) and 
Village Forest Management Agreements (VFMAs), will be subject to prior village-level discussion and agreement, 
with full CSO participation encouraged and facilitated. Village contracts will not be signed by the GCF project 
before at least 3 village-level consultation meetings have been held. CSOs will play an important role in various 
aspects of project implementation: 
 
 
CSOs will benefit from capacity building events, training, awareness-raising and project activities.  
 
 
CSOs such as farmer-based associations will facilitate communication between local communities and the 
project management units. 
 
 
133 https://www.greenclimate.fund/meetings/2017/bali

=== PAGE 67 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 63 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
CSOs will form an integral element of the project’s Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) approach. 
CSOs will be involved in the establishment of local-level networks in the target districts – such as the Lao 
Women’s Union, the Lao Biodiversity Association and Village Focus International – are expected to 
participate in FPIC consultation processes and, in the process, build their capabilities for future initiatives. 
 
 
CSOs will participate in the project’s grievance redress mechanism. CSOs in the target provinces and 
districts will be trained on the project’s grievance redress mechanism and provided with information 
brochures. They will be familiar with the mechanism, will be provided with key phone numbers and will be 
enabled to support local villages/villagers to understand the grievance redress mechanism. 
 
 
Funding for CSOs. Project funding will be made available under Action 1.3.1 (Strengthening the regulatory 
framework), Action 1.3.2 (Capacity building and awareness-raising on the forest sector legal framework), 
Action 1.7.1 (Knowledge management and communication), Action 1.7.2 (ESMP, gender action plan, FPIC 
and safeguards implementation) and Action 2.2.2 (Establishment of public-private sector dialogue to 
promote village-based agroforestry). 
 
Other stakeholders 
 
173. Additional consultations have been held to support the development of the GCF funding proposal, which 1,066 
participants have attended.134 Consultations have been held with the following stakeholders at the national, 
province, district and village level: 
 
Stakeholder 
Category 
Stakeholders Consulted 
Government 
National 
DoF/MAF: Production Forest Division, Forest Protection Division, Planning and 
Cooperation Division, National Protected Areas Division, REDD+ Division, Aquatic 
and Wildlife Division, Administration Division, Legal Division, Forest and Forestry 
Resources Development Fund, Forest Inventory and Planning Division, Deputy 
Director General of DoF, Village Forests and NTFP Division, Department of Forest 
Inspection 
 
DALAM/MAF: Department of Agriculture and Land Management 
 
Funds: EPF and FFRDF 
 
MoNRE: Planning and Cooperation Division, Department of Climate Change 
Representatives from National REDD+ Task Force 
 
Ministry of Planning and Investment 
 
Ministry of Finance 
 
NAFRI 
Provincial 
Provincial REDD+ Offices (PRO), PAFO, PONRE and POFI representatives in each 
Province 
 
Members of Provincial REDD+ Task Force 
District 
District representatives including from DAFO, DONRE and DOFI 
Local Communities (Projects 1 and 3) 
 
Houaphan 
Huayhu village, Ban Yard village, Hong Oy village, Ban Phonxay 
 
Sayabouri  
Phonekeo village, Ban Phonxay  
 
Luang Prabang 
Ban Phanid 
Local Communities (Project 2) 
 
Luang Namtha 
Ban Nam Mad Mai, Ban Nam Dee, Ban Don Mai 
 
Bokeo 
Ban Samork Neua, 1 additional village in NPA 
 
Oudomxay 
Nangew village, Ban Napa 
Civil Society 
Lao Women’s Union (including at national, provincial and district-level); Village Focus 
International; The Centre for People and Forests (RECOFTC); Lao FLEGT CSO 
Network – including the Green Community Development Association (GCDA), the 
Association for Rural Mobilisation and Improvement (ARMI), Lao Biodiversity 
 
134 Note that some participants may have participated in more than one consultation or workshop.

=== PAGE 68 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 64 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
Association (LBA), Maeying Houamjai Phathana (MHP, Women Participating in 
Development) and the Community Development and Environment Association 
(CDEA)135; National University of Laos (NUOL) 
Private Sector 
Burapha Agro-forestry Co. Ltd. 
Plus, interviews with 25 producers, 15 traders (paddy, maize, Job’s Tears, NTFPs), 
12 rice millers and 2 banks in Luang Prabang, Luang Namtha and Oudomxay 
provinces  
Development 
Partners 
KfW (Country Office and ICBF Programme); GIZ (CliPAD, LMDP, 
ProFEB/ProFLEGT); JICA (F-REDD); FAO; UNDP; ADB; Head of German 
Development Cooperation in Lao PDR/BMZ; World Bank; SUFORD-SU (WB). 
 
Stakeholder engagement during project implementation 
 
174. The stakeholder engagement plan for project implementation is provided in Annex 7o. Stakeholder engagement 
will be continuous throughout the implementation of the GCF project. This stakeholder engagement strategy has 
been designed with the following objectives: 
 
 
To ensure there are opportunities for stakeholders to provide feedback, ask questions and raise concerns. 
 
To ensure information sharing and disclosure. 
 
To establish a culturally appropriate mechanism for filing complaints and grievances. 
 
To foster strong project-stakeholder relationships, including at the village level. 
 
To ensure meaningful consultation and promote social acceptability of the project. 
 
Project grievance redress mechanism 
 
175. A grievance mechanism has been developed to acknowledge and address any negative impacts or complaints 
that arise as a result of the project. Any grievances will be analysed and mitigated as quickly as possible to avoid 
any tensions or conflicts. The grievance mechanism is cost-effective as it is integrated into the institutional design 
of Project 1. The objectives of the grievance redress mechanism are to: 
 
 
Provide affected people an avenue through which they can voice their concerns and dissatisfactions. 
 
Create a platform in which stakeholders and village members can freely raise concerns and complaints to 
be effectively addressed. 
 
Demonstrate to project stakeholders and villages that they play an important role in project design and 
implementation. 
 
Follow up and report on efforts to take corrective action. 
 
176. The resolution of claims and complaints arising from the project will be based on existing grievance and redress 
systems developed for REDD+ in the country (see Annex 7o), as well as a project-specific reporting mechanism 
to the NPMU, PPMU and/or DPMU, and the PPMU will include safeguards and M&E specialists hired to ensure 
the monitoring and fulfilment of safeguards for Project 1 implementation. The designed structure allows 
grievances to flow through an internal process from the district level to the national level. See Chapter 12 of the 
Feasibility Study (Annex 2a) for further details. 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  
D.6.1 Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
 
177. The project will result in 5.6 million tCO2eq of emission reductions over the 4-year project implementation period. 
This equates to a mitigation cost to the GCF of Euro 2.7 per tonne of CO2eq (see Section E.2.2). For reference, 
the abatement cost of another approved GCF REDD+ Phase 2 project (FP19, Ecuador) is Euro 2.5/tCO2eq. 
 
D.6.2 Co-financing and leveraging 
 
Co-finance – Project 1 
 
Project 1 GCF budget: Euro 15,160,596 
 
Project 1 co-finance: Euro 48,830,495 
 
135 The 6 CSOs listed here form the Core Committee of the Lao CSO FLEGT Network. The Network itself consists of 26 CSOs, including – 
for example - the Rural Research and Development Promoting Knowledge Association (RRDPA), the Wildlife Conservation Association 
(WCA) and the Social Development Alliance Association (SODA). The programme has also consulted with members of the broader 
Network.

=== PAGE 69 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 65 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
Project 1 co-finance ratio: 3.2 
 
Detailed leverage estimates are provided in Annex 3c. 
 
Leveraged finance by Project 1 – estimated to be Euro 227 million. 
 
D.6.3 Financial viability 
 
178. The Activities under Output 1 of Project 1 are entirely of a public good nature and will not generate financial 
reflows. These Outputs are naturally suited to a grant. Outputs 2 and 3 promote the adoption of sustainable 
deforestation-free agriculture (such as intercropping or sequential cropping of upland rice and maize with other 
crops), agroforestry and sustainable forest management (utilisation of non-timber forest products and timber 
harvesting under approved guidelines) that will result in positive reflows for the beneficiaries compared with 
current baseline (unsustainable) practices. The target beneficiaries are, however, subsistence farmers facing 
substantial knowledge, capacity and value chain barriers that make the realisation of such positive reflows 
altogether impossible without the project and GCF grant. Significant co-finance, both in grants and loans, is 
mobilised. For these reasons, a GCF grant is deemed to be the most appropriate level of concessionality. 
 
179. In addition, the government’s ability to assume additional debt obligations is severely constrained by the Lao 
fiscal and debt situation. Laos has recorded budget deficits in the range of approximately 3-5% of GDP each year 
since 2013. The IMF projects a budget deficit of 4.1% in 2019. Despite positive GDP growth, the debt/GDP ratio 
has increased from 56% in 2013 to a projected 66% in 2019. The IMF recommends, as a priority, the reduction 
of the debt/GDP ratio to 50% through a reduction of the budget deficit and other measures.136 
 
D.6.4 Application of best practices 
 
180. Land use practices commonly applied in the project area are characterised by low productivity and cannot 
typically be considered ‘good agricultural practice’.137 Increased competition for commercial agricultural lands is 
shifting subsistence agriculture (upland rice, vegetables, etc.) and certain cash crops (e.g. maize, Job’s tears and 
cassava) to less suitable forested upland areas. Tree-cutting and increasing land degradation are leading to 
lower productivity and producers seeking out more productive land, which is leading to further deforestation and 
forest degradation. Poor access to irrigation exacerbates the low productivity of agricultural production, as does 
the limited availability of government agricultural extension services. There is limited use of sustainable land 
management practices (e.g. soil conservation measures, climate-resilient practices) due to limited awareness of 
villagers and a lack of exposure to alternative business and income-generating models.  
 
181. The UNFCCC Technology Needs Assessment (TNA) explicitly identifies agriculture (alongside forestry) as one 
of two key sectors for climate change mitigation138 and as one of two key sectors (alongside water) for climate 
change adaptation in Laos.139 The TNA outlines a range of recommended interventions, such as watershed 
reforestation, irrigation, climate-smart agriculture and crop diversification, that are addressed by Project 1, which 
also supports best-practice techniques such as participatory land use planning (PLUP) and the application of 
modern technology (such as GPS, remote sensing and GIS).  
 
136 IMF (2018), Article IV Consultation: Lao PDR, https://www.imf.org/~/media/Files/Publications/CR/2018/cr1884.ashx 
137 FAO defines Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) as a “collection of principles to apply for on-farm production and post-production 
processes, resulting in safe and healthy food and non-food agriculture products, while taking into account economic, social and 
environmental sustainability.” FAO (2016), A Scheme and Training Manual on Good Agricultural Practices for Fruits and Vegetables. 
Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6677e.pdf 
138 Lao PDR and UNEP (2013), Technology Needs Assessment Report: Climate Change Mitigation, 
http://unfccc.int/ttclear/misc_/StaticFiles/gnwoerk_static/TNR_CRE/e9067c6e3b97459989b2196f12155ad5/04f154865ede42d7861a184bd7
c3c243.pdf 
139 Lao PDR and UNEP (2013), Technology Needs Assessment Report: Climate Change Adaptation, 
http://unfccc.int/ttclear/misc_/StaticFiles/gnwoerk_static/TNR_CRE/e9067c6e3b97459989b2196f12155ad5/14008ecce30a4ad0b980ab9f6a
9c9c6b.pdf

=== PAGE 70 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 66 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives 
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development 
 
E.3. Fund-level Impacts  
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
Final  
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
land use, 
reforestation, 
reduced 
deforestation, and 
through 
sustainable forest 
management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of 
M4.1 Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2 eq) 
reduced or avoided 
(including increased 
removals) - forest and 
land use 
Government 
sources: 
 
– Approved 
Reference Level 
(RL) of the 
FCPF ER-PD  
– Biennial 
Update Report 
(BUR) to the 
UNFCCC 
Net annual 
forest-sector 
GHG 
emissions of 
9.7 million 
tCO2eq 
1.9 million 
tCO2eq of 
avoided 
emissions 
5.6 million 
tCO2eq of 
avoided 
emissions 
GHG estimates are 
based on the 4-year 
Project 1 lifetime 
 
140 Over the 4-year implementation period of the project. The concept of a lifetime (influence period) does not apply well to a project that is 
expected to be followed by a second phase (Project 3). 
141 Project 1 implementation period (4 years). 
E.2. Core indicator targets 
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
1.4 million t CO2 eq 
Lifetime 
5.6 million t CO2 eq140 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 
eq, defined as total investment 
cost / expected lifetime emission 
reductions (mitigation only) 
(a) Total project financing 
65.2 million   Euros    
(b) Requested GCF amount  
15.2 million  Euros 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions141  
5.6 million  t CO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) 
11. 6   Euros / t CO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed 
(e = b / c) 
2.7   Euros / t CO2eq 
 
E.2.3. Expected volume of 
finance to be leveraged by the 
proposed project as a result of 
the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and 
private sources (mitigation only) 
 
(f) Total finance leveraged  
227 million   Euros 
(g) Public source co-financed 
150 million   Euros 
(h) Private source finance leveraged  
77 million   Euros 
(i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 
14.6   
(j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b)  
9.6  
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 
4.9  
 
E.2.4. Expected total number of 
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Direct 
120,000 rural beneficiaries 
50% female 
Indirect 
235,800 rural beneficiaries 
50% female 
 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
(disaggregated by sex) 
Direct 
2% of national population2% of national population (2% of women) 
Indirect 
3% of national population% of national population (3% of women)

=== PAGE 71 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 67 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
forest carbon 
stocks 
– Official 
REDD+ Office 
Reports 
 
Project sources: 
 
– Project M&E in 
cooperation with 
JICA 
– Mid-term 
evaluation report 
to have 
dedicated 
section on CO2 
emission 
reductions / 
sequestration 
 
142 The scale for rating the extent of incentives and implementation reflects the scale and scope of incentives put in place. Scale 1-5 
reflects: 1 = REDD+ Funding Window established and operational; 2 = REDD+ Funding Window disburses at least Euro 8 million for 
REDD+ activities; 3 = REDD+ Funding Window disbursements of at least Euro 8 million are augmented by a green credit line established 
and capitalised with at least Euro 3 million; 4 = REDD+ Funding Window disbursements of at least Euro 8 million are augmented by a Euro 
6 million green credit line and additional REDD+ financing of at least Euro 15 million catalysed/unlocked (e.g. REDD+ results-based 
payments, increased agricultural production, sustainable timber harvesting, enhanced FFRDF fee revenues, etc.); 5 = REDD+ Funding 
Window disbursements of at least Euro 8 million are augmented by a Euro 6 million green credit line and additional REDD+ financing of at 
least Euro 20 million catalysed/unlocked (e.g. REDD+ results-based payments, increased agricultural production, sustainable timber 
harvesting, enhanced FFRDF fee revenues, etc.). 
E.4. Fund-level Outcomes  
Expected 
Outcomes 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
Final 
M5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional 
and regulatory 
systems 
M5.1 Institutional 
and regulatory 
systems that 
improve incentives 
for low-emission 
planning and 
development and 
their effective 
implementation  
Government 
sources: 
 
– Published 
province and 
district Socio-
Economic 
Development 
Plans (SEDPs) 
(2021-2025)  
– Government-
approved 
revisions to Forest 
Law and 
associated 
Decrees 
– National, 
provincial and 
district-level laws, 
decrees and by-
laws 
– DAFO annual 
reports 
– EPF annual 
report 
– EPF grant 
disbursement 
reports 
– FFRDF grant 
disbursement 
reports 
 
Project sources: 
 
No REDD+ 
Funding 
Window 
exists 
 
No green 
credit line 
exists to 
support 
deforestation
-free 
agriculture 
 
The 
Emission 
Reductions 
Programme 
(ER-P) 
provides a 
route to 
unlocking 
REDD+ 
results-
based 
payments. 
Extent of 
incentives and 
implementation 
for REDD+ 
investment 
(forestry, 
sustainable 
agriculture and 
land-use 
planning): 
Extent = 3142 
Extent of 
incentives and 
implementation 
for REDD+ 
investment 
(forestry, 
sustainable 
agriculture and 
land-use 
planning): 
Extent = 5 
The project 
commences 
promptly in mid-
2020, so that it 
synchronises with 
the Lao PDR 
national 
development 
planning process.  
 
The government’s 
current strong 
commitment to the 
NDC and REDD+ 
implementation 
remains intact. 
 
REDD+, once 
integrated into the 
provincial and 
district SEDPs, will 
become eligible for 
national and sub-
national public 
financing, and will 
be fully integrated 
into the country’s 
budgeting process. 
EPF is able to build 
on its robust 
fiduciary and 
internal control 
standards (as 
validated by recent

=== PAGE 72 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 68 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
143 There are currently some management plans, developed by the SUFORD Project, for national production forest, however, these 
management plans are not currently implemented nor monitored. Therefore, minimal protection activities are occurring. 
– NPMU and 
PPMU annual 
reports 
 
Third-Party 
sources: 
 
External audit 
reports of EPF 
and FFRDF 
 
World Bank and 
UNDP 
assessments) in 
order to establish a 
well-designed 
REDD+ Funding 
Window. 
 
EPF (under 
MoNRE) and 
FFRDF (under 
MAF) fully 
collaborate to 
operationalise the 
REDD+ Funding 
Window. 
M9.0 
Improved 
management 
of land or 
forest areas 
contributing to 
emissions 
reductions 
M9.1 Hectares of 
land or forests 
under improved 
and effective 
management that 
contributes to CO2 
emission 
reductions  
Government 
sources: 
 
– DoF annual 
reports on SFM 
implementation in 
production forests, 
protection forests 
and national 
protected areas  
– Approved Forest 
Management 
Plans 
– Approved village 
forest 
management 
plans (VFMPs), 
village-level 
management 
agreements and 
private sector-
village partnership 
agreements 
(PSVPAs) 
– EPF grant 
disbursement 
reports 
 
Project sources: 
 
– Remote 
sensing/GIS (GoL, 
FCPF maps), field 
visits/spot checks, 
household 
interviews 
– Project 
monitoring reports 
Negligible 
non-forest 
land has 
been 
reforested or 
restored in 
the target 
areas143 
 
 
0 ha of 
avoided 
deforestation 
 
0 ha of 
reduced 
forest 
degradation  
833 ha of 
reforested land 
 
1,420 ha of 
restored forest  
 
4,460 ha of 
avoided 
deforestation  
 
4,050 ha of 
reduced forest 
degradation 
 
1,850ha of 
reforested land 
 
3,160 ha of 
restored forest 
 
9,900 ha of 
avoided 
deforestation  
 
9,000 ha of 
reduced forest 
degradation 
 
 
Local population 
chooses to 
participate in the 
project (FPIC). 
 
Government staff 
from the REDD+ 
Taskforce, REDD+ 
Office and line 
ministries (at 
national, provincial 
and district levels) 
will provide work 
time to support 
project 
interventions. 
 
Forest enforcement 
processes and 
reporting chains are 
successfully 
strengthened by the 
project.

=== PAGE 73 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 69 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
144 The target reflects the extent of effectiveness for the REDD+ Funding Window. Scale: 1 = REDD+ Funding Window channels at least 
50% of anticipated grant volume (GCF proceeds will be channelled successfully through the newly established REDD* Funding window 
under the EPF) under Outputs 2 and 3; 2 = REDD+ Funding Window channels at least 80% of anticipated grant volume under Outputs 2 
and 3; 3 = REDD+ Funding Window channels at least 90% of anticipated grant volume under Outputs 2 and 3; 4 = REDD+ Funding 
Window channels at least 90% of anticipated grant volume under Outputs 2 and 3 and additional finance raised domestically (e.g. PA fees, 
FFRDF fees) and/or internationally (e.g. from donors); 5 = REDD+ Funding Window channels at least 90% of anticipated grant volume 
under Outputs 2 and 3, additional finance raised domestically and/or internationally, and becomes the primary conduit for FCPF REDD+ 
results-based payments. 
145 The target reflects the level of institutional strengthening of FFRDF. Scale: 1 = FFRDF resources are unchanged and fiduciary standards 
are not met; 2 = FFRDF meets basic fiduciary standards and accepts up to Euro 300,000 of international financing (GCF through EPF, BMZ 
through GIZ/KfW, or others); 3 = FFRDF meets international fiduciary standards and other requirements and accepts international financing 
greater than Euro 700,000; 4 = FFRDF meets international fiduciary standards and is sufficiently capacitated that the Government transfers 
control of the REDD+ Funding Window to the FFRDF; 5 = GCF support to the FFRDF and EPF leads to such systemic improvement and 
collaborative engagement that the Government merges the two institutions.     
146 The target reflects the level of policy and regulatory reform. Scale: 1 = REDD+ is explicitly incorporated into Lao PDR’s revised NDC; 2 = 
REDD+ is explicitly incorporated into Lao PDR’s revised NDC and into the SEDPs for the 3 provinces covered by Project 1; 3 = REDD+ is 
explicitly incorporated into Lao PDR’s revised NDC, into the SEDPs for the 3 provinces covered by Project 1 and into at least 8 Project 1 
district SEDPs; 4 = REDD+ is explicitly incorporated into Lao PDR’s revised NDC, into the SEDPs for the 3 provinces covered by Project 1 
and into at least 12 Project 1 district SEDPs; 5 = REDD+ is explicitly incorporated into Lao PDR’s revised NDC, into the SEDPs for the 3 
provinces covered by Project 1 and into all 16 Project 1 district SEDPs. 
E.5. Project 1 performance indicators  
Expected 
Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
Final 
1. Enabling 
environment for 
REDD+ 
implementation 
1.1 Level and 
extent of 
access to 
financing for 
forest sector 
transformation 
Government 
sources: 
 
– EPF annual report 
– EPF grant 
disbursement 
reports 
– FFRDF grant 
disbursement 
reports 
 
Project sources: 
 
– Monitoring, 
reporting and 
evaluation reports 
by NPMU 
 
Third-Party sources: 
 
External audit 
reports of EPF and 
FFRDF 
 
No National 
REDD+ 
Funding 
Window 
 
 
 
 
 
FFRDF is 
unable to 
accept 
international 
finance due 
to capacity 
and fiduciary 
limitations 
REDD+ Funding 
Window channels 
finance to target 
beneficiaries: Extent 
= 2144 
 
 
 
 
FFRDF channels 
finance to target 
beneficiaries: Level 
= 2145 
REDD+ 
Funding 
Window 
channels 
finance to 
target 
beneficiaries
: Extent = 5 
 
FFRDF 
channels 
finance to 
target 
beneficiaries
: Level = 3 
EPF is able to build 
on its robust 
fiduciary and 
internal control 
standards (as 
validated by recent 
World Bank and 
UNDP 
assessments) in 
order to establish a 
well-designed 
REDD+ Funding 
Window. 
 
EPF (under 
MoNRE) and 
FFRDF (under 
MAF) fully 
collaborate to 
operationalise the 
REDD+ Funding 
Window. 
 
GIZ will provide 
institutional and 
capacity building 
support to FFRDF 
in addition to the 
support provided by 
the GCF project. 
 
 
1.2 Level of 
regulatory 
reform of the 
forestry sector 
for REDD 
Government 
sources: 
 
– NDC 
– Published 
national, province 
and district Socio-
Economic 
Development Plans 
(SEDPs) (2021-
2025) 
The REDD+ 
National 
Strategy is 
not 
mentioned in 
the current 
NDC; 
REDD+ is 
not 
mentioned in 
provincial or 
Level = 2146 
 
  
 
 
Level = 4 
 
 
 
The project 
commences 
promptly in mid-
2020, so that it 
synchronises with 
the Lao PDR 
national 
development 
planning process.  
 
The government’s 
current strong

=== PAGE 74 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 70 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
147 Women’s safety is paramount to the project’s success, and the project aims to promote safe and empowering activities. The idea of 
women-led patrol groups came from the women consulted during project preparation. There is, however, an emphasis on “women-led” 
patrols, not necessarily “women-only” patrols (although the latter is also possibly desired). This means patrol groups can be mixed, which 
may make the women feel safer. Regular consultation with women and monitoring will make sure that the forest patrol group structure is 
suitable to the village, taking into account key gender issues. 
148 The target rate of enforcement is reflected in the following Scale: 1 = SOPs established for 2 forest categories (out of protection, 
production, conservation and village forests), including roles and responsibilities of relevant institutions (POFRI, PONRE, military, police, 
customs) and communities; 2 = SOPs established for 4 forest categories (out of protection, production, conservation and village forests), 
including roles and responsibilities of relevant institutions (POFRI, PONRE, military, police, customs) and communities; 3 = SOPs (at least 
2) are augmented by boundary demarcation of the forest-types covered by the SOPs; 4 = SOPs (at least 2) are augmented by boundary 
demarcation and regular inspections by law enforcement agencies of the forest-types covered by the SOPs and at least 2 women-led 
patrolling groups are trained, equipped and operational; 5 = SOPs (at least 2) are augmented by boundary demarcation and regular 
inspections of the forest-types covered by the SOPs by law enforcement agencies and newly-established village forest monitoring units. 
– Government-
approved revisions 
to Forest Law and 
associated Decrees 
– National, 
provincial and 
district-level laws, 
decrees and by-
laws 
– Government 
budget expenditure 
reports 
– DAFO annual 
reports 
– EPF annual 
financial reports 
 
Project sources: 
 
– NPMU and PPMU 
annual reports 
– Workshop and 
village consultation 
meeting reports  
district 
SEDPs 
 
Forestry Law 
does not 
permit SFM 
for 
commercial 
purposes in 
village 
forests 
 
Laws, 
regulations 
and 
guidelines 
do not 
consider 
gender as an 
explicit factor 
in forest 
protection, 
user-rights 
and benefit-
sharing 
 
commitment to NDC 
and REDD+ 
implementation 
remains intact. 
 
1.3  
Rate of 
enforcement of 
new regulatory 
framework 
Government 
sources: 
 
– Government-
approved standard 
operating 
procedures (SOPs) 
for Forest Law 
enforcement 
– DOFI reports on 
patrols and 
inspections 
 
No 
consistent 
guidelines / 
standard 
operating 
procedures 
for 
enforcement 
of the Forest 
Law 
available, 
and limited 
patrolling / 
enforcement 
action on the 
ground 
 
No analysis 
of the 
potential for 
women-led 
patrolling 
groups147 in 
the target 
areas 
 
 
 Rate = 3148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rate = 4 
 
 
Continuous 
engagement by 
relevant 
stakeholders within 
the government to 
revise and clarify 
forest enforcement 
processes and 
reporting chains. 
 
Anti-corruption 
safeguards are 
strengthened 
through sub-project 
activities. 
 
A transparent 
reporting system is 
clarified/established 
that is effective, 
accessible and 
culturally 
appropriate to 
permit reporting at 
village, kumban, 
district, province 
and national levels.

=== PAGE 75 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 71 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
Women and men 
receive culturally 
appropriate 
information about 
the regulations and 
their benefits, and 
actively participate 
in village-based 
measures. 
2. Market 
solutions for 
agricultural 
drivers of 
deforestation 
2.1 Amount 
(EUR) 
disbursed to 
VDFs to 
support good 
agricultural 
practices and 
village 
agroforestry 
that include a 
gender 
perspective 
 
Amount (EUR) 
of result-based 
financing to 
private sector 
enterprises 
 
 
Government 
sources: 
 
– EPF annual report 
– EPF grant 
disbursement 
reports 
– FFRDF grant 
disbursement 
reports 
 
Project sources: 
 
– Annual monitoring 
reports prepared by 
PPMUs 
– Registry of 
PSVPAs signed by 
villages and private 
sector enterprises 
 
Third-Party sources: 
 
– VDF financial 
statements 
– Private sector 
company reports 
Village 
Developmen
t Funds 
(VDFs) 
receive no 
resources 
from external 
sources for 
good 
agricultural 
practices 
 
Private-
sector village 
partnership 
agreements 
(PSVPAs) 
cover 
approximatel
y 2,000 ha of 
reforested 
land 
 
No results-
based 
financing 
investment 
for 
agroforestry 
establishme
nt / 
implementati
on 
Euro 1.0 million 
disbursed to VDFs 
to support good 
agricultural 
practices 
Euro 0 of results-
based financing to 
private sector 
enterprises to 
implement 
sustainable 
agroforestry in 
conjunction with 
village communities 
 
Euro 1.5 
million 
disbursed to 
VDFs to 
support good 
agricultural 
practices 
Euro 
800,000 of 
results-
based 
financing to 
private 
sector 
enterprises 
to implement 
sustainable 
agroforestry 
in 
conjunction 
with village 
communities 
Capacity building 
support provided by 
the project under 
Activity 2.1 is 
synchronised with, 
and sufficiently 
effective, to enable 
the investments in 
good agricultural 
practices and 
agroforestry under 
Activity 2.1. 
 
Village communities 
are sufficiently 
incentivised to 
voluntarily apply for 
funds for good 
agricultural 
practices. 
 
Village communities 
and eligible private 
sector enterprises 
successfully sign 
and co-implement 
PSVPAs for agro-
forestry activities. 
 
2.2 Area (ha) 
under dry-
season 
irrigated 
agriculture 
 
Number of 
women using 
appropriate 
technologies 
to produce 
high-value 
crops and 
livestock 
Project sources: 
 
– Monitoring and 
evaluation reports 
by PPMUs 
 
Third-Party sources: 
 
– ADB project 
reports (expert 
assessment reports, 
annual reports, mid-
term review, final 
evaluation) 
– Irrigation works 
reports 
2,242 ha 
under dry-
season 
irrigated 
agriculture 
 
~ 180 
women 
using 
appropriate 
technologies 
to produce 
high-value 
crops and 
livestock 
3,000 ha under dry-
season irrigated 
agriculture 
 
 
 
400 women using 
appropriate 
technologies to 
produce high-value 
crops and livestock 
 
4,200 ha 
under dry-
season 
irrigated 
agriculture 
 
1,000 
women 
using 
appropriate 
technologies 
to produce 
high-value 
crops and 
livestock 
 
The ADB SRIWSM 
project is 
implemented 
according to plan 
and schedule. 
3. Climate 
change 
mitigation action 
through forestry 
3.1 Area (ha) 
under 
sustainable 
forest practices 
across forest 
categories 
 
Proportion of 
women’s 
Government 
sources: 
 
– DoF, PAFO 
annual reports on 
SFM 
implementation in 
production forests, 
protection forests 
0 ha of 
production 
forest 
 
0 ha of 
national 
protected 
area forest 
 
5,000 ha of 
production forest 
 
 
0 ha of national 
protected area 
forest 
 
 
15,000 ha of 
production 
forest 
 
670,000 ha 
of national 
protected 
area forest 
 
Prime Minister 
Order 15 (2016), 
which bans timber 
harvesting from 
national production 
forest areas, is 
revised (with project 
support under 
Output 1) to allow

=== PAGE 76 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 72 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
representation 
in village forest 
management 
committees 
and national 
protected areas. 
– National Forest 
Inventory 
– Approved village 
forest management 
plans (VFMPs) and 
signed village-level 
management 
agreements 
– EPF grant 
disbursement 
monitoring and 
evaluation reports 
 
Project sources: 
 
– Annual monitoring 
reports prepared by 
PPMU 
– Remote 
sensing/GIS 
 
Third-Party sources 
(private sector 
companies): 
 
– Private sector 
company reports 
 
 
 
67,000 ha of 
village forest 
managed 
under 
approved 
VFMPs 
 
 
No gender 
requirements 
associated 
with the 
establishme
nt or 
operation of 
village forest 
management 
committees 
 
100,000 ha of 
village forest 
managed under 
approved VFMPs 
 
 
 
 
25% of targeted 
village forest 
management 
committees consist 
of at least 30% 
women 
180,000 ha 
of village 
forest 
managed 
under 
approved 
VFMPs 
 
65% of 
targeted 
village forest 
management 
committees 
consist of at 
least 30% 
women 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sustainable 
harvesting 
principles. 
 
Heterogeneous 
landscape planning 
ensures that 
plantations occur on 
non-forested land, 
ensuring that no 
primary forest or 
permanent 
agricultural land is 
utilised for 
plantation activities. 
On land used for 
forest plantations, 
70% will be 
industrial trees, 
20% will form a 
buffer zone and 
10% of planted 
trees will be native 
tree species. 
 
Illegal logging and 
other illegal 
activities (hunting, 
wildlife trafficking) 
are avoided through 
monitoring and 
enforcement of land 
use plans, improved 
awareness of local 
communities on 
regulations, and 
provision of 
alternative 
livelihood options 
and financing. 
 
Community 
implementation of 
VFMPs is ensured 
through a 
participatory 
approach (which 
reflects the priorities 
of the communities 
and ensures the 
equal participation 
of women and men 
in related 
management 
decisions) as well 
as fines and 
sanctions agreed in 
the management 
plans.

=== PAGE 77 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 73 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
E.6. Activities for Project 1 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
1.1 REDD+ Funding Window 
and sustainable finance 
Establishment and 
operationalisation of a REDD+ 
Funding Window for Lao PDR. 
Technical support to EPF to 
initially run the REDD+ 
Funding Window and, in the 
process, provide EPF with 
practical exposure to assist 
EPF’s GCF AE accreditation. 
Enabling the EPF and Forest 
and Forest Resource 
Development Fund (FFRDF) 
to channel finance for REDD+, 
including mobilisation of 
additional funding streams for 
REDD+. Technical assistance 
support to a new green credit 
line for deforestation-free 
agriculture value chains. 
‐ 
Creation of a REDD+ 
Funding Window in 
conjunction with the EPF 
‐ 
Support to FFRDF to 
revise its governance 
structure and to develop 
SOPs, manuals and 
internal guidance 
documents that meet 
international fiduciary and 
safeguards standards 
‐ 
Integration of FFRDF 
staff in the EPF’s day-to-
day operations running 
the REDD+ Funding 
Window 
‐ 
Training for FFRDF staff 
‐ 
Support to FFRDF to 
implement village-based 
grants for forestry 
activities in the 
framework of Activities 
2.1, 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 
‐ 
Strategic roadmap 
developed and agreed 
with the Government to 
structure and mobilise 
new funding sources 
(PES from the 
hydropower industry, 
road fees, taxes, etc.) 
‐ 
Strengthening Village 
Development Funds 
‐ 
Institutional coordination 
and fundraising support 
to a green credit line that 
will supply credit (outside 
the framework of the 
project, using non-GCF 
funds) to firms with zero-
deforestation business 
models developed with 
support from Activity 2.2 
‐ 
REDD+ Funding Window is 
established and operational 
‐ 
FFRDF SOPs, manuals and 
internal guidance documents 
are updated to meet 
international fiduciary and 
safeguards standards 
‐ 
Green credit line is established 
and operational, capitalised 
with (non-GCF) international 
and national finance amounting 
to at least Euro 6 million 
1.2 Mainstreaming REDD+ 
into the NDC and socio-
economic development plans 
(SEDPs) 
Provision of technical and 
logistical support to the NDC 
and SEDP planning process 
to integrate the National 
REDD+ Strategy, so as to 
ensure REDD+ interventions 
are fully considered and 
budgeted in the updated NDC 
and in the provincial and 
district SEDPs 
‐ Participation in planning 
meetings and provision of 
technical inputs 
‐ Consultation workshops 
to support REDD+ 
mainstreaming into the 
updated NDC and into 
provincial / district SEDPs 
‐ 1 national-level consultation 
workshop  
‐ 3 province-level consultation 
workshops 
‐ 16 district-level workshops 
‐ REDD+ activities are integrated 
into the updated NDC  
‐ REDD+ activities are integrated 
into 3 provincial SEDPs (2021-
2025) 
‐ REDD+ activities are integrated 
into 16 district SEDPs (2021-
2025) 
1.3 Strengthening the 
regulatory framework 
Revision, modification and 
drafting of relevant laws, 
decrees and regulations to 
enable and strengthen the 
adoption of SFM, FLR and 
participatory village forestry. 
‐ International and national 
expert inputs for 
assessments, revisions 
and recommendations 
related to PMO 9, the 
Forestry Law, Land Law, 
‐ PMO 9 revised and endorsed by 
Government 
‐ Forest and Land Law, as well as 
supporting decrees, amended to 
include SFM in production 
forests

=== PAGE 78 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 74 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
Provision of gender- and 
ethnicity-sensitive awareness-
raising and capacity 
development on the revised 
regulatory framework to 
Government authorities (at 
national, provincial, district 
and kumban level), CSOs and 
villagers 
SFM, FLR and village 
forestry 
‐ Meetings with national, 
provincial and district 
Government officials to 
facilitate cross-sectoral 
coordination 
‐ Preparation of training 
and workshop materials 
‐ Training, workshops and 
technical assistance 
‐ Forest Law amended to include 
provisions for sustainable timber 
harvesting in village forestry 
‐ Laws, regulations and 
guidelines developed and 
approved by the Government to 
facilitate the implementation of 
ISP, SFM, FLR and village 
forestry 
1.4 Law enforcement and 
monitoring 
Revision of standard 
operating procedures (SOPs) 
for Forestry Law enforcement 
that are aligned with the 
revised regulatory framework 
(Activity 1.3). Improvement of 
coordination among key 
actors (POFRI, PONRE, 
forest inspectorate, police, 
customs) to improve Forest 
Law enforcement. Introduction 
of remote sensing data as a 
basis for controlling 
deforestation and forest 
degradation. Training to 
facilitate enforcement 
measures 
‐ Expert input to review 
SOPs 
‐ Training for POFI and 
DOFI staff (conducting 
inspections, technology 
application, monitoring, 
gender- and ethnicity-
sensitive community 
awareness-raising and 
community engagement, 
GIS/remote sensing) 
‐ Technical assistance to 
clarify coordination, 
exchange and reporting 
channels (village  
district  province  
national Government) 
‐ Dissemination of 
regulations and guidelines 
on permitted and 
prohibited clearing and 
utilisation of forest (timber 
and non-timber) products 
‐ 4 sets of SOPs established and 
approved for each forest 
category (protection, production, 
conservation, village forests), 
including roles and 
responsibilities 
‐ Annual summary reporting 
protocols from the village level 
are available at the DPMU 
‐ POFI and DOFI are able to 
monitor forest cover change with 
new Remote Sensing 
technologies according to SOPs  
 
1.5 Land use planning and 
improved tenure security 
Mainstreaming FLR guiding 
principles into land use 
planning manuals and 
guidelines. Participatory 
village land use planning 
(PLUP) in target project 
districts (linked with Activity 
1.4 and Outputs 2 and 3). 
Monitoring and enforcement 
for existing land use plans 
(forest-related enforcement 
linked with Activity 1.4) 
‐ 
Experts to mainstream 
FLR guiding principles 
into land use planning 
manuals and guidelines 
‐ 
Stakeholder 
consultations, training 
materials and workshops 
on revised guidelines 
‐ 
Consultations for target 
villages based on the 
principles of FPIC to 
engage them in voluntary 
land use planning 
processes 
‐ 
International and/or 
national experts to 
support land use zoning, 
mapping (GIS/remote 
sensing), boundary 
demarcation and 
agriculture management 
planning 
‐ 
Gender-sensitive 
trainings for village land 
use and forest 
management committees 
‐ 
Finance to support 
systematic land 
registration 
‐ 
FLR principles integrated into 
land use planning manual and 
guidelines, endorsed by the 
government 
‐ 
130 village land use plans 
established and implemented 
‐ 
Developed and implemented 
village land use plans have at 
least 70% compliance 
‐ 
At least 70% of all adult 
villagers in target villages state 
that they feel actively included 
in the PLUP process 
1.6 Implementation of the 
measurement, reporting and 
verification (MRV) system 
Support to the National Forest 
Inventory (NFI) process and 
assessment of carbon 
emissions/removals from the 
‐ 
Execution of the Fourth 
(2020/21) National Forest 
Inventory 
‐ 
Fourth National Forest 
Inventory finalised

=== PAGE 79 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 75 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
forest sector. Support to the 
MRV needs of the GCF 
project, as well as the FCPF 
Emission Reductions 
Programme, the UNFCCC 
National Communication and 
the UNFCCC BUR  
‐ 
Assessment and 
development of the 
National Forest-Type 
Map for 2020/21  
‐ 
Calculation of emission 
factors and removal 
factors for forest and non-
forest land-use classes 
‐ 
Assessment of leakage 
effects from the project 
area to the reference 
area (the entirety of Lao 
PDR) 
‐ 
Support to national 
reporting processes 
relating to forest carbon 
(e.g. for the FCPF, the 
National Communication 
and BURs) 
‐ 
Development and 
implementation of the 
National Forest 
Monitoring System 
‐ 
Development of digital 
solutions for community-
based monitoring 
‐ 
National Forest-Type Map for 
2020/21 produced 
‐ 
Updated emission / removal 
factors 
‐ 
Carbon emission reductions 
and removals relative to the 
FCPF Reference Level are 
reported 
‐ 
NFMS established and 
operational 
 
1.7 Knowledge management, 
FPIC, safeguards and gender 
Knowledge management and 
communication. 
Implementation of the 
Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) 
and Gender Action Plan 
(GAP), and ensuring 
compliance with FPIC 
procedures and safeguards 
‐ 
Knowledge management 
and communication, 
including data provision 
for the FCPF Emission 
Reductions Programme, 
the UNFCCC National 
Communication and the 
BUR 
‐ 
Lessons-learned and 
information-sharing at the 
policy-making level to 
inform national 
stakeholders of sub-
project progress and 
implementation lessons 
for REDD+ 
‐ 
Awareness-raising 
campaigns for targeted 
stakeholder groups 
‐ 
Development and 
management of a project 
website 
‐ 
Implementation of the 
ESMP and GAP 
‐ 
Development and 
monitoring of FPIC and 
safeguards-related 
mechanisms to collect 
lessons learned and 
complaints from target 
communities 
‐ 
Communication materials 
and tools are gender 
mainstreamed, culturally 
appropriate, and 
published in different 
ethnic languages 
whenever feasible 
‐ 
Project communication plan 
implemented 
‐ 
4 awareness campaigns 
designed and implemented 
(one on the legal and regulatory 
framework, one on REDD+ 
awareness at the local level 
and one on SLM/REDD+ 
targeted at schools) 
‐ 
1 project website developed 
and implemented 
‐ 
Safeguards-related activities 
(complaints received and 
actions taken) systematically 
recorded 
2.1 Local incentives for good 
agricultural practices and 
agroforestry 
Strengthening of extension 
services (DAFO and 
Technical Service Centre, 
‐ 
Agriculture specialists of 
the PPMUs and NPMU to 
deliver capacity building, 
‐ 
48 DAFO and TSC staff 
trained on good agricultural 
practices

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 76 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
TSC) for good agricultural 
practices. Development of 
District Activity Plans (DAPs). 
Financial support for ‘white 
list’ good agricultural practices 
and for village-based 
agroforestry. 
training and coaching to 
DAFO and TSC staff and 
village committee 
members using a trainer-
of-trainers approach 
‐ 
Development of District 
Activity Plans, outlining 
activities, participants, 
inputs and annual budget 
plans, based on land use 
plans from Activity 1.5 
and gender-sensitive 
village consultations 
‐ 
Combination of upfront 
and performance-based 
payments for ‘white list’ 
good agricultural practices 
(GAP) such as 
intercropping, mulching, 
no-tillage, etc. 
‐ 
Matching grants for 
eligible private sector 
enterprises to support 
village agroforestry 
activities (as agreed 
between the village and 
the enterprise in the form 
of a private sector-village 
partnership agreement – 
PSVPA – developed with 
Activity 2.2 support) 
‐ 
Good agricultural practices 
adopted, leading to increased 
yields of at least 50% 
(compared to baseline), 
disaggregated by crops 
‐ 
For good agricultural 
practices: Each eligible village 
(VDF) receives Euro 7,500 
upfront incentive payment and 
later Euro 4,000 performance-
based payment 
‐ 
For agroforestry: activities will 
be funded by 50% GCF grant 
finance (up to Euro 200/ha) 
and by 50% matching funding 
from the private sector 
‐ 
Participation rates of women in 
community meetings are at 
least 40% 
2.2 Catalysing private sector 
investment in value chains 
In-depth value chain 
assessment of key agricultural 
commodities at the provincial 
level, including analysis of the 
specific roles of women. 
Establishment of, and support 
to, multi-stakeholder platforms 
(MSPs) to contribute to 
improved networking and 
coordination across the value 
chain. Business development 
support to agribusiness 
SMEs. Intermediation and 
support to public-private 
sector dialogue and to 
formalisation of private sector-
village partnership 
agreements (PSVPAs).  
‐ 
Gender-sensitive value 
chain studies for key 
existing and alternative 
agricultural commodities 
(crops and livestock) 
‐ 
Workshop to share and 
agree on study results 
with NPMU, PPMUs, 
PAFO, DAFO and TSC 
staff, and selected male 
and female farmers. 
(Results of the value 
chain analysis will be 
linked with capacity 
building support under 
Activity 2.1) 
‐ 
Value chain action and 
implementation plan 
developed for each 
agricultural commodity 
‐ 
Identification and 
mobilisation of private 
sector companies 
(traders, input suppliers, 
processors, financial 
institutions, etc.) and 
other value chain actors 
(e.g. farmers’ 
organisations including 
representatives of male 
and female farmers, 
government 
representatives) to 
participate in district-level 
MSPs and to receive 
targeted training 
‐ 
1 in-depth value chain study per 
province (i.e. 3 in total) 
addressing approximately 9 key 
current and new commodities, 
including reviews of the 
gendered impact of the desired 
change (access, needs, 
barriers, potentials, workload, 
benefits) 
‐ 
3 value chain action and 
implementation plans 
developed 
‐ 
4,800 farmer households (in 16 
districts) benefit from improved 
communication and 
relationships with value chain 
actors

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 77 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
‐ 
Regular province-level 
exchange meetings for 
PAFO, DAFO and TSC 
staff, and private sector 
participants (male and 
female farmer 
representatives, input and 
service providers, traders 
and processors) 
2.3 Sustainable rural 
infrastructure watershed 
management 
The GCF project 
complements ADB investment 
in 11 small-scale agricultural 
irrigation schemes through 
support to ensuring that the 
forested landscapes in the 
catchment areas of the 
irrigation projects remain 
intact through improved land 
management (including good 
agricultural practices) and 
through reduced pressure 
from drivers of deforestation 
and degradation (e.g. lack of 
alternative livelihood 
opportunities, poverty, 
malnutrition, low agricultural 
productivity, lack of value-
adding activities and weak 
negotiation/marketing skills) 
‐ 
Gender-sensitive 
technical assistance 
provided to farmers to 
plan and produce dry-
season crops on the 
upgraded irrigation 
schemes 
‐ 
Systematic information 
provision to farmers on 
market demand, quality 
requirements and prices 
‐ 
Modernisation of small-
scale irrigation schemes, 
including additional water 
control measures (such 
as secondary distribution 
pipes and offtake points 
for hoses, sprinklers and 
drip applications 
‐ 
District Nutrition Teams 
(DNTs) established in 
each of the target districts 
‐ 
11 small-scale irrigation 
schemes modernised, 
covering a command area of 
at least 2,900 ha 
‐ 
11 market assessments for 
dry-season and upland crops 
produced 
‐ 
3 District Nutrition Teams 
established and operational 
 
3.1 Village forest 
management 
Development, implementation 
and monitoring of village 
forest management plans 
(VFMPs) 
‐ 
Development of 5-year 
VFMPs, including 
demarcation of forest 
areas and preparation of 
detailed village forest 
maps, participatory forest 
resources assessments 
(PFRAs) and forest 
inventories, preparation 
of annual forestry 
operation plans and 
signing of village forest 
management agreements 
‐ 
Gender-equitable and 
responsive VFMP 
planning processes 
(including participation of 
women on Village Forest 
Management 
Committees), 
management, 
implementation, and 
monitoring 
‐ 
Implementation of 
VFMPs by village groups, 
following the annual plan 
of operation (approved by 
DoF and PPMU) 
‐ 
Quarterly monitoring of 
implementation progress, 
including payments made 
to VDFs, reports of illegal 
activity and conflict 
reports 
‐ 
200 VFMPs approved in target 
villages 
‐ 
180,000 ha of village forest 
managed under approved 
VFMPs 
‐ 
Participation rates of women in 
community meetings are at 
least 40%

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 78 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
3.2 Sustainable management 
of production forests 
Forest inventory and forest 
management planning in 
production forests. 
Implementation of Forest 
Management Plans (FMPs) 
with associated monitoring 
‐ 
Designation of villages 
and preparation and 
implementation of forest 
management plans 
(FMPs, participatory land 
use zoning, boundary 
marking, inventory of 
trees and NTFPs) [Linked 
to the public-private 
dialogue process under 
Activity 2.1] 
‐ 
Definition, dissemination 
and enforcement of forest 
access rules (developed 
in conjunction with all 
villagers) 
‐ 
Capacity building for 
villages and provincial- 
and district-level officials 
on FMPs, monitoring 
(e.g. forest inventory 
revision, remote-sensing 
and ground-truthing) and 
enforcement (patrolling 
techniques) 
‐ 
Development of annual 
work and budget plans to 
implement forest 
restoration activities, 
including ANR and 
community-based 
plantation/agroforestry 
development 
‐ 
REDD+ Funding Window 
disbursement of village 
forestry grants to VDFs 
‐ 
Promotion and monitoring 
of gender-equitable 
management and benefit-
sharing of VDFs 
‐ 
15,000 ha of production forest 
category area under 
participatory forest 
management 
 
3.3 National Protected Area 
management 
Development or revision of 
National Protected Area 
(NPA) management plans. 
Improved law enforcement in 
NPA conservation landscape. 
Implementation of sustainable 
land and forest management 
by communities living within 
and adjacent to NPAs 
‐ 
Development or revision 
of NPA management 
plans (including 
assessment of previous 
plans, zonation and 
participatory land use 
planning, identification of 
alternative livelihood 
options considering 
gender and ethnicity 
dimensions, 
establishment of 
voluntary and inclusive 
co-management 
agreements with villages, 
development of law 
enforcement action plans 
for NPAs) 
‐ 
Implementation of law 
enforcement action plans 
(including checkpoint 
establishment and 
operation, targeting of 
high-risk areas by PAFO 
staff, capacity building 
and provision of 
equipment, gender-
‐ 
Development of 3 new NPA 
management plans 
‐ 
670,000 ha of NPA forest is 
managed under approved 
management plans

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 79 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
sensitive and -responsive 
community engagement) 
‐ 
Technical and financial 
assistance to villagers to 
implement sustainable 
forest management and 
land use activities based 
on co-management 
agreements 
‐ 
Technical assistance for 
monitoring, evaluation 
and reporting of 
implemented activities  
4.1 Project management, 
coordination, monitoring and 
reporting by the NPMU and 
PPMU 
Project management and 
coordination, including day-to-
day project execution, 
stakeholder liaison, 
procurement of goods and 
services, recruitment of 
consultants, and monitoring 
and evaluation. 
Oversight of the REDD+ 
Funding Window. 
 
‐ 
NPMU and PPMU 
support to project 
operations and 
coordination 
‐ 
Procurement of goods 
and services and 
recruitment of consultants 
following GIZ procedures 
‐ 
Support to executing 
partners in financial 
management, 
procurement, and internal 
and external audit 
management 
‐ 
Oversight of, and 
coordination with, the 
REDD+ Funding Window 
and provision of targeted 
training 
‐ 
Development of a 
dedicated M&E system 
for tracking sub-project 
inputs, activities, outputs 
and impacts in line with 
the project log-frame 
‐ 
Independent mid-term 
monitoring and evaluation 
will be carried out after 3 
years of project 
implementation  
‐ 
Project implemented and funds 
disbursed according to plan 
‐ 
M&E system established and 
operational, and performs 
according to GCF needs 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements 
182. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (in addition to the ESMP and GAP) will comply with the relevant 
GCF policies, as stipulated in the AMA, FAA and project-related Financing Agreements and Implementation 
Agreements with Executing Entities and Implementation Partners, which EEs will extend to sub-grantees. 
 
183. The project will apply a customised results-based Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system. The system will be based 
on: 
 
 
GIZ Standard Operating Procedures (“GIZ’s evaluation policy - principles, guidelines and requirements”) 
 
The Project 1 logical framework 
 
The Project 1 implementation schedule 
 
Requirements of the GCF’s Annual Performance Report 
 
Development partners’ standard operating procedures 
 
Procedures and requirements of project partners and stakeholders in Laos 
 
184. The M&E system will track project Inputs, Actions, Activities, Outputs and Impacts as well as associated financial 
flows across all Outputs in all project districts and provinces. 
 
185. The overall responsibility and oversight for M&E and reporting lies with the GCF AE unit of GIZ head office. The 
National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Laos will implement the M&E system and work closely with Provincial

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 80 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Management Units (PPMUs), District Project Management Units (DPMUs), GIZ Executing Entity in Vientiane, 
government partners and development partners.  
 
Recruitment of M&E staff 
 
186. Immediately when Project 1 commences, GIZ’s GCF AE unit at head office in Germany will make available one expert 
to oversee, coordinate and manage the project M&E and reporting routines. He/she will cooperate closely with NPMU 
and GIZ Executing Entity staff to coordinate the implementation of the project’s M&E system. As soon as GCF project 
proceeds become available in Laos, the NPMU and the three PPMUs will recruit one M&E specialist each. The NPMU 
will hire an international consultant to support the management of the M&E system and provide on-the-job training 
for PPMUs and other stakeholders of the system where requested. The three PPMUs will hire national M&E experts 
to support the implementation of the M&E system in their respective province and districts. In the first year of Project 
1, the NPMU will tender the services of a specialised technical consulting firm, which will support the project in 
designing the details of the M&E system and support the early implementation phase. The firm will also provide 
training and capacity building to the project implementation partners as requested. 
 
Independent monitoring and evaluation studies 
 
187. GIZ’s AE unit will initiate a mid-term review (MTR) in year three of Project 1 (or at any time that GIZ, the NDA and/or 
the National Steering Committee consider necessary). GIZ will competitively select and assign an independent 
consultant for this task. The MTR will duly involve project stakeholders, including target groups and beneficiaries, 
project partners and contributing development partners. The MTR will include: 
 
 
A review of the institutional, administrative, organisational, environmental, social, economic, technical and 
financial aspects of the project based on the assumptions and risks included in the design (among others, as 
specified in the Funding Proposal and Feasibility Study) and M&E system. 
 
A review of covenants to assess whether they are still relevant or need to be changed or waived due to altered 
conditions. 
 
A review of the viability of remaining planned impacts. 
 
An assessment of the need to restructure or reformulate the programme (including subsequent constituent 
projects) and the effects of such restructuring on the programme’s objective and long-term goals. The timing of 
the MTR is designed such that lessons-learned arising from implementation of Project 1 (mid-2020 to mid-2024) 
can be absorbed and applied to the design of Project 3 (mid-2024 to end-2029). 
 
188. GIZ’s AE unit will make available an MTR report to the GCF Secretariat and project stakeholders. 
189. In due time before the completion of the project, GIZ’s AE unit will initiate a project completion mission, in which the 
implementation of the project – based on the financing and implementation agreements, the delivery of outputs and 
the achievement of project targets – will be evaluated. The mission will duly involve project stakeholders including 
target groups and beneficiaries, project partners and contributing development partners. At the time of the project’s 
physical completion and commissioning, GIZ’s AE unit will make available a final report to the GCF Secretariat and 
project stakeholders. 
 
Data collection and frequency 
 
190. The NPMU will coordinate data collection for implemented activities through responsible executing departments / 
divisions at the district and provincial level. The PPMU will supervise and guide the monitoring and evaluation. Each 
PPMU will aggregate monitoring reports based on DPMU inputs at least every six months. The NPMU will aggregate 
all the PPMU reports and make a summary report available to GIZ’s AE unit at head office, again at least every six 
months. 
 
Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) of reduced GHG emissions 
 
191. The MRV of reduced emissions is an essential activity for monitoring the project’s efficiency and effectiveness as well 
as for continued learning across the programme. In cooperation with JICA, Project 1 includes a dedicated technical 
assistance package (Activity 1.6, ‘Implementation of the Measurement, Reporting and Verification System’) that will 
be specifically devoted to the measurement and reporting of achieved emission reductions. The MRV will be subject 
to verification by the FCPF Carbon Fund (as a basis for results-based REDD+ payments). Methodologically, the same 
approach will be used as for the Reference Level development (see Section D.1.1).

=== PAGE 85 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 81 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures   
192. A detailed analysis of Project 1 risks is provided in Chapter 11 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). Environmental 
and social risks are considered in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (Annex 6a) and the site-
specific Environmental and Social Management Plan (Annex 6b). Gender-specific risks are considered in the 
Gender Assessment (Annex 8a) and the Gender Action Plan (Annex 8b). From a safeguards perspective, the 
ESIA rates the project risk as medium (Category B). 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Sub-optimal cross-sectoral coordination and potential conflicting interests may limit the adoption and effectiveness of 
REDD+ and related measures. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
The GCF project builds on strengthened relationships and cross-sectoral planning established through the REDD+ 
Task Force, and promotes continuous dialogue and ongoing capacity building and coordination. It will continue to 
strengthen multi-stakeholder ownership of REDD+ created by other donor projects/programmes, as well as the 
development of the ER-PD and PRAPs, during recent years. 
 
Improved integration of REDD+ in SEDPs at the national, provincial and district levels will secure government 
budget allocations for REDD+ activities, and ensure ownership of, and commitments to, REDD+ across sectors 
at all levels (national, provincial, district).  
 
Improved cross-sectoral planning and dialogue between key actors (including MPI, MAF, MoNRE, PONRE, PAFO, 
POFI, etc.) as a cross-cutting measure throughout project activities. 
 
REDD+ results-based payments will provide an additional incentive for the government to maintain strong 
ownership of the GCF project and commitments to achieving the project’s results.  
 
Improved land use planning (including demarcation of land, issuance of GIS maps, participatory land use planning 
with local villages, among other Actions described in Activity 1.5) will improve monitoring and enforcement of land 
use based on plans.  
 
Improved planning and monitoring of forest areas, including areas with approved timber harvesting permits, will 
increase accountability and enforcement, ultimately limiting over-harvesting and unsustainable forest use. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
High staff turnover and limited numbers of government extension staff impedes retention of skills and knowledge in the 
relevant sectors/institutions  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
The project places a strong emphasis on documentation and information dissemination – as detailed in the Activity 
Descriptions in Chapter 3 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a) and in the project’s knowledge management 
framework (Annex 22u) – to facilitate knowledge retention, capacity building and knowledge exchange.  
 
Continuous engagement with relevant authorities at the national, province and district levels will help to strengthen 
knowledge exchange and maintain organisational knowledge. National and provincial PMUs will support this 
exchange. 
 
Training of multiple staff members in each department/province/district, etc. will mitigate the risk of any one of them 
leaving. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium

=== PAGE 86 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 82 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
Description 
Private sector actors do not want to participate in the project and prefer to continue using BAU practices 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
Extensive consultations with leading private sector actors have been undertaken during the GCF project 
development stage to gauge their interest and specific needs. For instance, leading forestry companies with an 
interest in sustainability, including Burapha Agroforestry Ltd., have expressed their interest in scaling-up 
community-based agroforestry in degraded production forests. In the agricultural sector, products such as 
cardamom and galangal, which are compatible with agroforestry systems and sustainable agriculture, are gaining 
in market relevance as foreign demand for the products grows and are attracting growing private sector interest. 
 
Agricultural value chain actors such as rice millers and traders have indicated their interest in training and capacity 
building on best practices (e.g. good milling practices) and financial literacy (business analysis and planning, 
accounting and bookkeeping), as well as ‘matchmaking’ with other value chain actors (farmers, local and 
international buyers, etc.). The district-level Multi-Stakeholder Platforms that will be set up by the GCF project will, 
therefore, be of key interest to private sector stakeholders.  
 
The project will target leading companies with established reputations for implementing sustainable forestry and 
agricultural projects in Lao PDR to serve as early movers/leaders, while also working with companies interested 
in adopting sustainable practices. 
 
Public-private sector dialogue will improve coordination and communication between government officials and 
private sector actors, raising awareness of key gaps and barriers and improving actions to address and overcome 
these challenges. 
 
Engagement of the private sector and deployment of GCF-supported agribusiness specialist staff time to engage 
with the private sector will improve granular understanding of needs and the means to address them. 
 
The REDD+ Funding Window matching grant mechanism under Activity 2.1 will greatly reduce financial 
institutions’ risk. 
 
Financial institutions will be approached and screened for cooperation on sustainable finance in order to identify 
the most appropriate partner(s) for, amongst others, operating the green credit line (Activity 1.1). 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
FFRDF capacity building progress is too slow, and the FFRDF is not capable of managing REDD+ finance within the 
project timeframe 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
The project will provide dedicated support to the FFRDF (Activity 1.1), including support to redesign of the FFRDF’s 
governance structure, its standard operating procedures, and its manuals and guidance documents so that they 
meet international fiduciary and safeguard standards. FFRDF staff will be provided with ongoing training and 
capacity development (including on-the-job exposure to the REDD+ Funding Window) to build needed skills and 
address capacity gaps. 
 
Utilisation of the Environmental Protection Fund (EPF) as a back-up strategy: the project has been designed to 
initially use the EPF to channel financial resources for REDD+, as the EPF’s capacities and accountability systems 
are already in place and meet international standards (see the EPF capacity assessment, Annex 22d). It is 
intended that the FFRDF will eventually assume responsibility for the REDD+ Funding Window from the EPF once 
its capacities and systems are in place. However, if this is not possible the EPF will continue to manage the interim 
REDD+ Funding Window and the project will continue to channel resources through the EPF. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Participating households do not comply with land use plans that are developed. Ethnic groups and poor households 
could be especially affected, as they are the most likely to experience economic dislocation due to their reliance on the 
land

=== PAGE 87 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 83 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
Participation in the project’s activities will be voluntary and based on the principle of FPIC. 
 
The project’s grievance mechanism will be clearly communicated in culturally appropriate ways, and villagers will 
be able to access the mechanism to file any grievance.  
 
Land use plans will be developed using participatory stakeholder processes and will be based on the priorities 
and interests of each village. Trainers will be specifically trained on social inclusion and how to target the inclusion 
of marginalised and vulnerable households. Awareness will be raised among households on current agricultural 
practices and their negative impacts, as well as on alternative agricultural models and sustainable forestry.  
 
Incentives will be provided to help overcome opportunity costs and support the transition to sustainable land use 
(e.g. inputs to support the implementation of land use activities, identification and strengthening of additional 
financial sources for future investments in sustainable land use).  
 
Capacity building and supported investments in monitoring, knowledge dissemination, training/capacity building 
and awareness-raising will help improve compliance and adoption. 
 
Extension and training materials will include visuals such as videos, pictures and other tools to communicate 
content, including translations into key languages (as necessary). Stakeholder consultations on proposed 
regulatory changes, including consultations targeting vulnerable groups and expert consultations, will help to 
sustain community interest and commitment to the project through active participation and compliance, and 
mitigate the potential risk of economic displacement and non-compliance (e.g. Activity 1.3). 
 
Strengthened capacities and technical support for ongoing monitoring will assess potential trade-offs or 
unforeseen impacts and will identify the need for potential adjustments. 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Parts of the project area are contaminated with Unexploded Ordnance (UXO), which poses a potential risk for 
agriculture- and forestry-related interventions (Outputs 2 and 3) 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Within the project area, Unexploded Ordnance (UXO) from the Second Indochina War (1964-1975) still contaminate 
some areas in Houaphan and Luang Prabang provinces. The same applies for the provinces of Sayabouri, though they 
are much less affected. Overall, UXO pose a potential risk for the project’s agriculture- and forestry-related interventions 
(Outputs 2 and 3), but the risk is classified as low. Across Laos there are fewer than 50 casualties per year, down from 
310 in 2008, mostly in the south of Laos where the majority of UXOs are located. Development partners have recorded 
no critical incidents in the context of their projects in recent years, including in agriculture, forestry and infrastructure 
projects. Moreover, the project’s activities focus on land that is already under use, which reduces the exposure to UXO 
risks. However, certain agriculture- and forest-related activities require disturbing the ground (for example, harvesting 
bamboo and other NTFPs, timber harvesting operations or ploughing) and UXO accidents cannot be entirely ruled out. 
The following measures have proven to work for development agencies in Laos and the GCF project will ensure they 
are observed in all project sites before commencing project activities: 
 
 
Confirm clearance of UXOs with provincial authorities before commencing project activities. 
 
Impact assessments based on historical bombing data as well as on the Information Management System for 
Mine Action (IMSMA) (accessible online: http://www.nra.gov.la/imsmadatabace.html). 
 
Applying 
NRA 
UXO 
guidelines 
and 
other 
standardised 
resources 
available 
online 
at http://www.nra.gov.la/resources.html. 
 
Working with the local population and guides, who know the area. 
 
If needed, clearance of UXOs can be initiated through the Government's National Unexploded Ordnance 
Programme (UXO Lao) or alternative land plots or other forms of cultivation will be identified. 
 
Community-based Mine Risk Education activities to offer people knowledge and alternatives for living and working 
safely in mine/UXO contaminated areas (available online at http://www.nra.gov.la/resources.html).

=== PAGE 88 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 84 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  
G.1.1 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
 
193. The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the project is provided in Annex 15a.  
 
194. The ESIA rates the risk category of the project as B (medium). 
 
195. The activities under Project 1 are oriented around FPIC, positively helping small-scale farmers and with a focus 
on ethnic groups in remote locations. A detailed description of the project’s FPIC process is provided in the Ethnic 
Groups Development Planning Framework in the ESIA (Annex 6a). The FCPF will shortly be developing a 
Community Engagement Framework (CEF), which the GCF project will adopt. The ESIA notes that the 3 Project 
1 provinces already have Provincial REDD+ Task Forces (PRTFs) and Provincial REDD+ Offices (PROs), which 
will facilitate stakeholder consultations. 
 
196. Particular challenges identified by the ESIA include: 
 
 
Self-assessments conducted by MAF and MoNRE vis-à-vis REDD+ readiness indicate that sub-national 
technical skills of government employees need improvement. Districts, particularly in remoter areas, are often 
understaffed, under-budgeted and under-equipped. District Agriculture and Forest Offices (DAFOs) do not 
necessarily have anyone available who has had more than minimal exposure to REDD+ and climate change 
concepts.   
 
 
Although the government is working seriously to improve the business climate in the country, the Ease of 
Doing Business Report ranks Laos 154 out of 190 (in previous years it was ranked 141 and 139).149 The 
barriers and challenges for domestic businesses are still high, and the reform process is proceeding more 
slowly in Laos compared to other countries. The regulatory framework on doing business in the agricultural 
and forestry sectors, whether through foreign direct investment or domestic investment, will require project-
supported improvement over the coming years. 
 
 
The government has recognised that corruption is a matter of serious concern in the country. The Party 
Congress in 2016 expressed high-level commitment to tackling corruption. Various crackdowns have 
occurred, but it will be a long process to ensure that all regulatory and inspection frameworks are in place 
and functioning. The Transparency International Corruption Perception Index for 2017 ranks Lao PDR 135 
out of 180, with a score of 29 (out of 100). The project’s financial monitoring, reporting and auditing systems 
will be required to mitigate potential risks. 
 
 
The varied levels of skills, staffing and resourcing available at district level means that land titling is still 
confined largely to urban and peri-urban areas in Lao PDR. In rural areas, there are over two million land 
parcels, most of which have no titles.150 Communal land titles are possible in law (old Land Law of 2003) but 
are seldom issued in practice. While there is some recognition in law for communal (cooperative) tenure, the 
issuance of communal land titles in the northern provinces has yet to take place. Project support and capacity 
development in this regard will be vital. 
 
 
The project area represents a diverse set of socio-economic, cultural and environmental conditions. Thus, 
neither a ‘one size fits all’ set of activities nor an overly generalised safeguards approach is appropriate for 
such a complex project area. The complex and interacting dynamics of landscapes, ethnic groups and policy 
implementation (among others) have created a diverse set of responses at village and household level that 
comprise people’s livelihoods. The socio-economic risks that may arise during the implementation of the 
project will be higher in some areas than others and are also likely to fluctuate over time. This underscores 
the importance of the site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) that has been 
developed for the project (see Annex 6b) and the Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
that will be set up during project implementation. The high percentage of non-Lao-Tai ethnic groups in the 
project area requires a higher degree of risk management as per the GCF Indigenous People Policy. 
 
149 World Bank (2018), Doing Business 2019: http://www.doingbusiness.org/content/dam/doingBusiness/media/Annual-
Reports/English/DB2019-report_web-version.pdf  
150 Department of Agricultural Land Management (DALAM) presentation, ‘Strategy of Agricultural Land Management and Development Up 
To 2025’.

=== PAGE 89 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 85 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data gaps. Considerable forest-related data are available for the project area, but socio-economic data are 
available mostly only at provincial level and are based on sources such as the Population and Housing 
Census, the Labour Survey and Statistical Yearbooks. Thus, there are some important information/data gaps 
that will require addressing so that the project may work with a reasonable socio-economic baseline. Such a 
baseline will be required for various monitoring purposes, including risk and safeguard monitoring.  
 
G.1.2 Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
 
197. The ESMP is provided in Annex 6b. Designed in response to the risks identified in the ESIA, the purpose of the 
ESMP is to provide a practical plan to manage the environmental and social risks and impacts associated with 
the project’s activities, as well as to allow for meaningful and inclusive multi-stakeholder consultations and 
engagement throughout the lifecycle of the project. The ESMP takes into particular account the circumstances 
of vulnerable, marginalised individuals and members of ethnic groups that are affected or potentially affected by 
the project’s activities. The ESMP also aims to assist Lao government counterparts, in cooperation with the 
Project Management Units and GIZ team, to maintain and/or improve the project’s environmental and social 
management system during project implementation. The ESMP will help to ensure that all of the activities 
proposed under Project 1 are properly screened, assigned appropriate environmental and social risk categories 
and that the environmental and social risks and impacts are properly and sufficiently assessed. Where impacts 
and potential impacts are identified and if these are unavoidable, proper mitigation measures will be properly 
planned to adequately compensate for residual impacts and to provide for restoration. 
 
198. The ESMP has been drafted using the guidance provided by the GCF environmental and social safeguards 
policy, approved in March 2018, and the Indigenous Peoples Policy, and it has therefore extensively incorporated 
the International Financial Cooperation (IFC)’s Performance Standards on Environment and Social Sustainability, 
the World Bank’s Safeguards Policy and the Lao national safeguards policy.  
 
G.1.3 Project Risk Mitigation Approach 
 
199. Of the eight GCF interim Environmental and Social Safeguards, the project triggers six of them, and its 
management system will require the development of mitigation hierarchies to manage and mitigate risks (as per 
Performance Standard 1 and the Indigenous Peoples Policy): 
 
Performance Standard 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts 
 
ESIA observation: The project will require a suitable ESMP that is in place for its duration. It will need to establish a 
mitigation hierarchy and will have to ensure that increased dialogues take place at local levels. Further, it will have to 
establish acceptable and appropriate communications and redress mechanisms. 
 
Project mitigation approach: A detailed ESMP has been developed (Annex 6b), accompanied by a stakeholder 
engagement plan (Annex 7o), a gender action plan (Annex 8b), a project redress mechanism (Annex 7o) and a 
knowledge management plan (Annex 22u). In order to inform project mitigation activities, the following surveys will be 
conducted during project implementation: 
 
 
Baseline socio-economic data collection in all target site village clusters. 
 
NTFP inventory, including specific surveys for site-specific areas that highlight what is available locally.  
 
Land tenure and titling survey to uncover the extent to which land titling has happened in site-specific areas. 
 
Economic investment survey in site-specific areas, to uncover the extent to which large-scale economic 
investment is planned in the SEDPs and to assess the impact on land and local environments. 
 
District- and provincial-level resettlement and relocation surveys to uncover the extent to which villagers may 
be moved for administrative or investment purposes (including villages that may lose access to land but will 
not have to move household buildings). 
 
District staffing levels surveys, including assessing skill levels of district staff and volunteers, and ethnic 
language capabilities. 
 
Credit availability for farming households and the extent to which those who have access to these facilities 
actually use them. 
 
A district project directory, which lists the agriculture and forestry projects in a given area and provides details 
about beneficiaries and government staff working on each project to aid coordination and avoid duplication. 
 
Updated provincial land use maps, some of which have not been updated since 1995.

=== PAGE 90 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 86 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
The principle of Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) is incorporated within the project design. For all activities 
implemented with villagers at the local level (e.g. land use planning and activities within Outputs 2 and 3), participation 
is voluntary and based on FPIC. FPIC agreements will be made with all participating villages prior to the implementation 
of interventions.  
 
Performance Standard 4: Community health, safety and security 
 
ESIA observation: This performance standard may be relevant to the project in the context of the potential use of 
pesticides/herbicides in project-promoted annual cropping and plantations. 
 
Project mitigation approach: The project will: 
 
 
Ensure that pesticides/herbicides (if used) are legal (not on any national or international banned lists) – with 
particular attention paid to paraquat, which was included on the list of banned pesticides in 2011 but is still 
widely used in upland crop production in northern Laos. 
 
Ensure that local authorities are able to monitor and enforce the use of legal pesticides/herbicides – notably, 
ensuring that DAFOs receive appropriate training on the laws and regulations governing pesticide/herbicide 
use and are enabled to safely confiscate illegal pesticides/herbicides.  
 
Ensure that proper safety measures are taken when pesticides/herbicides are used: provision of awareness-
raising and training for farmers. 
 
Promote ‘environmentally-friendly’ value chains as part of the project’s work on deforestation-free agricultural 
value chains, raising the awareness of farmers, traders and investors on: (i) the risks and safe use of 
pesticides/herbicides and (ii) the potential financial and marketing advantages of reducing or stopping the use 
of pesticides/herbicides (e.g. through the use of alternative agricultural practices, marketing of organic 
products, etc.). 
 
Performance Standard 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement 
 
ESIA observation: To be seen together with the Indigenous Peoples Policy in that “involuntary resettlement” also 
includes denial of access to land. 
 
Project mitigation approach: The project will: 
 
 
Ensure careful records are kept of all village interactions, and all district and provincial meetings, including 
breakdown by ethnicity and gender – this is especially critical for FPIC work. 
 
Ensure meaningful consultation at village level to enable participants to opt-out of project activities. 
o 
Small group meetings will be held at village level, with appropriate translators or ethnic language speakers, 
with village groups split by gender, to discuss potential impacts of project activities, both positive and 
negative, before the commencement of said activities. Clear records will be kept demonstrating this 
consultation has taken place. 
 
Ensure that land access considerations – including gender-, ethnic- and income-differentiated risks – are fully 
incorporated into, and addressed by, the Participatory Land Use Plans (PLUPs) developed by the project. Such 
considerations will include (non-exhaustive): 
o 
Consideration of whether forest protection activities will have any negative impacts on ethnic people’s 
ability to gather NTFPs for domestic or commercial use, and ensuring continued access to land, forest 
and natural resources to avoid income loss and to ensure food and nutrition security.  
o 
Respect for ancestral and spiritual land and forest use, and sensitivity to customary use of land by the 
community, especially ethnic groups, and ensuring rights remain to conduct ritual ceremonies (which often 
take place in forest). 
o 
Preserving and respecting indigenous knowledge, including traditional knowledge and use of medicinal 
plants. 
o 
Ensuring that irrigation infrastructure is accompanied by rigorous, inclusive LUPs to make sure that poorer 
households do not lose access to land while not gaining access to irrigation facilities. 
 
Provide access to information in appropriate ethnic languages, at the very least providing a translator for 
meetings.

=== PAGE 91 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 87 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
Ensure that information dissemination campaigns make use of images, cartoons and drawings, as well as clear 
and simple language, to support the comprehension of those who are less literate.151 
 
Performance Standard 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural resources 
 
ESIA observation: There is potential that some of the agricultural activities, especially promotion of agroforestry, will 
turn the Revegetated (RV) category of land to plantations, thus reducing biodiversity. Pesticide use would have negative 
impact on biodiversity. The integration of conservation needs and development priorities should be further documented 
for the project area. 
 
Project mitigation approach: Regarding the use of pesticides/herbicides, see above, Performance Standard 4. 
Regarding the risk of biodiversity reduction, for example through the use of monoculture forest plantations, the project 
mitigates this risk by: 
 
 
Identifying land that is suitable for new forest: 
o 
Stipulation that a combination of spatial planning and participatory land use planning with villagers is a 
precondition of GCF project support. This planning: (i) will be grounded in FPIC, (ii) will incorporate detailed 
GIS and ground-truthed data collection and analysis, including factors that determine suitability for forest 
(e.g. elevation and slope, soil conditions, hydrology, existing land uses, spiritual/cultural meaning of sites, 
etc.), (iii) will ensure that no primary natural forest or permanent agricultural land is used for forest 
plantation with GCF project support, (iv) will strongly guide new forest to be sited on degraded land, 
thereby ensuring incremental biodiversity benefits and avoidance of biodiversity harm, and (v) will not 
support agroforestry activities within protection or conservation areas. 
 
Stipulating the types of new forest planted: 
o 
Support for assisted natural regeneration in degraded forest. 
o 
On land used for village agroforestry and forestry, 70% of the land will be allocated to industrial trees, 20% 
will be buffer zone and at least 10% of planted tree species will be native to Laos. 
 
Performance Standard 7: Indigenous peoples 
 
ESIA observation: The project area contains more people of the non-Lao-Tai ethnic groups than of the Lao-Tai ethnic 
group in most of the selected districts. 
 
Project mitigation approach: See above, Performance Standards 1 and 5. The project will minimise, mitigate and 
compensate appropriately when project activities impact on indigenous people’s rights, regardless of whether there is 
a legal recognition of land titles, resources and territories. If the project supports activities that could potentially restrict 
indigenous people’s use of bush fallow for future upland cultivation, there will be consultation to ensure that FPIC has 
been obtained. An ‘Ethnic Group Development Planning Framework’ has been developed for the project to promote 
social inclusion, provide a targeted approach for ethnic groups to benefit from the project activities, and ensure the 
project does no harm. Additional measures to manage risks to ethnic groups include, among others:  
 
 
Developing Ethnic Group Development Plans based on the Ethnic Group Development Planning Framework 
to minimise, mitigate and compensate appropriately if there are negative impacts to ethnic groups. 
 
Application of FPIC prior to the implementation of project activities, maintained throughout the project’s lifetime 
 
Aim to direct project activities and financing measures that enable the most vulnerable ethnic groups to have 
better access to land, and technical support for the implementation of good agricultural practices, SFM and 
FLR. 
 
National laws will be respected by the project, and all project activities have been screened against the national 
legal framework. 
 
Project staff and trainers to include male and female representatives from diverse ethnic groups and positively 
target particularly vulnerable groups. Project staff will further receive training on gender equality and social 
inclusion within the context of the project. 
 
151 The project will develop visuals and media materials that focus on the real-life situation in the targeted villages. Such media will make 
use of photos and/or drawings of the forest, landscape and people living in the targeted villages. When training is conducted, the project will 
focus on in-depth understanding of policy objectives, and will ‘adjust’ explanations of forest policy statements in the local languages of the 
ethnic groups as needed. This will ensure mutual understanding and practical implementation, as well as an awareness of project 
information, valuable trees and plant species and endangered and/or near extinct species to promote informed choices in sustainable forest 
management.

=== PAGE 92 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 88 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
Outreach, extension and technical support at the community-level, workshops and capacity building activities 
shall be socially inclusive, culturally appropriate, and take into account local and traditional knowledge. 
 
All information on project activities will be made easily accessible, and in appropriate ethnic languages. Land 
use planning activities will also be conducted in appropriate ethnic languages, where translators can be made 
available if necessary.  
 
Opportunities for collaboration with other stakeholders (e.g. CSOs, Lao Women’s Union, etc.) to be sought out 
to strengthen stakeholder outreach and the engagement of various ethnic groups and vulnerable households.  
 
Performance Standard 8: Cultural heritage 
 
ESIA observation: During project preparation and consultation, no cultural heritage places, building or monuments, or 
instances where access to such heritage artefacts could be problematic, were identified in the project area. 
Nonetheless, residual uncertainty remains. It is thus recommended that further investigation of cultural practices and 
places of cultural and historical significance is conducted prior to the implementation of project activities in the field. 
Such a process will be participatory, closely coordinated with communities and local leaders to identify village areas of 
traditional or cultural significance.  
 
Project mitigation approach: The risk associated with Performance Standard 8 is assessed as medium. The following 
measures will support the project to manage this risk: 
 
 
All information on project activities will be made easily accessible, and in appropriate ethnic languages. Land 
use planning activities will also be conducted in appropriate ethnic languages, where translators can be made 
available if necessary. 
 
Consultations with stakeholders will continue throughout the project’s lifetime, as local stakeholder and 
community members will have a key role in the implementation and monitoring of the project. This will ensure 
that stakeholders are aware of the project and its progress, as well as any changes. This will also be used as 
an important mechanism for collecting ongoing feedback throughout project implementation. 
 
For activities that will be undertaken in areas near to those identified as having historical value, training will be 
conducted on cultural heritage awareness.  
 
Information dissemination and awareness-raising campaigns will pay particular potential to women, ethnic 
groups, illiterate people, people with disabilities, and people with limited or no access to internet, among others. 
Where possible, information dissemination and awareness-raising will engage project counterparts and local 
actors, including village and kumban leaders, producer associations, CSOs, the Lao Women’s Union and 
others.  
 
If objects of cultural heritage are uncovered by the project, the procedures described in the World Bank ESMF Annex, 
‘Chance Finds Procedure’, will be followed. This includes stopping activities in the area, delineating and securing the 
area, and notifying the respective members of the PPMU and responsible government authorities (including the 
Provincial Department of Culture) within 24 hours.  
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan  
200. The Gender Assessment (GA) is provided in Annex 8a and the Gender Action Plan (GAP) is provided in Annex 
8b. 
 
201. Women still face discrimination in many aspects of their lives despite government policy to promote gender 
equality and protect women’s and children’s rights.152 This discrimination, in turn, results in ongoing barriers for 
them to participate in public life and to access many of the services to which they have a right.  
 
202. The project design addresses the identified gender gaps (see Annex 8a for an extended list): 
 
 
The current draft of the new Forestry Law and the PRAPs do not reflect the gender aspects of forestry. Future 
regulations, guidelines and by-laws based on the Law will, with project support, integrate gender as a crucial 
factor in forest protection, monitoring, equal user rights and benefit-sharing, as well as resource management. 
 
 
152 Lao PDR ranks 106th (out of 189) on the Gender Inequality Index: http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GII. Major negative contributors to 
this ranking are the maternal mortality ratio, the adolescent birth rate and the low proportion of females with at least some secondary 
education. Positive contributors include the high share of female parliamentarians and the high female labour force participation rate.

=== PAGE 93 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 89 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
The current capacities of government staff at all levels to actively integrate gender and ethnic considerations 
into their management and implementation approaches are very limited, and the majority of staff are male. 
Ethnic languages are often a barrier to communication, which is not actively addressed. This strongly affects 
inclusiveness at the ground level, where women are often left out of planning and decision-making activities 
if not actively encouraged to participate. The project will provide training to all relevant government staff, 
including EPF and FFRDF personnel working on the REDD+ Funding Window and Lao Women’s Union 
(LWU) staff, on the gender dimensions of forestry, agriculture and REDD+. Communication materials on 
forest protection, REDD+ and other awareness-related activities will be gender-sensitive, user-friendly and 
made available in different ethnic languages whenever possible. 
 
 
Village-level consultations undertaken during project preparation revealed that women are considered the 
main users of forest resources and possess vast knowledge of their surrounding natural habitats and their 
status of degradation, but rarely participate in forest management and monitoring due to lack of education 
and traditional norms. Guidelines for village management committees supported by the project will state that 
village meetings should, where feasible, separate women and men (thereby providing ‘space’ for women’s 
participation) and should set a quota for women to be included in each committee (at least 30% women per 
committee). The guidelines will also provide alternative pathways for individuals to fulfill the necessary 
requirements to become committee members (e.g. minimum education standard OR passing of a standard 
oral test), which will address women’s generally lower educational qualifications.  
 
 
The consultations at village level revealed that environmental awareness is still very limited. The greatest 
motivation for villagers to engage in forest protection measures is when they see immediate effects on their 
livelihoods (more income, more food, more produce). Exchange with other villages is commonly seen as a 
very effective tool to build awareness and initiate change, but women are often prevented from travelling due 
to traditional norms and lack of transport. In coordination with the Lao Women’s Union, the project will enable 
women to participate in exchanges and meetings outside their villages, providing allowances and means of 
travel where necessary. 
 
 
Current Protected Area Law Enforcement Action Plans (LEAPs) do not consider gender aspects and are 
therefore not considerate of the potentials of women’s roles in forest use and protection. The project will 
support the inclusion of women’s roles in law enforcement measures (e.g. patrolling) in the next Action Plans 
(after 2020) and will revise the associated Standard Operating Procedures accordingly. 
 
 
Legally, women and men have the same rights to land. In reality, however, women are often not actively 
included in the decision-making steps of land use planning (LUP). The subsequent village forest management 
plan is generally seen by local men and women as a specialised step in which women participate even less. 
Reasons include lack of education to assume responsibility for perceived ‘technical’ tasks, lack of women’s 
confidence to participate in management decisions, and traditional norms of many ethnic groups. LUP 
processes supported by the project will be vigilant in actively including women and men in the target villages 
(separate meetings; women’s meetings led by female staff). Quotas will be set to encourage women’s 
inclusion in village management committees. The Lao Women’s Union will function as a facilitator and skills 
developer for village women, with project budget allocated accordingly. 
 
 
Microfinance is often perceived as too risky (when it is available – most microfinance institutions focus on 
urban and peri-urban areas). Women are often more hesitant to take on debts and only use microcredit for 
health emergencies. The project will improve villages’ access to micro-grants (as opposed to loans) 
channelled through the REDD+ Funding Window. 
G.3. Financial management and procurement  
203. The Government of Lao PDR (represented by MAF and MonRE), as a Project 1 Executing Entity, will sign a 
subsidiary agreement with GIZ, based on GIZ standard operating procedures for financing contracts. This 
financing contract will establish the legal basis by which GIZ makes GCF funding available to the EPF – a 
government institution under MoNRE – to enable the EPF to manage and operate grant disbursements through 
the REDD+ Funding Window. The EPF is responsible for implementing and administering its activities in 
accordance with GIZ and its own standard operating procedures.

=== PAGE 94 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 90 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
G.3.1 Financial Management 
 
204. The financial management of the project will follow GIZ’s internal rules and regulations. GIZ has bank accounts 
with Deutsche Bundesbank and Commerzbank. GIZ will not open a specific bank account for the GCF project 
but will ensure that all funds provided are clearly identifiable and distinguishable from GIZ’s other funds by setting 
up separate cost units exclusively for the funds disbursed by the GCF for each funded activity (ledger accounts). 
Funds received and expenditures incurred will be booked to the respective cost unit according to generally 
accepted accounting principles and procedures accepted by the German Government. As a general principle, 
GIZ disburses funds to recipients in accordance with the progress of the project. The Executing Entities (GIZ 
Laos, the Government of Lao PDR and JICA) have to report on the proper use of funds and defined progress as 
a prerequisite for any further disbursement (noting, however, that JICA will not receive any GCF funds). 
 
G.3.2 Procurement 
 
205. In the case of procurement by GIZ, GIZ will follow its own procurement guidelines. GIZ is required to comply with 
the relevant contracting rules as established in the German Act against Restraints of Competition (GWB), the 
German Regulation on the Award of Public Contracts (VgV) and, if applicable, the Contracting Rules for the 
Award of Public Service Contracts (VOB and VOL) when procuring services, construction work and supplies. 
When awarding contracts for supplies and services (including consultancy services) to be financed in full or in 
part from the financing contract, the external Executing Entities will observe the national legal standards for 
procurement and will, in any case, comply with the GIZ minimum standards. An overview of these minimum 
standards is available at https://www.giz.de/de/downloads/giz2017-en-Annex_4a-Award-Procedure.pdf. GIZ 
assesses adherence of submitted procurement documents with GIZ procurement regulations at defined stages 
in the process. 
 
G.3.3 Independent External Auditing 
 
206. Independent external auditors will perform annual financial audits of the project in line with International Auditing 
Standards. GIZ will be responsible for selecting and engaging the external auditors. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
  
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
  
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 95 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 91 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA No-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure template provided) 
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☒ Others – Indigenous People’s Plan is contained in the feasibility study 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) 
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plans (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule        
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☒ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Other references

=== PAGE 96 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 92 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex Number 
Annex Document 
1. NDA Approval 
1a 
NDA Letter of No Objection 
1b 
Request for NDA Letter of No Objection – Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 
2. Feasibility Study 
2a 
Feasibility study 
3. Economic and Financial Analysis 
3a 
Economic and financial valuation model 
3b 
Economic and financial valuation summary 
3c 
Estimated leverage impact 
4. Project Budget 
4a 
Project 1 budget 
4b 
Post-Project funding requirements 
5. Implementation Timetable 
5a 
Project 1 implementation timetable  
6. Environmental and Social Documents 
6a 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
6b 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
7. Stakeholder Consultations and Engagement Plan 
7a 
Summary of stakeholder consultations 
7b 
Project scoping mission – April 2017 
7c 
Kick-off meeting – April 2017 
7d 
National introduction workshop – October 2018 
7e 
National stakeholder discussions – October 2018 
7f 
Sub-national (province-, district and village-level) stakeholder discussions – 
October 2018 
7g 
National stakeholder debriefing workshop – October 2018 
7h 
GCF Secretariat meeting with national stakeholders – November 2018 
7i 
GCF Secretariat meeting with sub-national stakeholders – November 2018 
7j 
Capacity needs assessment (MAF, MoNRE, FFRDF) stakeholder meeting – 
November 2018 
7k 
REDD+ Funding Window stakeholder consultation meeting – November 2018 
7l 
Gender assessment stakeholder consultation meeting – January 2019 
7m 
ESMP stakeholder consultations – February 2019 
7n 
Project validation workshop – February 2019 
7o 
Stakeholder engagement plan for project implementation 
8. Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
8a 
Gender assessment  
8b 
Gender action plan 
9. Legal Due Diligence 
 
 
10. Procurement Plan 
10a 
Procurement plan 
11. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 
11a 
Monitoring and evaluation plan 
12. AE Fee Request 
12a 
AE fee request 
13. Co-finance Letters 
13a 
Co-finance letter – Government of Lao PDR 
13b 
Co-finance letter – Beneficiaries  
13c 
Co-finance letter – BMZ  
13d 
Co-finance letter – JICA  
13e 
Co-finance letter – ADB (including EU) 
13f 
Co-finance letter – IFAD 
13g 
Co-finance letter – Department of Forestry 
13h 
Co-finance letter – KfW  
14. Term Sheet

=== PAGE 97 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 93 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
14a 
Term sheet 
15. Internal Approval 
15a 
GIZ Letter of Internal Approval of the GCF project 
15b 
GIZ Letter of Internal Legal Approval 
16. Maps 
16a 
Map of project provinces 
16b 
Selected districts and ADB project sites 
16c 
Deforestation hotspot analysis - methodology 
16d - 1 
Map of deforestation hotspots – Houaphan Province (Projects 1 and 2) 
16d - 2 
Map of deforestation hotspots – Sayabouri Province (Projects 1 and 2) 
16d - 3 
Map of deforestation hotspots – Luang Prabang Province (Projects 1 and) 
16d - 4 
Map of deforestation hotspots – Luang Namtha Province (Project 3) 
16d - 5 
Map of deforestation hotspots – Bokeo Province (Project 3) 
16d - 6 
Map of deforestation hotspots – Oudomxai Province (Project 3) 
 
Houaphan Province (Projects 1 and 2) 
16e - 1 
Deforestation risk map - Xone District, Houaphan Province 
16e - 2 
Deforestation risk map - Hiem District, Houaphan Province 
16e - 3 
Deforestation risk map – Xam Nuea District, Houaphan Province 
16e - 4 
Deforestation risk map - Houameung District, Houaphan Province 
16e - 5 
Deforestation risk map - Viengxai District, Houaphan Province 
16e - 6 
Deforestation risk map - Xamtay District, Houaphan Province 
 
Sayabouri Province (Projects 1 and 2) 
16f - 1 
Deforestation risk map – Sayabouri District, Sayabouri Province 
16f - 2 
Deforestation risk map – Hongsa District, Sayabouri Province 
16f - 3 
Deforestation risk map – Phieng District, Sayabouri Province 
16f - 4 
Deforestation risk map – Phaklai District, Sayabouri Province 
16f - 5 
Deforestation risk map – Thongmixai District, Sayabouri Province 
 
Luang Prabang Province (Projects 1 and 2) 
16g - 1 
Deforestation risk map - XiengNgeun District, Luang Prabang Province 
16g - 2 
Deforestation risk map - Viengkham District, Luang Prabang Province 
16g - 3 
Deforestation risk map – Phonexay District, Luang Prabang Province 
16g - 4 
Deforestation risk map - Nan District, Luang Prabang Province 
16g - 5 
Deforestation risk map - Phonthong District, Luang Prabang Province 
 
Luang Namtha Province (Project 3) 
16h - 1 
Deforestation risk map - Namtha District, Luang Namtha Province 
16h - 2 
Deforestation risk map - Long District, Luang Namtha Province 
16h - 3 
Deforestation risk map - Viengphoukha District, Luang Namtha Province 
16h - 4 
Deforestation risk map - Nalee District, Luang Namtha Province 
 
Bokeo Province (Project 3) 
16i - 1 
Deforestation risk map - PhaOudom District, Bokeo Province 
16i - 2 
Deforestation risk map - Paktha District, Bokeo Province 
16i - 3 
Deforestation risk map - Mueng District, Bokeo Province 
16i - 4 
Deforestation risk map - Houayxai District, Bokeo Province 
 
Oudomxay Province (Project 3) 
16j - 1 
Deforestation risk map - NaMo District, Oudomxay Province 
16j - 2 
Deforestation risk map - Xai District, Oudomxay Province 
16j - 3 
Deforestation risk map - Nga District, Oudomxay Province 
16j - 4 
Deforestation risk map - Beng District, Oudomxay Province 
18. Evaluation Report of the Baseline Project 
18a 
Mid-Term Review - GIZ Climate Protection through Avoided Deforestation 
(CliPAD) project - February 2016 
20. KYC Assessment 
20a 
Enhanced Due diligence Report of EPF 
22. Other References 
22a 
Letter of intent – EPF 
22b 
Aide memoir between ADB and Government of Lao PDR (SRIWSM project) 
22c 
Capacity needs and gap assessment of MAF, MoNRE and FFRDF 
22d 
Organisational and gap assessment of EPF

=== PAGE 98 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 94 OF 95 
 
 
 
 
22e 
REDD+ Funding Window: design and implementation arrangements 
22f 
UNFCCC Forest Reference Emissions Level (FREL) 
22g 
FCPF Emissions Reduction Programme Document (ER-PD) 
22h 
National REDD+ Strategy 
22i 
Provincial REDD+ Action Plan (PRAP) – Bokeo 
22j 
Provincial REDD+ Action Plan (PRAP) – Houaphan 
22k 
Provincial REDD+ Action Plan (PRAP) – Luang Namtha 
22l 
Provincial REDD+ Action Plan (PRAP) – Luang Prabang 
22m 
Provincial REDD+ Action Plan (PRAP) – Oudomxay 
22n 
Provincial REDD+ Action Plan (PRAP) – Sayabouri 
22o 
Mapping Priority Jurisdictions for REDD+ in Lao PDR 
22p 
District selection calculations 
22q 
Activity data report for the ER-PD 
22r 
Emissions and removal factor report for the ER-PD 
22s 
GHG methodology and results 
22t -1 
GHG calculations - Ex-ante ER estimates of GCF Project 1 
22t -2 
GHG calculations - Ex ante ER estimates the Programme in which Project 1 is 
embedded 
22u 
Knowledge Management Plan 
22v 
Forestry Law legal compendium – DoFI and DoF (2015) 
22w 
World Bank SUFORD project – Lessons learned for forest landscape 
management 
22x 
Forest governance, REDD+ and village forestry in Laos - GIZ 
22y 
World Bank LENS2 – Project Implementation Manual (PIMS2) 
22z 
Rural finance in Northern Laos - opportunities and limitations for green finance - 
GIZ 
22za 
Funding of PFA Management – Projections on Revenue and Costs – MAF  
22zb 
Incentive Payments Mechanism

=== PAGE 99 ===
Lao People's Democratic Republic 
Peace Independence Democracy Unity Prosperity 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment 
Department of Climate Change      
 Vientiane, 25 February 2019 
To:  The Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
Subject:  No-Objection  Letter  -  Funding  proposal  for  the  GCF  by  GIZ  regarding 
“Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme through 
improved governance and sustainable forest landscape management” 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the project “Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme 
through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape management” as included in the 
funding proposal submitted by GIZ to us on 12th February 2019. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized of the National Designated Authority of Lao PDR. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the project “Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission 
Reductions Programme through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape 
management” as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Lao PDR has no-objection to the project as included in the funding
proposal;
(b) The project, as included in the funding proposal, is in conformity with Lao PDR’s
national priorities, strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the project as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project 
“Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme through improved 
governance and sustainable forest landscape management” as included in the funding proposal 
has been duly followed.  
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
 Sincerely, 
Syamphone Sengchandala 
National Designated Authority of Lao PDR 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 102 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme 
title 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions 
Programme through improved governance and sustainable 
forest landscape management1 
Existence of 
subproject(s) to be 
identified after GCF 
Board approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) 
GmbH 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or 
location(s) of programme 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, October 2, 2019 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Lao 
Explanation on language 
Lao is the official language of Lao PDR.  
Link to disclosure 
English:  
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/Environmental%20and%2
0Social%20Impact%20Assessment%20(ESIA)_Eng%203.pdf 
 
Lao: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/Environmental%20and%2
0Social%20Impact%20Assessment%20(ESIA)_Lao%203.pdf 
Other link(s) 
https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/17463.html 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the ‘Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) and recommendations for the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)’. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, October 2, 2019 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Lao 
Explanation on language 
Lao is the official language of Lao PDR.  
Link to disclosure 
English:  
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/Environmental-and-
Social-Management-Plan-ESMP_Eng.pdf 
Lao: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/Environmental-and-
Social-Management-Plan-ESMP-Lao.pdf  
 
Other link(s) 
https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/17463.html 
 
1 All reports referred to in this document have been produced with support from GIZ’s project “Climate Protection 
through Avoided Deforestation (CliPAD)” in Lao PDR and are therefore published on the CLIPAD project website.

=== PAGE 103 ===
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the ‘Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP)’. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
IPP, RPF, and RAP/ Wednesday, October 2, 2019 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Lao 
Explanation on language 
Lao is the official language of Lao PDR. 
Link to disclosure 
English:  
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/Environmental%20and%2
0Social%20Impact%20Assessment%20(ESIA)_Lao%203.pdf  
Lao: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/Environmental%20and%2
0Social%20Impact%20Assessment%20(ESIA)_Lao%203.pdf  
Other link(s) 
https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/17463.html 
Remarks 
IPP, RPF and RAP are included in the ESIA. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, October 4, 2019 
Place 
The ESIA, ESMP, Gender Assessment (GA) and Gender Action 
Plan (GAP) were made available at 
 
Offices of the Lao Women’s Union in all project provinces (as 
hard copies): 
 
 
Houaphan: 
Lao Women’s Union 
Sam Neua Village, Phathi Road, Sam Neua 
District 
Houaphan Province 
Tel: +856 64 312080 
 
 
Luang Prabang: 
Lao Women’s Union 
That Bosod Village, Luang Prabang Capital 
Luang Prabang Province. 
Tel: +856 71 212171

=== PAGE 104 ===
 
Sayabouri: 
Provincial Lao Women’s Union 
Simeung Village, Sayabouri District 
Sayabouri Province 
Tel: +856 74 211225 
 
GIZ Office in Vientiane (as hard copy): 
 
 
247/19 Watnak Nyai Road Thaphalanxay Village 
Sisattanak 
District Vientiane Capital 
P.O. Box 9233 
+856-21 353605 
+856-21 312408 
giz-laos@giz.de 
 
Lao PDR Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources 
(MoNRE) Environmental Protection Fund (EPF) website: 
https://laoepf.org.la/gcf/ 
 
Lao PDR Department of Forestry (DoF) website:  
http://dof.maf.gov.la/en/environmental-and-social-
safeguards-documents-of-gcf-funded-project/ 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
TBD after GCF Board approval 
Date of GCF’s Board 
meeting  
Tuesday, November 12, 2019 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 105 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP117 
Proposal name: 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions 
Programme through improved governance and sustainable 
forest landscape management 
Accredited entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) 
Country/(ies): 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The project mobilizes substantial additional 
funding from the Forest Carbon Partnership 
Facility (FCPF) Carbon Fund (at least EUR 23 
million) and leverages approximately EUR 200 
million from a deforestation-free agriculture 
green credit line and forest taxes and revenues. 
The project has co-financing from multiple 
parties including grants, loans and equity. 
The timely availability of such co-financing 
is necessary for the successful 
implementation of project activities. 
Its programmatic context allows for a strong 
linkage with the programmatic approach of the 
FCPF Emissions Reduction Programme in the 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
implemented by World Bank, which the 
proposal complements and supports. 
The incentives sharing/payments 
mechanism should ensure the adequate 
provision of incentives to all types of 
beneficiaries (government agencies, village 
development funds, civil society 
organizations and small and medium-sized 
enterprises). 
The project mobilizes EUR 50.0 million in co-
financing from other contributors: the German 
Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation 
and Development, the Kreditanstalt für 
Wiederaufbau Development Bank, Japan 
International Cooperation Agency, Asian 
Development Bank and the International Fund 
for Agricultural Development, as well as from 
the private sector and the Government of the 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic (with a co-
financing ratio of 3.2) 
 
The project proposes the establishment of a 
REDD-plus funding window through a 
governmental environmental fund for ensuring 
the financial sustainability of the project

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 106 
The project will result in 5.6 million tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) of emission 
reductions over the four-year project 
implementation period. This equates to a 
mitigation cost to the GCF of EUR 2.70 per 
tCO2eq. 
Beneficiaries include many ethnic groups in the 
most vulnerable and poorest regions of the Lao 
People’s Democratic Republic. 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XVII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 
Project background 
3.
This proposal consists of a stand-alone project (Project 1) embedded in a programmatic
context. Two additional projects sharing a similar theory of change will be developed under the
same programmatic context and will be submitted for Board approval at a future date. Board
approval for the project presented in this funding proposal is wholly separate from, and does
not pre-judge, Board approval for future related projects.
4.
This project is expected to run from mid-2020 to mid-2024 and be implemented in the
three provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang, which have the highest rates of
deforestation and forest degradation within the programme area.
5.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is a landlocked least developed country (LLDC) in
South-East Asia whose economy is dependent on natural resources, especially forestry,
agriculture, electricity generation (especially hydropower) and mining. Agriculture, forestry and
fisheries account for 16 per cent of the gross domestic product and employ 64 per cent of the
Lao workforce.
6.
Forest cover accounts for 58 per cent of the country’s surface area, significantly lower
than the 70 per cent forest cover of the mid-1960s. In the past 15 years, net forest loss has
amounted to approximately 680,000 hectares (ha). Moreover, the situation regarding forest
degradation – which encompasses reductions in forest carbon stocks, changes in biodiversity
and livelihoods – is as concerning as deforestation.
7.
The net annual average greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from land-use change and
forestry in the period 2005–2015 accounted for 26.6 million tonnes of carbon dioxide
equivalent (tCO2eq). Overall, the forestry and land-use change sector is responsible for 67 per
cent of emissions in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, and agriculture contributes a further
28 per cent. Nevertheless, the Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has recently
introduced bold policies and reforms, including ambitious nationally determined contribution
targets (70 per cent forest cover), a national REDD-plus strategy, a timber export ban and a new
forest law.
8.
The project provides a strategic opportunity to achieve a paradigm shift in the forest
and land-use sector of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic while mitigating GHG emissions
from the forest sector. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic has embraced REDD-plus as a way
to address its principal source of GHG emissions.

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 107 
 
 
9. 
For the last 10 years, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has progressed substantially 
towards REDD-plus readiness, notably through the acceptance of the forest reference 
(emission) level, the finalized REDD+ Strategy, the strategic and social environmental 
assessment (SESA) and the environmental and social management framework (ESMF), as well 
as the final acceptance of the Emission Reductions Programme Document with the Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) Carbon Fund. Therefore, the Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic is now strategically well-placed for Phase 2 of REDD-plus (implementation) in order to 
reduce forest-sector emissions and achieve true paradigm shift, which means considering forest 
landscapes fundamental to the low-emission and climate-resilient development pathways of the 
country. 
10. 
Although the project is a mitigation initiative, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
considers itself a least developed country (LDC) with limited adaptive capacities that is highly 
vulnerable to climate change impacts. Indeed, forestry and agriculture are two of four key 
sectors highlighted in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic’s national adaptation programme of 
action, as well as two of five key sectors identified in the nationally determined contribution as 
being highly vulnerable to climate change. Although the country is considered to have a high 
risk of river flooding, landslides, cyclones and wildfires, a medium risk for extreme heat, and a 
low risk for water scarcity, there are specific climate change impacts identified for the regions to 
be targeted with this project.  
11. 
After decades of losing tropical forest, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is actively 
seeking to implement an ambitious REDD-plus emission reductions programme. However, after 
committing substantial domestic resources and having worked closely with bilateral and 
multilateral donors, capacity and funding gaps remain. Therefore, building on and coordinating 
with complementary initiatives, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic will deploy GCF support 
to remove investment barriers to unlock future results-based payments, domestic taxes and 
fees and create a sustainable environment for scaling-up REDD-plus.  
12. 
The project is expected to engender the expected paradigm shift in the forest and land-
use sector of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic while mitigating GHGs from the forest sector 
by: 
(a) 
Strengthening the enabling environment for a REDD-plus implementation (REDD-plus 
funding window and sustainable finance and implementation of a monitoring, reporting 
and verification (MRV) system for REDD-plus);  
(b) 
Promoting market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation (deforestation-free 
agricultural value chains, private and public incentives, agroforestry); and  
(c) 
Supporting climate change mitigation action through forestry (sustainable forestry 
landscapes). 
13. 
The project is fully aligned with the Lao People’s Democratic Republic GCF Country 
Programme (updated in February 2019), which identifies REDD-plus as one of four mitigation 
priorities, and the increase and maintenance of forest cover as one of five short-term priorities. 
14. 
The project directly contributes to the two pillars of the GCF forest and land-use results 
area: (i) Scaling-up REDD-plus; and (ii) Strengthening Sustainable Forest Landscapes. 
15. 
The executing entities (EE) for the project are the Deutsche Gesellschaft für 
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), the Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
(represented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and the Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Environment), and Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).  
2.1.1. 
Climate objective 
Mitigation

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 108 
 
 
16. 
The project will result in 5.6 million tCO2eq of emission reductions over the four-year 
project implementation period in three regions of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic: 
Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang. The emission reductions will occur by: 
(a) 
Reducing emissions from deforestation (a reduction in deforestation of 6 per cent, 
equivalent to 9,900 ha); 
(b) 
Reducing emissions from forest degradation (a reduction of forest degradation of 10 per 
cent, equivalent to 9,030 ha); and 
(c) 
Enhancing forest carbon stocks (an increase of restoration and reforestation of 8 per 
cent and 1 per cent, respectively, equivalent to 3,160 ha of forest restoration and 1,850 
ha of reforestation). 
17. 
This volume of emissions reductions is equivalent to a reduction of 6 per cent compared 
to the FCPF Reference Level emissions and an increase in removals equivalent to 857,000 
tCO2eq, which is an increase of 4 per cent compared to the removals in the Reference Level. 
Adaptation 
18. 
Although the project is mitigation only (REDD-plus), it will serve to address climate 
vulnerabilities in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, thus generating adaptation co-benefits. 
However, the accredited entity (AE) has elected not to claim adaptation co-benefits for this 
project.  
19. 
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic identifies itself as an LDC with limited adaptive 
capacities, and it has been ranked as one of the most climate-vulnerable countries in the region. 
At a national scale, about three quarters of national disasters were climate-related during the 
period 1966–2009, including floods (50 per cent), storms (14 per cent) and drought (14 per 
cent). In northern areas of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic specifically (the project 
implementation region), a temperature increase of 0.8–0.9 °C relative to the historical average is 
expected to occur by 2030, while precipitation may increase slightly (11–15 mm annual 
average) but with greater temporal variability.  
20. 
The project responds to observed and expected climate change impacts through 
different strategies, mainly by Introducing drought-resilient crops and varieties and supporting 
dry-season irrigation schemes; providing training on sustainable water harvesting techniques; 
programming activities while taking into account seasonal conditions; monitoring; and other 
aspects described in detail in the funding proposal. 
2.1.2. 
Financing information 
21. 
The AE has requested that the project be financed by a EUR 15.2 million grant from GCF, 
with total co-financing of EUR 50.0 million. The AE requests GCF cover 23.3 per cent of the total 
project cost. Co-financing will be provided by the Government of the Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic (EUR 11.8 million), the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (BMZ) (EUR 10 million), JICA (EUR 1.6 million), the Asian Development Bank 
(ADB) (EUR 12.4 million), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) (EUR 7.7 
million) and some other stakeholders including the private sector (EUR 6.6 million). 
22. 
The AE has estimated a co-financing ratio of 3.2 for the four-year project.  
23. 
The project is expected to be implemented as part of a larger, 9.5-year programme, 
which will serve as the cornerstone instrument for the successful implementation of the 
Emissions Reduction (ER) Programme. The larger programme covers the same six provinces in 
the northern area of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic that comprise the ER Programme 
area: Houaphan, Luang Prabang, Sayabouri, Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay. This four-
year project addresses the three provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang.

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 109 
 
 
2.1.3. 
Environmental and social safeguards  
24. 
The AE has classified the entire programme, and thus the project, as category B, 
following the definition of environmental and social risk category of the AE and GCF. This 
indicates that the likely risks and impacts from the activities are limited, largely irreversible and 
readily mitigated. The assessment by the GCF confirms the category B classification of the 
project.  
25. 
The project will be implemented in a manner that meets the requirements of various 
policies and standards of AEs, the country, GCF, the World Bank, and other co-financing 
partners. The ESMF provides a detailed gaps assessment of these policies and standards. 
Nonetheless, the project will apply the most stringent policy, law or requirements in instances 
where there are variances between these requirements, including those of the AE, the country 
and GCF.  
26. 
The environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) presented an exclusion list. The 
list identifies activities that may raise the overall environmental and social risk profile of the 
project activities. The list includes activities that could generate significant adverse 
environmental and social risks and impacts such as those related to land tenure rights, 
conversion of primary forests, absence of consent from indigenous peoples, and physical 
displacement, among other things. The list of excluded activities is considered comprehensive 
and will limit the environmental and social risk category of the project activities to “moderate”.  
27. 
The ESIA identified several salient positive as well as negative environmental and social 
impacts, which are described in section III of this document. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
28. 
The project aims to catalyse a shift in land use, land-use change and forestry and 
establish viable models for the management of forestry and landscapes. The project will have 
four outputs: (1) creation of enabling an environment for REDD-plus implementation; (2) 
market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation; (3) climate change mitigation through 
forestry; and (4) project management, coordination, monitoring and reporting. These outputs 
are composed of closely interrelated activities, including those aimed at the development of 
capacities of stakeholders; support for integrated multi-level planning; strengthening of 
enforcement and monitoring; knowledge management; investments in good agricultural 
practices and agroforestry; a private sector value chain; investments in rural infrastructure and 
watershed management; village forest management; and sustainable forest management, 
including production forests.  
Component 1: Enabling environment for REDD‐plus implementation (total cost: EUR 9.8 million, GCF 
cost: EUR 3.65 million) 
29. 
This component will enhance the availability of financing for a major transformation in 
the way the Lao People’s Democratic Republic manages its forest landscapes, including by 
supporting a REDD-plus funding window; revising and strengthening the legal and regulatory 
framework for forestry; and improving the enforcement of the new regulatory framework. 
30. 
The primary focus is to unlock GHG emission reductions stemming from the project that 
will be traded by the REDD-plus funding window to the FCPF through the Ministry of Finance 
and MAF of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in exchange for results-based payments 
amounting to approximately EUR 23 million that are flowing into the Environmental Protection 
Fund (EPF) (in the first four-year period). 
31. 
The establishment of the REDD-plus funding window would offer significant benefits for 
blending international, national, public and private sources of finance; ensuring funds are

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 110 
 
 
earmarked for specific REDD-plus and land-use actions; channelling funds to intended 
beneficiaries (including communities and civil society and private sector actors); ensuring the 
management of REDD-plus finance meets defined fiduciary and safeguards criteria; and 
providing a platform for multi-stakeholder coordination. 
32. 
This component also seeks to mainstream REDD-plus into the nationally determined 
contribution and socioeconomic development plans, which provide the basis for government 
budgeting at all levels.  
33. 
Support will be provided to address the gaps and inconsistencies in the regulatory 
framework to create an enabling environment that incentivizes investments that (i) conform 
with land-use plans (including deforestation-free commitments); (ii) act responsibly in the 
context of local regulatory frameworks; and (iii) will sustain positive relations with local 
communities. It is expected that the strengthened regulatory framework will also facilitate and 
encourage stakeholders to adopt sustainable forest management, forest landscape restoration 
and village forestry. This activity will be co-financed by Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) 
Development Bank. 
34. 
Strengthened law enforcement will be a key measure pursued under this component to 
support the commitment of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic to REDD-plus, as well as other 
high-level initiatives – including Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade – as illegal 
logging and unauthorized clearing of forest land still occurs and is a challenge for provincial and 
district authorities to address due to limited budgets, limited technical capacities, understaffing, 
and unclear legal frameworks. Therefore, close cooperation with the Forest Law Enforcement, 
Governance and Trade process is needed for the project to benefit from the development of 
timber legality definitions and a timber legality assurance system for timber from different 
sources (for example, from village and production forests and plantations). This activity will be 
co-financed by JICA. 
35. 
Support will be provided to enhance land-use planning and improve tenure security. As 
such, villages without integrated participatory land-use planning in deforestation hotspot areas 
and/or within national protected areas will be encouraged to adopt suitable sustainable land-
use activities while also improving the monitoring and enforcement of land-use activities. This 
activity will be co-financed by JICA. 
36. 
The implementation of the MRV system has been supported by JICA since 2014 through 
the Sustainable Forest Management and REDD-plus Support (F-REDD) project. This support 
also included the development of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
forest reference emissions level. Ensuring a harmonized approach for MRV will be key at 
different land-use planning and governmental levels. JICA has committed co-financing to 
implement MRV-related activities. 
37. 
Finally, activities under Component 1 are expected to facilitate comprehensive 
communication and the exchange of information about topics of relevance for land users, 
policymakers and the broader public to understand the purpose and benefits of REDD-plus and 
the need for behavioural change in business-as-usual land use. 
Component 2: Market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation (total cost: EUR 38.9 million; 
GCF cost: EUR 6.5 million) 
38. 
This component will support deforestation-free agriculture and agroforestry by 
enhancing productivity, increasing farmers’ integration into agricultural value chains, and 
improving access to finance and private sector participation in economic activities that reduce 
pressure on forests. The component consists of three activities relating to the promotion of 
good agricultural practices and agroforestry in identified deforestation hotspots to reduce 
expansion pressure into forested landscape.

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 111 
 
 
39. 
Activities under this component build on, among other things, analytical work being 
undertaken by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations through the GCF 
readiness project for REDD-plus. This work has demonstrated that the Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic has the potential to strengthen deforestation-free agricultural value chains1 to add 
value and provide additional incentives to reduce pressure on existing forested areas (directly 
through sustainable practices, and through the creation of additional income-generating 
activities and employment). 
40. 
This component will support activities specifically designed to curb expansion into 
forested landscapes and, as a positive by-product, increase household incomes and resilience to 
climate risks. Activities are also expected to mobilize private sector investment in agroforestry, 
and detailed planning will ensure that agroforestry activities are implemented in suitable areas 
and in such a manner that they promote the protection of natural forest resources. 
41. 
Component 2 will support value chain analysis to identify linkages, or the absence 
thereof, between value chain actors, quantify value-added along the value chain, and identify 
gaps, potential efficiency and profitability gains, and thereby contribute to inclusive value chain 
competitiveness. Specifically, value chain analysis at the provincial level will analyse existing as 
well as potential new value chains. Existing value chains will be updated and improved while 
new deforestation-free value chains will be promoted. 
42. 
Moreover, sustainable rural infrastructure watershed management is expected under 
the planned ADB project Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector, 
which has been designed in conjunction with the project and whose principal objective is to 
secure farmer access to water during the dry season. Activities under this component will be 
aligned with the ADB project and will ensure that the forested landscapes in the catchment 
areas remain intact through improved land management and reduced pressure from drivers of 
deforestation and degradation by addressing the following key underlying causes: lack of 
alternative livelihood opportunities, poverty, low agricultural productivity, lack of value-
additional activities and weak negotiation/marketing skills. 
Component 3: Climate change mitigation action through forestry (total cost: EUR 12.3 million, GCF 
cost: EUR 3.9 million) 
43. 
Component 3 will build upon output 1 (enabling environment) and will reduce 
emissions through sustainable forest landscape management and the promotion of forest 
landscape restoration, especially on degraded lands. 
44. 
Village forest management will be implemented in all three forest categories 
(production forest without any commercial harvesting potential in the short term, protection 
forest and conservation forest) as well as in unclassified forest, following a landscape approach. 
In total, there is high-carbon-stock forest area of 2.3 million ha in the three provinces where 
village forest management can be implemented. In the selected districts where the interventions 
focus their on-the-ground activities, village forest management can be supported in a total of 1.5 
million ha in the three provinces. 
45. 
This component will promote the sustainable management of production forests. There 
are 51 production forest areas in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, and the scale of 
degradation in these production forest areas is immense: only 15 per cent of the total area in 
production forests (465,000 ha) is of a – more or less – satisfactory quality. In the project 
provinces, this forest category covers a total area of 700,000 ha, while regenerative vegetation 
accounts for 0.3 million ha and agricultural land for 32,000 ha, which could be used for 
restoration and reforestation. Moreover, since there is a logging ban in place in natural forests 
 
1 Deforestation-free value chains are those that can demonstrate that deforestation has not occurred throughout the 
value chain – from primary production through to sale to the consumer.

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 112 
 
 
due to low standing volumes, the focus of this activity will be on forest restoration in production 
forests, in close collaboration with villages and the private sector (see outcome 2). 
46. 
Finally, the project area contains three National Protected Areas (Nam Sam and Nam Et 
Phou Louey in Houaphan province and Nam Pouy in Sayabouri province). Activities will address 
the principal barriers preventing the sustainable forest management of National Protected 
Areas: lack of funding and weak capacities. These activities will reduce the deforestation 
pressure and reliance on unsustainable forest use and will improve household incomes. 
Project management, coordination, monitoring and reporting (total cost: EUR 3.7 million, GCF 
cost: EUR 0.7 million) 
47. 
Activities related to project management, coordination, monitoring and reporting 
include GCF project management and coordination by the National Programme Management 
Unit (NPMU) and Provincial Programme Management Unit (PPMUs); and monitoring and 
reporting.  
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential     
                                                                 Scale: High  
48. 
The project has a clear climate rationale. The project is expected to reduce emissions by 
5.6 million tCO2eq (an average of 1.4 million tCO2eq/year), consisting of 4.8 million tCO2eq in 
emission reductions due to reduced deforestation and forest degradation, which is equivalent to 
a reduction of 6 per cent compared to the FCPF Reference Level emissions; and increase 
removals equivalent to 857,000 tCO2eq, which is an increase of 4 per cent compared to the 
removals in the Reference Level. The funding proposal has high impact potential. 
49. 
As a result of the direct and the enabling implementation activities, over its four-year 
implementation period, the project is estimated to achieve (relative to the baseline): (i) a 
reduction of deforestation of 6 per cent, equivalent to 9,900 ha,; (ii) a reduction of forest 
degradation of 10 per cent, equivalent to 9,030 ha; and (iii) an increase of restoration and 
reforestation of 8 per cent and 1 per cent, respectively – equivalent to 3,160 ha of forest 
restoration and 1,850 ha of reforestation. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential     
 
                                          Scale: High  
50. 
The project, during its four-year implementation period, is expected to unlock REDD-
plus results-based payments of EUR 23 million from the FCPF Carbon Fund. The project 
provides a strategic and unique opportunity to achieve a paradigm shift in the forest and land-
use sector of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic while mitigating GHGs from the forest 
sector. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic has embraced REDD-plus as a way to address its 
principal source of GHG emissions and proposes innovative institutional and financial 
arrangements (e.g. REDD-plus funding window, deforestation-free agricultural supply chains) to 
ensure the long-term sustainability of the investments. 
51. 
The identified elements driving a paradigm shift – scale-up and replication, knowledge 
and learning, creation of an enabling environment and contribution to the regulatory 
framework and policies – will apply at both the project and programme levels. At the 
programme level, considerable scope exists to scale up/replicate in the remaining 11 provinces 
of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic as well as in neighbouring countries with similar 
landscape/forestry contexts.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 113 
 
 
52. 
The project will enable a paradigm shift across different sectors and business activities: 
agriculture, forestry and financial sectors in particular will be targeted as key sectors for 
transformation. Within these sectors, the project will work throughout the agricultural and 
forestry supply chains, including input suppliers, producers, traders and processors. The project 
will target sectors and commodities where there is strong and consistent demand in order to 
ensure the profitability of the supported sectors. 
53. 
New finance streams for forests will be mobilized, which will serve as a model for the 
rest of the country. The project will generate opportunities for leveraging additional private 
sector funds and de-risking investments, creating the needed platform for channelling 
investments into rural northern areas of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and scaling up to 
the entire country and region. Also, while capacities will be built in the main environmental 
funds (the EPF and the Forest and Forest Resource Development Fund (FFRDF)), the project is 
expected to facilitate replication and upscaling as well as the broader distribution of REDD-plus 
finance as the funds’ capacities are built and they become fully operational and capable of 
managing funds for REDD-plus. 
54. 
Also, the implementation approach of the project under a programmatic context 
provides the opportunity to gather data and learn iteratively for more effective and adaptive 
design. It also offers the potential for crowding in substantial sustainable financing from 
diversified sources (more emission reductions, additional domestic revenues, larger 
endowment for the REDD-plus funding window), thereby ensuring long-term financial 
sustainability. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
       Scale: High 
55. 
The project targets 120,000 direct beneficiaries and 235,800 indirect beneficiaries. 
Through its promotion of shifts in cultivation to more forest-friendly approaches, the project 
provides a just transition by creating better incomes, jobs and skills. Among other benefits, 
these will help to prevent brain drain and work emigration to neighbouring countries. The 
economic net present value provided to the local beneficiary is estimated as EUR 312 million for 
the whole programme.  
56. 
The project offers significant potential for contributing positively to gender equality and 
will work closely with the Lao Women’s Union to ensure the effective engagement of women. 
Moreover, specific needs of ethnic and indigenous groups will be addressed by the project in 
several ways as described in the gender action plan.  
57. 
With regard to the economic pillar, the project is expected to improve the livelihoods 
and income for rural poor population groups; support small and medium-sized enterprises; and 
strengthen domestic resource mobilization. As for the social pillar, the project will contribute to 
reducing hunger and improving nutrition and health through improved agricultural 
productivity; improving employment opportunities, including for women and ethnic groups; 
and improving gender equality through economic, training and entrepreneurial activities. 
Finally, with regard to the environmental pillar, the project will reduce GHG emissions from the 
forestry sector and increase carbon sequestration from the atmosphere and contribute to the 
sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources (notably, forests and land).  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
                                                      Scale: High  
58. 
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is an LLDC that is ranked 139 out of 189 on the 
Human Development Index. The northern area of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has 
historically been the poorest and most rural region of the country. The average annual income

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 114 
in the project area is approximately USD 1,200 per capita compared with a national average of 
USD 2,330. 
59.
Although the project is a mitigation (REDD-plus) initiative, it will serve to address
climate vulnerabilities in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The Lao People’s Democratic
Republic considers itself an LDC with limited adaptive capacities that is highly vulnerable to
climate change impacts, and the project responds to climate change impacts in a number of
ways.
60.
The project seeks to remove barriers that currently prevent Lao stakeholders from
accessing climate and REDD-plus finance to help address their financial, economic, social and
institutional needs.
3.5 
Country ownership 
           Scale: High 
61.
The proposed project is aligned with and directly delivers on the priorities outlined by
the country’s policies on national development, climate change, forest and agriculture.
62.
The programme has formed part of the GCF project pipeline for the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic since 2017 and has been formally prioritized by both MAF and the national
designated authority, as reflected in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic Country Programme.
63.
The experience and track-record of the AE (GIZ) and the three EEs demonstrate a
capacity to deliver.
64.
EPF is currently undergoing accreditation. As such, the experience they will get from the
project is unique, and they can later channel future funds through the REDD-plus funding
window and further contribute to scaling up.
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 Scale: Medium‐High 
65.
The project will result in 5.6 million tCO2eq of emission reductions over the four-year
project implementation period. This equates to a mitigation cost to the GCF of EUR 2.70 per
tCO2eq.
66.
The co-financing ratio is 3.2 (GCF budget: EUR 15,160,596, and co-financing: EUR
50,030,500). The finance leveraged by the project is estimated to be EUR 227 million.
67.
The rationale for GCF financing is explained well, as is the rationale for grant financing
on specific activities. It is understood that each financier is financing the activities that best fit
its expertise and interest.
IV.
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
68.
Environmental and social risk category. The AE has classified the entire programme 
as category B following the definition of environmental and social risk category of the AE and 
GCF, indicating that the likely risks and impacts from the activities are limited, largely 
irreversible and readily mitigated. The assessment by GCF confirms the category B classification 
of the programme.
69.
This project aims to catalyse a shift in land use, land-use change and forestry and 
establish viable models for the management of forestry and landscapes. The project will have 
three outputs: (1) creation of enabling an environment for REDD-plus implementation; (2)

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 115 
market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation; and (3) climate change mitigation 
through forestry. The project also includes activities related to management, coordination, 
monitoring and reporting. These outputs are composed of closely interrelated activities, 
including the development of the capacities of stakeholders; support for integrated multi-level 
planning; strengthening of enforcement and monitoring; knowledge management; investments 
in good agricultural practices and agroforestry; private sector value chains; investments in 
rural infrastructure and watershed management; village forest management; and sustainable 
forest management including production forests.  
70.
Safeguard instrument and information disclosure. The AE developed an ESIA and
environmental and social management plan (ESMP) covering the entire programme, including
project 1 activities, where GCF support is sought. The ESIA incorporates an Ethnic Groups
Planning Framework and a detailed stakeholder engagement plan. Overall, the environmental
and social due diligence by the AE is considered comprehensive. The various environmental and
social risks and impacts were identified. The AE presented a plan to manage the identified risks
and impacts following the mitigation hierarchy. Supporting the ESIA and ESMP are the SESA,
ESMF, and a resettlement policy framework (RPF) developed for the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic’s Emissions Reduction Programme. While the SESA was developed for a larger scale
set of interventions and different time frame, the programme-level ESIA and ESMP followed a
similar process and integrated recommendations from the SESA.
71.
Key environmental and social risks and impacts and mitigation measures. The
ESIA presented a programme exclusion list. The list identifies activities that may raise the
overall environmental and social risk profile of the programme activities. The list includes
activities that could generate significant adverse environmental and social risks and impacts,
such as those related to land tenure rights, conversion of primary forests, absence of consent
from indigenous peoples and physical displacement, among others. The list of excluded
activities is considered comprehensive and will limit the environmental and social risk category
of the programme activities to “moderate”.
72.
The ESIA identified several salient positive as well as negative environmental and social
impacts, which are described in the following paragraphs:
(a)
Labour and working conditions. The ESIA identified potential risks related to
occupational health and safety of personnel and other stakeholders directly involved in
the programme. Workers involved in forest management and operations can be exposed
to potential occupational health and safety risks, such as those from maintenance
cutting and other forest management activities. Workers and programme staff will be
trained in occupational health and safety practices and will be issued appropriate
personal protection equipment. The programme will also not allow the use of child
labour in programme activities. Local labour, including women and members of ethnic
groups, will be hired and trained to enable their involvement in the activities;
(b)
Community health, safety and security. The activities and the infrastructure to be
built will not pose potential health and safety risks to the communities. In supporting
the agricultural value chain, there is potential for the limited use of agrochemicals, such
as fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides, among others. If not managed well, the use of
agrochemicals can generate adverse health impacts on the workers and the
communities. The programme will not support the procurement of agrochemicals nor
actively promote their use. The programme’s list of excluded activities includes a list of
banned agrochemicals in the country, which are mostly used in plantations. A pesticide
management plan was developed and is included in the ESIA, providing mitigation and
management measures for risks resulting from the use of agrochemicals. Such measures
include prohibition or exclusion from programme support, training, guidance on the
management of chemicals, and the promotion of non-agricultural options. The
additional risk from unexploded ordnance is also identified in the ESIA. Measures to

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 116 
 
 
manage unexploded ordnance risks are presented in the ESIA following established 
national regulations and practices; 
(c) 
Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. The programme does not anticipate 
any acquisition of lands and involuntary resettlement of households. However, activities 
related to forest management planning may restrict the access of local communities to 
lands and resources. Restriction of access can potentially lead to loss of livelihood and 
further impoverishment. The ESMP provides measures to manage such risks, including 
ensuring participatory approaches in land-use planning, meaningful consultations and 
effective grievance redress. An RPF was developed for the Emissions Reduction 
Programme that provides the process for assessing and managing potential involuntary 
resettlement and economic displacement. The brief summary of the RPF describing the 
policy basis, eligibility criteria, and compensation and entitlement is included in an 
annex to the ESMP, with a link to the full version. A resettlement action plan (or 
abbreviated resettlement action plan) will be developed in cases where the activities 
may result in restriction of access leading to loss of livelihood.  
(d) 
Biodiversity and natural resources. The programme activities will be undertaken in 
marginal lands, degraded production forests and agricultural lands. The programme will 
not support activities that will lead to the further conversion of habitats and loss of 
biodiversity. This includes the expansion of agricultural land and the establishment of a 
timber plantation that could lead to reduced habitats and biodiversity values. Use of 
agrochemicals can also have adverse effects on biodiversity. Measures to avoid, reduce 
and mitigate impacts on biodiversity include awareness-raising and capacity-building; 
monitoring of land-use changes; and application of guidelines and standards for 
ensuring the protection and conservation of biodiversity. In addition, a pesticide 
management plan is provided as part of the ESIA that establishes the processes and 
measures for preventing and mitigating the impacts of the use of agrochemicals; 
(e) 
Indigenous peoples. The Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
recognizes 49 broad ethnic groups in the country, which are characterized by a diversity 
of languages. Within the programme area are inhabitants belonging to diverse 
ethnolinguistic groups. Three major groups residing in the area include the Lao-Tai, 
Mon-Khmer and Hmong-Hmien communities. Socioeconomic risks and impacts may 
arise from the programme activities, particularly on vulnerable populations, including 
ethnic groups in the area. The programme does not foresee risks related to (i) physical 
displacement and tenure on traditional lands and lands under customary use; and (ii) 
exclusion of indigenous peoples from the programme benefits and planning process. 
Further, the programme will not interfere with the ethnic groups’ use of traditional 
knowledge. Although not significant, the adverse risks and impacts can include 
restriction of access to lands and resources and on the ways ethnic groups use their 
lands and forest resources. As part of the ESIA, an ethnic groups development planning 
framework has been developed to provide the context, considerations and guidelines for 
integrating the rights, mitigation measures and contributions of ethnic groups into the 
overall programme design and due diligence. The framework describes the identified 
impacts of the programme activities on the ethnic groups; the results of the 
consultations; measures to manage adverse impacts and enhance benefits to the ethnic 
communities; the process for free, prior and informed consent; and the overall approach 
to enhance the involvement of the ethnic groups in the programme design and decision-
making. The Lao Front for National Development, through its Ethnic Affairs Department, 
will play a key role in ensuring the engagement of the ethnic groups in the programme. 
The Lao Front for National Development maintains representation in key programme 
decision-making and implementation structures. While the programme will promote the 
voluntary adoption of good agricultural practices and improved upland cultivation 
among the communities, the programme will maintain support to communities who will

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 117 
 
 
still opt for traditional shifting/rotational cultivation practices. Such traditional 
cultivation practices will be integrated into participatory land-use plans and other 
resource management plans. The framework also provides guidance and scope for 
stakeholder engagement, conflict resolution, and the development of specific community 
development plans; 
(f) 
Cultural heritage. The programme does not anticipate any of the activities to be 
undertaken in areas with identified cultural heritage sites or areas where access by the 
local communities to such areas will be restricted. However, to ensure that the 
programme activities will not have adverse impacts on cultural heritage and tangible 
and intangible cultural resources, further site assessments and consultations will be 
undertaken prior to commencing any work to identify any local cultural places, 
including religious and/or sacred sites and places where rituals and ceremonies are 
conducted. The ESIA and ESMP provide considerations for further due diligence and 
measures to manage risks, including chance find procedures; and 
(g) 
Other external risks. Apart from the unintended risks from the programmes, the ESIA 
also identified potential external risks that may be caused by extraneous factors that 
could be beyond the control of the programme. The ESMP identifies these extraneous 
risks and includes those resulting from other development projects in the area, for 
example infrastructure and energy and extractive industries. 
73. 
Stakeholder engagement. A comprehensive stakeholder engagement strategy for 
programme development and implementation is presented in the ESIA. It provides the overall 
approach of the programme in ensuring that all the stakeholders are informed and are provided 
with opportunities to participate in programme activities. The strategy also provides the 
protocol and principles for community engagement. A more detailed stakeholder engagement 
plan for Project 1 activities is presented in the ESIA and includes the tasks, timelines and 
budget. The report of stakeholder consultations held at the three provinces is included as an 
annex to the ESMP. 
74. 
The due diligence regarding the EPF was undertaken to determine any of its capacity 
gaps in various organizational and governance aspects. In terms of environmental, social and 
governance and duty of care aspects, the due diligence performed regarding the EPF found that 
EPF has previously implemented projects supported by donor organizations that meet the 
environmental and social safeguards requirements.  
75. 
Grievance redress mechanism. A programme-level grievance redress mechanism 
(GRM) will be established based on the existing grievance redress system developed for REDD-
plus in the country; it will be supported by a reporting mechanism to the various programme 
management units. The programme GRM will have cascaded responsibilities starting from the 
district programme management unit (DPMU), as it is the level closest to the communities 
affected or potentially affected by the programme activities. The structure includes channels 
and processes from the district to the national level, where the grievances are expected to be 
resolved and communicated back to the affected party. The ESIA describes the programme-level 
GRM process, related responsibilities and expected actions at each level. The GRM integrates the 
customary dispute resolution practices of ethnic and religious groups, ensuring that the 
responsible officer will consider opinions and recommendations related to customary practices. 
Information on programme GRM will be included in the programme consultations and 
information dissemination campaigns. 
76. 
Institutional arrangements. A NPMU within the Department of Forestry in the 
Ministry of Agriculture will have the implementation and reporting responsibility for the 
programme. The NPMU is supported by inter-agency working groups and the National REDD+ 
Task Force. As additional support, a team of experts will support the development, 
implementation and monitoring and reporting of actions in the ESMP. This programme

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 118 
 
 
management structure also includes provincial and district levels, with each level having its 
own programme management units. The district-level and provincial-level programme 
management unit will have the direct role of supporting the ESMP. The AE will exercise its 
oversight functions on the programme, including ensuring that resources are made available for 
implementation of the ESMP, implemented and updated. Civil society organizations (CSOs) are 
also encouraged to participate in the programme activities, for example, by participating in the 
consultations and by contributing and providing services for monitoring and reporting at the 
community level. The participation of CSOs will be supported through the stakeholder 
engagement plan implemented at the district level. The budget for the entire ESMP is presented 
and includes costs for staff and experts, activities and materials. The ESMP integrates training 
activities to support the capacity of programme management staff. Monitoring and evaluation 
for each of the eight action areas are included in the ESMP.  
4.2 
Gender policy 
77. 
The AE has submitted a gender assessment and therefore complies with the operational 
guidelines of the GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan. The gender assessment was undertaken 
with a desk review of relevant national policies, legal and regulatory frameworks, and pre-
existing assessments in the forestry sector, and consultations with relevant national authorities 
and villagers in three villages in Houaphan and Luang Namtha, two of the provinces being 
targeted by the project. It provides contextual information on the gender situation in the 
country and in the sector of intervention. The gender assessment discusses the social 
stereotypes and norms that determine access to resources by women, political participation, 
decision-making and leadership, education and economic participation. Women have significant 
roles in agriculture and forestry, however, they have less access to and control of farming and 
forestry-based inputs and outputs due to limited decision-making power. Other factors 
contributing to this include poverty and physical safety concerns and access to information and 
finance. When they do have rights to forest products, they tend to be restricted to products that 
are not profitable or have fewer commercial benefits. The assessment provides a number of 
implications and recommendations to consider in the implementation of the programme to 
address the needs and priorities of women and men that were identified in the analysis, and 
describes how issues discussed in stakeholder consultations have been addressed in the gender 
action plan of the programme. 
78. 
The AE has provided a project-level gender action plan. The plan has translated the 
recommendations of the gender assessment, including stakeholder inputs, into actions that can 
be implemented together with the project in an effort to ensure access to benefits and 
participation by both women and men. The action plan also has indicators to verify 
performance, baseline data where it is available, sex-disaggregated targets for some indicators, 
timelines, responsibilities and a budget for implementation. Some activities and indicators do 
not have sex-disaggregated targets, and a baseline survey will be undertaken in the first year of 
implementation in order to collect baseline data. It is recommended that the AE ensure that 
baseline data is collected before the programme commences implementation in its first year and 
use the baseline data to rationalize targets that have been set in the gender action plan and the 
logic framework. The logic framework includes the expected number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries of the programme and the number of beneficiaries relative to the total population 
disaggregated by sex. 
79. 
The project intends to contribute to ensuring the following: (i) access to information 
through training to build practical business skills for women; (ii) capacity-building for 
government implementing agencies of the programme on facilitating the gender-sensitive 
implementation of programme activities in village communities; (iii) empowerment of women 
to participate in decision-making by becoming members of village forest management 
committees and in consultations related to investments in community-based agroforestry. The

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 119 
 
 
project will endeavour to address the issue of physical safety for women by reviewing the 
potential for community-based, women-led patrolling groups and support their creation with 
the capacity development of such groups and awareness-raising efforts. It is recommended that 
the AE extend this awareness-raising to communities and not only focus on the women-led 
patrol groups. Access to finance will be supported by the provision of grants from the REDD-
plus funding window for the implementation of forest management plans, including livelihood 
activities at the village level. The AE is advised to include, in the gender action plan, access to 
micro-grants for women and men to address the limited access to finance noted in the gender 
assessment. 
80. 
The AE is advised to go beyond collecting information on the number of participants in 
the different actions listed in the gender action plan. The AE should, for example, evaluate the 
use of business skills acquired from training that will be provided as part of the project. In 
addition, the AE should use the findings from the integration of gender in the value chain 
assessments to guide the development of women’s business skills to help address the barriers 
that prevent women from accessing forest products that have more commercial value. The 
findings should also feed back into the capacity-building of the implementing government 
agencies in order to sustain the investments made by the project. 
81. 
Implementation arrangements include the recruitment, for the NPMU, of a safeguard, 
gender and monitoring and evaluation specialist as well as a national expert who will support 
the specialist in overseeing the mainstreaming of gender and implementation of the gender 
action plan. This team will be complemented by implementing government agencies who will 
receive technical gender training to effectively integrate gender into the project. 
4.3 
Risks 
4.3.1. 
Overall project assessment (medium risk): 
82. 
The GCF is requested to provide a grant of EUR 15.2 million to strengthen the enabling 
environment for REDD-plus. This financing will help the country to earn REDD-plus results-
based payments from FCPF of approximately EUR 23 million. While the benefit-sharing plan is 
being negotiated by the Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and FCPF, as per 
the indicative breakdown, the country will use most of the payment received from FCPF for 
local REDD-plus activities to implement similar activities.  
83. 
The project has co-financing by way of a grant from BMZ, the Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic Government (in kind), JICA, a loan from ADB and IFAD, and equity from the private 
sector. However, as per the term sheet, the co-financing received from those other than MAF 
and BMZ will not be administered by GIZ, rather, it will be managed by the respective 
institutions themselves. The AE will not report on the status of other co-financing to GCF. 
Timely availability of total co-financing is necessary for the successful implementation of the 
project. 
4.3.2. 
AE/EE capability to execute the current project (medium risk): 
84. 
The GIZ head office in Germany will be the AE and the GIZ office in the Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic will serve as one of the EEs together with the Government of the Lao 
People’s Democratic Republic (represented by MAF and the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment) and JICA. GIZ has been operating in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic since 
1993 and has a team of approximately 250 staff in the country.  
85. 
In the proposed project, EPF (under the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment) will set up a REDD-plus funding window to channel EUR 10.2 million from a GCF 
grant to sub-beneficiaries. The Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic will sign an

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 120 
 
 
agreement with the AE regarding the role that EPF will play. The GCF grant will flow to EPF 
through the AE. The AE has stated that EPF has a track record in disbursing funds according to 
international standards, and it is also involved in World Bank-funded project in the Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic. Further, EPF is receiving technical support from GIZ to address the gaps 
identified in the its capacity assessment. JICA will provide technical assistance (EUR 1.6 million) 
to departments within the participating ministries and to subnational agencies for some 
activities (activities 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 2.1 and 3.1).  
86. 
While GIZ with two other entities will act as EEs, the project implementation involves 
various other entities such as the FFRDF (for intermediating the grants to communities), small 
and medium enterprises (SMEs), Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) and the Village 
Development Funds (VDFs). Hence, close coordination in the activities of these various entities 
is expected and necessary for the project. 
4.3.3. 
Project‐specific execution risks (medium risk):  
87. 
Regarding the end use of FCPF payments, GCF financing will enable the country to earn 
FCPF results-based payments. As provided in the funding proposal, the country is expected to 
receive from FCPF EUR 23 million under the proposed project. The benefit-sharing plan is being 
negotiated by the Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and FCPF. The AE has 
provided that as per the indicative breakdown, the country will use most of the payment 
received from FCPF for local REDD-plus activities to implement similar activities. Adherence to 
such an indicative plan is necessary to ensure the sustainability of the proposed activities. 
88. 
EPF will channel the small grants through FFRDF to community-managed financial 
institutions – the VDFs. VDFs will be eligible to receive grants for the local incentives for good 
agricultural practices and agroforestry, sustainable rural infrastructure and watershed 
management and village forest management. Thus, the role of VDFs in representing the 
community interest and in distribution of the funds to the community members is critical. The 
project needs to identify/develop proper VDFs for the implementation. The experience of the 
AE in establishing and supporting the VDFs will be beneficial to the project. 
89. 
Regarding co-financing, the project has co-financing from multiple parties, including 
loans from ADB and IFAD, and equity contributions from the private sector. The timely 
availability of such co-financing is necessary for the successful implementation of the project 
activities. These contributions will not be administered by the AE but will be managed directly 
by the contributors. The AE will enter into legal arrangements with these parties to align their 
contributions to the programme. However, GCF may not receive the status of commitment and 
disbursement of the co-financing while disbursing funds to the project.  
4.3.4. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk): 
 
 
90. 
In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.5. 
Compliance risk (medium risk): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
91. 
The GIZ office in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Government of the Lao 
People’s Democratic Republic and JICA are the EEs responsible for the majority of procurement, 
disbursement of funds to final beneficiaries, and monitoring. GIZ will establish internal control 
routines and assess the integrity and capacity of the EEs. Not all activities involve GCF financing. 
Many activities are built on other projects earlier delivered in the Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic by ADB, GIZ other donor agencies. 
92. 
Activities include:

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 121 
 
 
(a) 
Under action 1.1.1, grant finance to be disbursed to subproject beneficiaries, including 
national and subnational Government entities, VDFs via the FFRDF, CSOs and SMEs;  
(b) 
Under action 1.1.4, a fundraising campaign is planned to capitalize the green credit line. 
Potential partners are yet to be identified, it is mentioned that it will be international 
public and private finance, and a couple of banks were tentatively selected as 
candidates; however, GCF funds will not be utilized for finance lending under this credit 
line; and 
(c) 
Under action 2.1.2, based on private sector village partnership agreements, private 
sector entities are also eligible for grants covering 50 per cent of establishment costs for 
village-based agroforestry.  
93. 
Under its Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) clause 9.03, GIZ shall apply its own 
fiduciary principles with regard to money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism, 
sanctions, know-your-customer checks, fraud and corruption. In this project, GIZ is to establish 
internal control routines, and assess integrity and capacity of the EEs. GIZ has the capabilities to 
carry out these responsibilities in a competent manner and, therefore, based on the information 
provided, the efforts of GIZ are deemed to be sufficiently mitigating to consider the overall 
compliance risk rating of “medium”. 
4.3.6. 
Recommendation:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
94. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision. 
Summary risk assessment 
Rationale 
Overall project 
Medium 
GCF financing will help the country to receive 
results-based payments from the Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility Carbon Fund. It 
is necessary that the country allocate these 
resources, as per the indicative plan, for local 
REDD-plus activities to implement similar 
activities 
Timely availability of all other co-financing is 
critical for successful implementation of the 
project 
Accredited entity/executing 
entity capability to implement 
this project 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
95. 
The GIZ head office (in Germany) will serve as the AE while the GIZ office in the Lao 
People’s Democratic Republic will fulfil the role of an EE together with EPF. The two GIZ roles 
will be separated and accountable to different management structures within GIZ.  
96. 
GIZ assumes overall management responsibility and accountability for project 
implementation. At the same time, as AE, GIZ will provide a three-tier oversight and quality 
assurance role involving GIZ staff in country offices and at regional and headquarters levels. In 
addition, independent of the project management function, GIZ will undertake the project 
assurance role that is covered by the AE fee to deliver GCF-specific oversight and quality 
assurance services including: (i) day-to-day oversight supervision; (ii) oversight of project 
completion; and (iii) oversight of project reporting. 
97. 
The National Programme Steering Committee (NPSC) will provide administrative 
oversight of the programme, ensuring coordination across ministries. The NPSC will provide

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 122 
 
 
strategic programme implementation guidance to the NPMU and Provincial Programme 
Steering Committees (PPSCs, the Provincial REDD+ Task Forces) while ensuring compliance 
with the nationally determined contribution, the National REDD+ Strategy and national 
socioeconomic development objectives. The structure of the NPSC builds upon the existing 
institutional structure for REDD-plus in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. Thus, the REDD+ 
Task Force, as the responsible Government entity for REDD-plus, will serve as the NPSC. 
98. 
GIZ will be responsible for the establishment and operation of the NPMU, which will be 
established within the Department of Forestry (in MAF); associated provincial (PPMU) and 
district (DPMU) units will be similarly managed – PPMUs will be situated in Provincial 
Agriculture and Forestry Offices (PAFOs) and DPMUs in District Agriculture and Forestry Offices 
(DAFOs). The physical location of the NPMU in the Department of Forestry is expected to foster 
local ownership of the entire programme, to build institutional capacity and to ensure 
continuous linkage with Government policymaking and implementation of other initiatives. 
99. 
GIZ will assess the engagement of project partners, including Government agencies and 
other co-financiers. GIZ shall enter into a legal arrangement (commission) with BMZ (BMZ 
financing), and into a legal arrangement for the in-kind contribution with the Government of the 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, represented by MAF (partner co-financing). Moreover, ADB, 
KfW, JICA and IFAD will contribute to the implementation of the programme by providing 
financial and in-kind support. These contributions will not be administered by GIZ but managed 
by the respective institutions themselves. However, GIZ will enter into legal arrangements with 
these parties in order to align the respective contributions to the programme.  
100. 
The financial management of the programme will follow GIZ internal rules and 
regulations. In the case of procurement by GIZ, GIZ will follow its own procurement guidelines 
while the external EEs will observe the national legal standards for procurement and also 
comply with the GIZ minimum standards.  
101. 
GIZ will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the reporting period, including 
semi-annual reporting, in accordance with the accreditation master agreement and the funded 
activity agreement. 
102. 
Independent external auditors will perform annual financial audits of the programme in 
line with International Auditing Standards. GIZ will be responsible for selecting and engaging 
the external auditors. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
103. 
As a mitigation project, the forestry and land use interventions of the investment 
expects to benefit 120,000 direct and 235,800 indirect beneficiaries. Through coverage of 
approximately 23,910 ha under improved management, the mitigation interventions estimated 
a GCF cost per tCO2eq removed of 2.7 EUR per tCO2eq. 
104. 
The funding proposal and logic framework appropriately applies GCF fund level (impact 
and outcome) results management framework/performance measurement framework 
indicators, and the project has built in baselines and data collection (inclusive of REDD-plus 
forest reference emission levels) that can inform progress reporting on expected results in 
addition to integrating qualitative measures looking at behavioural changes and policy/enabling 
environment transformations. 
105. 
Regarding section E.1, overall the logic framework complies with GCF standards and has 
been cleared through Secretariat review.  
106. 
The funding proposal theory of change could benefit from further details reflecting 
on the causal pathways at the project level in relation to the climate rationale and demonstrate

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 123 
 
 
reasons that the interventions selected are the best and most effective option(s) to resolve the 
barriers or problems and deliver paradigm shift. 
107. 
In annex 11(a) “Monitoring and Evaluation Plan”, the Secretariat notes the intention of 
GIZ to conduct formative/process evaluations for the interim and summative evaluation for the 
final evaluation requirements to assess the extent of achievement towards the paradigm shift 
objectives. The Secretariat recommends that a hybrid summative/outcome evaluation is 
conducted for the final evaluation to assess the project beyond the achievement of targets and 
particularly reflect on project effectiveness in producing changes/results that can be utilized as 
learning in any scaling up efforts. Additionally, the AE may wish to consider increasing the 
budgetary allocation for monitoring and evaluation data collection to ensure sufficient quality of 
resources and evidence generation through project activities for adaptive management 
objectives.  
4.6 
Legal assessment 
108. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) was signed with the Accredited Entity on 
15 November 2017, and it became effective on 18 January 2019. 
109. 
The Accredited Entity has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. 
110. 
The proposed project will be implemented in Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao 
PDR), a country in which the GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means 
that, amongst other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this 
country, which risks need to be further assessed. The GCF Secretariat provided the NDA of Lao 
PDR with a draft privileges and immunities agreement on 21 February 2019. No response on 
the draft agreement has yet been received. 
111. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, where appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
112. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board be made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) 
Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 124 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP117 
Proposal name: 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions 
Programme through improved governance and sustainable 
forest landscape management 
Accredited entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
GmbH (GIZ) 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
             Scale: High   
1. 
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is a landlocked least developed country (LDC) in 
South-East Asia, where the economy is dependent on natural resources, especially forestry, 
agriculture, sources of electricity generation (especially hydropower) and mining. Agriculture, 
forestry and fisheries account for 16 per cent of the country’s gross domestic product and 
employ 64 per cent of its workforce. 
2. 
In the last 15 years, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has lost approximately 
680,000 ha of forests. Forest cover accounts for 58 per cent of the country’s surface area, with a 
significant reduction in forest stocking owing to the valuable wood having been taken out, 
diminishing biodiversity and livelihoods. The country’s government is actively seeking to 
implement an ambitious REDD-plus emission reductions programme, for which substantial 
domestic resources have been committed, as well as bilateral and multilateral donors’ 
resources, to various projects. However, there are still immense challenges, including capacity 
and funding gaps. Therefore, building on, and coordinating with, complementary initiatives, the 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic will deploy GCF support to remove investment barriers and 
thus unlock future RBP, domestic taxes and fees, and to create a sustainable environment for 
scaling-up REDD-plus.  
3. 
This proposal consists of a stand-alone project (project 1) embedded in a programmatic 
context that shares a theory of change which includes two additional projects (projects 2 and 3) 
that will be submitted in the future for Board approval. Project 1 will be implemented in the 
provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang, which have the highest rates of 
deforestation and forest degradation within the programme area. 
4. 
The project has three outputs:  
(a) 
The first one is to enable REDD-plus implementation through three principal means:  
(i) 
Enhancing the financing environment for forest sector transformation;  
(ii) 
Revising and strengthening the legal and regulatory framework for forestry; and  
(iii) 
Improving the enforcement of the new regulatory framework; 
(b) 
The second output will:  
(i) 
Target the agricultural sector (including agroforestry) as a key driver of 
deforestation;

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 125 
 
 
(ii) 
Lower targeted barriers; 
(iii) 
Enhance productivity;  
(iv) 
Increase farmers’ integration into agricultural value chains; and  
(v) 
Improve access to finance and private sector participation in deforestation-free 
agriculture; 
The activities in this output will include local incentives for good agricultural practices 
and agroforestry, catalysing private sector investment in value chains and sustainable 
rural infrastructure and watershed management; and 
(c) 
The third output will target climate change mitigation through forestry focusing on 
village forests and production and conservation forests to allow landscape management 
and restoration. 
5. 
Net annual average greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from land-use change and forestry 
in the period 2005–2015 accounted for 26.6 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent 
(MtCO2eq). Overall, the forestry and land-use change sector is responsible for 67 per cent of the 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic’s emissions, and agriculture contributes a further 28 per cent.  
6. 
For the last 10 years, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has progressed substantially 
towards REDD-plus readiness, notably through the acceptance of the forest reference 
level/forest reference emissions level (FRL/FREL), the finalized REDD-plus strategy, the 
strategic and social environmental assessment and the environmental and social management 
framework, as well as the final acceptance of the emission reductions programme document 
with the Carbon Fund. The country has an ambitious naturally determined contribution (NDC) 
target to recover 70 per cent of the forest cover. 
7. 
Project 1 mitigates 5.6 million tCO2eq during its four-year implementation period, at a 
cost to GCF of EUR 2.7/tCO2eq. It represents the first project of a programme that will ultimately 
mitigate 144.7 million tCO2eq over its 20-year lifetime (influence period, 2020–2039), at a cost 
to GCF of EUR 0.4/tCO2eq. 
8. 
The independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) believes that the programmatic 
approach needs further development, as it will need substantial resources to account for the 
expected mitigation impacts over the project’s 20-year lifespan. The methodological approach is 
based on the methodology used for the preparation of the reference level, which was submitted 
and approved (in June 2018) by the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) Carbon Fund and 
is compliant with the Carbon Fund Methodological Framework.1 The approach equates to a 
highly detailed tier 3 approach in the terminology of the International Panel on Climate Change. 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH (GIZ) will replicate the same 
methodology for the ex post assessment of the achieved GHG emission reductions and removals 
within project 1, activity 1.6. The FCPF Carbon Fund will also use it for the determination of 
results-based payments (RBP) for the period 2019–2024, for which the reference level is valid.  
9. 
Even though the project is presented as a mitigation project, it does have adaptation 
merits. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic identifies itself as an LDC with limited adaptive 
capacities that is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts. Indeed, forestry and agriculture 
are two of four key sectors highlighted by the country’s national adaptation programme of 
action, as well as two of five key sectors identified in the NDC as being highly vulnerable to 
climate change. The country is considered to have a high risk of river flooding, landslides, 
cyclones and wildfires, a medium risk for extreme heat, and a low risk for water scarcity; there 
are specific climate change impacts identified for the regions to be targeted by this project.  
 
1 FCPF (2016), available at < https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/carbon‐fund‐methodological‐
framework]

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 126 
 
 
10. 
To deliver the outputs, project 1 will create a REDD-plus funding window divided into 
four subwindows, one for each of the four different beneficiary groups: (i) government agencies 
at national, provincial and district levels; (ii) villages (village development funds); (iii) civil 
society organizations (CSOs); and (iv) private sector enterprises. The project will reach 120,000 
direct local beneficiaries and 235,800 indirect beneficiaries in the villages in the northern Lao 
People’s Democratic Republic. Under activity 2.1, 160 small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs) will receive training in good agricultural practices and business management, which in 
turn, will support and provide markets to approximately 16,000 producers and provide 
employment to approximately 1,600 people. 
11. 
Overall, the project presents high mitigation and adaptation impacts consistent with GCF 
objectives. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
                               Scale: High  
1.2.1. 
Innovation 
12. 
The project has several elements of innovation. The jurisdictional approach bridging 
agriculture, forestry and financial sectors, and business activities is critical to enable real land-
use changes and an increase in the number of sustainable forest and food systems. The project 
will also enable a sustainable agricultural economy ensuring markets and value chains, and 
diversifying the commodity options to those that have potential demand.  
13. 
The REDD-plus funding window brings concrete benefits to local beneficiaries, 
incentivizing villages to develop village development plans with a vision for change. Rewarding 
private sector enterprises, mostly agribusinesses, and providing capacity-building in 
sustainable agricultural practices and markets could potentially reduce the need to expand the 
agricultural frontier and therefore protect ecosystems. 
14. 
The project is also working to bridge national strategies with regional realities, revising 
and strengthening the legal and regulatory framework for forestry that will be applied in turn in 
relevant jurisdictions, improving the enforcement of new regulations.  
15. 
The project will also demonstrate a paradigm shift by ensuring effective coordination 
with relevant projects in the same jurisdiction, making more effective use of resources and a 
more coherent theory of change for the jurisdictions and the country. By doing so, the project is 
providing new finance streams for forests and a REDD-plus finance model that could be 
scalable. 
16. 
The proposal presents a well-designed theory of change, with consistent assumptions 
and long-term outcomes and outputs to deliver the proposed paradigm shift. 
1.2.2. 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
17. 
The project has a well-developed knowledge management plan (annex 22(u) of the 
funding proposal) with comprehensive actions. In addition, it will provide relevant tools to 
enable policymakers, provincial governments and local communities to identify and understand 
the benefits of REDD-plus approaches in order to change the business-as-usual model. The 
project will also emphasize the importance of comprehensive communication and the exchange 
of information to build awareness and capacity development on the revised forest regulations to 
ensure its proper application. Collaboration with national universities will be sought by inviting 
them to participate in REDD-plus related activities.  
18. 
Sustainable agricultural and forest practices will also be critical in ensuring the impact 
of the project. The project will develop training for trainers, at the district level, involving the 
local staff who conduct of extensionists of the District Agriculture and Forestry Offices (DAFOs),

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 127 
 
 
which will ensure capacity-building after project completion. Special emphasis will be placed on 
information systems and mapping, training individuals who will support the use of remote 
sensing techniques to generate maps to support Provincial Offices of Forestry Inspection and 
District Offices for Forestry Inspection with monitoring deforestation and forest degradation. 
1.2.3. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
19. 
The programmatic approach is developed to create an enabling environment for REDD-
plus in a systemic manner, involving RBP through support to the FCPF Emission Reductions 
Programme. The project gives special attention to support for policy and regulatory reform in 
forestry and land-use planning. One of the most important elements is to strengthen the DAFO 
agricultural extension system, ensuring the delivery of support to the communities and the 
scalability of services in the country. 
20. 
The REDD-plus funding window will be funded and operationalized with concrete target 
beneficiaries. This will be complemented with a new green credit line for deforestation-free 
agriculture that is being set up outside the framework of the GCF project (activity 1.1).  
1.2.4. 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies 
21. 
A strategic component of the project is to strengthen the policy and regulatory 
framework. The project will focus on six areas:  
(a) 
Mainstreaming REDD-plus into socioeconomic development plans;  
(b) 
Strengthening the regulatory framework (revision, modification and drafting of relevant 
laws, decrees and regulations) to enable sustainable forest management and private 
sector investment in village-based agroforestry development;  
(c) 
Strengthening law enforcement and compliance monitoring;  
(d) 
Supporting land-use planning and measures to improve tenure security; and  
(e) 
Strengthening the forest and forest carbon monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) 
system. 
1.2.5. 
Scalability and replicability 
22. 
There is substantial potential for scaling up and replicating the programme. Project 1 is 
beginning in three provinces that could later be scaled to three more provinces with projects 2 
and 3 (the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has 17 provinces), covering 28 of 50 districts. The 
model could be replicated within the country, if there are sufficient financial flows to allow its 
scalability, ensuring economies of scale.  
23. 
The programme will mainstream REDD-plus into national and provincial development 
planning, allowing the possibility for scaling up and replication of the programme interventions 
in the country at large. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
                   Scale: High   
1.3.1. 
Environmental and social co‐benefits 
24. 
Although this GCF proposal is clearly a mitigation (REDD-plus) initiative, it incorporates 
interventions that will promote climate change adaptation – notably enhanced land-use 
planning, improvements in irrigation infrastructure, reforestation in catchment areas and 
climate-smart agriculture. These linkages provide certain guarantees that the long-term effects

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 128 
 
 
(environmental and social co-benefits) of the project measured against the backdrop of climate 
change scenarios and impact will remain positive in the future. 
25. 
The National REDD-plus Strategy (2025) and Vision (2030) aim to improve the quality 
and extent of forests nationwide to provide economic, social and environmental benefits. The 
policies require all stakeholders, including households, communities and the private sector, to 
actively participate in the reduction of deforestation and degradation, and the promotion of 
forest restoration and reforestation. More specifically they aim to: 
(a) 
Improve the quality of forests by naturally regenerating up to 6 million ha and planting 
trees in unstocked forest area of up to 500,000 ha as an integral component of a rural 
development strategy (livelihood support system) encompassing watershed 
management, stable water supplies and the prevention of natural disasters (floods and 
landslides); 
(b) 
Provide a sustainable flow of forest products for domestic consumption and to generate 
revenue through wood-processing sales and exports, contributing to livelihood 
improvement, fiscal revenue and foreign exchange earnings, while increasing direct and 
indirect employment;  
(c) 
Preserve the many species and unique habitats which are, for different reasons, under 
threat; and 
(d) 
Conserve the environment, including protection of soil, conservation of watersheds and 
combating climate change. 
1.3.2. 
Economic co‐benefits 
26. 
The exact benefits will depend on the selected projects in the jurisdictions involved. The 
economic benefits of conserving forests are varied, including the provision of materials and 
food, thus contributing to income generation. In terms of the financial scheme, the economic co-
benefits could include private sector awareness of the possibility of generating income sources 
from different opportunities, including carbon sequestration and timber production and 
transformation. 
27. 
By catalysing investment in value chains, the project will create economic benefits for 
SMEs that will in turn increase profits and job creation. The project estimates that 160 SMEs 
will receive training in good agricultural practices and business management, leading to nearly 
USD 9 million in investment. These 160 SMEs will, in turn, support and provide markets for 
approximately 16,000 producers and provide employment to approximately 1,600 people. 
28. 
Output 2 promotes the transition to sustainable agricultural practices. The project 
presents financial models for shifting from traditional rice and maize cultivations to sequential 
intercropping models, which prove to have much higher net present value estimates. Moreover, 
the programme, through its promotion of shifts in cultivation to more forest friendly 
approaches, provides a just transition by creating better incomes, jobs and skills. The economic 
net present value provided to the local beneficiary is estimated at EUR 312 million (annex 3(b) 
of the funding proposal). 
1.3.3. 
Gender‐sensitive development 
29. 
Social inclusion is a cross-cutting theme within GCF-supported outputs, activities and 
actions. Project 1 aims to promote an inclusive approach, ensuring beneficiaries from diverse 
ethnic groups and marginalized villages are included and empowered. 
30. 
The project provides a well-developed gender assessment and a gender action plan. This 
plan forms the basis for operationalizing the results and recommendations of the gender

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 129 
 
 
analysis. It contains specific gender elements to be considered in the programme design and 
during the implementation of programme measures and activities. 
31. 
Project 1 will work closely with the Lao Women’s Union to ensure the effective 
engagement of women. All the activities will proactively involve empowerment elements for 
village women, including promoting their leadership roles in local structures through various 
methods, such as ensuring a quota of at least 30 per cent female representatives on village 
committees. The project will include training on business skills development for women that 
will help to address common participation gaps and barriers, including financial support. It will 
also seek to find economic opportunities for women related to agroforestry, forest management 
and agricultural activities. All extension staff and trainers supporting project 1 will be trained 
on gender equality and social inclusion, including time-saving activities. 
32. 
Project 1 includes an ethnic group development planning framework on the specific 
needs of ethnic and indigenous groups. Project priorities include strengthening the female voice 
in the context of village decision-making; improving their access to land, forest and natural 
resources for livelihood purposes; respect for customary use of land, including for ancestral and 
spiritual uses; and appropriate access to information, including the use of ethnic languages and 
simple imagery to accommodate lower literacy rates. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
                               Scale: High    
1.4.1. 
Vulnerability of the countries and vulnerable groups 
33. 
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is a landlocked country with a population of 6.8 
million people and an area of 236,800 km2. The country has a human development index of 
0.601, ranking it 139 of 189 globally. The country’s economic growth has more recently been 
among the fastest in Asia, averaging more than 7.7 per cent per year for most of the last decade. 
According to the World Bank country profile, growth is expected to be driven by the 
construction sector, supported by investments in large infrastructure projects (mainly energy), 
and a resilient services sector, led by wholesale and retail trade growth2.  
34. 
Growth has been largely dependent on natural resources, and this has placed increasing 
pressure on the environment. Environmental degradation is taking an economic toll on the 
country due the depletion of natural resources and adverse impacts on environmental services 
as well as to human health from pollution and waste: 70 per cent of the country’s population 
still depends on forests and waterways for income and nutrition. The Lao Government has 
recognized the limitations of this economic model and is implementing reforms to drive a 
greener and more inclusive model.  
35. 
Many of the country’s poorest people live in rural areas and are the most vulnerable to 
pollution, climate risks and deforestation. The green growth agenda aims to improve local 
livelihoods by diversifying income sources and involving the private sector to spur market 
developments – for instance, by promoting sustainable forest management and nature-based 
tourism. 
36. 
In its second national communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change secretariat, the country identifies itself as an LDC with limited adaptive 
capacities that is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts. The Economy and Environment 
Programme for Southeast Asia ranks the Lao People’s Democratic Republic as one of the most 
climate-vulnerable countries in the region. 
37. 
According to the proposal, by 2100, mean annual temperatures are projected to increase 
by 1.4–4.3 °C. Under high emissions scenarios, the number of days of extreme rainfall are 
 
2 World Bank Country Profile, 2019

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 130 
 
 
projected to increase by about seven days from 1990 to 2100, and the days of heatwaves to 
increase from fewer than 10 in 1990 to about 170 days, on average, in 2100.  
38. 
Poor and marginalized groups disproportionally face climate risks, among them 
temperature increases and erratic rainfall, given that they are more exposed to such changes 
and generally have a lower capacity to adapt given their reliance on the immediate 
environment. Natural disasters have increased, and about three-quarters were climate-related 
(flood 50 per cent, storm 14 per cent, drought 14 per cent). The country is rich in water 
resources, but has a high risk of river flooding, landslides, cyclones and wildfires. 
39. 
Project 1 address the three provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang in the 
northern Lao People’s Democratic Republic, where poverty rates are among the highest in the 
country, exceeding the national average by 23 per cent. Food security is a major challenge for 
many households in rural areas with an estimated 25 per cent of rural households in the region 
accounted as food poor.3 
40. 
These provinces contain the districts with the highest rates of deforestation and forest 
degradation within the emission reductions programme document accounting area and contain 
the remaining forest areas most at risk of deforestation/forest degradation. In addition, the 
geographical locations of these three provinces enable connectivity of forest ecosystems at the 
landscape level. 
41. 
The project presents accurate information on climate change for the northern part, 
predicting a temperature increase of 0.8–0.9 °C relative to the historical average by 2030. 
Precipitation may increase slightly (11–15 mm annual average) but with greater temporal 
variability. 
42. 
Land use and deforestation are the main drivers of emissions. Deforestation and forest 
degradation are in the centre of the globally recognized biodiversity hotspots. Supporting the 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic in its effort to safeguard forests will be critical for the country 
and for the Indochina region at large, which is rapidly being depleted of its natural resources. 
1.4.2. 
The need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity 
43. 
The country’s transition to a green growth model implies a behavioural change that 
needs to be embedded in the country institutions and development plans.  
44. 
The project will support the revision of the Forestry Law (No.06/NA, 2007) and the 
Land Law, including implementing decrees and regulations. The body of regulations is currently 
internally inconsistent in the main (although contradictory in some respects), complex and not 
easily understood by local authorities. There is a need to support the regulatory framework to 
create an enabling environment that incentivizes deforestation-free investments and to ensure 
that land-use plans are effectively implemented in the provinces. The project will promote local 
regulatory frameworks, enabling positive relations with local communities and the adoption of 
sustainable forestry management in production forests and village forestry.  
45. 
GCF project 1 will work closely with the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
and the Forest Inventory and Planning Division of the Department of Forestry (DoF) on a 
harmonized MRV system, including the national forest inventory and the preparation of the 
Forest Reference Emission Level (FREL) under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change.  
 
3 Pimhidzai O, Fenton NC, Souksavath P and Sisoulath V. 2014. Poverty Profile in Lao PDR: Poverty Report for the Lao 
Consumption and Expenditure Survey 2012–2013. Available at <http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/ 
868521467998508506/pdf/100120-WP-P146141-PUBLIC-Box393225B-Poverty-Profile-in-Lao-PDR-publication-
version-12-19-14.pdf>.

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 131 
 
 
46. 
The project will also support the DAFO agricultural extension system ensuring capacity-
building to maintain the services after project completion. 
1.4.3. 
Absence of alternative sources of financing 
47. 
The persistent fiscal deficit has led to an increase in public debt and an elevated risk of 
debt distress. Total public debt was nearly USD 9 billion in 2016, or 59 per cent of gross 
domestic product. Management of the debt is a constraint on the Lao economy, inhibiting the 
government from spending to fulfil its development agenda, including transferring resources to 
support REDD-plus measures. According to the International Monetary Fund’s recent debt 
sustainability analysis, “Lao PDR’s risk of external debt distress remains high, suggesting the 
urgent need to tighten fiscal policy, strengthen public financial management, and develop a 
comprehensive medium-term debt management strategy”.  
48. 
Despite this situation, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has committed substantial 
domestic resources to participate in REDD-plus and to transform its forest sector from a net 
GHG emission source into a net carbon sink. However, government budgets are constrained and 
highly dependent upon donor support, partly because collection levels of legally mandated 
forest-sector fees and taxes (e.g. income tax, timber harvesting taxes, land taxes) are low. While 
the country’s economy is growing and there is a potential to transfer resources from 
hydropower schemes and infrastructure development, the current fiscal situation is giving little 
space for government expenditure. 
49. 
On the other hand, land-use planning in the country builds on over 20 years of 
experience of donor-funded projects (e.g. KfW, GIZ, German AgroAction, the Swedish 
International Development Cooperation Agency - SIDA, TABI, AgriSud and others). Several 
projects have been and continue to be implemented in the project 1 target region, supporting 
the forestry and biodiversity sectors. The project proposal provides a complete list of projects 
with interventions and lessons learned. The project aims to coordinate investments in the 
jurisdiction to allow for the better use of resources, mixing in country resources with donor 
resources to account for a future emission reductions payment agreement, through which it 
expects to receive up to USD 42 million of REDD-plus RBP by 2025.  
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
                               Scale: High 
1.5.1. 
Alignment with national climate strategy 
50. 
In recent years, the Lao Government has embarked on several reforms that provide a 
platform for launching GCF project interventions. In 2012, the government issued a suspension 
on the granting of new concessions for mining, eucalyptus and rubber investments, which 
remains in effect today. A national moratorium on logging in production forests has also been in 
effect since 2013 to protect natural forests from unsustainable exploitation. In 2016, the 
government put in place measures to halt illegal logging and illegal timber exports; this has 
already demonstrated a significant impact and underlies the ongoing forest law, enforcement, 
governance and trade voluntary partnership agreement negotiations with the European Union. 
The adoption of the Central Party Committee Resolution on Land in 2017, indicating the need 
for reform in land management, is paving the way for a new Land Law in 2019. The Forestry 
Law (2007), which determines the basic principles, regulations and measures for the use of 
forest and forestland, is currently under revision to address the emerging domestic and 
international challenges facing the sector. Moreover, since 2016 all responsibilities for forestry 
have been returned to one ministry, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF), thereby 
promoting “joined up” policy development and implementation.

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 132 
 
 
51. 
The integration of the project’s course of action into the country’s highest-level policy 
statements and decisions, including the 8th national socio-economic development plan (2016–
2020), the Green Growth Strategy (currently being drafted), the Central Party Resolution on 
Land (2017), the Forestry Strategy 2020, as well as in the country’s NDC provide some 
safeguards that its impact will continue to be felt beyond the end of this project, especially if the 
second and third phases of this programme maintain the same policy outlook and emphasis.  
52. 
The GCF programme is also fully aligned with the GCF Country Programme (updated in 
February 2019). The GCF Country Programme identifies REDD-plus as one of four mitigation 
priorities. The increase and maintenance of forest cover is identified as one of five short-term 
priorities (mitigation and adaptation). The Country Programme specifically identifies the GIZ 
GCF programme as a programming priority. Synergies with other GCF proposals that are 
planned or under development – including integrated food systems (United Nations 
Development Programme), climate-friendly agribusiness (Asian Development Bank) and 
climate-resilient smallholder farmers (World Food Programme) – are noted, as well as 
synergies with a number of GCF readiness activities (notably, the work of GIZ supporting the 
Environmental Protection Fund to become an accredited entity (AE) and the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations’ support to private sector engagement with 
REDD-plus).  
53. 
The Lao Government, together with development partners, has put in place an extensive 
institutional framework at national and subnational levels to implement REDD-plus, including 
the emission reductions programme. This framework includes the establishment of a National 
REDD-plus Task Force, representing diverse economic sectors, including forestry, agriculture, 
mining, energy and land-use planning, as well as including representatives of the Ministries of 
Justice, Finance, and Planning and Investment; the Lao Front for National Development, the Lao 
Women’s Union and the Lao Chamber of Commerce.  
1.5.2. 
Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
54. 
The GIZ head office (in Germany) will serve as the AE. The GIZ office in the Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic will fulfil the role of one of the executing entities (EEs) of project 1, 
together with the Lao Government (represented by MAF and the Ministry of Natural Resources 
and Environment, MoNRE) and JICA. The two GIZ roles will be strictly separated and 
accountable to different management structures within GIZ.  
55. 
As the AE, GIZ will assume oversight responsibility for project 1, as defined in the 
accreditation master agreement between GCF and GIZ. GIZ will also administer project funds on 
behalf of GCF and will provide oversight guidance and quality assurance of the three EEs 
through its relevant head office units. 
56. 
GIZ has been operating in the country since 1993 and employs approximately 250 staff 
members, most of them Lao nationals. GIZ technical assistance in the Lao forestry sector 
amounts to EUR 21 million, with the Lao People’s Democratic Republic ranking among the top 
15 recipient countries of forestry-related German development assistance worldwide. GIZ has 
proven global experience in developing REDD-plus programmes. 
57. 
In order to implement project 1, GIZ will need to establish legal arrangements with the 
EEs (the Lao Government and JICA), implementation partners and contributing partners. 
58. 
For project 1, the following agreements will be necessary:  
(a) 
German Federal Ministry for Economic Development Cooperation (BMZ) Commission; 
(b) 
A funded activity agreement between GIZ (as the AE) and GCF; and 
(c) 
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic–Germany bilateral agreement with the Ministry 
of Planning and Investment.

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 133 
 
 
59. 
In terms of EEs, there needs to be:  
(a) 
A subsidiary agreement (grant agreement) between the GIZ Head Office (the AE) and the 
Lao Government (represented by MAF and MoNRE) relating to the REDD-plus funding 
window. This agreement will, among others, also address the implementation of those 
activities co-financed by the International Fund for Agricultural Development, KfW and 
the Asian Development Bank under cooperation agreements; and 
(b) 
A subsidiary agreement between the GIZ Head Office (the AE) and JICA. 
60. 
The National Project Steering Committee will provide administrative oversight for the 
project, ensuring coordination across ministries and will provide strategic implementation 
guidance to the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) and Provincial Project Steering 
Committees (PPSCs, the Provincial REDD-plus Task Forces). 
61. 
The REDD-plus Task Force was established by Government Decree No. 1313 (2008) as a 
multi-sector body. It is headed by the Vice-Minister of Agriculture and Forestry and comprises 
representatives of: 
(a) 
The DoF, under MAF;  
(b) 
The Department of Agricultural Land Management and Development, under MAF;  
(c) 
The Department of Climate Change, under MoNRE;  
(d) 
The Department of Environmental Quality Promotion, under MoNRE;  
(e) 
The Land Department, under MoNRE;  
(f) 
The External Finance Department, under the Ministry of Finance;  
(g) 
The Ethnic Groups Department, under the Lao Front for National Development;  
(h) 
The Department of International Cooperation, under the Ministry of Planning and 
Investment;  
(i) 
The Division of International Law and Administration Law, under the Ministry of Justice;  
(j) 
The Energy Conservation and Saving Division, under the Ministry of Energy and Mines;  
(k) 
The Central National Lao Women’s Union;  
(l) 
The Faculty of Forestry Science of the National University of Laos; and  
(m) 
The Lao National Chamber of Industry and Commerce. 
62. 
GIZ, as the GCF AE and one of three EEs, will maintain observer status on the National 
Project Steering Committee to provide strategic guidance and ensure that GCF-related guidance 
and compliance is provided to the national actors. 
63. 
The PPSCs, one for each participating province, will be led by the provincial REDD-plus 
Task Force in each province. At the provincial level, the PPSCs will review project 
implementation progress and provide support to address potential bottlenecks related to 
implementation.  
64. 
GIZ will be responsible for the establishment and operation of the NPMU. The NPMU will 
be established within DoF (in MAF); associated provincial and district units (provincial project 
management units (PPMUs) and district project management units (DPMUs), respectively) will 
be similarly managed – PPMUs will be situated in Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Offices 
(PAFOs) and DPMUs in DAFOs. 
65. 
The Lao Government, represented by MAF and MoNRE, will also serve as one of the EEs. 
MoNRE is the country’s GCF national designated authority and is responsible for the 
Environmental Protection Fund (EPF). MAF serves as the Chair of the REDD-plus Task Force

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 134 
 
 
and is (together with the Ministry of Finance) the contract-signing party with the FCPF Carbon 
Fund to sell GHG emission reductions and receive RBP. MAF is further responsible for the Forest 
Resource Development Fund, which will have two roles as: a) a beneficiary receiving capacity-
building support; and b) channelling funds to beneficiaries, once its capacities have been 
satisfactorily built.  
66. 
While the legal agreement with GIZ (as the AE) will be signed with the Lao Government, 
GCF funding will flow from GIZ directly to the EPF, which will be responsible for the financial 
management and disbursement of grants to other beneficiaries. 
67. 
In its capacity as an EE, JICA will provide technical assistance to departments within the 
participating ministries and to subnational agencies. JICA will use its own funds (EUR 1.6 
million co-finance) in the context of its F-REDD II project to:  
(a) 
Support law enforcement and land use planning (activities 1.4 and 1.5);  
(b) 
Set up the MRV system and support knowledge generation for the FRL/FREL under 
activity 1.6 in close coordination with the Forest Inventory and Planning Division of 
MAF and the NPMU; and  
(c) 
Support the implementation of activities 2.1 and 3.1 in the province of Luang Prabang. 
68. 
The iTAP believes that this is a complicated arrangement, especially because it will be 
binding GCF with the responsibility of overseeing the implementation of all the associated 
programmes and invested resources with partner entities.  
1.5.3. 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
69. 
GIZ conducted two preliminary fact-finding scoping missions in 2018, including a high-
level meeting with government representatives to ensure commitments to project development 
from the main project partners and supporting partners interested in providing co-finance.  
70. 
An inception workshop for national government partners was held on 5 October 2018, 
where the initial project structure was presented, as well as key considerations for activities 
and actions, institutional arrangements and potential co-financing sources. The project has been 
developed with regular engagement from the national designated authority (MoNRE). The 
project has been designed with the continuous engagement of government focal points from key 
ministries, where the government has demonstrated strong ownership of the project concept.  
71. 
CSOs have been consulted extensively, and at frequent intervals, during the project 
preparation process. The number of participants in the stakeholder consultations was 1,066, of 
which only 24 per cent were woman. Therefore, the project implementors will need to ensure 
that a better proportion of women participation during project implementation. CSOs involved 
in the design of the project have included the Lao Women’s Union (at national, provincial and 
district levels), Village Focus International, Centre for People and Forests, the forest law, 
enforcement, governance and trade CSO Network and the National University of Laos.  
72. 
CSOs represent a central beneficiary of project support at the local level and will be 
involved in all village-level activities, including funding for capacity-building and awareness-
raising, knowledge management and communication, gender plan and establishment of public–
private sector dialogue to promote village-based agroforestry project activities. Furthermore, 
CSOs in the target provinces and districts will be trained on the project’s grievance redress 
mechanism and provided with information brochures.  
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
                               Scale: High 
1.6.1. 
Cost‐effectiveness and efficiency

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 135 
 
 
73. 
Project 1 is requesting EUR 15,2 from GCF, mobilizing EUR 50 million of co-financing. 
The project will unlock REDD-plus RBP of EUR 23 million from the FCPF Carbon Fund during its 
four-year implementation period.  
74. 
The project’s budget includes resources provided by GCF (EUR 15,2 million), BMZ (EUR 
5,2 million), the Lao Government (EUR 11,8 million) and other institutions delivering parallel 
projects (EUR 33 million) for a total amount of EUR 65,2 million. 
75. 
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic has been engaged in the REDD-plus readiness 
process since 2008, demonstrating genuine commitment from the Lao Government and civil 
society stakeholders. As part of the national REDD-plus process, the Lao Government has 
designed an emission reductions programme under the FCPF Carbon Fund, and as stated before 
is currently in negotiations regarding the emission reductions payment agreement, through 
which it expects to receive up to USD 42 million of REDD-plus RBP by 2025.  
76. 
The programmatic approach of the project will invest in the enabling environment to 
support deforestation-free agriculture and sustainable forest landscape management to receive 
results-based financing, aligned with the emission reductions programme under FCPF. 
Moreover, the approach expects to not only reverse deforestation but also to prove 
regeneration with approximately 100,000 ha in additional forest area by 2030. Such a reversal 
follows sustained, uninterrupted and precipitous forest decline over the preceding in excess of 
20 years. 
77. 
The activities under outputs 2 and 3 to promote the adoption of sustainable 
deforestation-free agriculture (such as intercropping or sequential cropping of upland rice and 
maize with other crops), agroforestry and sustainable forest management (utilization of non-
timber forest products and timber harvesting under approved guidelines) will result in positive 
reflows for the beneficiaries.  
78. 
The project presents an estimated leverage impact annex that estimates to leverage EUR 
227 million unlocking EUR 23 million from FCPF REDD-plus RBP, additional carbon revenue is 
EUR 120 million from emission reductions, EUR 6 million revenues to SMEs from the green 
credit line, EUR 77 million from increased agricultural productivity, EUR 86.6 million from 
protected areas fees, EUR 825,000 from forest fees and taxes and EUR 374,000 from timber 
revenues. The iTAP believes that estimating these aggregated benefits is a unique way of 
presenting the impacts of actions from GCF resources. 
79. 
The REDD-plus funding window is granting EUR 11,098,939 to beneficiaries that will be 
channelled through funding sub windows. From this amount EUR 5,529,000 will be delivered in 
the form of cash to villages, SMEs and CSOs and EUR 5,569,939 will be delivered in form of 
services (equipment, training, etc.) to various governmental agencies. These payments will be of 
three types: operational funds, upfront payments and performance-based payments. 
Beneficiaries will include government agencies, villages and private sector entities. The 
resources will be channelled initially through the EPF and will progressively be transferred to 
the Forest Resource Development Fund. However, the proposal is not clear on this scheme and 
needs better refinement. 
80. 
For the Lao Government window, the EPF will channel funds to government ministries 
(principally, MAF and MONRE), as well as their provincial- and district-level counterparts (i.e. 
Provincial Offices of Natural Resources and Environment and District Offices of Natural 
Resources and Environment, PAFOs and DAFOs. 
81. 
Government agencies at the national and subnational levels will be required to submit 
funding proposals to the REDD-plus funding window in order to receive resources. The NPMU 
within MAF (DoF) and associated provincial (PPMU) and district (DPMU) units will assist 
government agencies to prepare funding proposals.

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 136 
 
 
82. 
For the village window, funds will be channelled to a deposit account of each village, a 
village development fund, and will be managed by Village Development Fund Committees. 
Villagers can apply to receive funds to invest in good agricultural practices aligned with an 
eligible options list (a “white list”). Funds related to forest management are based on simple 
fund management methods. Depending on the village, villagers will receive cash payments to 
implement certain forest management-related activities. Performance-based payments will be 
channelled to the village development funds as well. 
83. 
For the private sector window (SMEs), there will be private sector village partnership 
agreements. Private sector enterprises will be eligible for grants from the REDD-plus funding 
window covering 50 per cent of the establishment costs for village-based agroforestry (up to 
EUR 200/ha, approximately 50 per cent). The remaining 50 per cent will be financed by the 
enterprises, as per the private sector village partnership agreement.  
84. 
The iTAP observed in the submission that the fees payed to international consultants 
were very high compared to the salaries of local consultants and that a high percentage of 
resources was destined for consultancies rather than beneficiaries. Based on this observation, 
GIZ decided to transfer those international consultancy rates to the BMZ budget and allocate 
more GCF resources to increase the funding of the REDD-plus funding window. 
85. 
GIZ is investing in the development of a green credit line to boost agricultural 
productivity and reduce pressure on existing forests, proving concessional debt finance to SMEs 
(with a particular focus on women-led SMEs). GIZ will not use GCF funds to finance lending 
under the green credit line. Instead, the project 1 team will assist in fundraising activities to 
mobilize international public and private finance to capitalize the green credit line. The 
selection of a partner financial institution to operate the green credit line is under discussion 
involving Lao financial institutions like Bank of Lao, ACLEDA Bank Lao Ltd. and Banque Pour Le 
Commerce Exterieur Lao. 
86. 
Finally, the project has an economic model that takes into consideration the reduction of 
CO2 emissions and economic value-add-ons captured by project beneficiaries. Assuming, as a 
base case, a carbon price of EUR 25/tCO2eq (the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme 
price as of June 2019) and the economic value-added, which is derived from applying the per-
hectare findings of the financial analysis above to the entire target area of outputs 2 and 3, the 
programme in which project 1 is embedded produces a very high Net Present Value (NPV) of 
EUR 1,485 million (over a 20-year period and a 10 per cent discount rate). 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
87. 
The iTAP recommends approval of this project. 
88. 
The iTAP notes that the project involves many actors and layers that will be difficult to 
coordinate. The iTAP recommends providing a well-structured benefit-sharing mechanism with 
concrete indicators on incentives and disincentives; that will allow to clarify the governance 
mechanisms, at the national level and also at the local level where all the different players 
coincide.

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.03 
Page 137 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP 117) 
Proposal name: 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme 
through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape 
management 
Accredited entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft Fur Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GMBH 
 
Impact potential 
Thank you for the positive assessment. We welcome the iTAP’s recommendation. No further 
comments. 
Paradigm shift potential 
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments. 
Sustainable development potential 
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments. 
Needs of the recipient 
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments. 
Country ownership 
Thank you for the positive assessment. We welcome the iTAP’s recommendation. No further 
comments. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
Thank you for recommending the project approval. We welcome the iTAP’s recommendations. 
No further comments.

=== PAGE 138 ===
GENDER ASSESSMENT
Supporting a Funding Proposal to the Green Climate Fund 
Programme Title:  
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions 
Program through improved governance and sustainable 
forest landscape management  
Commissioned by Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH 
Gender documentation for FP117

=== PAGE 139 ===
Content 
1. INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ 3 
2. GCF AND GIZ GUIDELINES FOR THE PROMOTION OF GENDER EQUALITY .................................... 4 
3. METHODOLOGY ........................................................................................................................ 4 
4. GENDER-RELATED ASPECTS OF EMISSION REDUCTION THROUGH FOREST GOVERNANCE AND
FOREST LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT ............................................................................................. 6 
INTERNATIONAL LEVEL: AGENDA 2030, FAO´S CRITERIA AND INDICATORS ..................................................... 6 
REGIONAL AGREEMENTS ON FORESTRY IN THE ASEAN REGION ................................................................... 7 
FORESTRY AND BIODIVERSITY IN LAO PDR .............................................................................................. 7 
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE GCF PROGRAMME ............................................................................................. 9 
5. THE CONTEXTUAL SITUATION OF GENDER EQUALITY IN LAOS .................................................... 9 
5.1 THE META LEVEL: NORMS AND TRADITIONAL ROLES OF WOMEN AND MEN IN LAOS................................. 10 
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PLANNED GCF PROGRAMME ....................................................................................... 11 
5.2 MACRO LEVEL: INTERNATIONAL AND REGIONAL COMMITMENTS & NATIONAL LEGISLATION AND POLICIES ..... 11 
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PLANNED GCF PROGRAMME ....................................................................................... 12 
5.3 MESO LEVEL: INSTITUTIONS AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS .............................................. 13 
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PLANNED GCF PROGRAMME ....................................................................................... 15 
5.4 MICRO LEVEL: GENDER EQUALITY AMONG THE TARGET GROUP ........................................................... 15 
POLITICAL PARTICIPATION: DECISION-MAKING AND LEADERSHIP ........................................................................ 15 
EDUCATION............................................................................................................................................... 16 
ECONOMIC PARTICIPATION .......................................................................................................................... 17 
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PLANNED GCF PROGRAMME ....................................................................................... 19 
6. GENDER EXPERTISE NECESSARY TO THE PLANNED GCF PROGRAMME ...................................... 20 
7. GENDER-SENSITIVITY AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES IN PARTNER ORGANIZATIONS ................... 21 
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PLANNED GCF PROGRAMME ....................................................................................... 21 
8. RECOMMENDATIONS AND SPECIFIC ACTIONS FOR THE GCF PROGRAMME ............................... 22 
LIST OF REFERENCES ..................................................................................................................... 0 
ANNEX 1: LIST OF CONSULTED STAKEHOLDERS .............................................................................. 3 
ANNEX 2: TRANSCRIPTS OF STAKEHOLDER INTERVIEWS ................................................................ 4

=== PAGE 140 ===
List of Abbreviations 
ADB 
Asian Development Bank 
ADWLE 
Association for Development of Women and Legal Education 
ASEAN 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
CBD 
Convention on Biological Diversity 
CEDAW 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
Against Women 
CSO 
Civil Society Organization 
DAFO 
District Agriculture and Forestry Office 
DLWU 
District Lao Women´s Union 
DoF 
Department of Forestry 
ER Program 
Emission Reduction Program 
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
FLEG(T) 
Forest Law Enforcement and Governance (and Trade) 
FLR 
Forest and Landscape Restoration 
GAP 
Gender Action Plan 
GCF 
Green Climate Fund 
GFP 
Gender Focal Point 
GIZ 
German Development Cooperation (Deutsche Gesellschaft
für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH 
Lao PDR 
Lao People´s Democratic Republic 
LDC 
Least Developed Country 
LWU 
Lao Women´s Union 
MAF 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 
MoU 
Memorandum of Understanding 
MRV 
Measurement, Reporting, and Verification 
NCAWMC 
National Commission for the Advancement of Women, Mothers 
and Children 
NPA 
Non-Profit Organization 
NSAW 
National Strategy for the Advancement of Women 
NSEDP 
National Socio-Economic Development Plan 
NTFPs 
Non-Timber Forest Products 
PAFO 
Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office 
PLWU 
Provincial Lao Women`s Union 
PRAP 
Provincial REDD+ Action Plans 
REDD+ 
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation 
and the role of conservation, sustainable management of 
forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing 
countries 
RECOFTC 
The Center for People and Forests 
SDGs 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SFM 
Sustainable Forest Management 
Sub-CAW 
Ministry-based (sub-)Committee for the Advancement of 
Women 
VPA 
Voluntary Partnership Agreement

=== PAGE 141 ===
1. Introduction
Lao PDR is a landlocked, Least Developed Country (LLDC) with dwindling forest cover, from 
70% in the 1960s to 58% in 2015. Forests are not only an important sector for Laos´ national 
economy, but are also central to the income, nutrition and livelihoods of its people. Especially 
the poor rural population is strongly dependent on the natural resources derived from land 
and forests. Forest degradation and deforestation therefore pose a significant risk to the 
livelihoods of a majority of the Lao population. Women, the poor, and geographically remote 
communities are typically most vulnerable to these changes due to their limited adaptation 
capacities and limited access to alternative means of securing their livelihoods. 
The core national strategies (8th Socio-Economic Development Plan, Central Party´s Resolution 
on Land, Forestry Strategy 2020, Lao PDR´s Nationally Determined Contribution) acknowledge 
the importance of Laos´ forest resources and their sustainable management as an integral 
component of rural livelihood support and improvement. The National REDD+ Strategy and 
National REDD+ Vision to 2030 build on these national policies and emphasize the importance 
of all stakeholders, including households, communities, Government and private sector, to be 
an active contributor to reducing deforestation and degradation, and to promote forest 
restoration and reforestation. 
The planned Green Climate Fund (GCF)-supported programme will contribute to the 
implementation of the national Emission Reduction (ER) Program. With approximately 
250,000 direct beneficiaries from at least 23 different ethnic groups, and an additional 
250,000 women and men indirectly benefitting, the ER Program aims to mainstream gender 
and ethnic sensitivity throughout all planned measures. 
The proposed programme aims to support the successful implementation of the Lao PDR 
Emission Reductions Program through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape 
management. 
The 
funding 
proposal 
describes 
four 
outputs 
to 
achieve 
that: 
Output 1 will address barriers at the national and sub-national levels, including development 
planning, policy and regulatory environment, law enforcement, Measurement, Reporting, and 
Verification (MRV) activities, and sustainable financing for the forest and land use sector, and 
therefore contribute to the creation of an enabling environment for REDD+. 
Output 2 will address key drivers of deforestation and degradation. It delivers emission 
reductions on the ground at scale through reducing the expansion of agricultural activities into 
forested landscapes. That will include the promotion of deforestation-free agricultural 
practices and value-chains, modernized technologies, and access to markets and financial 
means.  
Output 3 aims to reduce emissions through Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) and Forest 
and Landscape Restoration (FLR), including the enhancement of carbon sequestration through 
the rehabilitation and restoration of degraded forest lands. Planned activities include 
systematic village forest and watershed management, support of national conservation forest 
management, and the promotion of private sector investments in community-based 
agroforestry.  
Output 4 includes management activities and other services, as well as a contingency fund. 
The Gender Action Plan and stakeholder engagement activities are also planned under this 
output.

=== PAGE 142 ===
In order to guarantee a gender-sensitive approach and implementation of the programme and 
to meet the standard requirements of the GCF and GIZ, this gender analysis provides 
recommendations 
for 
the 
funding 
proposal 
for 
the 
GCF-ERP 
programme. 
Although by no means exhaustive, this gender analysis attempts to provide both a general and 
sectoral overview on the state of gender equality in Laos, covering direct and indirect factors 
which can impact the implementation of the program.  
2. GCF and GIZ Guidelines for the Promotion of Gender Equality
According to the GCF’s Gender Policy, “proposed projects or programmes submitted to the 
Fund are required to be aligned with national policies and priorities on gender and with the 
Fund’s gender policy1”. This includes a mandatory initial socio-economic and gender 
assessment, complementary to the environmental and social safeguards (ESS) process. 
The main goal of this assessment is therefore to determine how the programme can respond 
to the needs of women and men in view of the addressed forest degradation and 
deforestation, and the proposed measures.  
Gender dynamics and related drivers of change will be identified to achieve the programme 
goals in a sustainable manner and will be reflected in the proposed activities. The assessment 
is required to include stakeholder consultations. 
Additionally, implementation budgets will be provided alongside realistic indicators at output, 
outcome and impact levels.  
In line with the above-mentioned GCF Gender Policy, GIZ’s Safeguards and Gender 
Management System and Gender Strategy2 require that a gender analysis is conducted at an 
early stage of the preparation phase of a programme in order to identify potentials for 
promoting gender equality and risks that need to be avoided, or at least mitigated, through 
specific measures. 
The results and recommendations of this analysis are directly taken into account for the 
objective, indicators, the methodological approach and the results monitoring system of the 
programme.  
The assessment will conclude with gender-responsive REDD+ Strategies with tangible benefits 
to women, and a concrete gender action plan (GAP) for addressing gender gaps and 
maximizing benefits and women’s empowerment in the forest and landscapes sector in the 
accounting area. 
3. Methodology
This gender analysis has been elaborated in three phases: 
1. A desk review of relevant national policies, legal and regulatory frameworks, and pre-
existing assessments in the sector.
2. Consultations with relevant local government authorities and villagers in three villages
in two of the target Provinces (Houaphan and Luang Namtha).
3. Further research and finalization of the gender analysis and GAP.
1 Green Climate Fund 2015 
2 GIZ 2012

=== PAGE 143 ===
Overall, the availability of recent data and information on gender in the forest sector is limited 
in Lao PDR, and data collection and analysis usually take place in the framework of larger and 
more generic country assessments of donors, and census data collection.  
The field consultations took place between 15-24th January 2019: one mission to Houaphan 
Province from 15-18th January, and one mission to Luang Namtha Province from 22-24th 
January 2019. In both Provinces, interviews were conducted with the Provincial Agriculture 
and Forestry Office (PAFO) and the Provincial Lao Women´s Union (PLWU).  
At the District level, interviews were conducted with the District Agriculture and Forestry 
Offices (DAFO) and District Lao Women´s Union (DLWU) in Xam Neua (Houaphan) and Luang 
Namtha District. In total, four village consultations took place: Ban Yard Village in Xam Neua 
District; Ban Nam Mad Mai village and Ban Nam Dee village in Luang Namtha District.  
In total, 148 people were interviewed and consulted (79 men and 69 women). 
The selected villages are of different ethnic and economic background, and showed different 
levels of women´s participation: 
-
Ban Yard village/Houaphan: Khmu and Hmong ethnicity, with two villages merged into
one. High poverty and unemployment rates, low education standard. Strong weaving
tradition, livestock as central income activity, shifting cultivation and paddy rice
production. Women were highly active during the consultations, and the organization
of two separate meetings for women and men was supported.
-
Ban Nam Mad Mai village/Luang Namtha: Akha ethnicity. Village was moved several
times in the past 20 years and has experienced improving income levels since they now
live close to Luang Namtha town. Education levels are still very low. Rubber provides
the main income, in addition to income from forest resources and rattan production.
Shifting cultivation is still practiced. The villagers refused separate meetings. The
women needed continuous translation between Akha and Lao, and appeared overall
very shy to speak up in front of the village authorities and other men.
-
Ban Nam Dee village/Luang Namtha:  Lanten/Yao ethnicity. The village is an eco-
tourism site. Income levels are proportionally higher, but with high dependence on
funds for the tourism site which will end soon, and on their income from rubber with
strong price fluctuation (monopoly of one Chinese company). Very low education
levels amongst the women; the few women who attend school tend to leave the
village. Villagers did not organize separate meetings, and the village head continuously
overpowered the attending villagers. Women´s participation could only be encouraged
through the attending national Lao Women´s Union representative.
Feedback from the consultations, including comments and recommendations have been 
integrated throughout the document. The findings and observations are crucial to the 
planning, implementation and monitoring of the planned programme. In actively integrating 
gender-sensitive and gender-responsive measures throughout the programme activities, the 
programme can not only prevent the continuation of traditional gender stereotypes, but can 
also contribute significantly to improving gender equality and equity in the target areas. This 
will largely add to the positive impact the programme can have.

=== PAGE 144 ===
4. Gender-related Aspects of Emission Reduction through Forest
Governance and Forest Landscape Management
The following chapter provides an overview of relevant gender strategies in the forestry sector 
at international, regional and national level. 
International level: Agenda 2030, FAO´s Criteria and Indicators 
The Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development, including its seventeen Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), represents the overarching framework for sustainable global 
development throughout different sectors, including gender and forest protection. Gender 
equality is addressed as a stand-alone development goal under SDG 5, but is also integrated 
into all other SDGs. With regard to forest governance and protection, three SDGs provide 
guidance for the planned programme: 
-
Sustainable production and consumption (SDG 12): development of production and
consumption that takes into account the limitation of natural resources and empower
local populations, including women, to keep the ownership of their lands and means
of production.
-
Climate action (SDG 13): women, indigenous peoples and local communities, and other
groups have the right to be represented in climate summits as climate change affects
them in different ways and they are the holders of knowledge and experiences that
can help finding adapted solutions to climate change.
-
Conserving forests and biodiversity (SDG 15): limiting the industrialization of
agriculture and forestry in order to protect forests, biodiversity and preserve local
communities’ ways of subsistence.3
The Women 2030 Program is a coalition of gender network organizations supporting the 
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. It is implemented in 50 countries all over the world, 
including Lao PDR, aiming at the realization of the SDGs in a gender-equitable and climate-just 
manner. The Program works mainly through capacity building of women´s civil society 
organizations and enables them to participate in relevant policy dialogues and monitoring, as 
well as citizens´ engagement.4  
Amongst the agencies of the United Nations, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
leads the way regarding an integrated approach of gender and forestry. FAO´s Criteria and 
Indicators for sustainable forest management (SFM) were recently updated with a gender-
responsive toolbox providing a general framework for practical integration of gender aspects 
for the forest development sector5. FAO recognizes that, even though women play a very 
important role in forest-related work and the generation of income from forest resources, this 
is rarely reflected in forestry-related planning and programming6.  
Another important international framework is provided through the Convention on Biological 
Diversity (CBD), which Laos ratified in 1996. A Gender Plan of Action (currently until 2020) is 
3 Women2030 Project: About the Sustainable Development Goals 
4 Women2030 Project: About Women2030 
5 FAO 2018 
6 FAO 16/07/2018: Sustainable Forest Management Toolbox increases gender considerations in its modules.

=== PAGE 145 ===
aligned with the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity and provides concrete tools and action steps 
to integrate gender into related national policies and implementation efforts. Parties to the 
Convention are requested to report on actions undertaken to implement the Gender Plan of 
Action under the CBD7.  
The four strategic objectives of the CBD Gender Plan of Action are: 
1. Integration of gender perspectives
2. Promoting gender equality
3. Demonstrate the benefits of integrating gender
4. Increase the effectiveness of implementation efforts
Actions based on these objectives are organized around four spheres of work: policy, 
organizational, delivery, and constituency. The Plan further provides concrete actions to 
integrate gender aspects into all mentioned spheres relevant to successful implementation of 
the Convention. 
Regional Agreements on Forestry in the ASEAN region 
The only regional agreement in the forestry and biodiversity sector is a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) on ASEAN Cooperation in Agriculture and Forest Products Promotion 
Scheme. The MoU has been renewed three times since 1994, with the current one being in 
force since 2014. As an MoU, it does not require further ratification or detailed integration 
processes, and it focuses on economic promotion rather than resource protection. None of 
the related documents considers gender aspects of the addressed schemes and production 
chains8. 
The year 2007 was seen as a political landmark in ASEAN cooperation with regard to forestry 
and related forest law enforcement and improved forest governance. The ASEAN Statement 
on Strengthening Forest Law Enforcement and Governance (FLEG) was issued in 2007 and 
paved the way to take action addressing illegal logging and its associated trade issues as a 
joint effort with regional partners and international stakeholders. The FLEG work plan 2016-
2025 does not provide specific recommendations for gendered aspects of transboundary 
trafficking of wildlife and timber or illegal logging, but it recognizes the social and cultural 
aspects in general, and poverty as a driver for related illegal practices in particular.  
Gender considerations are notably absent in the actions set for improved market access, 
capacity building for law enforcement-related authorities and community stakeholders, 
awareness-raising activities and training on forest governance for business actors, civil society 
organizations and local communities9. 
Forestry and Biodiversity in Lao PDR 
The current Lao National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016-2025 mentions the Lao 
Women´s Union as a potential civil society stakeholder to reach out to women, but it does not 
take gender issues into account beyond that. The proposed way forward for the current 
strategy, however, recognizes that future training efforts supported under the National 
Strategy should also consider women, youth and ethnic groups beyond the internal 
77 Convention on Biological Diversity: 2015-2020 Gender Plan of Action 
8 Memorandum of Understanding on ASEAN Cooperation in Agriculture and Forest Products Promotion Scheme 2014 
9 Compare Work Plan for Forest Law Enforcement and Governance (FLEG) in ASEAN, 2016-2025

=== PAGE 146 ===
Government system. Furthermore, the Strategy also proposes to consider women and youth 
leaders as specialists and training resources in their function as keepers of Traditional 
Knowledge10.  
With regard to the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on ASEAN Cooperation in 
Agriculture and Forest Products Promotion Scheme, Laos assigned the Director of the Division 
of Planning under the Department of Forestry at the MAF to be the national coordinator and 
focal point for the other ASEAN member countries. The overall coordination of all ASEAN 
members under this MoU is facilitated through the ASEAN Forest Products Industry Club – led 
by the Malaysian Timber Industry Board and therefore the private sector. Given the variety of 
stakeholders involved in the concerned promotion schemes, gender considerations would 
have broad potential to be taken up, but do not form part of any guiding principles of the Club 
or the agreement itself.  
It is not likely that the MAF´s focal point will proactively add a gender dimension to the 
cooperation. The MAF has its own gender focal point who could be consulted for such matters, 
but that is usually only utilized when projects/partners set specific requirements towards 
gender mainstreaming.   
The Lao FLEGT Voluntary Partnership Agreement (VPA) process is still in the negotiation phase, 
with expectations for its ratification and signing in 2020. Despite the relevance for gender- 
and ethnicity-sensitive inclusion in areas concerning production and village forests, and the 
implications of the VPA on forest governance structures, the FLEG VPA negotiations 
completely lack a respective gender lens11. In a 2018 gender analysis, the GIZ-FLEGT 
programme in Laos pointed out that most FLEGT-VPA meetings were predominantly led by 
senior men. If social issues were raised, it was mostly initiated by the represented CSOs, and 
had a rather general focus on people´s benefit-sharing12. A gender imbalance at decision-
maker levels, combined with generally low gender knowledge, is a significant barrier to 
successful integration of gender aspects into Laos´ forestry sector as a whole. 
The National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP) VIII, as Laos´ guiding strategic 
document, refers to environmental protection and natural resource management in section 
3.4.3, but its content is not specifically gender-differentiated. The cross-cutting section on 
Women´s Development, however, offers several targets which directly or indirectly influence 
the forestry sector and therefore can be used for strategic decisions/communication of such 
decisions towards donors and partners of the GCF programme, such as to “ensure gender 
equality in economic opportunities, including access to resources such as land, funds, 
technologies and basic infrastructure (electricity, roads, markets)”, and the goal to “promote 
women to take up 20% of leading management-level positions”13.  
The main legal document in the forestry sector is the new Forestry Law (currently still under 
final revision). The current version (July 13th 2018) does not mention gender or women in any 
of its articles. The same applies to the recently-developed Provincial REDD+ Action Plans 
(PRAPs) and the Law Enforcement Action Plans in the interviewed Provinces. The interviewed 
Government partners at Provincial and District level all agreed that the Forestry Law itself 
does not need to mention gender dimensions explicitly since other relevant legislation – the 
10 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016-2025 
11 Compare: FLEGT VPA process in Lao PDR 2018 
12 GIZ/Bode 2018 
13 Lao PDR´s National Socio-Economic Development Plan VIII 2016-2020

=== PAGE 147 ===
Constitution, the Labor Law, the Family Law, the Law on Women´s Union, and the Law on the 
Development and Protection of Women – already provide the legal basis for gender equality 
throughout all sectors. The interviewed partners stated that gender aspects in the 
development of the PRAPs were covered by involving the Lao Women´s Union in the 
respective consultations. They did not see any entry points for direct inclusion in the resulting 
PRAPs due to the technical nature of the measures. All interview partners emphasized, 
however, that future guidelines and regulations need to provide concrete guidance on the 
integration of gender into implementation structures.  
 
The interviews also showed that the Provincial and District Forestry agencies might possess 
only limited awareness on the relevance of gender-responsive measures in their sector. This 
was signaled by their responses, which lacked concrete understanding of gender 
mainstreaming, as well as the fact that most interview partners in the forestry offices were 
men. One office mentioned that they have a gender focal point but did not consider inviting 
her to the interview. This is rather symbolic of the under-utilization of gender resources within 
the partner structures. 
 
The key message from the interview partners was coherent with other programme findings: 
the key challenge to effective gender mainstreaming in the forestry sector is only partly in the 
legal provisions but mainly at the implementation level. This includes knowledge and 
awareness, as well as personnel and financial resources, and lack of designated and 
committed responsibilities beyond the Lao Women´s Union.  
 
Implications for the GCF programme 
The planned GCF programme can draw valuable recommendations for the practical 
integration of gender into forest governance from international frameworks and action plans, 
as mentioned above. Regional structures and existing legal frameworks do not provide 
sufficient guidance for all concerned stakeholders for a gender-sensitive implementation of 
the ER program or its associated GCF programme. A valuable contribution of the programme 
can therefore lie in supporting the development of guidelines and regulations for forest 
governance and protection which are sensitive to the diverse needs of the communities with 
regard to gender, ethnicity and economic status. Furthermore, the programme might be able 
to significantly promote gender balance in stakeholder meetings and other platforms relevant 
to decision-making.  
The institutional structures for improved gender-responsive forest governance do currently 
exist (ministries´ gender focal points, Lao Women´s Union), but currently lack in-depth 
technical knowledge, budgets and the internal mandates to be taken seriously enough.  
 
5. The Contextual Situation of Gender Equality in Laos 
Laos currently ranks 106th on the Gender Inequality Index (rank 138 on general Human 
Development Index; as of 2015). Major negative contributors to that ranking are the maternal 
mortality ratio, the adolescent birth rate and the low female proportion of people with at least 
some secondary education. Positively influencing contributors are the proportionally high 
share of female parliamentarians and the high female labor force participation rate14. 
                                                     
14 Gender Inequality Index

=== PAGE 148 ===
5.1 The Meta Level: Norms and Traditional Roles of Women and Men in Laos 
Despite a strong legal framework stating and promoting the equality of Lao women and men, 
the influence of gender norms and traditional roles is still seen as one of the major obstacles 
in achieving factual gender equality in Laos. This becomes most visible in decision-making 
positions throughout all sectors, as well as at the community level where women continue to 
struggle to participate on equal terms and in equal numbers.  
Gender equality is additionally influenced by ethnic background in Laos. The Lao-Tai group 
represents 67% of Lao PDR`s population, along with three major non-Lao-Tai ethno-linguistic 
groups, namely the Mon-Khmer (21%), the Hmong-Lu Mien (8%) and the Chine-Tibetan (3%). 
These groups further splinter into 49 distinct ethnicities and 200 ethnic sub-groups. 
Many traditional norms within Lao-Tai cultures are favorable with regard to gender equality: 
women are often financial decision-makers, inherit land and property more often, and have 
gained equal access to education. The other three ethno-linguistic groups mostly have 
stronger patriarchal traditions and norms, limiting women´s access to decision-making, 
property and education15. 
Violence against women is, however, a reality for women from all ethnic backgrounds in Laos. 
Research indicates that around 20% of Lao women have been physically and/or sexually 
abused by a partner or non-partner, and at least 35% of women live in circumstances of 
emotional violence, with both figures estimated to be much higher since most cases go 
unreported. Perhaps more jarringly, the majority of women and almost half of all men in Laos 
believe violence is justified if a woman does not adhere to traditional gender norms and roles, 
such as leaving the house without permission or burning the food16. This indicates that 
problems are both in enforcement and broader issues of tradition and culture that cannot be 
fixed in the short-term17. Village Mediation Units are the first micro institution to deal with 
cases of domestic violence and often smooth over cases for the sake of village unity and the 
rewarded status of “case-free village” (no referrals to district courts). Traditional gender roles 
directly influence the village-based justice system, in addition to women´s generally weaker 
access to justice outside the village structures due to illiteracy, lack of Lao language skills and 
legal knowledge, and lack of means and permission to travel. 
Lao PDR has one of the highest rates of early marriage in the region as part of traditional 
practices, including “bride kidnappings” and child marriages. One-third of women marry 
before age 18, while one-tenth marry before age 15. Early marriage is often associated with 
early pregnancy. In 2012, 19.4 percent of reproductive-age women had given birth by age 18, 
while 3.6 percent had done so by age 15. Both early marriage and adolescent birth have a 
negative impact on the education and livelihood opportunities of women18. 
The impact of these factors on a programme cannot be underestimated. It affects women´s 
participation, their confidence to speak up and voice opposing opinions, and their willingness 
and capacity to participate in village management tasks. Many rural women themselves also 
15 King & van de Walle 2007 
16 World Bank and Asian Development Bank 2012 
17 Open Development Laos 2018: SDG 5 Gender Equality 
18 Compare United Nations in Lao PDR 2018

=== PAGE 149 ===
think that women are generally not capable of decision-making due to lack of education and 
perceived lack of inherent leadership qualities, a viewpoint that was expressed in two out of 
three village interviews during the assessment mission. The third village had higher income 
rates for the women and a culture of women being part of decision-making. The latter is the 
more decisive factor, since another village also claimed that women earn more than men, but 
there it did not lead to higher participation rates of women.  
 
Implications for the planned GCF programme 
In addition to avoiding the continuation of existing gender stereotypes and norms which are 
of disadvantage to Lao women, the planned GCF programme has a significant potential to 
contribute positively to gender equality. Inclusive awareness-raising measures targeting 
women as carriers of traditional knowledge and change agents within their families have great 
outreach, especially when presented in different ethnic languages, and tailored to lower 
education levels. 
Whenever possible, any form of awareness-raising, village consultation, training or 
dissemination meeting should proactively involve components of empowerment for village 
women. This includes separate meetings between men, women and village authorities to 
create safe spaces for everyone to share, trainings for concerned staff on inclusive facilitation, 
sending staff who speak ethnic languages or providing budget to hire translators, and 
designing any concrete activities with the specific social conditions of a village in mind.  
Since one of the GCF programme’s central approaches will be to create new production 
methods and value chains, and therefore new income structures for communities, it is 
important to minimize financial risks for participating families. Research indicates that 
financial and work-related problems increase the likelihood of domestic violence, especially 
in families where women have lower educational levels and lower incomes in comparison to 
their husbands19. Where forestry regulations affect family businesses, or communities are 
supported to change traditional ways of living and earning, it can be assumed that women are 
at a higher risk of domestic violence.  
The GCF programme could therefore contribute to a prevention of violence against women 
through the formulation of gender-sensitive and -responsive prevention strategies, aiming at 
women´s skill development and empowerment, and men´s change of attitudes towards 
gender equality. 
 
5.2 Macro Level: International and Regional Commitments & National Legislation and 
Policies 
At the international level, Laos is a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms 
of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). A recent Capacity Assessment on CEDAW 
implementation in Laos conducted by the Association for Development of Women and Legal 
Education (ADWLE) concluded that, despite having a very advanced legal framework for 
gender equality, there is only very limited implementation of these laws due to lack of 
capacities, knowledge and budget20 - basically, the exact same situation as in the forestry 
sector, with strategic frameworks but a lack of capacities to implement them properly.  
 
Besides that, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are having a strong overall influence 
on Lao strategies and policies, including SDG 5 which is aiming to achieve gender equality and 
                                                     
19 NCAW 2015 
20 Compare ADWLE 2016

=== PAGE 150 ===
empower women and girls. The elevated relevance of the SDGs for the Lao PDR is connected 
to the country´s efforts to graduate from Least-Developed Country status. Even though the 
original goal to graduate in 2020 cannot be reached anymore, the Government is determined 
to further push towards it. Efforts to promote women´s economic integration and 
opportunities 
will 
directly 
contribute 
to 
graduating 
from 
LDC 
status21. 
At the regional level, several ASEAN declarations lay the foundations for gender 
mainstreaming in the region. The Declaration of the Advancement of Women in the ASEAN 
Region22 was signed in 1988 and focuses mainly on the promotion and implementation of 
equitable and effective participation in all fields and at all levels. Even though the declaration 
mentions the political, social and cultural sphere, the emphasis is on women´s economic 
participation. 
The social dimension was added consecutively in later declarations, namely with the ASEAN 
Declaration Against Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (2004); the Ha Noi 
Declaration on the Enhancement of Welfare and Development of ASEAN Women and Children 
(2010); the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration; the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence 
against Women and Elimination of Violence against Children in ASEAN (2013); and other 
relevant declarations, especially on social protection.  
A further important step towards integration of gender aspects was the ASEAN Declaration 
on Gender-Responsive Implementation of the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and Sustainable 
Development Goals in 2017. The Declaration provides unusually detailed guidance on the 
improvement of gender-responsive data collection and analysis, and policy review, 
emphasizes the necessity to end violence against women (including making men and boys 
engaged agents of change efforts), and encourages cooperation with women´s groups and 
organizations for improved gender-responsive implementation23. 
Lao PDR has a strong legal framework for promoting gender equality. The revised Constitution 
of 2003 and other laws explicitly state that women and men have equal rights in all spheres - 
political, social, cultural and in the family.  
Women’s equal rights are also stipulated in the Family, Land and Property Laws; the Labor 
Law; the Electoral Law; and the Penal Law.  
The Law on the Development and Protection of Women (2004) is the most specific Lao 
legislation with regard to equal rights and access for women, and provided the framework for 
several later laws defining women´s rights, and served also as a basis to form the National 
Commission for the Advancement of Women and Mother-Child. 
Implications for the planned GCF programme 
The legal foundation for the promotion of gender mainstreaming into policies and regulations 
is strong. Laos has an elevated interest in adhering to international agreements relevant to 
gender mainstreaming. The ASEAN Declarations relevant to gender provide regional entry 
points, and the national framework to integrate gender into policies and strategies at all levels 
is broad and strong. Unfortunately, this strength might at the same time constitute a barrier 
for effective integration of gender into sector-specific legislation, including in the forestry 
sector: as mentioned also by interviewed Government staff, integration is not perceived as 
21 UNDP 2017 
22 ASEAN 1988 
23 ASEAN Declaration on Gender-Responsive Implementation of the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and Sustainable Development Goals in 
2017

=== PAGE 151 ===
relevant because overarching legislation is seen as sufficient to inform the interpretation of 
sector-specific laws such as the Forestry Law. The planned GCF programme can therefore 
contribute substantially to an improvement of gender-responsive legal frameworks in 
supporting the development of gender-sensitive and -responsive regulations, guidelines and 
by-laws based on the upcoming revised Forestry Law. In adherence with the ASEAN 
declaration to engage with women´s organizations to improve policy analysis24, a Lao-based 
CSO such as ADWLE can assist with gender-proofing any planned intervention in this area. To 
develop capacity of the relevant Government agency, the Gender Focal Points/Sub-CAW 
within the MAF (national and Provincial level) should also be involved in these processes as 
much as possible (more under 5.3). 
5.3 Meso Level: Institutions and Non-Governmental Organizations 
The National Commission for the Advancement of Women and Mother-Child (NCAWMC) is 
responsible for formulating and implementing the national policy for the advancement of 
women, as well as for mainstreaming gender aspects in all sectors. NCAWMC’s capacity and 
institutional support remains limited despite donor support for capacity development. 
The NCAWMC is also responsible for formulating the National Strategy for the Advancement 
of Women (NSAW), which is renewed every five years and seeks to promote and enhance 
equality between men and women in Laos in all spheres. The inclusion of the strategy’s goals 
in other strategies and plans, including the National Socio-Economic Development Plan 
(NSEDP), is advancing well, but it often lacks implementation power and funded mandates25. 
The lead Government agency in the forest sector, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 
(MAF), was the first ministry to create a Division for the Advancement of Women (“Sub-
CAW”), and a ministry-internal Gender Network with focal points in each department.  
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) supported this development significantly between 2006-
2008. The final report of this programme (“Capacity Building for Gender Mainstreaming in 
Agriculture and Forestry in Lao PDR”) concludes that while MAF´s commitment to gender 
mainstreaming and to the established structures is very high, the gender division remains 
understaffed and therefore with low absorption capacity26. Interviews with two Provincial and 
District Agriculture and Forestry Offices mirrored these capacity gaps. If there was a Gender 
Focal Point (GFP) appointed in the office, the concerned staff member was not invited to the 
interviews because the senior staff did not consider her knowledgeable enough to be of value 
for the meeting, which they considered to be of a rather technical nature. 
On the strategic side, the MAF developed a Strategy for Gender Equality in the Agriculture and 
the Forestry Sector (2016–2025) and Vision 203027 that aim for men and women of all ethnic 
groups to have equal access to natural resources, agricultural land, shelter, development 
funds and technical support. Vision 2030 additionally states that women should hold at least 
30% of leadership positions.  
The constitutional mandate to protect women’s rights and interests is traditionally with the 
Lao Women’s Union (LWU; Article 7 of Constitution). The LWU has representation in every 
village, with one member of the LWU representing women in each village council. Through its 
24 Ibid, page 3 of the Declaration 
25 World Bank and Asian Development Bank 2012 
26 Asian Development Bank 2008 
27  Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 2015

=== PAGE 152 ===
extensive networks, the LWU has been able to bring women’s voices into public 
administration at all levels — often providing the only female voice at the table28. The LWU 
also has its own policy research center (Gender Resource Information and Development 
Center, Vientiane), which has undertaken research tasks on issues such as violence against 
women and gender budgeting on behalf of donors29.  
The current National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP VIII) foresees a 70% LWU 
membership of women 15 years and older30. Development partners will therefore almost 
automatically work with members of the LWU and should capitalize on its vast access to, and 
understanding of, Lao women as much as possible.  
 
The Lao Front for National Construction oversees and coordinates all Lao mass organizations 
and is responsible for overall social mobilization and the inclusion of ethnic groups in national 
development. At the local level, the interviewed villages shared the view that the Lao Front is 
a key player in organizing activities related to forest protection and resource management. 
 
There is a diverse range of civil society organizations (CSOs) in Laos active in areas of particular 
relevance to gender equality, including women’s rights and development, child protection, 
support of people with disabilities, environment, education and health. CSOs in Laos are, 
however, usually not actively invited by the Lao Government to participate in policy dialogue 
at any stage. Most CSOs are therefore implementers at the local level but have limited 
opportunities to feed their implementation experiences into policy processes31.  
Organizations, Non-Profit Associations and NGOs which are active in the nexus of forestry and 
gender in Laos are32: 
 
- 
RECOFTC - The Center for People and Forests 
- 
Green Community Alliance (GCA) 
- 
Green Community Development Association (GCDA) 
- 
Love Natural Resources Association (LNRA) 
- 
Maeying Huamjai Phattana (MHP) 
 
Organizations which are not directly active in the forestry sector but are valuable partners 
with in-depth gender expertise are: 
 
- 
Gender Development Association (GDA; gender, law, community development, 
education) 
- 
Participatory Development Training Center (PADETC; participatory community 
development) 
- 
Association for Development of Women and Legal Education (ADWLE; law, gender) 
 
RECOFTC appears to have the strongest ties to the Department of Forestry (DoF/MAF). A joint 
national consultation workshop in October 2018 with the DoF, other Government partners, 
CSOs and private sector representatives focused solely on the identification of potential inputs 
to promote gender equality in the Lao forestry sector33. MAF´s Strategic Plan to restore forest 
                                                     
28 World Bank and Asian Development Bank 2012 
29 ADB 2011 
30 National Socio-Economic Development Plan 2016-2020 
31 ADB 2011 
32 Compare Lao CSO Directory 2017 
33 RECOFTC November 2018

=== PAGE 153 ===
cover to 70% of the country´s terrain until 2020 includes the goal of having at least 30% of all 
Government positions in conservation work held by women34 - a goal strongly promoted by 
RECOFTC. The close collaboration leads to the assumption that RECOFTC has valuable and 
valued cooperation experience with the DoF which can be utilized by other programs.  
 
Implications for the planned GCF programme 
 
Based on the existing institutional structures and strategies, the planned GCF programme has 
strong leverage to link up with MAF – particularly the DoF – for institutional support to 
promote female leadership and participation in stakeholder processes from the national to 
the local level. The political commitment seems currently particularly high and should be 
capitalized on. The approach should be two-fold: utilizing the existing gender structures (GFPs, 
MAF´s Sub-CAW, LWU on all levels) while at the same time actively involving senior and 
technical staff to foster a Government culture where gender is increasingly mainstreamed. 
Capacity development is necessary for all stakeholders, since only very few Government staff 
possess in-depth knowledge on gender and REDD+ at the same time. The efforts which have 
already been put into mainstreaming gender into forestry activities also need to become more 
prominent and shared as best practice35. The planned GCF programme can support the REDD 
desk to compile these practices and to disseminate them to other line agencies, departments, 
Provincial and District agencies, and LWU.  
 
The interviewed Provincial and District LWU offices demonstrated high commitment towards 
supporting the planned GCF programme but admitted that they need more technical expertise 
to be of meaningful assistance, and budget to contribute responsibly and by their own means. 
A technical training for all concerned Provincial and District LWU, P/DAFO, P/DOFI (Forest 
Inspection) on gender in forestry/REDD+ is recommended to mainstream efforts and align the 
local implementers and decision-makers. 
Furthermore, the planned GCF programme will need to ensure that the acquired knowledge 
is utilized. Gender aspects can be integrated into Standard Operating Procedures, guidelines, 
manuals and work plans, and appointed staff should be given the responsibility to regularly 
follow up on the status of implementation. Trainings and gender-sensitive guidelines alone 
will likely not be sufficient to ensure effective implementation. 
High-level, regular meetings, such as programme steering committee meetings, should make 
it a requirement to report on gender aspects and related implementation efforts.  
 
5.4 Micro Level: Gender Equality among the Target Group 
This section briefly examines the gender equality situation in the areas of political 
participation, decision-making and leadership, education and economic participation.  
 
 
 
Political participation: Decision-making and leadership 
With 27.5% female Members of Parliament, Laos is well above global average (22.5%). 
However, women in decision-making positions in the district, provincial and national 
                                                     
34 RECOFTC October 2018 
35 RECOFTC November 2018

=== PAGE 154 ===
Government agencies constitute only 5% (as of 2012). The highest proportion of women in 
the Government can be found in the legislative branches at the national level (more than a 
quarter)36; the lowest proportion of women beyond administrative support roles can be found 
at the Provincial and District level. This is likely tied to the factors explained in the sections on 
education and health.  
 
Within the potential partners of the planned GCF programme, representation seems to vary 
between different ministries and departments, but generally the programme also faces a 
lower representation of female leadership throughout its activities. Forestry at the community 
level is highly “female” on the user side, with women collecting non-timber forest products 
(NTFPs) and making up a significant proportion of the small business workforce in the forest 
and timber sector.  
The interviewed village women and men stated that women spend usually more time in the 
forests and have a more detailed knowledge of the status of the forest resources. The 
interviewed Government partners added that village women additionally also showed more 
intrinsic interest in protecting the surrounding forests. At the same time, none of the 
interviewed villages included women in the village forest management committee or any 
other existing form of decision-making over forest resources.  
Accordingly, the lack of women´s representation at any decision-making level often results in 
a lack of consideration of women´s needs and potentials in in the forestry sector.  
 
The land sector shows similar dynamics: whereas women and men have the same legal rights 
to land, women´s factual land tenure is still less secure than men´s. Women are also often not 
actively included in decision-making steps of land use planning (LUP). The subsequent forest 
management plan (if developed) is then seen as an even further specialized step which women 
perceive having even less access to. The provided reasons in the village interviews were lack 
of education, lack of technical knowledge and lack of confidence to participate in management 
decisions. Traditional gender norms of many ethnic groups further contribute to these 
dynamics.  
 
Education 
The gender equality gap has narrowed at all three levels of education enrolment in Laos, but 
challenges persist in completing education.  
Two key determinants drive the patterns of gender inequity in education: First, girls are more 
likely to be kept at home due to safety concerns and household responsibilities, especially if 
the secondary school is far from home. Second, parents do not place the same value on 
education for girls as they do for boys, especially if this view is part of their cultural tradition, 
or if the parents are poor, or have little or no education, especially the mother37. 
 
The widest gap in gender equality is found among children from rural areas without road 
access, children from the non Lao-Tai groups, children of uneducated mothers and children of 
families in the poorest quintiles. This gap is much larger in secondary education: for example, 
in the appropriate age group of the poorest quintiles, 66 girls attend secondary school for 
every 100 boys.38 
 
                                                     
36 The United Nations in Lao PDR 2015 
37 Compare United Nations in Lao PDR 2018 
38 Ibid.

=== PAGE 155 ===
The majority of interviewed village women had no or very low education. This lack of 
education was named - by men and women alike - as the main reason for the absence of 
women in village decision-making committees and groups in general, and particularly with 
regard to the villages´ forestry.  
 
Economic participation 
The share of women in wage employment is low in all sectors, at 35 percent. Instead, among 
the unpaid workers for the family, about 70% percent were women in 2015, but only 32% are 
identified as “own account workers” – which suggests that women are less likely engaged in 
productive work with income they control39. This reality was mirrored in the interviewed 
villages: women and men agreed that women work longer hours in a day while men do less 
and/or focus more on physically-demanding tasks. Accordingly, men produce more tangible 
results and have more time available for management-related tasks. In the visited Akha village 
in Luang Namtha, the village authorities noted that the village women earned more money 
than their men but had no role in the village decision-making. Several women stated that they 
would strongly like to be involved in the management of forest resources. 
 
An equal share of men and women make up the working population (77% each, as of 201540), 
but women generally occupy the lower rungs of the labor market. Women are relatively more 
excluded from formal sectors and the social protection that this entails. Some 64 percent of 
workers in the elementary occupations and 63 percent of those classified as service, shop and 
market sales workers are women. On the other hand, men account for the majority of civil 
servants, professionals, technicians and other sectors.  
The programme partners of the planned GCF programme reflect these proportions. As 
mentioned above, the Government has already set a 30% goal of having women hold positions 
in the conservations sector, but implementation lags behind.  
 
The private sector is creating new opportunities for entrepreneurs in Lao PDR, and 30-40 
percent of these new entrepreneurs are women. About 74% of small and medium enterprises 
in Laos are family-owned41, including the wood-processing sector which is influenced by the 
regulations and negotiations around the Lao FLEGT-VPA process, and potentially other 
regulations which will be supported by the planned GCF programme.  
Even though men are often the more visible ones in these small family businesses, it is usually 
the whole family which is engaged and therefore equally impacted by regulations to their 
business. 
 
Although women have significant roles in agriculture and forestry, they have less access to, 
and control of, farming and forestry-based inputs and outputs.42 The village interviews 
showed the same tendency: the village women all stated that the key decisions on land and 
forest 
are 
usually 
taken 
by 
their 
husbands 
and 
the 
village 
authorities.  
Experience from other sectors, such as fisheries, shows that women’s multiple roles in 
traditional, complex and lengthy value chains tend to diminish when value chains are 
modernised. This may also be true for the forestry sector, but the lack of data does not allow 
us a clearer picture.  
                                                     
39 Compare World Bank and Asian Development Bank 2012 
40 Human Development Index 2018 
41 Southiseng & Welsh 2010 
42 Compare United Nations in Lao PDR 2018

=== PAGE 156 ===
Women’s rights to forest and tree products tend to be restricted to products that are not 
profitable or have little commercial benefits43.  
 
Gender wage gaps are present, and women work longer work hours than men, as they spend 
7 hours per day on productive and reproductive tasks (men: 5.7 hours).44 Women’s time 
poverty and physical safety concerns limit their wider access to, and use of, forest resources. 
In the case of the interviewed villages, it mainly hindered women from participating in forest 
management tasks, including decision-making.  
Women can face discrimination in the market when marketing their produce directly, and also 
can be stymied by lack of language skills, access to information or training45.  
 
Especially in the rural areas, women´s lower income often also directly translates into a lower 
decision-making power in the family: the lower their income, the lesser their voice. Women 
with higher own-income possess higher decision-making power, but the final say is usually 
with the man as head of the household. Disadvantages from income disparities are therefore 
particularly relevant in combination with certain cultural gender norms.  
This needs to be taken into account in all programme activities where behavior change and 
new income activities are promoted, or where regulations affect family businesses or access 
to forest resources. 
 
Microfinance access has been shown to empower communities if the villagers are not 
amongst the poorest. In that case, microfinance is often seen as too risky. Women are often 
more hesitant to take on debts to protect their families, and use micro credits most often for 
health emergencies and children´s education.  
Village Development Funds are often managed by women, and many ethnic groups´ women 
are responsible for the families´ financial management. The interviewed villagers and local 
authorities agreed that access to micro grants as planned by the GCF programme would create 
more opportunities for the local communities to improve their income situation, including 
complementary micro investments into alternative, deforestation-free agricultural practices.  
 
The change and volatility of market demand, increase of entrepreneurship and off-farm work 
opportunities leave many rural women rather intimidated, since they perceive their lack of 
education and skills, including their lack of knowledge how to reach and understand a non-
visible market, as barriers to their potential for increasing their productivity or starting a 
business. Most women seemed afraid of starting something entirely new and tend to stick to 
familiar work such as agriculture and NTFPs, animal husbandry and weaving.   
 
The interviewed local Government agencies and local villagers welcome private sector 
investment as long as it does benefit the communities in terms of higher income and less 
workload, as well as enhanced skills. All parties expressed the wish to have the Government 
strongly controlling such potential investments to limit risks for the communities. The 
interviewed women stated that they do not feel confident to participate in decisions over 
investments. 
                                                     
43 Climate Investment Funds 2017 
44 Compare United Nations in Lao PDR 2018 
45 Compare Climate Investment Funds 2017

=== PAGE 157 ===
Implications for the planned GCF programme 
The planned GCF programme will have great leverage to advocate for improving women´s 
representation in forest management positions from the national to the local level.  
At the national level, the political willingness to increase the number of female Government 
staff in conservation work exists. A consultation with DoF and RECOTFC could help to shed 
light on the known reasons for the lack of women in this sector. A gender-proofing of Human 
Resources procedures and internal career advancement processes could be advised. The 
programme could furthermore initiate a sector-based mentoring system to motivate 
superiors to promote younger colleagues, and to build the capacities of junior staff using 
internal resources.  
 
At the Provincial and District level, the same principles apply, but one additional barrier 
hinders field teams to be more gender-balanced: it is more difficult to find female staff willing 
to travel to remote villages. This is even more relevant knowing that women living in remoter 
villages are often the ones who would open up most to female staff for reasons of culture and 
lack of confidence. Female staff barriers to traveling are usually safety concerns and family 
considerations. The GCF programme could investigate possible support measures in addition 
to building female staff confidence in technical areas through trainings. At the same time, the 
LWU should be supported both with technical trainings (REDD+ and gender, forest 
management and gender) and budget to travel and accompany planned community 
measures.  
 
As the analysis showed, women are often the key knowledge carriers regarding the status of 
community forests and its resources. Since the programme plans to support the development 
of a National Forest Inventory and Monitoring system, it would make sense to explore the 
utilization of local women for community monitoring support. The interviewed women and 
men, and local Government partners, all agreed that such measure would be suitable to the 
local realities, and the local women were very supportive of this suggestion.  
 
The influence of the education gender gap is also very relevant for the scope of work of the 
planned GCF programme: global experience shows that education has considerable power to 
help individuals reconsider environmentally harmful lifestyles and behavior46. Women´s lower 
education levels can therefore influence the capacities of target communities to fully 
understand and support environmental protection measures and change of behaviors. Since 
the interviewed men and women agreed that women traditionally possess deeper 
understanding about the forest resources, spend considerable time in them as users, and – 
according to the interviewed Government staff – are more likely to show interest in forest 
protection, educational measures should particularly target women. Younger men and 
women can also play a key role in protection measures, since the interviewed villages revealed 
that the Lao Youth Union at community level is already assigned with forest protection tasks.  
 
A lower education status is also often mentioned as the key reason for Lao women´s low levels 
of confidence, which strongly effects their willingness to aim for leading positions in their 
communities and to be active change-makers in their families and villages. This was absolutely 
reinforced in the village interviews: all women groups showed high interest and willingness to 
                                                     
46 World Education Blog 2015

=== PAGE 158 ===
participate in forest management and decision-making much more than they currently do but 
felt insecure about their lack of education. The planned GCF programme therefore needs to 
install mechanisms to give men and women with lower education levels access to 
management positions. This can be achieved with the development and promotion of 
alternative requirement catalogues to qualify for management tasks, and targeted skills 
development activities. 
 
Research could be commissioned by the planned GCF programme to identify and highlight 
what opportunities exist to strengthen women’s roles as producers and processors, including 
support for financial services, financial management and business development services. The 
results of this research should influence any further analysis on new potential value chains 
promoting deforestation-free agriculture. 
 
The planned GCF programme can consider accessing information about the impact of 
regulations on women in family businesses, and what measures could mitigate this impact, or 
create pathways for new income opportunities which consider cultural limitations and current 
change behavior. The interviewed women and men were keen to find alternative income 
paths, but also showed high risk-avoidance attitudes based on their currently vulnerable 
economic status and previous negative experiences with new crops and investors. Women are 
also interested in micro-finance, but targeted support is needed to enable them to build 
confidence to take on more prominent management positions in village management 
committees, and to strengthen their capacities on financial and business literacy. Such courses 
could build off of successful initiatives, such as the courses implemented by ILO together with 
LWU and other government departmetns to strengthen womens engageemtn in village 
banking called “Get Ahead for Women in Enterprise“, a course designed for poor women who 
want to start or expand a micro business.47  
 
It is further recommended to support gender sensitization for men and women, raising 
awareness about gender equality as well as the national legal and regulatory framework. In 
addition, LWU should serve as an important resource for rural women providing information 
on key services.   
 
6. Gender expertise necessary to the planned GCF programme 
The planned GCF programme should employ at least one advisor with in-depth knowledge 
and implementation experience in gender equality and mainstreaming in the conservation 
sector. The vacancy should explicitly require such expertise.  
To ensure sound integration into all activities, this position would ideally be with a senior 
technical advisor rather than with a junior position. This person would be most appropriate to 
also become the general Gender Focal Point of the programme to oversee gender 
mainstreaming efforts, including gender sensitization for both men and women.  
It is important, however, to equally empower all team members to be able to mainstream 
gender into their work areas, especially the senior staff and the staff responsible for 
monitoring and evaluation.  
                                                     
47 For more information refer to: https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-
bangkok/documents/publication/wcms_099876.pdf

=== PAGE 159 ===
If not all staff possess sufficient gender expertise, the programme should invest in a technical 
gender training aiming to enable the team to proactively and effectively integrate gender into 
all workstreams.  
All standard procedures of the programme should be streamlined to review gender aspects 
throughout the course of the programme.  
The GIZ Gender Strategy, GIZ Guidelines on Designing a Gender-Sensitive Results-Based 
Monitoring System, the Practical Guide to Gender-Responsive Programme Management and 
the Guidelines on Gender in Reporting provide useful guidance for the whole team.  
Additional technical expertise to integrate gender into forestry projects is provided by FAO´s 
Practical Field Guide, “How to mainstream gender in forestry”48. 
 
7. Gender-sensitivity and Equal Opportunities in Partner Organizations 
The main implementing partner of the planned GCF programme will be the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and the EPF (host of the National REDD+ Funding Window).  
The majority of staff – especially at senior level – within the responsible departments and 
divisions, including the REDD+ desk, are men. Hence, there is a general gender imbalance at 
partner level. This imbalance becomes worse at the Provincial and District level. As mentioned 
above, the DoF is striving to hire and promote more women into its divisions to increase the 
number of women in conservation work to at least 30%. A current figure could not be 
obtained.  
Representation in terms of numbers is one issue; the factual participation of female staff who 
are already working in the departments is another, as particularly female junior staff are often 
not actively participating in meetings. This was also observed in the Provincial DAFO/DOFI 
interviews. 
The Lao Women´s Union is not seen as a direct implementation partner but should be utilized 
by the programme as much as possible to compensate for the current lack of gender capacities 
and to ensure a continuous commitment to gender equality.  
 
Implications for the planned GCF programme 
Besides supporting the partners in proactive and improved recruitment and promotion 
processes of female staff, the current gender capacities of all staff seem to be rather low. The 
GCF programme should emphasize the importance of gender mainstreaming clearly and from 
the design stage all the way through to evaluation of activities. Knowing that partners do 
particularly well in response to quantified analysis of the costs of gender inequality, the GCF 
programme could benefit substantially from a commissioned study used for partner 
communication and capacity development measures. 
A gender training for all involved partners – including the LWU – should be supported, 
focussing on the gender dimensions of the forestry sector in general, and REDD+ in particular. 
 
 
 
                                                     
48 FAO 2016

=== PAGE 160 ===
8. Summary of stakeholder consultations on gender 
Summary of comments and recommendations from the stakeholder consultations 
In general, the programme was well received by all consulted stakeholders. At the district and 
village level, many participants noticed that resources are becoming increasingly scarce and 
in poorer quality. Women, as the main collectors of forest products, know forests well and 
have seen the impact of deforestation and forest degradation on their livelihoods. As forests 
become increasingly degraded, women must either travel longer distances, or use less NTFPs 
for domestic consumption. Also, some stakeholders noted forest biodiversity has declined. In 
terms of agriculture, consulted women also noted that soil quality has been in decline. Some 
villages noted that initially they tried to use dung fertilizers, but then switched to some 
chemical fertilizers. While they can see the impact of some land use practices (e.g. shifting 
cultivation), they noted a major barrier for them to address this is the lack of available finances 
and knowledge of alternative “good” agriculture and land use practices. They further noted 
the need for support in marketing and identifying suitable opportunities (based on land use 
planning).  
 
A summary of comments from the gender-specific stakeholder consultations and a brief 
description of how they have been incorporated into the programme and/or GAP is provided 
in the following Table.

=== PAGE 161 ===
Stakeholder comment and/or 
recommendation 
How it has been integrated in the programme´s gender action plan: 
Related 
programme 
output/ 
activity 
No. of 
corresponding 
measure in GAP 
LWU 
is 
an 
important 
institution 
in 
supporting gender equality and gender-
sensitive 
development 
in 
Lao 
PDR. 
Nonetheless, their capacities can be further 
strengthened to better enable them to 
support gender equality within both the 
context of the program, and in general.  
The program will develop the capacities of line implementing Government 
agencies and the Lao Women´s Union to provide gender-sensitive 
facilitation of programme activities in village communities. Implement 
targeted trainings on REDD+ and gender. Technical staff from DAFO, DOFI 
and DLWU will be trained in “REDD+ and Gender”, as well as social 
inclusion.  
It will further support the capacity of female staff within government 
agencies to improve the gender balance within the forest and agriculture 
sector, and will aim to increase the number of women supporting the 
implementation of program activities.  
Cross-cutting/ 
all 
(1) 
(4) 
Implementing government agencies have 
weak capacities on gender. 
Women’s 
participation 
in 
meetings, 
trainings and committees is often limited. 
This is due to various factors (e.g. cultural 
norms, timing and location of trainings, 
education of women, among others). 
Targeted technical support is needed to 
strengthen 
women´s 
participation 
in 
program meetings. 
 
Encourage the active and effective participation of women in community 
meetings, through the following practices: 
 
Building the capacities of LWU and government agencies on gender and 
social inclusion (see recommendations above) 
 
Setting a quota of 40% participation of women in community meetings 
 
Conducting a survey to determine if women felt actively included in 
REDD+ related meetings 
 
Time and locate trainings taking into account women’s work schedules 
and accessibility to ensure maximum participation and outreach, 
coordinate with LWU, LNFC, and  local women’s organizations to build 
on existing networks and best practices for outreach. 
 
Ensure that village consultations regarding potential private sector 
investments in community-based agroforestry enable all villagers 
equally to participate in the investment decisions. 
Cross-cutting/ 
all 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(8) 
(13) 
(14) 
Women and men are interested in stopping 
shifting cultivation, as it is labour intensive 
and difficult work, however they need 
suitable alternatives. Women’s capacities 
are low, and they often have less access to 
Activity 1.4 will support villagers with LUP, which will help identify suitable 
land use activities. Outputs 2 and 3 will provide technical and financial 
support to communities to adopt sustainable land use practices on 
agricultural and forested land. Participation in the program is voluntary, 
Activity 1.5, 
all Activities 
within 
Outputs 2 and 
3 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(8)

=== PAGE 162 ===
Stakeholder comment and/or 
recommendation 
How it has been integrated in the programme´s gender action plan: 
Related 
programme 
output/ 
activity 
No. of 
corresponding 
measure in GAP 
extension 
services, 
trainings 
and 
information than men.  
and based on participatory processes where villagers are able to identify 
practices that are suitable and of interest based on their local context. 
The program will support the development of women’s capacities to adopt 
sustainable land use practices, and venture into the production, processing 
and marketing of new value chains. All training modules and extension 
materials will be reviewed by a gender specialist, all extension agents and 
trainers will be trained on gender equality and social inclusion (e.g. 
promotion of time-saving practices). In addition, the program will ensure 
close cooperation with LWU to reach the most women possible, and 
encourage their participation.  
Trainings for only women on “business skill development” will be 
implemented, to help women to improve their business literacy, build 
confidence and develop leadership skills.  
Assessments on targeted value chains will include gender assessments, to 
understand the key opportunities and challenges for women.  
Ensure that village consultations regarding potential private sector 
investments in community-based agroforestry enable all villagers equally 
to participate in the investment decisions. 
As for women´s access to such services, see the additional 
recommendations in the row above.  
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(14) 
Women often have less access to decision 
making and planning processes, despite 
being the main users of forest lands.  
 
The program will help empower women to become members of village 
forest management committees and other village decision-making bodies 
at the local level. The program will support the development of guidelines 
local village forest management committees to strengthen gender and 
social inclusion. 
It will further ensure gender is cross-cutting throughout all training modules 
and materials, and will encourage gender sensitization for men and women. 
Activity 1.4, 
1.5, all 
activities 
within Output 
2 and Output 
3 
(13) 
(8)

=== PAGE 163 ===
Stakeholder comment and/or 
recommendation 
How it has been integrated in the programme´s gender action plan: 
Related 
programme 
output/ 
activity 
No. of 
corresponding 
measure in GAP 
Women often know the forest better than 
men, but are often not involved in 
monitoring or law enforcement/ patrolling 
due to various reasons (cultural norms, 
unpaid labour/ household responsibilities, 
lower education). Nonetheless, women 
should be increasingly involved in these 
activities (if activities are safe, and close to 
villages). Women should be fully consulted 
on patrolling activities. 
Safety must be closely considered for forest 
patrols, as they are often dangerous 
activities, and may be far away from villages.  
 
Review the potential for community-based women-led49 patrolling groups, 
and support their creation with capacity development and awareness 
raising. 
 
Activity 1.4, 
1.5 
(6) 
(7) 
1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
As with monitoring and law enforcement, 
despite women´s in-depth knowledge of the 
forest, they are often not involved in 
monitoring activities. Women should be 
actively engaged and consulted on forest 
monitoring.  
Capitalize on local women´s extensive knowledge about community forests 
in making them an integral part of community contributions to the National 
Forest Monitoring System. This includes gender-responsive mechanisms for 
community monitoring within the National Forest Monitoring system. 
 
Activity 1.5 
(9) 
It was mentioned in the consultations that 
women often know more about marketing 
than men, whereas men are often involved 
in more activities requiring ´heavier´ labor. 
Thus, it is important for the value chain 
assessments 
conducted 
within 
the 
The program will ensure that a gender assessment is integrated in every 
analysis for potential new agricultural practices and value chains utilized by 
the program. All feasibility studies for the development of new value chains 
or agricultural practices should review the estimated gendered impact of 
Activity 2.1 
and 2.2 
(10) 
                                                     
49 Women-led implies that the groups are organized and led by women, however it does not mean that the participation is only women. These groups can be mixed patrolling groups, however, majority of the leaders and 
organizers of the group should be women.

=== PAGE 164 ===
Stakeholder comment and/or 
recommendation 
How it has been integrated in the programme´s gender action plan: 
Related 
programme 
output/ 
activity 
No. of 
corresponding 
measure in GAP 
framework of the program that gender-
related issues are considered within value 
chain 
assessments, 
including 
key 
opportunities for women to strengthen 
their roles and capacities.  
the desired change (access, needs, barriers, potentials, work load, 
benefits).

=== PAGE 165 ===
9. Outstanding gender gaps and recommendations to integrate them 
into the GCF programme 
The following table connects the outstanding identified gaps (i.e. in addition to those identified in the 
stakeholder consultations and described in the previous tables), with regard to gender with proposed 
recommendations to act upon these drivers. The third column shows the integration into the existing 
outline for outputs and activities of the planned GCF programme, and the fourth column where they 
have been integrated into the Gender Action Plan.  
 
They are not listed according to priority. They should be integrated as much as possible throughout 
the course of the programme, starting with the funding proposal, the Log-frame, the operational 
planning, and monitoring and evaluation systems. 
 
Furthermore, it is strongly recommended to review this analysis and the effectiveness of the suggested 
activities on a regular basis, and to include it in the required on-boarding documents for new 
programme staff.

=== PAGE 166 ===
Identified gender gap 
Recommendation 
Related 
Programme 
Output and 
Activity 
No. of corresponding 
measure in GAP 
The current Forestry Law draft and PRAPs do not 
reflect upon gender aspects in the land use sector.  
The program will support the elaboration and revision 
regulations and guidelines to implement gender-sensitive 
SFM, FLR and village forestry under the revised Forestry Law 
and the PRAPs. The program´s safeguard, gender and M&E 
specialist and if necessary other gender experts will revise the 
regulations and guidelines. 
As a result, new/revised laws, regulations and guidelines will 
explicitly consider gender (e.g. in the context of stakeholder 
roles, institutional responsibilities, resource access and 
benefit-sharing 
1.2 
1.3 
(5) 
The current capacities of Government staff at all 
levels to actively integrate gender and ethnic 
considerations into their management and 
implementation approaches are very limited, and 
the majority of staff are male. Ethnic languages 
are often a barrier of communication which is not 
actively 
addressed. 
This 
strongly 
affects 
inclusiveness at the ground level, where women 
are often left out of planning and decision-making 
activities if not actively encouraged to participate. 
The program will train all concerned Government staff, 
including Lao Women´s Union (LWU) and the REDD+ Funding 
Window management, on gender, REDD+ and social inclusion 
It will further implement targeted trainings to support the 
capacity development of female staff for all implementing 
Government agencies at all levels to improve the gender 
balance within the forest sector. 
Communication materials on forest protection, REDD+ and 
other awareness-related activities should be gender-
sensitive, user-friendly and in different ethnic languages 
whenever possible. All communication and information 
materials will be revised by a gender specialist.  
Cross-cutting/ all 
(1) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
The consultations showed that women are 
considered the main users of forest resources and 
possess vast knowledge of their surrounding 
natural habitats and their status of degradation, 
but rarely participate in forest management and 
The program will support the development of guidelines local 
village forest management committees, and set standards of 
to ensure such committees are accessible for women, 
members of diverse ethnic groups and the poor, including a 
quota of at least 30% of female members per committee.The 
by-laws should also provide alternative pathways for people 
1.3 
2.1 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
(13) 
(1)

=== PAGE 167 ===
Identified gender gap 
Recommendation 
Related 
Programme 
Output and 
Activity 
No. of corresponding 
measure in GAP 
monitoring due to lack of education and 
traditional norms. 
to fulfill the necessary requirements to become committee 
members (e.g. minimum education standard OR passing of a 
standard oral test).  
LWU will support consultation processes to help strengthen 
gender equality in program implementation.  
The consultations at village level showed that 
environmental awareness is still very limited. The 
greatest motivation for villagers to engage in 
protection measures is found when they see 
immediate effects on their livelihood through 
diminishing resources (less income, less food). 
Exchange with other villages is commonly seen as 
a very effective tool to initiate change, but women 
are often prevented from traveling due to 
traditional norms and lack of transport. 
The program will promote awareness-raising campaigns 
through the use of interactive tools and gender-/ethnic-
sensitive communication materials which consider existing 
motivation factors. All major communication materials and 
awareness raising campaigns will be reviewed and approved 
by the program´s safeguard, gender and M&E specialist 
 
The program will further enable female villagers to participate 
in exchanges and meetings outside the village through direct 
campaigning through LWU and Government staff, and 
provide allowances and means to travel if necessary. 
1.4 
2.1 
3.1 
4 
(17) 
GAP budget 
considers DSAs for 
villagers, and will 
provide support to 
access trainings. 
There are currently no specific women groups 
active in forest management. The Lao Women´s 
Union 
(LWU) 
is 
usually 
the only 
active 
organization which can influence decision-making 
at all levels.  
The programme needs to utilize the LWU as much as possible 
to represent and reach women, and it is recommended to 
allocate budget directly to the local LWU offices to enable 
them to responsibly co-facilitate programme activities. 
Cross-cutting/ all 
(1) 
(17) 
The current Law Enforcement Actions Plans do 
not consider gender aspects and are therefore not 
considerate of the potentials of women´s role in 
forest use and protection. 
The program will support inclusion of women in law 
enforcement measures (e.g. patrolling). 
1.4 
(6) 
(7) 
Legally, women and men have the same rights to 
land. Reality shows, however, that women´s land 
tenure is still less secure than men´s. Women are 
also often not actively included in decision-
LUP processes supported by the programme will be vigilant in 
actively including all women and men in the target villages 
(separate meetings; women meetings led by female staff). 
1.5 
3.1 
(13) 
(8) 
(2) 
(1)

=== PAGE 168 ===
Identified gender gap 
Recommendation 
Related 
Programme 
Output and 
Activity 
No. of corresponding 
measure in GAP 
making steps of land use planning (LUP). The 
subsequent forest management plan is then seen 
by local men and women as a specialized step 
which women are even less part of. Reasons 
provided are lack of education to assume 
responsibility for “technical” tasks, lack of 
confidence 
to 
participate 
in 
management 
decisions, and traditional norms of many ethnic 
groups. 
Quotas will to be set to encourage women´s inclusion in 
village management committees (at least 30%). 
Quotas will be set to encourage the participation of women in 
meetings, and targeted support (e.g. business skill training, 
training of program staff on gender equality and social 
inclusion) will be provided to strengthen the effective 
engagement of women.  
Again, LWU can function as a facilitator and skills developer 
for village women, if budget is allocated accordingly.  
 
(3) 
(4) 
There is currently no National Forest Inventory 
System in place. The development of it, as 
planned by the programme, should utilize 
women´s roles in forest use and access. 
The developed National Forest Monitoring system will feature 
effective gender-responsive mechanisms for community 
monitoring.  
It will further support: 
 
A small feasibility study on the potential of developing a 
women-centered 
approach 
for 
community-based 
patroling 
 
Gender-proofing all related capacity building and 
trainings efforts, forest-inventory planning, field data 
collection and data entry/analysis/reporting, quality 
control, 
communication/ 
documentation 
and 
dissemination activities. 
1.6 
3.2 
 
(9) 
(17) 
(16) 
Women and men in the villages are willing to 
make the shift away from shifting cultivation and 
other 
land 
use 
systems 
contributing 
to 
deforestation, 
towards 
deforestation-free 
agriculture as long as the shift provides more 
income and considers the high work loads of 
villagers. Women traditionally work longer hours 
As 
mentioned 
in 
the 
stakeholder 
consultation 
recommendations above, the programme will conduct 
studies on potential alternative production practices which 
are considerate of potential impacts on workload and cultural 
practices. Community-based learning and consultation 
activities, as proposed by the programme, need to ensure that 
women and men can openly express these concerns (separate 
2.1 
2.3 
 
(10) 
(11)

=== PAGE 169 ===
Identified gender gap 
Recommendation 
Related 
Programme 
Output and 
Activity 
No. of corresponding 
measure in GAP 
per day, whereas men´s work is physically of 
higher intensity. 
meetings, grievance mechanisms considerate of gendered 
barriers). 
Women´s and men´s access to local markets 
strongly depends on road access. Women´s access 
is further limited by safety concerns, traditional 
norms and higher workload in the families which 
prevent them from venturing out. Regarding 
general market access, women feel less confident 
and knowledgeable to venture beyond women´s 
traditional products (handicraft, weaving, NTFPs). 
Extension and training for agriculture and forestry 
interventions will be closely monitored by the program´s 
safeguard, gender and M/&E specialist. All training modules 
and materials will be reviewed and approved by the specialist 
prior to approval. 
All extension agents and trainers will be trained by the 
safeguard, gender and M&E specialist on gender equality and 
social inclusion within the framework of the program.  
Women-only business skills courses to be conduced for 
kumbans 
Gender-responsive monitoring will be conducted, that 
permits active management and learning throughout 
program implementation. 
Budget will be provided for the provision of translators and 
the translation of materials into local languages, as necessary.  
2.2 
2.3 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(16) 
(17) 
How to ensure women can access finance? 
Women are often less able to access loans from 
larger financial intutions (e.g. may not have land 
titles), and may be more reluctant to take loans.  
Village banking in Lao PDR has been successful in 
strengthening access to finance for rural women in Lao PDR. 
Over 1,650 Lao Village Credit Associations exist, having been 
strongly promoted by international donor agencies as well as 
the Lao Womens Union. LWU has as one of its main objectives 
increasing access to credit and finance for women.   
Village management commitees must consist of both men 
and 
women, 
and 
have 
stringent 
requirements 
for 
representation. Lao Womens Union also plays an important 
role in supporting village banking across the country.  
The programme will support the channeling of small grants 
through village banks for the adoption of sustainable land use 
1.1 (design of 
funding window) 
2.3 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
1.7 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
(16)

=== PAGE 170 ===
Identified gender gap 
Recommendation 
Related 
Programme 
Output and 
Activity 
No. of corresponding 
measure in GAP 
practices by local men and women. This will follow existing 
guidelines and best practices for integrating women and 
ethnic peoples in management committees. Training will be 
provided for village committee members on managing 
finance, and ensuring socially inclusive and gender-equitable 
best practices are applied.  
Guidelines for the creation of local village forest management 
committees set standards of requirements accessible for 
women and the poor, and a quota of at least 30% of female 
members per committee. 
In addition, additional trainings will be conducted for women 
on financial literacy and business development (within 
Activity 1.7, as described in the GAP).50 These trainings build 
on best practices, and further address comments raised in the 
consutlations that women may have more fears about lending 
risks and lower education and require targeted trainings and 
education on financial literacy and business planning. 
Nonetheless, women in Lao PDR are often responsible for 
household finances, often considered ´family bankers´ and 
thus many villages have had positive examples in developing 
village banks and having women directly benefit from such 
micro-finance instituions.51    
(17) 
                                                     
50 Builds off of positive experiences, such as those conducted in the ILO training courses “Get Ahead for Women in Enterprise”, which were designed for poor women who want to start or expand a micro-business. For 
more information refer to: https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/documents/publication/wcms_099876.pdf  
51 E.g. see studies by Siebel and Kunkel (1999) – Microfinance in Laos: A Case for Women´s Banking; GIZ (2012) – Microfinance in Rural Areas – Access to finance for the poor; ILO (no date) – Banking as a solution: How 
microfinance can help reduce the need for young people to migrate for employment and thus diminish their vulnerability to human traffickers.

=== PAGE 171 ===
Identified gender gap 
Recommendation 
Related 
Programme 
Output and 
Activity 
No. of corresponding 
measure in GAP 
Improved access to micro-grants could lead to a 
risk in the escalation of domestic violence.  
Women play an important role as family bankers, and while 
finances are often managed by women – decisions are often 
made jointly in many communities. It is not expected for the 
programme to lead to an escalation of domestic violence. 
Early experiences with micro-finance and village banks in Lao 
PDR have demonstrated that it has led to mostly positive 
impacts for women, with main concerns voiced by women to 
include:52 
- 
Dominant role and decision making of men 
- 
Limited capcities of women (financial literacy and 
business planning), and 
Gender equality and social inclusion will be cross-cutting 
throughout all consultations, and trainings, as well as program 
activities in general. Gender sensitization should be conduted 
for both men and women, including different age groups (e.g. 
youth, adults, elderly). 
Training will be held for men and women to understand their 
rights and relevant laws, while also discussing the 
imprortance of men and women to have access to finance and 
trainings, as well as other issues related to gender-equality. In 
trainings and consultations, representatives from Lao 
Womens Union will be present, and can support awareness 
raising on womens rights and available resources. 
For instance, at trainings for women on financial literacy, 
information will also be provided on women´s rights, and 
available resources in the instance of gender-violence. LWU 
will be an important institution to support such trainings, and 
Gender 
sensitization and 
equality cross-
cutting in all 
Activities; 
 
1.7 (GAP) 
 
2.2 (Financial 
trainings) 
 
3.1-3.3 (access to 
micro-finance) 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
                                                     
52 GIZ (2012) – Microfinance in Rural Areas – Access to finance for the poor

=== PAGE 172 ===
Identified gender gap 
Recommendation 
Related 
Programme 
Output and 
Activity 
No. of corresponding 
measure in GAP 
provide key information – including disseminating the 
number for the Lao Womens Union Counselling and 
Protection Centre for Women and Children, and discussing 
other services provided by LWU. There are often limited CSOs 
and resources in rural communities working on topics related 
to gendered-violence, and thus LWU remains one of the main 
focal points for disseminating information and providing 
support to rural women.  
Both local Government agencies and local 
villagers welcome private sector investment as 
long as it benefits the communities in terms of 
higher income and less workload, as well as 
enhanced skills. All parties expressed the wish to 
have the Government strongly controlling such 
potential investments to limit risks for the 
communities. The interviewed women stated that 
they do not feel confident to participate in 
decisions over investments.  
Village 
consultations 
about 
potential 
private 
sector 
engagement need to separate villagers from village 
authorities and men from women to ensure that all villagers 
feel safe to express their views and ask questions.  
2.2 
 
(15)

=== PAGE 173 ===
List of References 
 
ADWLE 2016 (Association for Development of Women and Legal Education), accessed 
29.01.2019: 
http://adwlelaos.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/SRP001_Cedaw-
Assessment_EF-14-07-2016-ENG.pdf 
 
ASEAN 1988: Declaration of the Advancement of Women in the ASEAN Region. Accessed 
https://asean.org/?static_post=declaration-of-the-advancement-of-women-in-the-asean-
region-bangkok-thailand-5-july-1988 
 
ASEAN Declaration on Gender-Responsive Implementation of the ASEAN Community Vision 
2025 
and 
Sustainable 
Development 
Goals 
in 
2017. 
Accessed 
01.02.2019. 
https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/7.-ADOPTION_ASEAN-Declaration-on-the-
GR-Implementation_CLEAN_Sept.8-2017_for-31st-Summit_CLEAN.pdf 
 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) 2008: Final report on “Capacity-building for Gender 
Mainstreaming 
in 
Agriculture 
and 
Forestry 
in 
Lao 
PDR” 
2008. 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project-document/67491/35309-lao-tacr.pdf 
 
ADB 
2011. 
Civil 
Society 
Briefs: 
Lao 
PDR. 
Accessed 
28.01.2019. 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/28968/csb-lao.pdf 
 
Climate Investment Funds 2017: Gender and Sustainable Forest Management: Entry Points 
for 
Design 
and 
Implementation. 
Accessed 
01.02.2019: 
https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/sites/cif_enc/files/knowledge-
documents/gender_and_sustainable_forest_management.pdf 
 
Convention on Biological Diversity: 2015-2020 Gender Plan of Action. Accessed 20.01.2019. 
https://www.cbd.int/gender/action-plan/default.shtml 
 
FAO 2016/Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations: How to mainstream 
gender in forestry: A practical field guide. Accessed 14.01.2019. http://www.fao.org/3/a-
i6610e.pdf 
 
FAO 16/07/2018: Sustainable Forest Management Toolbox increases gender considerations 
in 
its 
modules. 
Accessed 
21.01.2019. 
http://www.fao.org/sustainable-forest-
management/toolbox/sfm-home/detail-events/en/c/1145493/ 
 
FLEGT 
VPA 
process 
in 
Lao 
PDR 
2018. 
Accessed 
19.01.2019. 
http://www.euflegt.efi.int/documents/10180/451571/Lao+PDR+at+Chiang+Mai.pdf/927b65
b0-24fa-705d-8d69-9df73c7a9f5f 
 
Gender Inequality Index. http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GII 
 
Green Climate Fund 2015, Gender Policy and Action Plan, March 2015, GCF/B.09/10, Annex 
II, section IV, paragraph 4.4.

=== PAGE 174 ===
GIZ 2012, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), „Gender Strategy 
– Gender Pays Off“, March 2012. 
 
GIZ/Bode 2018: Gender Analysis of the programme “Protection and Sustainable Use of Forest 
Ecosystems and Biodiversity”. Analysis can be requested by the ProFEB project. 
 
King & van de Walle 2007: Girls in Lao PDR: Ethnic affiliation, poverty, and location. Pp 31-70 
in Lewis & Lockheed (eds): Exclusion, gender and education. Case studies from the developing 
world. Washington DC, Center for Global Development  
 
Lao 
CSO 
Directory 
2017. 
Accessed 
05.02.2019. 
https://laocs-kis.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/11/e-Directory_LAO-CSO_eng.pdf 
 
Lao PDR´s National Socio-Economic Development Plan VIII 2016-2020. Accessed 24.01.2019. 
http://www.la.one.un.org/images/publications/8th_NSEDP_2016-2020.pdf 
 
Memorandum of Understanding on ASEAN Cooperation in Agriculture and Forest Products 
Promotion 
Scheme 
2014. 
Accessed 
22.01.2019. 
http://agreement.asean.org/media/download/20141003172848.pdf 
 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 2015: Agricultural Development Strategy to 2025 and 
vision 
to 
the 
year 
2030. 
Accessed 
20.01.2019. 
 
http://www.maf.gov.la/wp-
content/uploads/2016/01/MDS-2025-and-Vision-to-2030-Eng.pdf 
 
National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016-2025. Accessed 22.01.2019. 
https://www.cbd.int/doc/world/la/la-nbsap-v2-en.pdf 
 
NCAW 2015 (National Commission for the Advancement of Women): Summary Report. A 
Study 
on 
Violence 
Against 
Women 
in 
Lao 
PDR. 
Accessed 
25.01.2019. 
http://www.la.one.un.org/images/publications/Lao_PDR_Violence_Against_Women_Summ
ary_Report.pdf 
 
 
Open Development Laos 2018: SDG 5 Gender Equality. Accessed 24.01.2019. 
https://laos.opendevelopmentmekong.net/topics/sdg-5-gender-equality/ 
 
RECOFTC October 2018. More Women in Conservation a Forestry Department Goal. 
https://www.recoftc.org/en/lao-pdr/news/more-women-conservation-forestry-department-
goal 
 
RECOFTC November 2018. Solutions for Change: Changing Gender Narratives in Lao PDR. 
https://www.recoftc.org/en/lao-pdr/stories/solutions-change-changing-gender-narratives-
lao-pdr 
 
Southiseng & Welsh 2010: “Competition and Management Issues of SME entrepreneurs in 
Laos: Evidence from Empirical Studies in Vientiane Municipality, Savannakhet and Luang 
Prabang”, 
accessed 
01.02.2019: 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/0ecf/65aa1985eb04f17330e721daadc785a0a1d5.pdf 
 
The United Nations in Lao PDR 2015. The Millennium Development Goals and lessons learnt 
for 
the 
post-2015 
period: 
A 
Summary 
Review.

=== PAGE 175 ===
http://www.la.undp.org/content/dam/laopdr/docs/Reports%20and%20publications/2015/G
overnment_LaoPDR_MDG_%20Review_September2015_FINAL.pdf 
 
The 
United 
Nations 
in 
Lao 
PDR 
2018, 
accessed 
24.01.2019: 
http://www.la.one.un.org/sdgs/sdg-5-gender 
 
UNDP 2017 (United Nations Development Programme): Graduation from Least Developed 
Country 
Status: 
Lao 
PDR. 
Accessed 
25.01.2019. 
http://www.la.undp.org/content/dam/laopdr/docs/Reports%20and%20publications/2017/5
th%20NHDR%20-%20Lao%20PDR.pdf 
 
Women2030 Project: About the Sustainable Development Goals. Accessed 21.01.2019. 
https://www.women2030.org/about-the-sdgs/ 
 
Women2030 
Project: 
About 
Women2030. 
Accessed 
21.01.2019. 
https://www.women2030.org/the-women-2030-programme/ 
 
Work Plan for Forest Law Enforcement and Governance (FLEG) in ASEAN, 2016-2025. 
Accessed 24.01.2019. https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Work-Plan-for-FLEG-
in-ASEAN-2016-2025.pdf 
 
World Bank and Asian Development Bank 2012: Country Gender Assessment for Lao PDR, 
accessed 
15.01.2019: 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/33755/files/cag-lao-pdr.pdf 
 
World Education Blog 2015: Education increases awareness and concern for the environment. 
Accessed 
02.02.2019. 
https://gemreportunesco.wordpress.com/2015/12/08/education-
increases-awareness-and-concern-for-the-environment/

=== PAGE 176 ===
Annex 1: List of consulted stakeholders 
 
Names 
Government office/village 
Mr. Kim Thoummala  
Deputy Director General of PAFO Houaphan 
Ms. Phengvanh Sermkhamlar 
Deputy Director General of LWU Houaphan 
Mr. Lar Khamvongsa 
Technical Coordinator PAFO Houaphan 
Mr. Singthong Phanthavongkham 
Deputy Head of DAFO Sam Neua 
Ms. Kongkhammany Lorlakhang 
Deputy Head of LWU Sam Neua 
Ms. Phoungseng Oudommyxai 
Deputy Head of LWU Sam Neua 
PAFO & POFI team 
PAFO/POFI Luang Namtha 
PLWU team 
PLWU Luang Namtha 
DAFO team 
DAFO Luang Namtha 
DLWU team 
DLWU Luang Namtha 
15 female villagers 
Ban Yard, Houaphan, Sam Neua 
13 male villagers 
Ban Yard, Houaphan, Sam Neua 
27 female & 8 male villagers 
Ban Nam Mad, Luang Namtha 
4 female, 10 male villagers 
Ban Nam Dy, Luang Namtha

=== PAGE 177 ===
Annex 2: Transcripts of stakeholder interviews 
 
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: PAFO & PLWU Houaphan 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved 
Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
Supporting the CLIPAD activities 
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, 
and in forest protection? 
 
Collection of NTFPs. 
 
3. How are women already part of REDD+ mechanisms? 
 
PAFO: Women should be part of REDD+ activities but in fact are not yet, except of 
women´s participation in village meetings (PRAP etc.). Awareness-raising campaigns 
on forest laws and regulations also targeted women. Capacity-building activities on 
District level also focus on gender in REDD+ activities (trainer from PAFO, participants 
LWU, DAFO, DoNRE, police, DIndCommOffice). More trainings will follow in every 
District (supported by FCPF).  
 
4. How could they be more part of it? 
 
Higher levels (Provincial and national) need to be trained further so that they can 
support building the capacities of the Districts. Also, activities in the villages need 
continuous effort to reach out to women.  
 
5. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
80% remoter, mountainous communities, so change of livelihood will take time and a 
multi-sector approach. If women are not understanding the activities and goals, 
change will not happen. Challenges in having women truly participating: lack of 
understanding and education esp. amongst remoter living ethnic groups; changes to 
their lifestyle need lots of awareness raising first; if women are not convinced of the 
suggested change (lifestyle, livestock & agriculture changes etc.), it usually does not 
happen in the communities. 
 
Note: Village Development Funds (VDF) are mainly used by women (livestock 
projects mainly). 
 
6. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and 
their management/decision-making? Is that different for different forest 
management modalities, like community forests, collaborative forests, protection

=== PAGE 178 ===
forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests? 
 
NTFPs & firewood are usually collected and sold by women (often to Chinese 
marketers), so the benefits include them.  
Forest Management Plans help to determine roles and responsibilities in villagers´ 
forest use.  
 
7. What women groups are currently involved in forest management modalities?  
 
Women groups are usually less active in forest management activities, but the LWU 
is part of the Livelihood Improvement Group, and women are mainly responsible for 
the VDF management. 
 
8. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in 
regards to gender equality? 
 
PAFO: Our knowledge and experience to support gender equality are not sufficient, 
despite the many projects we have implemented. We need trainings in management, 
procurement, accounting, and finance, and other technical trainings including 
livelihood improvement and gender, implementation and agriculture-related 
technical trainings. Study tours to other countries are useful to understand practical 
implementation, even between villagers (peer-to-peer learning between different 
villages from different Provinces).  
 
9. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much 
are REDD+ and gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?  
 
Clipad implementation has improved our understanding about gender issues and 
women´s participation. (Note: Interviewees did not understand the question.) 
 
10. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based 
on the new Forest Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
Decree PM, LWU law, SEDP all suggest the equal participation of women. This must 
be mentioned in the regulations as well, and integrate these existing laws into the 
new regulations, even if only in the programme area first as a pilot. The laws for 
equal participation are in existence – but it´s upon regulations to make sure it is 
happening. 
 
11. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
We have a Law Enforcement Action Plan until 2020 (responsible: Dep. Of Forestry 
Inspection, POFI), but it is very generic, no mentioning of women´s participation. We 
should think of ways to include women in law enforcement measures. If they would 
like to go on patrolling, they should be supported in that. 
 
12. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for 
women, what needs to be improved?

=== PAGE 179 ===
LUP before forest management plan, so it paves the path to equal participation. The 
plans should be very specific (giving %, at least 20% suggested) how many women 
have to participate in which land & forest use & management.  
So far, LUPs have only been done for areas, not for individual HH, so it´s hard to draw 
conclusions on the factual land tenure security from that. Having both names of 
husband and wife on land titles will guarantee women´s and men´s equal and tenure. 
 
13. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
Note: Question was not understood correctly. 
 
14. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting 
cultivation practices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? 
What would that mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also 
include community-based learning and consultation activities with participating 
farmers/villages. 
 
Agricultural Strategy leads the way. Cash crops promoted for Houaphan: coffee, 
Chinese cardamom, pilot projects are already running (too early to draw 
conclusions). One main difficulty is the lack of markets.  
 
15. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are 
women´s greatest challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their 
barriers to access markets now? 
 
Key problem is the general lack of markets, not the production. PSEDP tries to 
address the market gaps and production needs. Rice is not identified as a commercial 
crop in Houaphan, only for domestic consumption.  
 
16. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting 
from that? 
 
LWU: Micro finance is a very essential mechanism to promote women´s economic 
activity. However, MFI are hard to access for people, only a few Village Banks exist 
/through VDF). PAFO & PLWU think it would be essential to increase access to 
microfinance/village banks in Houaphan to promote people´s confidence in new 
production methods etc. 
 
17. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments 
in community-based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the 
timber and fiber industries? Do you think villagers will be benefitting from such 
investment? How could the GoL ensure that the investments are benefitting the 
villagers? 
 
Investment are a huge potential but need to be tailored to the different potentials of 
the Districts, e.g. Livestock in Houameuang and Sam Neua, Viengxay for fruit trees,

=== PAGE 180 ===
etc. Ecotourism as huge potential for the NPA areas. The potentials are already 
assessed and written into their strategy.  
GoL has to support with careful study of the impacts on local communities – f the 
investment is not beneficial and does not create increased income for people, we 
cannot allow such investment.  
 
18. Any other remarks?   
 
LWU: national laws & strategies, as well as leadership position quotas are in place – 
the gap is on the implementation level, where we need very concrete guidelines, 
with details on gender equality, participation figures.  
 
Women lack knowledge because of lower education levels, young marriage an issue, 
lower roles in society despite laws stating equality. Just setting quotas does not help 
if it is not combined with awareness raising on all levels (incl. villages); needs 
trainings for GoL officers dealing with villagers; LWU is present in all villages but 
needs stronger utilization in village management 
 
Women can play a huge role in deforestation-free agriculture, e.g. silk worm farms & 
silk production, cotton could be female-driven productions. Now too much import 
from Vietnam, but we could support the development of these value chains in 
Houaphan. Textile industry is very inclusive, since it does not require high education 
and also disabled women can work in it.

=== PAGE 181 ===
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: DAFO Houaphan Sam Neua 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved 
Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
Districts/DAFO are key implementers of REDD+ mechanisms. Roles: planning process, 
hotspot and potential analysis,  
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, 
and in forest protection? 
 
Women are main users of forests, so they need to get involved in all activities and 
facilitated by all sector agencies incl. LWU 
 
3. How are women already part of REDD+ mechanisms? 
 
Involvement of women in the planning processes very limited, since mostly only the 
head of HH participate.  
 
4. How could they be more part of it? 
 
We have to have more women participating already from the planning process in 
villages onwards. That starts with awareness raising for the women (DLWU key 
responsibility, in collaboration with DAFO and other line agencies).  
 
5. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
Language barriers; kumban level meetings usually include travel which women 
cannot do, so only men attend.  
Solutions: hire more ethnic staff in District teams. Keep either meetings to the village 
level only, or allocate resources and organize pick-ups for women to be able to 
travel. 
 
6. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and 
their management/decision-making? Is that different for different forest 
management modalities, like community forests, collaborative forests, protection 
forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests? 
 
Women have little access to decision-making and planning processes on forest 
resources, but are the main users of the same (NTFPs collecting & marketing/selling). 
In regards to benefitting from that work in the form of shared decision-making, 
families definitely discuss purchases and investments jointly, but the final decision is 
with the husband as the traditional head of the HH.

=== PAGE 182 ===
7. What women groups are currently involved in forest management modalities?  
 
No women groups except of LWU. 
 
8. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in 
regards to gender equality? 
 
Still need CB; new technology which needs more training and staff fluctuation are 
challenges; need more training on gender issues, plus regular opportunities to 
discuss and exchange on implementation experiences. 
 
9. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much 
are REDD+ and gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?  
 
Insufficient integration on implementation level. Suggestion of study tours between 
villagers (learning exchanges), and integrate a gender perspective into these 
exchanges 
 
10. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based 
on the new Forest Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
The Forest Law is too general, so regulations need to be based on the reality of 
Districts and Provinces. For the creation of the regulations, it would be best to 
include both District authorities and villages in the consultations. Bottom-up 
approach. 
 
11. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
Villagers incl. women first need to understand why the laws are relevant, so 
enforcement starts with encouraging villagers´ support to adhere to the laws. 
 
12. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
Women could be part of NTFP monitoring, but needs a lot of initial support and 
follow-up. 
 
13. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for 
women, what needs to be improved? 
 
LUP did only allocate land on a village level so far, but most of the times, no land 
titles have been issued yet. That put women in disadvantage because the key 
decisions in LUP were and are taken by the (mostly male) village authorities and 
heads of HH. Future LUPs need to be more specific in regards to land use, and half-
completed LUP processes need to be completed. No land tenure security on the 
current basis. 
 
14. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting 
cultivation practices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices:

=== PAGE 183 ===
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? 
What would that mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also 
include community-based learning and consultation activities with participating 
farmers/villages. 
 
Needs in-depth village-by-village potential and risk analysis. Funding to invest needs 
to be available. People are already willing to stop shifting cultivation but currently 
don´t have alternatives.  
 
15. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are 
women´s greatest challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their 
barriers to access markets now? 
 
Lack of financial resources, plus lack of confidence to risk investments.  
Markets are local, and many villages are too far off the markets and cannot access 
them.  
DAFO suggests creating a form to monitor which products are produced where and 
sold where, so that market assessments become possible, and prices can be 
regulated for the benefit of the farmers (who usually don´t get paid enough). 
Creation of this form could come from the Provincial Office for Industry and 
Commerce, collection of data by their District offices. 
 
16. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting 
from that? 
 
They would probably benefit from that if there would not be the immense risk to lose 
investments (e.g. when livestock diseases kill the animals they purchased from 
borrowed money). Also, the interest rates need to be low so that poorer people can 
access MF, e.g. in Village Banks.  
 
17. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments 
in community-based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the 
timber and fibre industries? Do you think villagers will be benefitting from such 
investment? How could the GoL ensure that the investments are benefitting the 
villagers? 
 
Proposals will go through PAFO which will review the benefits for the villagers 
carefully. Consult with the villagers, and do an area survey. Monitoring and follow-up 
by DAFO. 
 
18. Any other remarks?   
 
Plans need to be realistic in terms of budget. Use regular village visits to raise other 
than usual topics (e.g. gender issues in the frame of livelihood improvement, 
something tangible for the villagers). Make meetings more attractive for villagers, 
making clear what the benefit for them is in attending.  
DDG DAFO: target the senior men in a village if you want to promote gender equality,

=== PAGE 184 ===
and keep it simple and interesting (videos, games etc.).

=== PAGE 185 ===
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: DLWU Houaphan Sam Neua 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved 
Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
FPIC and VDF implementation and management; no direct implementation 
responsibility for REDD+, e.g. village forest management agreement as part of FPIC 
process 
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, 
and in forest protection? 
 
LWU contribute to legal dissemination and mobilization of women in the villages to 
aid forest protection.  
 
3. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
Knowledge and understanding in women low which affects meetings and 
participations significantly: low education rates esp. amongst women in remote areas 
 
4. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and 
their management/decision-making? Is that different for different forest 
management modalities, like community forests, collaborative forests, protection 
forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests? 
 
Forest Management Committee has LWU member, but usually not more women (7 
members total) – so women´s decision-making power is very limited. It is difficult to 
find more women for this task because most don´t feel educated enough to do the 
technical tasks related to that responsibility. 
 
5. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in 
regards to gender equality? Are there activities in the planned program they think 
they will/would like to support but would need more in-depth knowledge for? 
 
Once District Steering Committee is in place, conduct a gender training for them and 
us focused on the kind of activities which will be implemented on the village level.  
 
6. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are?  
 
The implementation is usually not gender-sensitive, very few people understand 
gender equality.  
 
7. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based 
on the new Forest Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of?

=== PAGE 186 ===
Regulations and all legal documents should include aspects of gender equity, which 
build the basis for implementation. Create a specific guideline on gender for the 
implementation of programme activities. Add to the guidelines that line agencies 
have to send at least local language-speaking staff to the villages to ensure that 
everyone understands the activity and is able to participate.  
 
8. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for 
women, what needs to be improved? 
 
Challenge to follow through now with jointly signed land titles for wife and husband.  
LWU is part of LUP committees in the villages and tries to engage female villagers in 
the discussions.  
 
9. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
Forest Management Committee of all villages have already one fixed female member 
(the LWU member), so she could support women´s support to monitoring the forest.  
 
10. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting 
cultivation practices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? 
What would that mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also 
include community-based learning and consultation activities with participating 
farmers/villages. 
 
Promoted alternatives need to make sure that tasks in the production can be fairly 
distributed between men and women so to avoid increased work load for either, esp. 
women. Alongside promotion of more equitable share of domestic work (awareness 
raising campaigns).  
 
11. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are 
women´s greatest challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their 
barriers to access markets now? 
 
MOIC has to support the identification of new markets. Markets now are too far 
away for most remote villages. Sometimes villages produce a lot (e.g. vegetables) but 
markets are too far away to bring it there and sell it.  
 
12. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting 
from that? 
 
MF can aid women to start businesses in handicraft, livestock, agriculture. Main 
customers of MF institutions are currently women. Combine access to MF with 
business trainings for women. In case of cash crop promotion, provide such training 
before the introduction of new cash crops, so that women are prepared and more 
confident.  
More hands-on trainings to learn new skills are needed (e.g. handicrafts). Also not 
only talking about how to access markets, but organize learning tours for villagers to

=== PAGE 187 ===
markets. 
When creating access to MF: Conduct educational trainings on MF which are 
sensitive to women´s fears and insecurities regarding risk and lower education levels. 
 
13. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments 
in community-based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the 
timber and fiber industries? Do you think villagers will be benefitting from such 
investment? How could the GoL ensure that the investments are benefitting the 
villagers? 
 
Concession & labor fees should go to villagers, land goes back to village. Technical 
knowledge should be provided by the company to the villagers.

=== PAGE 188 ===
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: PAFO Luang Namtha 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved 
Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
Preparing new structure for REDD+ implementation right now; PRAP finalized but 
awaits signing. Consulted with Provincial REDD+ task force. Activities budgets are 
currently prepared, five core activities: REDD dissemination, forest regulation 
dissemination, scaling up PRAP activities & training, admin budget 
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, 
and in forest protection? 
 
No separation from GoL side. VDF or conservation fund oftentimes are more lead by 
women and are seen as key players in management and accounting. Patrolling is 
traditionally done by men, even though it is not specified to be like that. As long as 
forests are close to the village, women could also do that task.  
 
3. How are women already part of REDD+ mechanisms? 
 
Women could have many roles – because they are more careful and considerate of 
the natural resources. Women often have more valuable additional work, like 
handicraft/textiles. NTFP  collection. Rubber harvest done more efficiently and 
successfully by women. 
 
4. How could they be more part of it? 
 
We are aware that we need to involve especially women when it comes to the 
dissemination of forest-related information to village women. We will separate in 
women and men discussion groups because otherwise women will not speak out. 
Women are also important educators towards their children. 
 
5. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
Women are the key persons in collecting NTFPs etc, but in ethnic villages, it is mostly 
men who take all decisions. We need to increase our awareness raising to these 
communities regarding equal decision-making. 
Lack of Lao language skills makes it difficult to communicate with ethnic villagers, 
esp. the women. They often only talk to the Naiban. But many ethnic groups, 
including Akha improved their Lao significantly in the last ten years, so it is getting 
easier to access them.  
 
6. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and 
their management/decision-making? Is that different for different forest 
management modalities, like community forests, collaborative forests, protection

=== PAGE 189 ===
forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests? 
 
Women as money-keepers of the family possess higher benefits from the resources. 
In many ethnic minorities, men however have often the “last word” in decision-
making. Not the case in the cities, where women usually have higher decision-making 
power. 
Men have more access to forest resources management. We need to get more 
women into the forest management. Women are usually the money keepers in Lao 
culture, so if women see the “cash value” of forest resources and their management, 
they will naturally want to become more involved.  
 
7. What women groups are currently involved in forest management modalities?  
 
LWU only as a group. VDF has promoted a lot of women in managing roles, especially 
in regards to SME development. Ecotourism activities have promoted women into 
management positions.  
PAFO has some women in natural protection section (3 out of 8), forestry section (13 
in total, 6 women). 
 
8. What are their capacities, what would they need to improve? 
 
PAFO female staff has same capacities, but child birth puts them behind. Two female 
patrollers in Long District who work together with POFI as part of law enforcement.  
 
9. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in 
regards to gender equality? 
 
PAFO has two-three gender focal points, men and women, who is often involved in 
setting up activities and sometimes goes to the villages. Also, LWU is the go-to 
structure to implement any specific activities.  
 
A specialized training on REDD+ and gender would be useful before implementation 
starts. Also a training on improved facilitation and presentation skills for the staff to 
improve village work. 
 
10. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much 
are REDD+ and gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?  
 
Women were very much involved in the planning process of the current REDD* plan. 
The overall gender-sensitivity is hard for us to assess.  
 
11. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based 
on the new Forest Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
Not necessary to mention gender specifically in the regulations, but instead bring 
more women into the implementation. In some cases there is already a balance, but 
not everywhere. On Provincial level, balance is fine, but not in most villages, so focus 
there.

=== PAGE 190 ===
12. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
Patrolling is accompanied by PAFO, DAFO, DOFI together with militia and police. Not 
possible without villagers´ involvement. Villages often request GoL support. Work can 
be dangerous (hunters, loggers). Some women might have the capacity, but not in 
general.  
 
13. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for 
women, what needs to be improved? 
 
LUP has majorly completed except of villages with lots of immigration which makes it 
difficult for authorities to update the necessary information to allocate land. 
Sustainable LUP needs to think more long-term than it previously has. Sing-District 
has particular immigration issue due to fast development (pull location for many 
people). In terms of gender equality, LUP has so far benefitted everyone equally. 
Participation in forest-related decisions was very equal, and women and men feel 
equally involved. 
 
14. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
Women know the forests well and should be largely involved in their monitoring. 
They are also viewed as more reliable and honest than men in providing this kind of 
information.  
 
15. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting 
cultivation practices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? 
What would that mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also 
include community-based learning and consultation activities with participating 
farmers/villages. 
 
Cardamom, tea, NTFP. A negative point: in order to plant cash crops, small trees are 
often cut down. So the balance for agrobiodiversity is not perfect, leads to decreasing 
biodiversity. If we amp up cash crops, this also often means disturbance of wildlife, 
so we should find ways to limit disturbance.  
Shifting cultivation needs extensive labor, so any change from that to cash crops is 
likely positive in regards to people´s work load.  
In village consultations, women should be particularly targeted, esp. also with 
technical knowledge to empower them, and to utilize their role as their children´s 
educators.  
 
16. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are 
women´s greatest challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their 
barriers to access markets now? 
 
In the promotion, it is often good to discuss potential work divisions needed for a 
new product (e.g. men do planting, women harvesting etc.).

=== PAGE 191 ===
Women usually know more about market access than men, and also what prices 
certain products get. That can be utilized in trainings. 
 
17. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting 
from that? 
 
Microfinance institutions are often a high barrier for people to use as starters for a 
new value chain/product etc. because people are afraid of the interest rates and 
paying back the money on time, and might therefore not use it. Microfinance 
institutions possess very valuable technical knowledge though which can be useful 
for the villagers to learn how to identify sources for investment themselves, so a 
cooperation would be best. 
 
18. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments 
in community-based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the 
timber and fiber industries? Do you think villagers will be benefitting from such 
investment? How could the GoL ensure that the investments are benefitting the 
villagers? 
 
Lessons learned from the past: organized study tour for villagers and provided them 
with seeds to empower them to start a new product, and PAFO made sure that a 
company buys the product (mak dao). In some cases, the companies provided the 
funds for these activities, sometimes PAFO if they have the budget for it. Another 
example: a paper company was built, so PAFO trained villagers how to plant bamboo 
to sell to that company.  
Both are running well, but they don´t feel these are sustainable solutions because 
price fluctuations tend to heavily impact the villages, often leading to deforestation 
because villagers rapidly need to plant other crops to earn additional income. 
If more companies are interested to invest, maybe agricultural land can be directly 
allocated to them.

=== PAGE 192 ===
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: PLWU Luang Namtha 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved 
Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
PAFO usually coordinates with PLWU about forest-related activities, and vice-
president and one technical staff are assigned to join all REDD+ consultations, 
including on the village level. Also join SUFORD activities on village level. Also gender-
sensitive information dissemination to villagers.  
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, 
and in forest protection? 
 
LUP has been improved, many stopped shifting cultivation, jobs were created 
 
3. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and their 
management/decision-making? Is that different for different forest management 
modalities, like community forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, national 
parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests? 
 
4. What women groups are currently involved in forest management modalities?  
 
LWU is not a key implementer but coordinates with all sectors to ensure gender 
equality. We wish more women to be part of the management also on village level. 
We need to mobilize women in the villages, and ask the village authorities to make 
sure that women equally attend. It is always a problem if only the head of the HH are 
called into meetings, because then only men join. Customary practices and too much 
house work hinder women further from attending. Education is lower for women, so 
they feel less confident in participating. All these factors need to be taken into 
account when planning village activities. 
 
5. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in 
regards to gender equality? 
 
We had some trainings as introduction into the sector but would appreciate more in-
depth trainings on REDD+ and how to support the programme activities best. 
 
 
6. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much 
are REDD+ and gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?  
 
It was good that PLWU was involved in all consultations towards formulating REDD+ 
activities in the last year, so they feel it improved the gender-sensitivity of the 
process.

=== PAGE 193 ===
7. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based 
on the new Forest Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
LWU should be involved in the development of these regulations and guidelines. The 
Forestry Law has not been reviewed by them yet, so they don´t feel like they know 
enough. They want to improve their understanding once the law has been improved 
in the National Assembly.  
 
8. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
Women are parts of different committees in the forest and should be systematically 
trained to also take part in law enforcement measures including patrolling. 
 
9. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for 
women, what needs to be improved? 
 
No specific challenges by gender, rather the general challenge that LUP has not been 
completed in some areas.  
 
10. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
Women know the forests better than men and should therefore be strongly involved 
in the monitoring of forest resources, esp. NTFPs.  
 
11. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting 
cultivation practices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? 
What would that mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also 
include community-based learning and consultation activities with participating 
farmers/villages. 
 
New crops need a gender-sensitive analysis before introduction if that crop would 
benefit everyone in the village and does not give women more work. 
Community-based learning and consultation activities need to separate women and 
men to make sure that all voices are heard equally.  
 
12. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are 
women´s greatest challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their 
barriers to access markets now? 
 
Make women more confident in starting a new crop/value chain. LWU and other 
sectors should be included in educated them several times and support them in 
identifying markets and promote their access for women to these markets. For 
example, this year cardamom suddenly did not sell well which scared many villagers 
away from trying out new products in fear of financial problems. We need a 
thorough documentation of lessons learned like this, and find sustainable solutions 
together.

=== PAGE 194 ===
13. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting 
from that? 
 
Having microfinance support is better than nothing but not the sole and optimal 
solution. For some women, this might help to get started. Very poor HHs do not take 
the risk in the first place, so microfinance alone is not the solution.  
 
14. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments 
in community-based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the 
timber and fiber industries? Do you think villagers will be benefitting from such 
investment? How could the GoL ensure that the investments are benefitting the 
villagers? 
 
Village consultations for such potential private sector investments need to ensure 
that village women´s voices and concerns are actively taken into account (only-
women meetings etc.). 
 
15. Any other remarks?   
 
LWU should always be involved in village level activities because they can easily 
access village women. So they recommend to make the responsibility very clear that 
LWU is responsible to implement all activities related to REDD+ and gender. This way 
it is ensured that gender is always an integral part. They feel ready to fully support 
the project.

=== PAGE 195 ===
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: Luang Namtha, District Lao Women´s Union 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved 
Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
DLWU is usually invited by DAFO to join forest-related activities. No specific 
implementation experience in REDD+ activities so far but the Deputy Head of DLWU 
has participated in consultation meetings for ICBF (by KfW), and bamboo projects. 
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, 
and in forest protection? 
 
Women take part in forest management and protection, especially in regards to 
NTFPs. In the ICBF project, there are always also women in the village steering 
committees (usually the village LWU representative). 
 
3. How are women already part of REDD+ mechanisms? 
4. How could they be more part of it? 
 
5. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
Language, traditions, lower education. Early marriages in many ethnic groups. 
Children are living so close to nature and traditional life that they don´t want to go to 
school. In some ethnic groups and villages, not even the LWU can get the village 
women together: when they call for a women´s meeting in an Akha village, the men 
send their women away and attend the meeting themselves instead of their women. 
It´s very difficult to overcome their traditions. 
Also, road access and remoteness (in combination with lack of proper vehicles) is a 
barrier for staff to reach these villages. The District offices try to support each other 
with vehicles and in joining in activities together.  
 
What they do to overcome these barriers: information dissemination to both women 
and men, through women´s law information integrated into gender issues. 
Traditional gender norms which led men and women to believe that women are 
worth less than men are the biggest barrier to women´s inclusion in activities. Also, 
staff needs to adapt to villagers´ schedules. E.g., Akha women are not at home 
throughout the day, so if you want to meet them, the team needs to be flexible and 
wait until evening and sleep in the village. Also, changing traditions takes time – 
projects need to plan for repeated activities and flexible time frames to trigger 
change. 
 
6. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and 
their management/decision-making? Is that different for different forest 
management modalities, like community forests, collaborative forests, protection 
forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests?

=== PAGE 196 ===
Women are the key collectors of forest resources but most of the time are not given 
the opportunity to participate in anything related to village politics, including forest 
management.  
 
7. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in 
regards to gender equality? 
 
They feel they need more technical training on REDD+ and its gender implications to 
be able to fully support the new program.  
 
8. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much 
are REDD+ and gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?  
 
Very little. Gender is not an integral part of these planning processes and 
consultations.  
 
9. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based 
on the new Forest Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
The LWU Law should be consulted when drafting those guidelines and regulations. 
Opportunities for women to participate need to be actively integrated into any 
guideline, otherwise it will not happen. Also, include that the LWU should always by 
standard be involved in planning and implementation activities, and any 
consultations. That would also then include that the LWU gets budgeted support to 
do this.  
 
10. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
LWU would like to be part of forest law enforcement measures. Village women 
should be part of the village steering committee where decisions about forest 
management and law enforcement needs are taken.  
 
11. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for 
women, what needs to be improved? 
 
Women and men have the same rights according to the Law but women are often 
not having the same opportunity to decide about their land use in comparison to 
men. That starts with a more equal and active participation of women in LUP village 
meetings which is often not realized. Women especially need to think about having 
only their own name on property which they inherited. Shared property can have 
both names, but since women are still often at disadvantage when it comes to local 
legal procedures, they often lose their land, e.g. when their husbands die and the 
women remarries, and the land right was not clearly with the woman – the land 
usually then goes over into the men´s family.   
 
12. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute?

=== PAGE 197 ===
Whenever village conditions allow, both men and women should partake in forest 
resource monitoring efforts, including patrolling if the traditions allow that. 
Whenever an active monitoring would not be possible for villagers (too far away, no 
vehicles, too dangerous, too much other work), they should at least always be 
consulted regularly. 
 
13. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting 
cultivation practices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? 
What would that mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also 
include community-based learning and consultation activities with participating 
farmers/villages. 
 
See next answer. 
 
14. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are 
women´s greatest challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their 
barriers to access markets now? 
 
LWU is often asked by projects to identify markets specifically for women which is 
necessary to do when introducing a new value chain. Many projects support women-
typical income activities such as weaving/textile production but if there is no market 
and promotion of women´s market access, then the new value chain is not improving 
women´s lives 
 
15. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting 
from that? 
 
Beneficial for women, village women should be included in the management of these 
banks at village level from the start. DLWU in Luang Namtha is not involved in 
microfinance. Difficult to assess for them if microfinance access would in fact 
empower women to start new products/businesses, but the DLWU would support 
this potentially beneficial activity to make sure that women are part of the 
management and implementation. 
 
16. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments 
in community-based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the 
timber and fiber industries? Do you think villagers will be benefitting from such 
investment? How could the GoL ensure that the investments are benefitting the 
villagers? 
 
They don´t see potential for Luang Namtha District since there is no area for that. 
There is already a lot of rubber plantations. People don´t have funds to start such 
endeavors themselves, and there is no market to sell the new products. So any 
potential investment would have to analyze these challenges and keep sustainability 
and ongoing benefits for the involved people in mind.

=== PAGE 198 ===
17. Any other remarks?   
 
DLWU Luang Namtha would be more than willing to implement own parts of the 
programme because they are usually only consulted. So a budgeted sub-
implementation would be their favorite solution, or at least involve them in the 
steering committees for the program.

=== PAGE 199 ===
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: Luang Namtha, District Agriculture and Forestry Office (DAFO) 
and District Office for Forest Inspection (DOFI) 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved 
Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
Deputy DAFO head usually joins REDD+ consultations, but they feel they still have 
only limited knowledge of REDD+ 
But DAFO`s key role is to protect forests and their species, as well as general 
biodiversity/wildlife protection and emission reduction, and the adherence to laws 
and regulations, patrolling, deforestation.  
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, 
and in forest protection? 
 
Forest protection on village level, women have more roles and responsibilities 
because women usually go to the forest for NTFP production/collection and 
vegetable collection. Men mainly do dissemination and enforcement of regulations; 
only a few women are part of that level of protection/resource management.  
 
3. How are women already part of REDD+ mechanisms? 
 
In general, all activities aim to benefit all villagers equally. But especially in many 
ethnic groups, women are participating less in activities due to traditions. 
 
4. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
Language, education, understanding of regulations and laws is very low. Use modern 
communication tools like posters, videos shown by LCDs to engage all villagers and to 
convey messages more playfully. 
 
5. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and 
their management/decision-making? Is that different for different forest 
management modalities, like community forests, collaborative forests, protection 
forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests? 
 
In some villages, women are already part of village and forest management 
committees. DAFO thinks that the local LWU representatives are the best choices to 
systematically place into the forest management committees because they usually 
possess better education. 
 
6. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in 
regards to gender equality? 
 
Implementation-wise we are ready, but always appreciate additional specialized

=== PAGE 200 ===
trainings to improve our work, especially when the program requires certain 
knowledge and technical skills. We have sufficient staff and capacities to implement 
the program. Study tours to other Provinces are very useful learning tools for them. 
 
7. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much 
are REDD+ and gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?  
 
The activity is still too new for them to be able to assess that.  
 
8. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based 
on the new Forest Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
The Forest Law is gender-neutral because law is law, and both men and women 
equally need to follow it once approved. Guidelines can be supportive in setting 
standards for village participation. Of course we also have to keep realities in mind – 
some ethnic groups just won´t let women participate, and even on the District 
Government level, we often struggle finding enough suitable female candidates to 
work with us. 
Since women are naturally already seen as the “protectors” of the forests, the 
development of guidelines can be a chance to foster this role for women. 
 
9. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
Women are much more reliable and committed to forest protection. They protect, 
men destroy. So we need to find ways to support women´s natural protection efforts. 
Women need to be formally part of law enforcement units. If it is not formalized 
beforehand, the village authorities will just take over. Instead of approaching the 
village head (naiban), approach village LWU first. Could be entry point for 
PLWU/DLWU. Also, if women are more systematically placed in village steering 
committees, they will also be more part of any law enforcement measures.   
 
10. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for 
women, what needs to be improved? 
 
Women´s and men´s names are both on land use titles now, so the legal status is 
equalized. Same for LUP.  
The challenge is within internal decision-making power relations in HHs which are 
harder to address. Land titling is not very advanced in the remoter areas of Luang 
Namtha.  
 
11. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
If such system is developed, formalize women´s support and contribution to that 
from the beginning. Women need to be part of that because they are main users and 
protectors of the forests. 
 
12. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting 
cultivation practices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices:

=== PAGE 201 ===
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? 
What would that mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also 
include community-based learning and consultation activities with participating 
farmers/villages. 
 
If we want to stop deforestation, the focus needs to be on income-generating 
activities, including NTFP conservation, sustainable use of NTFPs, value-added 
products.  
Government needs to partake in village consultations since they will be part of the 
implementation.  
 
13. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are 
women´s greatest challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their 
barriers to access markets now? 
 
It is essential to focus on market demand when developing new value chains, but all 
in the frame of local traditions (e.g. Akha: textiles) to make it valuable and realistic 
for the villagers.  
Government needs to be part of the negotiations to ensure monitoring and support. 
 
14. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting 
from that? 
 
Luang Namtha has only limited experience with microfinance. It could be very 
beneficial for people though to empower them to start new production methods, 
products etc.  
Besides microfinance, the DOFI sees VDF are great ways to empower especially 
women in leadership and management. Introducing village-managed funds for forest 
protection would empower women to take over that role.  
 
15. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments 
in community-based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the 
timber and fiber industries? Do you think villagers will be benefitting from such 
investment? How could the GoL ensure that the investments are benefitting the 
villagers? 
 
In Luang Namtha, rubber plantations are one of the drivers of deforestation. This 
needs to be taken care of, and avoided to do the same mistake again with another 
potential investment promotion. 
Government needs to be part of the negotiations to ensure monitoring and support. 
 
16. Any other remarks?   
 
Feasibility studies of every village are necessary before activities are decided upon 
because every village is different.  
Road access/improvement is a huge issue for program implementation – many 
villages where deforestation is an issue are remote and hard to reach. So small

=== PAGE 202 ===
infrastructure improvements should be part of the program. 
DAFO staff needs vehicles to access more remote areas.

=== PAGE 203 ===
GCF/GIZ, Village interviews: Houaphan, Sam Neua, Ban Yard (Khmu & Hmong) – WOMEN 
GROUP (15 women) 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved 
Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. Tell us something about how your life is like. 
 
Weaving, selling in Sam Neua, sometimes they have traders who regularly buy their 
weaving, shifting cultivation, paddy fields, livestock. 
 
2. What are women´s and men´s specific roles in forest and land use? 
 
Forest: 
Demarcation boarder clearing both, natural regeneration activities both (esp. youth); 
Men lead demarcation group, patrolling, timber harvesting for domestic 
construction, firewood collection (together with women), hunting 
Women collect vegetables, NTFP & tree fruit & bamboo shoots 
 
Land: work together, paddy fields, garden 
 
Livestock: poultry, everything near the house – women; further away (bigger 
animals): men 
 
3. …and in forest protection? 
 
Small planting activities; plantations of trees (rubber) inside the forest cover; adhere 
to the different forest management modalities according to LUP 
 
4. Do you feel like the work related to forest and land use are distributed fairly 
between men and women? 
 
Women are having higher work load than men because they take care of all the “less 
hard” tasks; men do the heavy tasks like plowing the field. This makes women busy 
over the course of a whole day.  
 
5. Do you know of REDD+ mechanisms and why they are existing? 
 
Not of REDD+ as such, but about Environment Protection, climate change, forest 
protection and that we have to take care of it. 
 
6. From your knowledge of the forest and land: did you see any changes over the 
years? E.g. Less resources, NTFPs etc.?  
 
Resources becoming less and less over the last years. Since they started forest 
protection area, the trees recovered and to them it seems like there are more trees 
again. NTFPs got less. Women don´t want to walk too far away from the village (time

=== PAGE 204 ===
constraints), so they have less NTFPs for domestic consumption.  
Soil quality went down, trying to use dung to fertilize but with little effect so far. No 
chemical fertilizers so far.  
 
7. Do you feel like you benefit from forest resources? How? 
 
Not balanced within the village depending on how much you can collect and sell. 
Within HH, equal benefits.  
Women take care of finances. Decision-making about finances: small things sole 
decisions, bigger investments are discussed and decided jointly. 
 
8. What kind of forests do you have access to? Examples: community forests, 
collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and 
buffer zone community forests. 
 
Village use forest, protection forest, forest for NTFP collection 
 
9. Do you feel you are participating in forest management/decision-making? Is that 
different for different forest management modalities (like community forests, 
collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and 
buffer zone community forests)? 
 
Have a Forest Management Plan. Committee has 9 members total, 3 women. 
Women participate in the discussions very well, esp. the LWU member who has 
higher education and is from the city and can bring lots of knowledge into the 
discussions.  
 
10. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for 
women, what needs to be improved? 
 
The existing LUP had positive effects for the villagers, esp. in regards to forest 
restoration and protection. No more conflicts about land since LUP, but as a 
suggestion it could be done for forest allocation/upland land as well because there 
are still conflicts between villagers. 
Land security did not change since LUP. They feel empowered and land-safe enough 
to negotiate with potential investors.   
 
11. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting 
cultivation practices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
How do you hope this will change your livelihoods? What are your fears? 
Note: Programme will also include community-based learning and consultation 
activities with participating farmers/villages. 
 
They hope to get more income, and to be able to construct a village meeting hall 
(and other things to develop the village). Interested in: vegetables to export to the 
markets, livestock, weaving, fish pond.  
Fears:  if full financial support by the project, they are ready to give up shifting

=== PAGE 205 ===
cultivation. They just still do it because of lack of alternatives and financial resources 
to do the shift. 
 
12. The programme wants to make the villagers an active part of forest management 
(village forest management planning & agreements, forest planting, restoration 
activities) and monitoring (incl. patrolling): what do you think of that? Where do 
you feel women and men should be part of? 
 
If women can work in groups, they would get involved in forest monitoring & 
patrolling. The programme could train them how to do it, and they would like to get 
involved in that kind of forest management. In the committee, they already feel 
represented.   
 
13. What are your barriers to access markets? Which support would you need to access 
them? 
 
Poor families because no transport to reach markets, and also because they often 
only produce very small amounts. Road condition is bad, esp. in rainy season (barely 
access then), so that should be the first thing to be changed. That would also change 
livelihoods in regards to health care access.   
 
14. What do you think of microfinance to start a business/invest in a new agricultural 
practice etc.? 
 
Want Village Bank, would be best to access money on the village level and use it to 
do small investments. For what exactly, they would like to work with the programme 
in joint discussions and develop a plan together.  
 
15. The programme wants to invite private sector investments in community-based 
agroforestry in national production forests. What do you think of that?  
 
They always support having new projects in the village, but are very careful with 
private sector involvement. It must be completely ensured that the activity in the 
village will benefit everyone and is creating alternative jobs and increased income.  
 
16. Any other remarks?   
 
Priority on road improvement, increase paddy rice area, improve school building, 
irrigation systems, small village infrastructure like village hall, office. Small road to 
the paddy area would improve patrolling as well. Financial support for forest 
management esp. for fire prevention (clearing forest line), patrolling, surveying, 
replace demarcation signs.

=== PAGE 206 ===
GCF/GIZ, Village interviews: Houaphan, Sam Neua, Ban Yard (Khmu, Hmong) – MEN 
GROUP (13 men) 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved 
Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. Tell us something about how your life is like.  
 
Unity between men and women. Very poor living conditions/poverty. Low education, 
few jobs.  
Mainly work paddy fields, agriculture on shifting cultivation plantations.  
Deforestation decreased. Water supply good. Road access is at least there, so better 
off than other villages, but could still be improved. HH try to develop step by step. 
Some families don´t have enough rice throughout the year. Village has primary 
school. Compared to more remote villages, we feel we are having better conditions, 
but still many things to improve. Need to improve housing, commercial trade 
products. Some HH raise livestock to increase their income, but not too successful 
yet. Challenges in the village (Naiban) also include that the village is divided into two 
ethnic groups and villages which makes coordination and meetings harder. Road 
access improvement necessary for health care access. Improve school building. The 
Hmong group does not have enough paddy fields. They dug a road access to their 
fields with their hands. More forest land is available but too far away from their 
village (30km).  For secondary school, the kids walk about 6km to the neighboring 
village. 
 
2. What are women´s and men´s specific roles in forest and land use? 
 
Forest: men and women work together 
Land: Work together (harvest, fencing, paddy fields) 
 
3. …and in forest protection? 
 
Fire prevention, restoration. 
Patrolling currently done by men, but they feel women could also do that job if they 
want to do that.  
They also do watershed protection patrolling.  
 
4. Do you feel like the work related to forest and land use are distributed fairly 
between men and women? 
 
Men work more than women outside the harvest season because men check all the 
time on the fields whereas women are working at home & weaving. Naiban adds: 
men work harder but women work more. Men feel the main pressure to provide for 
their families is on men, and have to take on tasks and jobs which generate more 
income. They also feel like they always have to think ahead as much as possible to 
ensure their families´ income and well-being.

=== PAGE 207 ===
5. Do you know of REDD+ mechanisms and why they are existing? 
 
Never heard of REDD+, but of climate change, environmental protection etc. 
(activities by Clipad). Since the programme (2016), they started to protect their forest 
and created a Forest Management Committee which regularly reminds the villagers 
to take care of the forest.  
 
6. From your knowledge of the forest and land: did you see any changes over the 
years? E.g. Less resources, NTFPs etc.?  
 
Fruits on the trees increased because of the forest restoration measures, as well as 
bigger trees due to protection measures. Wildlife increased for the same reason. 
Good forest results in good/lots of mushrooms.  
NTFPs decreased.  
They also observe that the climate is changing: rainy season has more rain, more 
flooding, but the programme (Clipad) helped to control the flooding. 
 
7. Do you feel like you benefit from forest resources? How? 
 
Depends on how much work a family puts in, and how many family members 
contribute. But on average, all villagers benefit equally from the forest resources. 
Within HH, equal benefits, even in consumption. 
 
8. What kind of forests do you have access to? Examples: community forests, 
collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and 
buffer zone community forests. 
 
Agroforestry area, NTFP. 
Protection forest is mentioned only after mentioning by programme team. 
 
9. Do you feel you are participating in forest management/decision-making? Is that 
different for different forest management modalities (like community forests, 
collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and 
buffer zone community forests)? 
 
They feel women and men are both part of forest management, because they share 
tasks and have both men and women in the Forest Management Committee.  
 
10. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for 
women, what needs to be improved? 
 
No more conflicts about land with other villages any more since LUP, which they are 
very happy about. Forest protection measures are showing positive impact already 
(except for NTFP decrease).  
Recommendation: agricultural area should be divided by HH as well (DAFO came but 
still in the negotiation process with villagers in conflict; for housing, areas are 
allocated already).

=== PAGE 208 ===
Naiban: For the Forest Management, they still need funding for fire prevention 
(clearing forest line), patrolling, surveying, replace demarcation signs.  
 
11. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting 
cultivation practices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
How do you hope this will change your livelihoods? What are your fears? 
Note: Programme will also include community-based learning and consultation 
activities with participating farmers/villages. 
 
Villagers lack experience and knowledge on agricultural methods, and we have 
nothing to export to markets so far. So we need both technical and financial support 
to change to alternatives. Also, land analysis needs to be done to determine what 
cash crop would be suitable. We need support to do this analysis, as well as how to 
access markets. We want to be involved in consultations and decide together, and 
we want to feel sure that this change would improve our living conditions and 
income.  
 
12. The programme wants to make the villagers an active part of forest management 
(village forest management planning & agreements, forest planting, restoration 
activities) and monitoring (incl. patrolling): what do you think of that? Where do 
you feel women and men should be part of? 
 
Villagers are already an active part in forest management and are very keen to keep 
doing that, and take over new tasks if they feel it makes sense for the village.  
 
13. What are your barriers to access markets? Which support would you need to access 
them? 
 
They feel like there are already a lot of vegetables on the Sam Neua market, so the 
transport costs are not worth the market trip.  
They would like to develop new value chains, new products (e.g. dried food which 
stores longer and is more unusual, so more people would buy it). 
 
14. What do you think of microfinance to start a business/invest in a new agricultural 
practice etc.? 
 
In the past, when funds were provided to villagers, they did not know how to use the 
money. So if access to finance is provided, then jointly with business plan 
development.  
They feel taking loans is risky for the villagers in case they cannot sell their products. 
If analyzed carefully, MF/Village Banks would be great for the village. The village 
developed a lot in the last years, but with MF access they could start doing the 
investments into livelihood improvement as mentioned above.  
 
15. The programme wants to invite private sector investments in community-based 
agroforestry in national production forests. What do you think of that?  
 
Private sector investment would be very welcome because they would create more

=== PAGE 209 ===
jobs and infrastructure in the village. They see potential for ecotourism with the 
nearby waterfall. 
Investments would need to be tightly controlled by the Government though to 
ensure that the villagers benefit from the cooperation because we lack the 
experience and capacity to control the cooperation ourselves. If a cooperation would 
change too much infrastructure in the village, they would not want it.  
 
16. Any other remarks?   
 
Allocation of HH agricultural land needs to be continued.  
All programme activities should aim to increase people´s income through distinct 
products (similar to One District One Product), 
Road and school improvement will create better access to health care & markets, 
and education.  
Hmong representative repeats that they need road access to their fields and forest 
area.

=== PAGE 210 ===
GCF/GIZ, Village interviews: Luang Namtha District, Ban Nam Mad (Akha ethnic); 
participants: 8 men, 27 women) 
 
Notes: the interview was conducted with a mixed group of women and men of all ages. A 
separation by gender was impossible to get organized since the villagers had celebrations 
ongoing and decided that they would rather have one joint discussion. The discussion with 
the women also needed a lot of additional translation (Akha-Lao-English).  
 
Further observations: the village is located only a few kilometers outside main town Luang 
Namtha. The access to the city had significantly improved people´s access to health centers 
and markets. On the other hand, the trash problem of the village is immanent in every 
corner of the village. Environmental education has not been provided, and people´s 
understanding of the necessity of proactive environmental protection is basically not 
existing. Only the women showed a basic understanding of the correlation between their 
actions and the swindling resources. 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved 
Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. Tell me how your life is like. 
 
Women: Harvest rubber in the morning, evening bamboo, rattan, broom grass, 
firewood & vegetables. Lot less work since women have road access & motorbikes & 
access to a rice mill. Getting up early to prepare rice and breakfast, feeding animals, 
washing. Women work more than men. 
Women earn more money than men, because men are lazy. Women are the money-
keepers. 
 
Men: bringing harvest/rice down from the upland fields, now by tractor (until 
recently by foot or motorbike). Shifting cultivation, no paddy rice.  
 
Rubber trees: share the work, depending on family 
 
2. What are women´s and men´s specific roles in forest and land use? 
See answer above. 
 
3. …and in forest protection? 
 
4. Do you feel like the work related to forest and land use are distributed fairly 
between men and women? 
 
Depending strongly on family, all variations exist in this village. Generally, women 
work longer and more, while men do physically more straining work.  
 
5. Do you know of REDD+ mechanisms and why they are existing? 
 
Since 2012 no timber harvesting regulation in place. 1mio LAK fine is to be paid per

=== PAGE 211 ===
m2 harvested. 
 
6. From your knowledge of the forest and land: did you see any changes over the 
years? E.g. Less resources, NTFPs etc.?  
 
More people in the village, so the forest resources are getting less. Some people are 
harvesting continuously without giving the forest the chance to recover.  
 
7. Do you feel like you benefit from forest resources? How? 
 
Women benefit even more than men from the forest resources because the harvest 
everything from the forests and keep the money (and often earn more than their 
men). 
 
8. What kind of forests do you have access to? Examples: community forests, 
collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and 
buffer zone community forests. 
 
Nearby is a natural protected forest area; land and forest allocation was only done 
between different villages so far. 
 
9. Do you feel you are participating in forest management/decision-making? Is that 
different for different forest management modalities (like community forests, 
collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and 
buffer zone community forests)? 
 
Mainly village authorities are taking decisions about all village decision, including 
forest management. No women in the village committee. Some women are ok with 
that, others not (but they don´t challenge the decisions).  
Note: After repeated attempts of getting the women to speak about their potential 
involvement in forest management, one woman speaks up stating that she would like 
to be an active part of the village forest management. Then the women start a 
discussion on what ideas they have to support forest recovery, and how beneficial it 
would be if they could be part in decision-making. This discussion shows the 
importance of persisting in men-led discussions to hear women´s voices. The 
accompanying LWU member was helpful in explaining and encouraging women to 
speak – which showcases the important role the LWU is still able to play in village 
facilitations. 
 
10. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for 
women, what needs to be improved? 
 
No LUP or titling yet, only zoning. Process needs to be continued. Demarcation 
borders don´t mean much to them and the nearby villages – no one is really 
controlling the use.  
 
11. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting 
cultivation practices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices:

=== PAGE 212 ===
How do you hope this will change your livelihoods? What are your fears? 
Note: Programme will also include community-based learning and consultation 
activities with participating farmers/villages. 
 
Shifting cultivation is very hard and lots of work, so they would very much like to 
change to alternative crops. Rubber plantations meant less work for everyone, at 
least after the initial period (young trees need more care). 
 
12. The programme wants to make the villagers an active part of forest management 
(village forest management planning & agreements, forest planting, restoration 
activities) and monitoring (incl. patrolling): what do you think of that? Where do 
you feel women and men should be part of? 
 
Women want to be part of the forest management, restoration activities, planning. 
Villagers want to increase patrolling in the future because currently, everyone is 
using the forest as they want and they see the resources decreasing.  
 
13. What are your barriers to access markets? Which support would you need to access 
them? 
 
They keep some for their own consumption, and sell the rest on markets in Luang 
Namtha town nearby and a market in a nearby village. Rubber is sold to a company 
which is either coming to pick up harvested rubber or the villagers transport it to the 
company. 
 
14. What do you think of microfinance to start a business/invest in a new agricultural 
practice etc.? 
 
The village has no experience with any form of microfinance yet. With access to small 
amounts to borrow, the men would start small shops, the women would like to 
increase their handicraft and textile production and create a small business.  
 
15. The programme wants to invite private sector investments in community-based 
agroforestry in national production forests. What do you think of that?  
 
The village would be open to a collaboration with the private sector, if the land is 
suitable.  
 
16. Any other remarks?   
 
They would like to have access to the VDF, a bridge (requested since 10 years). They 
had built the school building by themselves but need more furniture for it. They feel 
like they are often requesting for things but rarely anything happens.

=== PAGE 213 ===
GCF/GIZ, Village interviews: Luang Namtha District, Ban Nam Dy (Lanten ethnic group, 
natural tourism site; 4 women, 10 men) 
 
Note: villagers asked for one joint meeting because they felt too busy to organize separate 
meetings. 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved 
Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. Tell us about your everyday life. 
 
Naiban: rubber plantation care, paddy rice fields, some HH do shifting cultivation, 
livestock (pig, chicken, ducks, goats), few HH have small shops; paper production and 
textiles & handicraft mainly done by all women. Started to be tourism site in 2003 
(officially opening in 2007 when they also received funding support for that by ADB, 
today New Zealand´s Fund for Community Tourism Development is supporting with 
funding until 2020), upon the idea of one of the villagers (a man). 7 villagers created 
the tourism site. When funding ends, the village plans to keep maintaining it 
themselves. 60% of the income from the site stays with the village, rest goes to 
Provincial Tourism Office and Tourism Fund and others. Villagers take care of it in 
rotation (cleaning, maintenance, ticket selling). No women in the management 
committee for the site because village women who stay in the village have low 
education (no literacy and calculation skills).  
The Naiban recognizes that they need external support to find ways to include 
women more in the management structures of the village. Women usually don´t 
want to participate in meetings. 
 
Women: they join meetings if they feel they can learn something. They feel shy, not 
educated enough, and as if they cannot contribute much.  
 
2. What are women´s and men´s specific roles in forest and land use? 
 
Villagers don´t use the forests much as the forest area is very small. Also see answer 
above. 
 
3. …and in forest protection? 
 
Only individual measures, nothing systematic.  
 
4. Do you feel like the work related to forest and land use are distributed fairly 
between men and women? 
 
Work is equally divided in our village: women do handicraft, paper, textile and 
clothing; men do construction, paddy rice care 
Cooking, animal raising, rubber plantation care are done by everyone jointly

=== PAGE 214 ===
5. Do you know of REDD+ mechanisms and why they are existing? 
 
Some families have little awareness about forest protection and watershed 
protection. They did not hear about REDD+ so far, but about deforestation, 
environmental protection, and they try to educate villagers who contribute 
negatively to that. 
 
6. From your knowledge of the forest and land: did you see any changes over the 
years? E.g. Less resources, NTFPs etc.?  
 
10-15 years ago the biodiversity was significantly higher, now they perceive a 
stagnation. 
 
7. Do you feel like you benefit from your forest/natural resources equally? 
 
Income and benefits are shared equally within the HHs. 
Women: normally, the families keep the earned money together, but some men 
spend too much money on alcohol, so the women try to keep it together.  
 
8. What kind of forests do you have access to? Examples: community forests, 
collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and 
buffer zone community forests. 
 
LUP completed. Protected forest and use forest. 
 
9. Do you feel you are participating in forest management/decision-making? Is that 
different for different forest management modalities (like community forests, 
collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and 
buffer zone community forests)? 
 
Women: we don´t have enough education to partake in any decision-making, and we 
are not strong enough. We would like to be part in decision-making, but don´t fulfill 
the requirements. The few women who have education either leave the village to the 
city or don´t want to be part in village management.  
 
10. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for 
women, what needs to be improved? 
 
Need to improve the existing LUP enforcement. When villagers don´t adhere to the 
LUP and cut down protected areas, they are called to the village office and have to 
pay a fine, and the District office is involved. But once the villagers do it again, no 
further consequences happen, so the villagers don´t take the protection areas serious 
enough. So enforcement is the key issue for our village. 
If the population is growing as expected, the LUP will also need to be adjusted and 
they will need more agricultural land.  
 
11. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting 
cultivation practices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices:

=== PAGE 215 ===
How do you hope this will change your livelihoods? What are your fears? 
Note: Programme will also include community-based learning and consultation 
activities with participating farmers/villages. 
 
Villagers want to be involved in the consultations. Consultations teams need to be 
very clear that they want women to participate in meetings. Less than 10 families do 
shifting cultivation, so it is not seen as a big problem. We see that rubber prices are 
falling right now, so we need to think of alternative crops. 
 
12. The programme wants to make the villagers an active part of forest management 
(village forest management planning & agreements, forest planting, restoration 
activities) and monitoring (incl. patrolling): what do you think of that? Where do 
you feel women and men should be part of? 
 
See answer to question 9. 
 
13. What are your barriers to access markets? Which support would you need to access 
them? 
 
Rubber is currently the village´s main income source and bought by the only rubber 
company (Yunnan), which is trying to lower the price. Villagers are afraid that they 
lose income because of that monopoly soon.  
Handicraft and textiles are sent mainly to a center in Luang Prabang, and some to the 
Luang Namtha Tourism shop. They requested the Provincial Tourism Office to 
establish a connection, and the New Zealand Fund connected them and established a 
regular business. This is, however, just an additional income for the village, they are 
more dependent on rubber. 
 
14. What do you think of microfinance to start a business/invest in a new agricultural 
practice etc.? 
 
They have a village bank which made it easier for the villages to take small loans. 
They need more training for the village bank steering committee though, because 
financial literacy and understanding is still low.  
Women: most women do not take loans because they don´t know what kind of 
business/new product they could invest in. So a training and support in market 
demand analysis would be appreciated by both women and men. 
 
The village started their own VDF one year ago, and the money will be used for small 
infrastructure projects in the village.  
 
15. The programme wants to invite private sector investments in community-based 
agroforestry in national production forests. What do you think of that?  
 
In the past, we had a company approaching is to plant crops for biofuel but in the 
end, no one bought it. So a thorough market demand analysis is needed, and a 
diversification of crops and products to secure income despite market fluctuations.

=== PAGE 216 ===
Their dependency on rubber is too high, especially with the existing monopoly by 
Yunnan which already has huge concessions. 
 
16. Any other remarks?   
 
The funding support for the tourism site is ending soon, so the villagers are afraid 
what will happen then. The site already needs more maintenance than they can 
afford to provide. They also need funding and technical assistance in developing the 
site because many tourists just come to take photos of the village and the handicrafts 
but don´t go to the site. They have the idea to develop the site with accommodation 
for tourists, and other interesting features like in other sites (swing etc.).  
 
They would also like more traders coming to the village and buy handicrafts – if that 
would happen regularly, many women would potentially be interested to take small 
loans to develop their handicraft businesses.  
 
Agricultural practices need to be improved, and market access beyond rubber.  
 
Watersheds are shared with other villages, so it is very polluted due to rubber 
pesticides. So even though villagers live at the stream, they experience severely 
limited water access.

=== PAGE 217 ===
Gender Action Plan 
 
Programme Title: Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through 
improved governance and sustainable forest landscape management 
This Gender Action Plan (GAP) forms the basis for operationalizing the results and 
recommendations of the gender analysis. It contains specific gender elements to be 
considered in the programme design and during the implementation of programme measures 
and activities. Moreover, it helps to monitor implementation of these measures and activities. 
Hence, the GAP ensures effective gender mainstreaming and integration of a consistent 
gender-perspective in the GCF programme in order to maximize climate and development co-
benefits. The aim is to promote opportunities, drivers of change and positive gender dynamics 
as well as to manage and mitigate potential adverse risks over the duration of the programme. 
The GAP ensures that the programme is compliant with GCF’s gender policy (GCF/B.09).  
 
The GAP is closely aligned with the outputs of the log-frame and planned activities. It 
complements the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) that already contains 
gender-related aspects. In addition to the specific activities and measures of the GAP, the GCF 
programme will systematically apply some general measures in accordance with the GIZ 
Gender Strategy:  
 
 
Based on the GIZ’s guidelines on designing and using a results-based monitoring 
system (RBM), the programme will document the positive and negative effects that the 
program’s activities have on gender relations by setting up adequate, gender-sensitive 
results-based monitoring and by collecting sex-disaggregated data.  
 
 
A gender-sensitive language is used in reports, training materials and publications. 
 
 
In the programme team(s), competencies on gender and gender-sensitive forest 
management will be considered during the hiring process and further developed by 
means of training.  
 
 
The GAP will be executed by the different entities involved in the programme 
management, including all concerned Government line agencies and development 
partners. 
 
 
Programme overview: 
Impact Statement: To support the Government and people of Laos in changing the present-
day use of forests and landscapes and to ensure a transition to sustainable management at 
scale. This will reduce more than 140m tCO2eq over the program’s lifespan and more than 
55m tCO2eq over the program’s duration. 
 
 
Programmatic approach: 
The programme design consists of: 
 Three Projects: 
o Project 1: Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang provinces. Mid-2020 to mid-2024. 
o Project 2: Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay provinces. 2022 to end-2029. 
o Project 3: Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang provinces. Mid-2024 to end-2029. 
 
 
Each Project contains four Outputs (see below): 
o Output 1: Creation of an enabling environment for REDD+

=== PAGE 218 ===
o Output 2: Market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation 
o Output 3: Climate mitigation action through forestry 
o Output 4: Project management, coordination, monitoring and reporting 
  
Project 1 and Project 2 share many similarities in terms of their ‘on-the-ground’ interventions. 
However, Project 1 also addresses a number of national-level interventions that will also serve 
to support Project 2 (subject to separate GCF funding approval Project 2). The most notable 
example is the creation of the REDD+ Funding Window, which will be undertaken in Project 1 
but whose structure and functionality will also be utilized in Project 2. 
 
The approval of a first payment from the GCF for Project 1 will allow the establishment and 
initial implementation of the programme. At the core of the programme and its projects are 
performance-based payments to participating communities and institutions to incentivize and 
fund those types of land-use practices that yield the highest emission reductions. The 
programme ties its performance to MRV-able milestones, providing GIZ and GCF with the 
necessary information for the design of Project 2 and Project 3, for which additional funding 
may be approved subsequently by the GCF Board. 
 
This Funding Proposal seeks approval of GCF funding for Project 1 only. Separate Funding 
Proposals will be submitted in the future for Project 2 and for Project 3. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: GCF Programme to Implement the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme 
 
 
 
The following specific outputs and activities are planned:  
Output 1: Creation of an enabling environment for REDD+ implementation 
 
Activity 1.1: REDD+ Funding Window and sustainable financing 
 
Activity 1.2: Mainstreaming REDD+ into the NDC and socio-economic development 
plans (SEDPs) 
 
Activity 1.3: Strengthening the regulatory framework 
 
Activity 1.4: Law enforcement and monitoring 
 
Activity 1.5: Land use planning and improved tenure security 
 
Activity 1.6: Implementation of the measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) 
system 
 
Activity 1.7: Knowledge management, FPIC, safeguards and gender  
 
Output 2: Market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation 
 
Activity 2.1: Local incentives for good agricultural practices (GAP) and agroforestry 
 
Activity 2.2: Catalyzing private sector investment in value chains 
 
Activity 2.3: Sustainable rural infrastructure watershed management

=== PAGE 219 ===
Output 3: Climate mitigation action through forestry  
 
Activity 3.1: Village forest management 
 
Activity 3.2.: Sustainable management of production forests 
 
Activity 3.3.: National Protected Area management 
 
Output 4: Programme management, coordination, monitoring and reporting  
 
Gender is integrated into all outputs and most activities. The target group survey, which 
is mentioned under activities 2, 4, and 11 is suggested to be carried out as one field 
survey towards the end of the 9.5-year programme cycle. 
 
 
Gender Action Plan 
 
Below the gender action plan for the (i) programme and (ii) Project 1 are presented. As the 
programme is implemented, additional revisions may be required for the programme-level 
gender action plan, which will be submitted along with each of the projects.

=== PAGE 220 ===
Programme-level Gender Action Plan 
No.  
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
Cross-cutting 
1 
All (cross-cutting) 
Develop the 
capacities of 
line 
implementing 
Government 
agencies and 
the Lao 
Women´s 
Union to 
provide 
gender-
sensitive 
facilitation of 
programme 
activities in 
village 
communities. 
Implement 
targeted 
trainings on 
REDD+ and 
gender 
Technical staff 
from DAFO, 
DOFI and 
DLWU have 
been trained in 
“REDD+ and 
Gender”.  
 
Technical staff 
in DAFO, 
DOFI and 
LWU1 have 
received no 
training (or, in 
rare cases, 
limited 
training) in 
gender issues 
pertaining to 
REDD+ 
 
‘REDD+ and gender’ 
training workshops 
held for DAFO, 
DOFI and LWU staff 
– each in a different 
province, each with 
approximately 16 
participants. 
Y: 1 
GIZ/ CSO 
training provider 
25,000 
 
Participants: 14 
trainings x 2 days 
x 16 persons per 
training / 2x 
districts (incl. 
DSA/NA) 
Trainers: 28 
trainings days + 56 
travel days + 
transport for 2x 
trainers (trainer 
fee, DSA, NA, 
vehicle) 
2 
All (cross-cutting) 
Encourage the 
active and 
effective 
participation of 
women in 
community 
meetings.  
Time and 
locate trainings 
taking into 
account 
women’s work 
schedules and 
Percent (%) 
female 
participants in 
community 
meetings 
Participation 
rates of 
women in 
community 
meetings are 
often below 
40%. 
40% participation of 
women in 
community 
meetings. 
Y: 1-9.5 
DAFO 
- 
Included within the 
budget of Activity 
1.7 
3 
In a survey 
amongst target 
communities, 
at least 50% of 
women state 
that they felt 
Baseline 
survey to be 
conducted 
during year 1 
50% of women in 
target communities 
state that they felt 
actively included in 
REDD+ related 
village meetings. 
Y: 1, 4, 
9.5 
3. DoF / MAF & 
REDD+ Desk & 
GIZ 
20,000 
 
Baseline survey, 
and two follow-up 
surveys (mid-term 
and programme 
end) 
                                                     
1 Lao Women’s Union.

=== PAGE 221 ===
No.  
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
accessibility to 
ensure 
maximum 
participation 
and outreach, 
coordinate with 
LWU, LNFC, 
and  local 
women’s 
organizations 
to build on 
existing 
networks and 
best practices 
for outreach. 
actively 
included in 
REDD+-
related village 
meetings. 
4 
All 
Support the 
capacity 
development of 
female staff for 
all 
implementing 
Government 
agencies at all 
levels to 
improve the 
gender 
balance within 
the forest 
sector. 
Percent 
increase (%) in 
the number of 
women 
implementing 
actions. 
Baseline 
survey to be 
conducted 
during year 1 
Number of women 
implementing 
actions has 
increased by at least 
10%. 
Y: 1, 4, 
9.5 
MAF / DoF 
12,965 
Training and 
capacity 
development 
workshops for 
female 
government staff 
Output 1: Creation of an enabling environment for REDD+ implementation 
GAP Objective: Creation of an enabling environment for improving gender equality within the REDD+ framework 
5 
1.2, 1.3 
Gender-
sensitive future 
regulations and 
guidelines to 
implement 
SFM, FLR and 
village forestry 
under the 
revised 
Forestry Law 
New 
regulations 
and guidelines 
consider 
gender as a 
crucial factor in 
forest 
protection, 
monitoring, 
equal user 
Laws, 
regulations 
and guidelines 
do not 
consider 
gender as an 
explicit factor 
in forest 
protection, 
user-rights 
New/revised laws, 
regulations and 
guidelines explicitly 
consider gender 
(e.g. in the context 
of stakeholder roles, 
institutional 
responsibilities, 
resource access 
and benefit-sharing)  
Y: 1-9.5 
DoF/MAF 
REDD+ Desk 
- 
Included within the 
budget of Activity 
1.7

=== PAGE 222 ===
No.  
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
and the 
PRAPs. The 
program´s 
safeguard, 
gender and 
M&E specialist 
and if 
necessary 
other gender 
experts will 
revise the 
regulations and 
guidelines. 
rights and 
benefit 
sharing, as 
well as 
resource 
management. 
and benefit-
sharing 
 
 
6 
1.4, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 
Review the 
potential for 
community-
based women-
led patrolling 
groups, and 
support their 
creation with 
capacity 
development 
and awareness 
raising. 
No. of 
assessments 
conducted on 
women-led2 
patrolling 
groups in the 
target area 
0 - no analysis 
of the potential 
for women-led 
patrolling 
groups in the 
target areas 
 
A short assessment 
has clarified the 
interest in local 
women-led 
patrolling groups in 
the target areas. 
Y: 2 
 
DOFI, supported 
by REDD+ Desk 
and GIZ 
5,000 
1x Assessment 
7 
No. of women-
led patrolling 
groups trained 
0 
DOFI has trained at 
least 15 women-led 
patrolling groups. 
Y: 9.5 
15,000 
Participants : 5 
trainings x 2 days 
x 10 persons / 
village  
Trainers: 10 
trainings days + 10 
travel days + 
transport for 2x 
trainers (trainer 
fee, DSA, NA, 
vehicle) 
8 
1.5 
Ensure fully 
inclusive land 
use planning 
processes in 
Response to a 
survey 
question 
stating if 
villagers felt 
Baseline 
survey to be 
conducted 
during year 1 
In a survey amongst 
target communities, 
at least 70% of all 
villagers state that 
they felt actively 
Y: 1, 4, 
9.5 
PAFO / DAFO 
35,000 
 
Baseline survey, 
and 1 additional 
survey at 
programme end 
                                                     
2 Women-led implies that the groups are organized and led by women, however it does not mean that the participation is only women. These groups can be mixed patrolling groups, however, majority of 
the leaders and organizers of the group should be women.

=== PAGE 223 ===
No.  
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
the target 
communities. 
Where 
necessary, 
ensure 
translators and 
materials in 
local 
languages are 
available.  
Diverse 
communicative 
materials 
should be used 
to reach men 
and women 
with different 
education and 
literacy 
backgrounds 
(picture books, 
brochures, 
videos, 
posters, etc.) 
actively 
included in 
LUP 
processes. 
included in the LUP 
processes. 
9 
1.6 
Capitalize on 
local women´s 
extensive 
knowledge 
about 
community 
forests in 
making them 
an integral part 
of community 
contributions to 
the National 
Forest 
Monitoring 
System. 
 
Inclusion of 
gender-
responsive 
mechanisms 
for community 
monitoring 
within the 
National 
Forest 
Monitoring 
system. 
N/A (system 
not fully 
developed) 
The developed 
National Forest 
Monitoring system 
features effective 
gender-responsive 
mechanisms for 
community 
monitoring. 
Y:1-9.5 
JICA 
 
- 
Included in the 
budget of Activity 
1.6

=== PAGE 224 ===
No.  
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
Output 2: Market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation 
GAP Objective: Ensure women´s equal and equitable access, to and benefit from, the promotion of new agricultural practices and value chains 
10 
2.1, 2.2 
Integrate a 
gender 
assessment in 
every analysis 
for potential 
new 
agricultural 
practices and 
value chains. 
All feasibility 
studies for the 
development of 
new value 
chains or 
agricultural 
practices 
should review 
the estimated 
gendered 
impact of the 
desired change 
(access, 
needs, 
barriers, 
potentials, 
work load, 
benefits). 
 
Integration of 
gender into 
value chain 
assessments. 
Agricultural 
value chains 
have not been 
assessed from 
a gender 
perspective 
Value chain 
assessments of 9 
key existing and 
alternative 
agricultural 
commodities include 
reviews of the 
gendered impact of 
the desired change 
(access, needs, 
barriers, potentials, 
workload, benefits) 
Y: 4 
(mid-
term),9.5 
(final) 
DoF, PAFOs, 
DAFOs, REDD+ 
Desk 
28,000 
3 value chain 
studies are 
produced (one for 
each project 
province), each 
addressing 3 
relevant 
commodity value 
chains 
11 
 
2.1 
Development 
of women’s 
capacities to 
adopt 
sustainable 
land use 
practices, and 
venture into 
Gender expert 
reviews all 
training 
modules 
(materials, 
coursework, 
etc.) 
0 
All training modules 
developed by the 
program are 
reviewed by the 
program´s gender 
specialist prior to 
implementation. 
 
Y:2-9.5 
MAF and the 
program´s 
safeguard, 
gender and M&E 
specialist 
 
15,000 
-

=== PAGE 225 ===
No.  
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
the production, 
processing and 
marketing of 
new value 
chains. 
PMU´s 
safeguard and 
gender 
specialist 
trains all 
extension 
workers and 
trainers on 
gender-
sensitive 
extension, and 
social inclusion 
 
All extension staff 
are trained by the 
program´s 
safeguard, gender 
and M&E specialist 
on gender equality 
and social inclusion.  
12 
2.2 
 
Support local 
women to 
develop 
practical 
business skills 
to enhance 
their 
participation in 
businesses 
supporting 
sustainable 
land 
management. 
 
 
No. of 
business skills 
training 
courses 
conducted 
0 
100 business skills 
training courses 
conducted 
Y: 1-9.5 
GIZ/ (D)LWU 
160,000 
Average 7 villages 
per kumban, 100 
kumbans trained 
per year, EUR 
1,600/kumban 
Output 3: Climate mitigation action through forestry 
GAP Objective: Women are an active and equitable part of village forest management and watershed management 
13 
3.1 
Empower 
women to 
become 
members of 
Village Forest 
Management 
Committees 
and other 
forestry 
 Guidelines for 
the creation of 
local village 
forest 
management 
committees set 
standards of 
requirements 
accessible for 
0 - No gender 
requirements 
associated 
with the 
establishment 
or operation of 
village forest 
management 
committees 
Village forest 
management 
committee 
guidelines 
developed by the 
project set 
standards of 
accessibility for 
women, with a quota 
Y: 2-9.5 
 
MAF/ DoF 
2,000 
1x workshop to 
sensitize  
Guidelines. 
 
The program´s 
safeguard, gender 
and M&E specialist 
will also revise the 
guidelines.

=== PAGE 226 ===
No.  
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
decision-
making bodies 
at the local 
level. 
women and 
the poor, and a 
quota for 
female 
representation 
within 
committees. 
 
 
of at least 30% 
female committee 
members 
 
 
 
14 
3.1 
Percentage 
(%) of Forest 
Management 
Committees 
that consist of 
at least 30% 
women. 
0 
65% of village forest 
management 
committees 
supported by or 
engaging with the 
project consist of at 
least 30% women 
 
Y: 4-9.5 
 
 
- 
Included within the 
budget of Activity 
1.7 and Output 4 
15 
3.2 
Ensure that 
village 
consultations 
regarding 
potential 
private sector 
investments in 
community-
based 
agroforestry 
enable all 
villagers 
equally to 
participate in 
the investment 
decisions. 
Percent of 
target 
community 
members 
(disaggregated 
by gender) 
who state that 
they felt 
actively 
included in the 
investment 
decision-
making 
processes 
- 
70% of women from 
participating 
communities state 
they felt actively 
included in the 
investment decision-
making process 
Y: 4-9.5 
Ministry of 
Industry and 
Commerce 
supported by 
MAF and FAO 
7,500 
Survey 
Output 4: Programme management, contingencies, coordination, monitoring and reporting 
GAP Objective: Ensure a gender-sensitive and gender-responsive M&E system 
16 
All/ cross-cutting 
Collect and 
analyze sex-
disaggregated 
data used for 
steering and 
correction of 
measures 
The indicators 
of the GAP are 
fully integrated 
into the M&E 
system and 
are reviewed 
regularly. 
- 
Annual reports, mid-
term reports, and 
final reports all 
contain a chapter on 
gender. 
Y: 1-9.5 
MAF, REDD+ 
Fund 
Management 
- 
Included within the 
budget of Activity 
1.7

=== PAGE 227 ===
No.  
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
aiming to hold 
all partners 
accountable to 
gender equality 
and effective 
gender 
mainstreaming. 
Active 
monitoring and 
evaluation 
using the 
program´s 
gender 
responsive 
M&E 
framework will 
also enable the 
program to 
quickly adapt if 
there are 
challenges, 
and improve 
gender-related 
learning. 
17 
All/ cross-cutting 
Promote 
gender aspects 
of all activities 
through 
targeted and 
culturally-
sensitive 
awareness-
raising and 
campaigning. 
All major 
communication 
materials and 
awareness-
raising 
campaigns are 
reviewed by 
the program´s 
safeguard, 
gender and 
M&E specialist 
- 
All major 
communication 
materials and 
awareness raising 
campaigns are 
reviewed and 
approved by the 
program´s 
safeguard, gender 
and M&E specialist.  
Y: 1-9.5 
REDD+ Fund 
Management, 
supported by 
implementing 
partners 
24 000 
Review and 
update, if 
necessary, all 
existing materials 
and reprint; 
address for all new 
developed 
communication 
material 
(workshops, 
printing: 3000 €/Y) 
TOTAL Budget for the Gender Action Plan 
349,465

=== PAGE 228 ===
Project 1-level Gender Action Plan 
No. 
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Project 1 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibiliti
es 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
Cross-cutting 
1 
All (cross-cutting) 
Develop the 
capacities of 
line 
implementing 
Government 
agencies and 
the Lao 
Women´s Union 
to provide 
gender-
sensitive 
facilitation of 
programme 
activities in 
village 
communities. 
Implement 
targeted 
trainings on 
REDD+ and 
gender 
Technical staff 
from DAFO, 
DOFI and 
DLWU have 
been trained in 
“REDD+ and 
Gender”.  
 
Technical 
staff in 
DAFO, DOFI 
and LWU3 
have 
received no 
training (or, in 
rare cases, 
limited 
training) in 
gender 
issues 
pertaining to 
REDD+ 
 
5 ‘REDD+ and 
gender’ training 
workshops held 
for DAFO, DOFI 
and LWU staff , 
1 at the national 
level and 2 in 
each province, 
with 
approximately 
16 
participants.2 
Y: 1 
GIZ/ CSO 
training 
provider 
9,000 
Participants: 5 
trainings x 2 
days x 16 
persons per 
training / 2x 
districts (incl. 
DSA/NA) 
Trainers: 10 
trainings days + 
21 travel days + 
transport for 2x 
trainers (trainer 
fee, DSA, NA, 
vehicle) 
2 
All (cross-cutting) 
Encourage the 
active and 
effective 
participation of 
women in 
community 
meetings. 
 
Time and locate 
trainings taking 
into account 
women’s work 
schedules and 
accessibility to 
Percent (%) 
female 
participants in 
community 
meetings 
Participation 
rates of 
women in 
community 
meetings are 
often below 
40%. 
40% 
participation of 
women in 
community 
meetings. 
Y: 1-4 
DAFO 
- 
Included within 
the budget of 
Activity 1.7 and 
Output 4 
3 
Percent of 
respondents 
that state they 
felt actively 
included in 
REDD+ related 
Baseline 
survey to be 
conducted 
during year 1 
50% of women 
in target 
communities 
state that they 
felt actively 
included in 
REDD+ related 
Y: 1, 4 
DoF / MAF & 
REDD+ Desk 
& GIZ 
8,000 
 
Baseline 
survey, and two 
follow-up 
surveys (mid-
term and 
programme 
end) 
                                                     
3 Lao Women’s Union

=== PAGE 229 ===
No. 
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Project 1 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibiliti
es 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
ensure 
maximum 
participation 
and outreach, 
coordinate with 
LWU, LNFC, 
and  local 
women’s 
organizations to 
build on existing 
networks and 
best practices 
for outreach.  
village 
meetings. 
village 
meetings. 
 
4 
 
All 
Support the 
capacity 
development of 
female staff for 
all implementing 
Government 
agencies at all 
levels to 
improve the 
gender balance 
within the forest 
sector. 
Percent 
increase (%) in 
the number of 
women 
implementing 
actions. 
Baseline 
survey to be 
conducted 
during year 1 
Number of 
women 
implementing 
actions has 
increased by at 
least 10%. 
Y: 1, 4 
MAF / DoF 
5,166 
Workshops and 
trainings to 
build the 
capacity of 
female staff 
within 
implementing 
government 
agencies 
 
 
Output 1: Creation of an enabling environment for REDD+ implementation 
GAP Objective: Creation of an enabling environment for improving gender equality within the REDD+ framework 
5 
1.2, 1.3 
Gender-
sensitive future 
regulations and 
guidelines to 
implement 
SFM, FLR and 
village forestry 
under the 
revised Forestry 
Law and the 
PRAPs. The 
program´s 
safeguard, 
New regulations 
and guidelines 
consider gender 
as a crucial 
factor in forest 
protection, 
monitoring, 
equal user 
rights and 
benefit sharing, 
as well as 
resource 
management. 
Laws, 
regulations 
and 
guidelines do 
not consider 
gender as an 
explicit factor 
in forest 
protection, 
user-rights 
and benefit-
sharing 
 
New/revised 
laws, 
regulations and 
guidelines 
explicitly 
consider gender 
(e.g. in the 
context of 
stakeholder 
roles, 
institutional 
responsibilities, 
resource 
Y: 1-4 
DoF/MAF 
REDD+ Desk 
- 
Included within 
the budget of 
Activities 1.2 
and 1.7 
(revision by 
program 
safeguard, 
gender and 
M&E specialist)

=== PAGE 230 ===
No. 
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Project 1 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibiliti
es 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
gender and 
M&E specialist 
and if 
necessary other 
gender experts 
will revise the 
regulations and 
guidelines. 
access and 
benefit-sharing)  
 
6 
1.4, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 
Review the 
potential for 
community-
based women-
led patrolling 
groups, and 
support their 
creation with 
capacity 
development 
and awareness 
raising. 
No. of 
assessments 
conducted on 
women-led 
patrolling 
groups in the 
target area 
0 - no 
analysis of 
the potential 
for women-
led patrolling 
groups in the 
target areas 
 
A short 
assessment has 
clarified the 
interest in local 
women-led 
patrolling 
groups in the 
target areas. 
Y: 2 
 
DOFI, 
supported by 
REDD+ Desk 
and GIZ 
2,000 
1x Assessment 
7 
No. of women-
led4 patrolling 
groups trained 
0 
DOFI has 
trained at least 
five women 
patrolling 
groups. 
Y: 3 
2,000 
Participants : 5 
trainings x 2 
days x 10 
persons / village  
Trainers: 10 
trainings days + 
10 travel days + 
transport for 2x 
trainers (trainer 
fee, DSA, NA, 
vehicle) 
8 
1.5 
Ensure fully 
inclusive land 
use planning 
processes in 
the target 
communities 
Response to a 
survey question 
stating if 
villagers felt 
actively 
included in LUP 
processes. 
Baseline 
survey to be 
conducted 
during year 1 
In a survey 
amongst target 
communities, at 
least 70% of all 
villagers state 
that they felt 
actively 
Y: 4 
PAFO / DAFO 
14,000 
 
Baseline 
survey, and 1 
additional 
survey at 
programme end 
                                                     
4 Women-led implies that the groups are organized and led by women, however it does not mean that the participation is only women. These groups can be mixed patrolling groups, however, majority of 
the leaders and organizers of the group should be women.

=== PAGE 231 ===
No. 
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Project 1 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibiliti
es 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
included in the 
LUP processes. 
9 
1.6 
Capitalize on 
local women´s 
extensive 
knowledge 
about 
community 
forests in 
making them an 
integral part of 
community 
contributions to 
the National 
Forest 
Monitoring 
System. 
 
Inclusion of 
gender-
responsive 
mechanisms for 
community 
monitoring 
within the 
National Forest 
Monitoring 
system. 
N/A (system 
not fully 
developed) 
The developed 
National Forest 
Monitoring 
system features 
effective 
gender-
responsive 
mechanisms for 
community 
monitoring. 
Y:4 
JICA 
 
- 
Included in the 
budget of 
Activity 1.6 
Output 2: Market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation 
GAP Objective: Ensure women´s equal and equitable access, to and benefit from, the promotion of new agricultural practices and value chains 
10 
2.1, 2.2 
Integrate a 
gender 
assessment in 
every analysis 
for potential 
new agricultural 
practices and 
value chains. 
All feasibility 
studies for the 
development of 
new value 
chains or 
agricultural 
practices should 
review the 
estimated 
Integration of 
gender into 
value chain 
assessments. 
Agricultural 
value chains 
have not 
been 
assessed 
from a 
gender 
perspective 
 
Mid-term: Value 
chain 
assessments of 
3 key existing 
and alternative 
agricultural 
commodities 
include reviews 
of the gendered 
impact of the 
desired change 
(access, needs, 
barriers, 
potentials, 
workload, 
benefits) 
Final: Value 
chain 
Y: 2 (mid-
term),4 
(final) 
DoF, PAFOs, 
DAFOs, 
REDD+ Desk 
9,334 
3 value chain 
studies are 
produced (one 
for each project 
province), each 
addressing 3 
relevant 
commodity 
value chains

=== PAGE 232 ===
No. 
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Project 1 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibiliti
es 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
gendered 
impact of the 
desired change 
(access, needs, 
barriers, 
potentials, work 
load, benefits). 
 
assessments of 
9 key existing 
and alternative 
agricultural 
commodities 
include reviews 
of the gendered 
impact of the 
desired change 
(access, needs, 
barriers, 
potentials, 
workload, 
benefits) 
11 
 
2.1 
Development of 
women’s 
capacities to 
adopt 
sustainable land 
use practices, 
and venture into 
the production, 
processing and 
marketing of 
new value 
chains. 
Gender expert 
reviews all 
training 
modules 
(materials, 
coursework, 
etc.) 
PMU´s 
safeguard, 
gender and 
M&E specialist 
trains all 
extension 
workers and 
trainers on 
gender-
sensitive 
extension, and 
social inclusion 
 
0 
All training 
modules 
developed by 
the program are 
reviewed by the 
program´s 
safeguard, 
gender and 
M&E specialist 
prior to 
implementation. 
 
All extension 
staff are trained 
by the 
program´s 
safeguard, 
gender and 
M&E specialist t 
on gender 
equality and 
social inclusion.  
Y:2 
MAF and PMU 
safeguard, 
gender and 
M&E specialist  
 
11,200 
 
12 
2.2 
Support local 
women to 
develop 
 
 
0 
28 business 
skills training 
Y: 1-4 
GIZ/ (D)LWU 
44,800 
100, 7 villages 
per kumban,

=== PAGE 233 ===
No. 
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Project 1 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibiliti
es 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
practical 
business skills 
to enhance their 
participation in 
businesses 
supporting 
sustainable land 
management. 
No. of business 
skills training 
courses 
conducted 
courses 
conducted 
28 kumbans 
trained per 
year, EUR 
1,600/ kumban 
Output 3: Climate mitigation action through forestry 
GAP Objective: Women are an active and equitable part of village forest management and watershed management 
 
13 
3.1 
Empower 
women to 
become 
members of 
Village Forest 
Management 
Committees 
and other 
forestry 
decision-making 
bodies at the 
local level. 
 Guidelines for 
the creation of 
local village 
forest 
management 
committees set 
standards of 
requirements 
accessible for 
women and the 
poor, and a 
quota of at least 
30% of female 
members per 
committee. 
 
0 - No gender 
requirements 
associated 
with the 
establishment 
or operation 
of village 
forest 
management 
committees 
 
Village forest 
management 
committee 
guidelines 
developed by 
the project set 
standards of 
accessibility for 
women, with a 
quota of at least 
30% female 
committee 
members 
 
 
Y: 2 
 
MAF/ DoF 
2,000 
1x workshop to 
sensitize 
authors of 
guidelines 
14 
3.1 
Percentage (%) 
of Forest 
Management 
Committees 
that consist of 
at least 30% 
women. 
0 
65% of village 
forest 
management 
committees 
supported by or 
engaging with 
the project 
consist of at 
least 30% 
women 
 
Y: 4 
 
 
- 
Included within 
the budget of 
Activity 1.7 and 
Output 4 
 
15 
3.2 
Ensure that 
village 
consultations 
Percent of 
target 
community 
- 
70% of women 
from 
Y: 4 
Ministry of 
Industry and 
Commerce 
3,000 
 
Survey

=== PAGE 234 ===
No. 
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Project 1 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibiliti
es 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
regarding 
potential private 
sector 
investments in 
community-
based 
agroforestry 
enable all 
villagers equally 
to participate in 
the investment 
decisions. 
members 
(disaggregated 
by gender) who 
state that they 
felt actively 
included in the 
investment 
decision-making 
processes 
participating 
communities 
state they felt 
actively included 
in the investment 
decision-making 
process 
supported by 
MAF and FAO 
Output 4: Project management, contingencies, coordination, monitoring and reporting 
GAP Objective: Ensure a gender-sensitive and gender-responsive M&E system 
16 
All/ cross-cutting 
Collect and 
analyze sex-
disaggregated 
data used for 
steering and 
correction of 
measures 
aiming to hold 
all partners 
accountable to 
gender equality 
and effective 
gender 
mainstreaming. 
The indicators 
of the GAP are 
fully integrated 
into the M&E 
system and are 
reviewed 
regularly. 
- 
Annual reports, 
mid-term 
reports, and 
final reports all 
contain a 
chapter on 
gender. 
Y: 1-4 
MAF, REDD+ 
Fund 
Management 
- 
Included within 
the budget of 
Activity 1.7 and 
Output 4

=== PAGE 235 ===
No. 
Activity/ Output 
Measures and 
Actions 
GAP indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
Project 1 
Timeline 
(years) 
Responsibiliti
es 
Budget 
(EUR) 
Comments 
17 
All/ cross-cutting 
Promote gender 
aspects of all 
activities 
through 
targeted and 
culturally-
sensitive 
awareness-
raising and 
campaigning. 
All major 
communication 
materials and 
awareness-
raising 
campaigns are 
reviewed by the 
program´s 
safeguard, 
gender and 
M&E specialist 
- 
All major 
communication 
materials and 
awareness 
raising 
campaigns are 
reviewed and 
approved by the 
program´s 
safeguard, 
gender and 
M&E specialist 
Y: 1-4 
REDD+ Fund 
Management, 
supported by 
implementing 
partners 
12,000 
Review and 
update, if 
necessary, all 
existing 
materials and 
reprint; address 
for all new 
developed 
communication 
material 
(workshops, 
printing: €3000 
/year) 
TOTAL Budget for the Gender Action Plan (including all measures within Activity 1.7´s gender action plan budget) 
122,500

=== PAGE 236 ===
Gender Action Plan: Monitoring, evaluation and reporting 
A long-term safeguard, gender and M&E specialist as well as a national expert who will support 
the safeguard, gender and M&E specialist, will be embedded within the NPMU. They will 
oversee, guide and coordinate gender-related measures within the programme, and ensure 
the successful implementation of the GAP and ESMP. They will be responsible for monitoring, 
evaluation and reporting for the GAP.  
With a focus on gender, their responsibilities will include (among others): 

Liaison with all program stakeholders

Responsibility for overseeing program communication and stakeholder engagement on
topics related to gender

Revision of program documents/ publications/ guidelines/ policies to ensure effective
gender-mainstreaming, and that information is gender-sensitive

Close cooperation with the LWU and LFNC on topics related to gender, building on best
practices

Identification of local and provincial CSOs and women’s groups for collaboration on
community outreach, information dissemination and other program activities

Dissemination of information about the grievance mechanism to program partners, local
communities, CSOs, among others

Overseeing (implementing, monitoring and reporting) the gender action plan

Monitoring program progress, including in achieving the ESMP and gender action plan
targets, and ensuring adaptive management (as needed).
______________
