=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.21.20048
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.21.20048
creationDate: D:20191022132107+09'00'
modDate: D:20191022152024+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
12 – 14 November 2019 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 14 
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
22 October 2019 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum II 
Funding proposal package for FP116 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled “Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in 
Forests and Rangelands in Kyrgyz Republic (CS-FOR)”; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
104 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
106 
Secretariat’s assessment 
109 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
122 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
138 
Gender documentation 
139

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment 
in Forests and Rangelands in Kyrgyz Republic (CS-FOR) 
Country/Region: Kyrgyz Republic 
Accredited Entity: Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN 
Date of Submission: __June 21, 2018___________________________

=== PAGE 4 ===
Acronyms and definitions 
 
AE 
Accredited Entity  
AI 
Artificial Insemination 
AMA 
Accreditation Master Agreement 
ARIS 
Community Development and Investment Agency [ARIS is acronym of Russian name] 
A/R 
Afforestation/Reforestation 
AWP/B 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
CBD 
UN Convention on Biological Diversity 
CC 
Climate Change 
CCCC 
Coordination Commission on Climate Change 
CFC 
Climate Financing Center 
CLMG 
Community Landscape Management Groups 
CS-FOR 
Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in Forests and Rangelands Project  
CSO 
Civil Society Organizations 
DPLF 
Department of Pastures, Livestock and Fisheries 
DW 
Dry Weight 
EBRD 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
EE 
Executing Entity 
ESA 
Environmental and Social Analysis 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
ESRI 
Environmental Systems Research Institute 
ESS 
Environmental and Social Safeguards 
EU 
European Union 
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN 
FC 
Forest Code 
GCF 
Green Climate Fund 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Facility 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
GIZ 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
GPS 
Global Positioning System 
IFAD 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
IFEMP 
Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management Project – WB funded 
INDC 
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution 
INRMCRP 
Integrated Natural Resource Management and Climate Resilience Plans 
JICA 
Japan International Cooperation Agency 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MAFIM 
Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and Melioration

=== PAGE 5 ===
m a.s.l. 
Meters above sea level 
MES 
Ministry of Emergency Situations 
MoU 
Memorandum of Understanding 
NAP 
National Action Plan  
NBKR 
National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic 
NDA 
National Designated Authority 
NDVI 
Normalized Difference Variation Index 
NGO 
Non-governmental Organization 
NRM 
Natural Resource Management 
NSC 
National Statistics Committee 
NSSD 
National Strategy for Sustainable Development 
NTFP 
Non Timber Forest Product 
OECD 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
OPA 
Operational Partners Agreement 
OPIM 
Operational Partners Implementation Modality 
PMU 
Project Management Unit 
PUU 
Pasture Users Unions 
QGIS 
Quantum GIS Software for Desktop provided for free under open source license 
RDF 
Rural Development Fund 
RKDF 
Russian-Kyrgyz Development Fund 
SAEPF 
State Agency for Environment Protection and Forestry  
SALSGIR 
State Agency for Local Self Government and Interethnic Relations 
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SFF 
State Forest Fund 
SFM 
Sustainable Forest Management 
SLF 
State Land Fund (area managed by MAFIM where majority of pastures are located) 
SPCR 
Strategic Programme for Climate Resilience 
TA 
Technical assistance 
TNC 
Third National Communication 
UN 
United Nations 
UNCCD 
UN Convention to Combat Desertification 
UNDAF 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme 
UNFCCC 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
US$ 
United States dollar 
WB 
World Bank 
WFP 
World Food Programme 
WP 
Working Paper 
WUA 
Water User Associations

=== PAGE 6 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
 
• 
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 7 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 99 
 
 
 
A 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in Forests 
and Rangelands (CS-FOR) in the Kyrgyz Republic 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     
Kyrgyz Republic 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☐  Direct 
☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entities: SAEPF, ARIS, FAO, RKDF 
Direct beneficiaries: 432,450 individuals (7% of the country’s 
population) of which 246,497 are women in the Project Area;  
Indirect beneficiaries: 540,563 (8% of the country’s population) 
individuals of which 380,121 are women in the Project Area 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, 
million US$) 
☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  
☒  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐  Mitigation 
☐  Adaptation ☒  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
21 June 2018 (v.1); 27 November 2018 (1st re-submission); 22 August 2019 
(2nd re-submission); 30 August 2019 (3rd re-submission); 13 September 
2019 (4th re-submission); 19 September 2019 (5th re-submission); 23 
September 2019 (6th re-submission); 3 October 2019 (7th re-submission); 7 
October 2019 (8th re-submission) 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Daniel Gustafson,  
Deputy Director General 
Organization 
FAO 
Email address 
Daniel.Gustafson@fao.org; FAO-GCF-Team@fao.org  
Telephone number 
+39 0657056320 
Mailing address 
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 
00153 Rome, Italy 
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ 
Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☒ 
Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
☒

=== PAGE 8 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 99 
 
 
 
A 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
dd/mm/yyyy  
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
End 2027 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: First Quarter 2020  
End:  First Quarter 2027 
Project/programme lifespan 
20 years (8 years of implementation under project financing, and 12 
years of capitalization) 
 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
1. 
The Kyrgyz Republic’s Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) under the Paris Agreement commits 
the country to reducing, by 2050, its greenhouse gas emissions by 35 – 37 percent through international assistance. By 
investing in rangeland and forestry management, strengthening national and local institutions, introducing market-driven 
incentives and local planning processes, the project will lead to the sequestration of 19.8 million tCO2eq in 20 years. 
These reductions represent 7.6 percent of the country’s total emissions, and 22.6 percent of the agricultural share of 
emissions.  
2. 
The project will achieve these sequestration results, while capitalizing important co-benefits from adaptation and 
disaster risk reduction, through: supporting government’s on-going efforts to harmonize relevant policies and legal 
frameworks, and strengthen its planning, monitoring and evaluation systems (Component 1); introducing a process of 
local integrated rangeland and forestry resource planning built around forest, rangeland and livestock management 
practices that sequester carbon, are responsive to observed changes in the climate and enable the diversification of 
household income earning activities (Component 2); facilitating market opportunities that provide the financial incentives, 
funded by the Russian Kyrgyz Development Fund (RKDF), for resource users to adopt and maintain management 
practices that sequester and preserve stored carbon. The targeted project areas were selected due to their high level of 
exposure and sensitivity to climate change stressors, mitigation potential, human poverty and dependency on natural 
resources. 
3. 
The 49.99 million US$ investment will achieve carbon sequestration at a cost of US$ 2.5 per tCO2eq, while also 
indirectly strengthening the resilience and improving the livelihoods of 90,000 households (8.9 percent of total county 
population) by facilitating investment towards diversification, increase of efficiency and competitiveness, thus reducing 
dependency of communities on direct uses of resources (i.e., wood and pasture) and improving their livelihoods through 
benefits gained by improving ecosystem functions and diversification of livelihood opportunities for women and men. The 
harmonized legislative and legal frameworks, enhanced institutional systems and local procedures, will enable the 
national scaling-up of carbon sequestration investments through forest and rangeland management, and increase the 
effectiveness of additional domestic expenditures in reaching the country’s INDC targets.

=== PAGE 9 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 99 
 
 
 
B 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
4. 
The project’s investments and activities will be executed through three components in addition to Project 
Management:  
• 
Component 1. Evidence-based Strengthening of Natural Resources Management Governance;  
• 
Component 2. Green Investments for Forests and Rangeland Rehabilitation;   
• 
Component 3. Climate-sensitive Value Chains Development 
 
5. 
The total project costs amount to US$ 49.99 million, with project management costing less than 5 percent of the 
total. Table B.1.1 presents the breakdown of costs by Component and Table B.1.2 the breakdown of Components by 
financiers. 
Table B.1.1: Breakdown of costs by Component (GCF format) – rounded figures in US$ 
Component 
Outcome 
Amount (for 
entire project) 
Currency  
Amount (for 
entire project) 
(1US$=69.78 
KGS) 
Local 
currency 
 
GCF funding 
amount 
Currency of 
disbursement to 
recipient 
1: Evidence-
based 
strengthening of 
NRM governance 
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
4.175.587 
million 
USD ($) 
 291,388,746  
KGS 
3.775.587 
million USD ($) 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
for climate-
responsive planning 
and development 
1.406.350 
million 
USD ($) 
 98,140,588  
KGS 
1.406.350 
million USD ($) 
2: Green 
investments for 
forest and 
rangeland 
rehabilitation 
M9.0 Improved 
management of land 
or forest areas 
contributing to 
emissions 
reductions 
22.472.168 
million 
USD ($) 
  1,568,195,524 
KGS 
20.295.168  
million USD ($) 
3: Climate-
sensitive value 
chains 
development 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity 
and reduced 
exposure to climate 
risks 
19.512.965 
million 
USD ($) 
 1,361,690,798  
KGS 
3.012.965 
million USD ($) 
Project 
Management 
Component 
Project Management 
Component 
2.497.930 
million 
USD ($) 
169,081,505 
KGS 
1,423,450 
million USD ($) 
Total project financing 
49.990.000 
million 
USD ($) 
3,488,497,161 
 KGS 
29.998.520 
million USD ($) 
 
Financing 
6. 
The project will be funded by a GCF grant for the amount of US$ 29.99 million, or 60 percent of the total CS-
FOR costs. The GCF grant will finance: (i) 93 percent of the evidence-based strengthening of NRM governance 
Component (US$ 5.2 million); (ii) 91 percent of the green investments for forest and pasture rehabilitation Component 
(US$ 22.4 million); (iii) 15 percent of the Climate-sensitive value chains development Component (US$ 2.5 million); and 
(iv) 60 percent of the project management Component (US$1.5 million). An estimated 82.7 percent of the GCF budget 
(US$ 24.82 million) will be devoted to mitigation result area’s interventions (i.e., reduced emissions from forest and land 
use), and the remaining 17.2 percent (US$ 5.17 million) to the adaptation result area (i.e., more specifically: about 12.9 
percent or US$ 3.88 million to increased resilience of most vulnerable people, communities and regions; and about 4.3 
percent or US$ 1.29 million to Ecosystem and ecosystem services).).  
7. 
The GCF grant mechanism is an innovative catalytic element of the co-financing components which assists by 
enhancing the public-private partnership for promoting climate-related investments holistically in the project.  The project 
will create an integrated policy and legal framework through technical, legal and institutional approaches to advance 
public-private partnership in integrated natural resources management (e.g. Output 1.1 and Output 2.1). Under the public-
private partnership, the GCF grant and co-financings will provide investment environment and opportunities for

=== PAGE 10 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 99 
 
 
 
B 
entrepreneurs and business actors in: i) afforestation/reforestation and forest enrichment; ii) rangeland rehabilitation and 
livestock production; and iii) agribusinesses upgrade/operation in selected value chains identified and mobilized through 
information campaign with agribusinesses and value chain mapping for market access/development (see e.g. Output 2.1 
and Output 3.1). The business investment and opportunity will cover for example native walnut and pistachio production, 
livestock, honey, non-timber forest products. In addition to this, an inclusive-finance scheme may be used, as part of the 
blended finance component of the project, to support the initial investments for establishing community tree nurseries. 
The project will de-risk and secure financial inclusion to facilitate the participation in critical climate sensitive value chains. 
RKDF as well as communities are committed to co-financing the relevant private investment to make sure the innovative 
financing in a GCF grant mechanism.    
8. 
By targeting policy harmonization, and strengthening the capacities of key national and local institutions in the use 
of new approaches and tools, the project will significantly influence the policy and operational environment in a way to 
shift towards climate change mitigation-driven natural resources management. Component 1 is instrumental to ensure the 
national scale up of the project approach (reference: Section C.3, and Chapter 4 and 5 of the FS). The improved framework 
will also contribute to a more effective mainstreaming of climate resilience in vulnerable economic sectors (forestry and 
livestock), and enable lessons learned from the field to be progressively adopted by all involved stakeholders, and scaled-
up by the relevant authorities (SAEPF, Pasture Department, and all institutions involved in monitoring the country’s natural 
resource base). As a reinforcing element, even during the project life cycle, the project will promote market driven 
incentives at national level (via Component 3 and private sector involvement) to income diversification thus reducing 
pressure on natural resources. Finally, the harmonized and evidence based approach of integrated management of forests 
and rangelands has the potential for replication also in other countries - especially in Central Asia, with similar economic 
structure (i.e., livestock dominated in rural areas, and suffering from progressive rangelands degradation). As shown in 
the EFA (Annex 3) and in the carbon accounting (Annex 3.a), the project has the potential to enhance carbon sequestration 
at a low cost per ton of CO2eq, which is an attractive element to adopt similar approach for other countries committed to 
similar mitigation objectives. 
9. 
RKDF co-financing amounts US$ 15.0 million, or 30 percent of the total CS-FOR costs. The co-financing will 
cover 77 percent of the climate-sensitive value chains development Component (US$ 15.0 million). Such investment is 
critical to the project’s theory of change, as they contribute to the required (a) economic diversification from the prevailing 
livestock practices; (b) valuation of economic opportunities from sustainably managed and climate resilient forests and 
rangelands (i.e., by developing non timber forest products value chains); and (c) transition towards a modern economy 
less dependent on natural resources. The investment in climate sensitive value chains as the innovative part compared 
to the past practices of forest investment in the country, and its integration in the project theory of change will be one of 
the critical success factors.  
10. 
RKDF will provide its contributions as wholesale credits to local banks which will on lend to entrepreneurs 
beneficiaries (“End-borrowers”). Wholesale loans to the banks will be provided at about 3 percent p.a. in US$ and 6 
percent in local currency (with interest rate to End-borrowers of 5 percent p.a. in US$ and at 10 percent in local currency, 
for a term of about 3-5 years). RKDF already has partner arrangements and experience in working with 13 local 
commercial banks. During project design, five local commercial banks were pre-identified as already intervening in the 
Project Area (see Section C). RKDF will also provide direct retail credits to End-borrowers (at 5 percent p.a. in US$ and 
at 10 percent in local currency, for a term of about 3-5 years). 
11. 
The final selection of End-borrowers will be carried out by RKDF under the oversight of FAO, reviewed by the 
Project Steering Committee and finally confirmed by AE during the project implementation. Contractual agreements with 
selected End-borrowers will be signed by RKDF or local commercial banks accredited by RKDF (including beneficiaries’ 
co-financing contribution). RKDF manages and oversees the loan fund, while FAO will oversee the implementation of 
activities and modality of loan as co-financing in the overall project framework. The loan input will be applied by following 
the grant inputs in the project activities sequentially as a co-financing of the grant component. The timeline of RKDF 
financing is aligned to the project implementation (with the majority of the investment expected from project’s Y2 to Y6). 
12. 
The component is co-financed by RKDF and will ensure the sustainability of the investment in carbon sequestration 
carried out in Component 2 in the improved enabling environment supported through Component 1, and will create 
economic opportunities with limited risk, in order to decrease pressure on and degradation of natural resources in the 
project intervention areas, this will result in important contributions to enhanced resilience of target communities. 
13. 
SAEPF, MAFIM and ARIS will provide an in-kind contribution of US$ 0.3 million each (about 0.7 percent of 
the total project costs), covering 40 percent of the Project Management Component. For SAEPF, MAFIM and ARIS, the 
in-kind contribution will be through staff time and office spaces. For FAO, the contribution will be from Technical

=== PAGE 11 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 99 
 
 
 
B 
Cooperation Project for staff, trainings & conferences, travel, etc. FAO will provide an in-kind contribution of US$ 0.4 
million for Component 1 (about 0.8 percent of the total project costs).  
14. 
The project beneficiaries are expected to contribute about US$ 3.6 million, or 7 percent of the total project 
costs, covering: 9 percent of the investments for Component (US$2.1 million), and 8 percent of the cost of Component 3 
investment (US$1.5 million). Their contribution would comprise labour, materials and own investment resources. The 
beneficiary contributions will be: in kind (labour) for forestry activities; also in kind (labour and some material) for rangeland 
rehabilitation; and as part of the investment for the climate sensitive value chain under Component 3. The beneficiary 
contribution will be calculated based on the anticipated labour/ material inputs (e.g. hours and standard wages, cost) and 
the basis of calculation will be reflected in the contractual agreement to be signed (see Table C.3.1 for detail). The in-kind 
contribution will be monitored accordingly as per the contractual agreement.   
15. 
The Project Management Component costs about US$ 2.498 million, equivalent to 5 percent of the project cost, 
with a contribution from GCF grant of 60 percent, slightly lower than the overall GCF contribution to the project. Tables 
B.1.2 below provide summaries by the project Components, by financier and financing parameters.  
 
Table B.1.2: Financing Plan by Components (million US$) – rounded figures in US$ 
Component 
% 
GCF 
RKDF 
SAEPF 
MAFIM 
ARIS 
BENEF 
FAO 
Total 
Component 1 
11% 
5,181,937 
  
 
 
  
 
400,000 
5,581,937 
Component 2 
45% 
20,370,168 
  
 
 
  
2,102,000 
  
22,472,168 
Component 3 
39% 
3,012,965  
15,000,000 
 
 
  
1,500,000 
  
19,512,965 
PMC 
5% 
1,423,450 
  
340,000 
317,000 
342,480 
 
  
2,422,930 
Total 
100% 
29,988,520 
15,000,000 
340,000 
317,000 
342,480 
3,602,000 
400,000 
49,990,000 
 
16. 
As shown in table B.1.2 above, component 2 represents the bulk of the investment for carbon sequestration. Among 
the investment in component 2, the majority is for afforestation / reforestation / forest enrichment, with a lower share on 
rangeland rehabilitation. While the largest share of carbon sequestration is from rangeland, the costs for forestry are 
higher, and require a higher concessionality than the rangeland investment (75%) as the latter generate higher financial 
benefits. The EFA (Chapter 7 of the Feasibility Study in Annex 2, and detailed in Annex 3) demonstrates that without the 
provided concessionality, the forest investment would not be feasible, with consequent risks for the project’s framework. 
Similarly, there is limited scope for private sector investment (i.e., from the financial market) as the returns are too long 
and too low for the currently existing financial products (Component 3 works also on the financial literacy and inclusion). 
Nevertheless, Component 1’s efforts on the enabling environment (policy and regulatory framework) will generate 
economic interests in maintaining the forests investment and Component 3 will support in diversifying from the prevailing 
unsustainable livestock practices.  
17. 
A breakdown of cost by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, travel, goods, works, services, etc.) is 
included in Chapter 8 of Annex 2 (Feasibility Study).  
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
49.99 
million USD ($) 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable grants* 
(vi) Grants * 
………… 
………… 
………… 
………… 
………… 
29.99 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
million USD ($) 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
 
 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to provide, 
particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and that of accredited entities.

=== PAGE 12 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 99 
 
 
 
B 
Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the project/programme’s expected performance 
against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
29.99 
million USD ($) 
 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
In-kind 
0.34 
million USD ($) 
SAEPF  
 
(5-101) %  
 
 
Options 
seniorsenior 
Options 
Options 
Senior Loan 
15.00 
million USD ($) 
RKDF 
(3-5)  years 
In-kind 
0.32 
million USD ($) 
MAFIM 
 
In-kind 
0.34 
million USD ($) 
ARIS 
 
In-kind 
3.60 
million USD ($) 
Beneficiaries 
 
In-kind 
0.40 
million USD ($) 
FAO 
 
 
Options 
Financing institution: SAEPF, RKDF, MAFIM, ARIS, and FAO. Co-financing letters are provided in Section 
I.  
Beneficiaries’ contribution to the investment will be in-kind depending on the activities.2 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
(d) 
Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and 
AE (if 
applicable) 
18. 
The GCF grant financing is entrusted to FAO as Accredited Entity. FAO will in turn transfer funds to 
SAEPF and ARIS as Executing Entities. The latter, throughout the Funding Proposal, will be referred to as 
Operational Partners, and will be executing selected project’s activities under the FAO Operational Partners 
Implementation Modality (OPIM) and following the respective Operational Partners Agreements (OPAs) 
contracted with FAO.  
19. 
The senior loan co-financing will be entirely managed by RKDF, which will report to the Project 
Management Unit (PMU) Coordinator and to FAO for planning and results monitoring purposes. A detailed 
financial scheme for the project, including RKDF participation, is described in Chapter 5 of the Feasibility 
Study (Annex 2). 
 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
20. 
In order to support the sustainability of carbon sequestration investment in forests and rangeland, with US$ 15.0 
million in co-financing as senior loans from the RKDF, the project will activate special credit lines for project-relevant value 
chains and entrepreneurs. Within its Component 3, CS-FOR will generate loans to existing enterprises representing 
eligible value chains. The loans will be provided to entrepreneurs at 5 percent p.a. in US$ and at 10 percent in local 
currency, for a term of about 3-5 years (wholesale loans to the banks providing credit to End-borrowers will be at about 3 
percent p.a. in US$ and 6 percent in local currency, and End-borrowers will enjoy the same level of concessionality as for 
direct loans provided by RKDF). Such interest rates applied are about half of the prevailing market weighted average 
interest rates (Credit Information Bureau - see Chapter 3 of the Feasibility Study, rural finance Section). Wholesale loans 
to the banks will be provided at about 3 percent p.a. in US$ and 6 percent in local currency. This is in line with the project 
concept to support investment towards reducing unsustainable use of forests and rangelands. The RKDF loans will 
specifically target small and medium sized enterprises that need larger loans as compared to those typically offered in the 
market by commercial banks.  
 
1 5% in USD, 10% in local currency 
2 By reinforcing beneficiaries’ ownership, their contribution represents an element of sustainability of the project’s investment.

=== PAGE 13 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
C.1. Strategic Context  
Climate Scenario 
21. 
The Kyrgyz Republic is a low-income food deficit country (LIFDC) with a population of nearly 6 million, of which two-
thirds live in rural areas. Agriculture is one of the key economic sectors in the Kyrgyz Republic, with 48% of labour force 
dedicated to this sector and almost 15% of GDP coming from it. 
22. 
Kyrgyzstan is a landlocked country with many tall mountains, glaciers, and high-altitude lakes. Ninety-three percent 
of the country is mountainous, dominated by the Tien Shan range, with over 40 percent of the country laying at above 
3,000 meters elevation, and three-quarters of that under permanent snow or glaciers. At lower altitudes, the dominant 
weather regime is dry, showing the typical characteristics of the continental climatic zone marked with sharp contrasts 
between summer and winter seasons. With increasing altitude, average temperatures decrease while humidity increases 
such that diurnal variations and differences between the summer and winter seasons are less marked. 
23. 
The Third National Communication to the UNFCCC and additional literature3 show small but statistically significant 
changes in key weather variables (minimum and maximum temperatures and precipitation). Average annual temperatures 
over the period 1960-2010 have been increasing at a rate of 0.025oC/year, reaching a rate of increase of 0.07oC/year 
between 1990 and 2010. The greatest rate of warming has occurred during in the winter months, with monthly low 
temperatures warming more rapidly than highs.4 Annual precipitation has shown a slight downward trend in the last 20 
years (-1.868 mm/year). The full climate scenario for the target areas and entire country is available in the Feasibility Study 
attached to this proposal (Chapter 1). The main climatic changes are summarized as follows: 
• 
Under the intermediate emission pathway RCP4.5,5 maximum temperatures are expected to increase more rapidly, 
reaching between 2ºC (in the east) and 2.8ºC (in the north) by mid-century (under RCP8.5 the expected maximum 
temperature rise is between 2.6ºC (east) and 3.8ºC (north)). Minimum temperatures are also expected to continue to 
increase between 0.5º and 1ºC. Regarding change to average seasonal temperatures, RCP4.5 predicts an increase 
of between 2ºC (east) and 3ºC (north) in winter and autumn, between 2ºC and 2.7ºC in summer, and between 1.7ºC 
and 2.6ºC in spring. 
 
• 
Precipitation’ projections suggest an increase in accumulated rainfall of between 12% (west) and 18% (northeast) 
under RCP4.5 by mid-century (for RCP8.5 the relative change could be between 20% (west) and 28% (north)). Annual 
and monthly rainfall records (2000-20017) analysed by FAO revealed a scenario of overall precipitation increase, 
except in the project target areas where a significant decrease is evident. In the project target areas monthly rainfall 
trends show a clear intra-seasonal shift, with increased rainfall during autumn and winter (+6% to +20%), and a 
marked reduction in summer (from -18% to -28%).6 In addition, FAO analysis of snow cover between 2000 and 2017 
identified a marked decrease in the number of days with snow cover in areas above 1,500 meters above the sea level 
(m a.s.l.) and a slight increase in areas below 1,500 m a.s.l. The projected change in annual runoff is 0.261; projected 
change of annual groundwater recharge is 0.354. 
 
24. 
As reported in the feasibility study (Chapter 1), the interactions between changing weather patterns, the impact of 
these changes on vegetative communities and forests, and the degradation of natural resource systems due to human 
activities, has led to an increase in damage from extreme weather events and a growing threat to the future provisioning 
of key ecosystem services. The Kyrgyz Ministry of Emergency Situations reports that during the past 20 years the number 
of weather related disasters has increased by six times and that about 70 percent of these events have occurred in the 
country’s Southern regions (the project target area). In 2016, the last year for which data is available, the number of 
weather related emergencies was above average, causing 1.6 billion KGS in damages (approximately US$23 million)7. 
One of the key reasons for the growing number of disasters is the unsustainable harvesting of timber from mountain slopes 
and degradation of hillside vegetation and along waterways from livestock overgrazing. The growing volume of rainfall in 
the spring and autumn, falling on hillsides and waterways removed of their protective forest and vegetative cover, has 
resulted in the increased frequency and intensity of flash floods and landslides (UNISDR 2015). 
25. 
As the climate continues to change, the changes and seasonal redistribution of rainfall and rising temperatures will 
increasingly exert direct pressure on forest and grassland ecologies. In response to temperature increase and to the extent 
allowed by physical features, forest biomes will shift upwards in elevation, although into an ever-decreasing surface area. 
The species composition of grassland communities will also change in response to temperature increase and the decrease 
 
3 FAO and NDA teams collected and analyzed over 250 publications. Priority was given to: (i) national communications/reporting to UNFCCC, UNCCD, CBD and others; 
(ii) national action plans and strategies; (iii) national legal frameworks, (iv) UN assessments and reports; (v) publications from national institutions, academia (national and 
international) and CSO; (vi) national media; and (vii) bilateral donors’ reports. A climate reference list is attached to the Feasibility Study and to the Funding Proposal. 
4 When comparing the mean monthly temperatures for the periods 1961-1990 and 1991–2010, the greatest increase in temperature (at all altitudes) was observed during 
the cold months - February, March, October and November, while in summer the temperature increase was the lowest. Perhaps, this is the reason for a significant reduction 
in the mean duration of the heating period. (Climate profile of the Kyrgyz Republic, 2013, UNDP Project: “Climate Risk Management in Kyrgyzstan”). 
5 Representative Concentration Pathways.  
6 See Figure 17 in Chapter 1, Feasibility Study.  
7 Ministry of Emergency of the Kyrgyz Republic data

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
and re-distribution of seasonal rainfall. The steady increase of the livestock population, poses a major threat to ecologies 
that are already degraded and which are undergoing substantial change. 
26. 
With more than 40 percent of the agricultural land seriously degraded and over 85 percent of the total land area 
exposed to erosion, as a result of poor pasture management, and with the increasing volume of rainfall in the spring and 
autumn falling on hillsides and waterways removed of their protective forest and vegetative cover, the degradation of 
natural resource systems due to human activities and unsustainable agricultural practices will continue  to be the key 
reasons for the growing number of disasters.  
27. 
As the country recognizes the importance of an adequate response to climate change, its Intended Nationally 
Determined Contribution (INDC), highlights relevant and ambitious adaptation and mitigation actions and refers to 
important policy and strategic documents such as the National Development Programme and the National Sustainable 
Strategy for the Kyrgyz Republic, which establishes a commitment to ensure a transition to a resource-efficient and low-
carbon development based on rational nature use.  
28. 
According to the ND-GAIN Index 8, Kyrgyzstan’s Country Index Rank is 81 9. Its vulnerability is 0.390, and its 
readiness is 0.391. Adaptation challenges still exist, but Kyrgyzstan is well positioned to adapt, especially considering 
national level commitment. Kyrgyzstan is the 65th least vulnerable country and the 87th least ready country. Nonetheless, 
forests and pastures, already under stress due to anthropogenic pressure, are among the most sensitive resources being 
impacted by climate change; the lack of intervention in this regard is among the main causes of increased exposure of the 
Country to climate induced natural disasters. Extreme events like flash floods and mudslides have increased in frequency 
and intensity in large areas of the country where forests have historically provided protection and pastures have been the 
main, if not the only, source of livelihood for communities. Climate change, coupled with a transforming set of Natural 
Resource Management practices that suffered radical changes in the past 20 years, is now not only threatening key 
ecosystems but also Kyrgyz cultural heritage and development opportunities.  
29. 
For climate change adaptation, additional information on climate rationale for the Project Area and its selection is 
summarized in Addendum 1 of the Funding Proposal. 
30. 
Concerning CO2eq emissions, Kyrgyzstan’s Intended Nationally Determined Contributions, and its National 
Communications to the UNFCCC, report on emissions relative to the period 1990-2010. 10 National GHG emissions 
dropped significantly from 1990-1995, reflecting the economic slowdown that followed independence in 1991, held more-
or-less stable from 1996-2000, and grew modestly from 2001 to 2010 (from less than 10,000 Gg CO2eq in 2001 to over 
12,500 GgCO2eq between in 2010). During the 1990-2010 period, the sector showing the least reduction in emissions was 
the agricultural sector. The sector’s share of total emissions in fact increased during the period from 19.8 percent to 33.5 
percent, as other sectors of the economy struggled. In 2010, agriculture was still the second largest contributor to the 
country’s emissions, in spite of a lower than average increase of the sector’s contribution to the national GDP. From 2000 
to 2016, emissions from the agricultural sector grew from about 3.1 m tCO2eq to 4.6 m tCO2eq. The contribution of 
emissions from livestock related sources (enteric fermentation and manure management) represented around 90% of the 
total agricultural emissions (FAOSTAT).  
31. 
The Third National Assessment (TNA, 2016) reports that despite a general reduction of the emission of the country 
compared to 1990 levels, after the significant drop from 1990-1995, the trend of general emissions shows a general 
increase (10,000 GgCO2eq in 1995 to above 12,500 GgCO2eq in 2010). The TNA reports also that the lowest reduction 
in emissions in the period 1990-2010 was registered in the agriculture sector. The share of Agricultural emissions on total 
emissions went up from 19.8% to 33.5%. Agriculture in 2010 remains the second largest contributor to the country 
emissions, in spite of a low than average increase of the sector on the national GDP (meaning a significantly lower 
efficiency in carbon).  As mentioned in section D.1 of the funding proposal, the CS-FOR potential sequestration of CO2eq 
corresponds to some 22.6% of the agriculture share of emissions. This would be achieved by investing in only 4 of the 40 
districts of the country.  
32. 
Moreover, it is worth noticing that mitigation from land use management and forests is generally reported as the 
most effective way to stabilize soils. Given the high risks of soil and climate related negative events in target areas, 
mitigation is the best option to achieve not only carbon sequestration but also  benefits that can be monitored in terms of 
increased resilience, disaster risk reduction and environmental benefits. Mitigation in Kyrgyzstan, as per project planned 
investments, is also a global opportunity contributing to GCF fund level impacts and paradigm shift objective and will 
contribute to CO2eq sequestration by over 19.8 m t at an estimated cost of about USD 2.5 per ton which is about 50% 
cheaper than the world average (ref: REDD+ related intervention costs). 
33. 
For emissions from land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF), carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide 
were considered, as well as precursor gases (nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide). Carbon dioxide was considered both 
in terms of CO2eq emissions into the atmosphere from the soil, as well as the flow of CO2eq back into the soil through 
 
8 A country’s ND-GAIN index score is composed of a vulnerability and readiness score. Readiness measures a country’s ability to leverage investments and convert them 
into adaptation actions. ND-GAIN measures overall readiness by considering three components: economic, governance and social readiness. 
9 https://gain-new.crc.nd.edu/country/kyrgyzstan  
10 It should be noted that the TNC does not use most recent data – only up to 2010.

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
sequestration. CO2 is the largest constituent of total GHG emissions, contributing to 96.11 percent total of GHG emissions 
in 1990 and increasing to 99.15 percent in 2010. Net emissions from LULUF sources were relatively steady during the 
period 1990-2010, and may decline in importance in the future as emissions from other sectors in the economy grow and 
existing stocks of stored carbon (forests and soils) become further depleted through mismanagement (see Feasibility 
Study, Chapter 1). 
34. 
As reported by the World Bank, the Kyrgyz economy is expected to grow by 4-5 percent per year, with GHG 
emissions increasing proportionally under the business as usual scenario. The increase in national  GHG emissions is 
expected to be much faster than in developed countries due to rapid growth of key variables, such as: (a) total population 
(2010-2016, +12%); (b) urban population growth (2010-2016, +100%); and (c) electric power consumption (2010-2016 
+41%). The literature reviewed and FAO’s analysis of land cover change and changes in productivity, point to an increasing 
tendency towards degradation of the main carbon sinks of the country (rangelands and forests) due to climate change 
impacts (principally the declining trend in summer rainfall) and inefficiency of natural resource management practices. 
Forest cover in Kyrgyzstan decreased at a rate of 6 percent between 2010 and 2016, while the extent of rangeland 
degradation reached 42 percent as livestock numbers increased by 41 percent over the same time period. 
 
Country Economic Background11 
35. 
The economy of Kyrgyzstan highly depends on services (56%), industry (29%), and agriculture (15%) with a GNI 
per capita of US$1,100 in 201612. One third or 30.4 percent of GDP comes from the remittances of almost 1 million people 
working abroad, mostly in Russia and Kazakhstan.  
36. 
The Debt Sustainability Analysis carried out by the IMF in 2017 assesses the Kyrgyz Republic at moderate risk of 
debt distress. However, the debt outlook remains vulnerable, in particular to a sizeable exchange rate depreciation, a 
deceleration in real GDP growth and a deterioration of the fiscal balance, which could tilt the assessment to high risk of 
debt distress. Therefore, the IMF recommends authorities to remain cautious when contracting and guaranteeing new debt 
and to continue fiscal consolidation13. 
37. 
Poverty level is high, with 25.4 percent of the country’s population living below minimum subsistence level in 2016. 
Another 50 percent of the population were vulnerable to poverty, living below US$5/day in 2015. About 74 percent of poor 
people live in rural settlements, but poverty is the highest in remote mountainous areas, where almost all households are 
poor with average per-person annual incomes there being approximately US$82 in 2015, which is equal to minimum level 
for subsistence established by the Government and 1.3 times lower than in valleys (NSC data). 85.4 percent of the 
population living in extreme poverty in 2016 and about three quarters of the poor reside in rural areas. Poverty rates vary 
across the regions with Naryn recording the highest in 2016 (37.8 percent). However, the absolute number of the poor is 
high in Jalalabad and Osh, which accounts for 22 percent and 20 percent of the total population, respectively. 
38. 
Scarce arable land combined with underdeveloped irrigation, limited off-farm employment opportunities, distance 
and poor accessibility and inadequate market infrastructure are among the key factors that constrain economic 
development in rural areas. According to the World Food Programme (WFP), two out of three food insecure people live in 
remote valleys, ‘where high altitudes, harsh winters and hot, dry summers limit livelihoods potential’14. Food insecurity is 
exacerbated by climate-related shocks, including floods and mudslides, which affect resilience of families and 
communities. Livestock is the most important source of income and the primary source of nutrition for the rural poor. 
Animals also serve as an important asset for the poor families, which can prevent them from becoming destitute at the 
time of shocks.  
39. 
Among the key drivers of forest degradation are overexploitation and over grazing, related to livelihood and weak 
management of natural resources exacerbated by the negative impacts of climate change. Forest’s level of degradation is 
estimated by applying the UNCCD LPD methodology (approach and methodology are described in Chapter I of the 
feasibility study). A detailed reference of climate change impact on forests is also in Chapter 1 of the Feasibility Study 
(Page 31).  
40. 
Livestock rearing is a long-standing tradition of Kyrgyz people. Before being fully settled by the Soviets in the mid-
20th century, Kyrgyz mountain tribes enjoyed a pastoral lifestyle based on transhumant grazing. Traditional knowledge of 
sustainable transhumant grazing was lost during the Soviet times, when households were prohibited to own more than 
three sheep for personal purposes. After gaining independence and with more people engaged in livestock breeding, 
traditional livestock practices have been slowly recovering. More farmers today migrate along the rangelands not only to 
ensure adequate feeding for their livestock, but to preserve and allow the vegetation to regenerate. Sustainable landscape-
based grazing has been a core of Kyrgyz traditional pastoral practices, which have been incorporated in recent pasture 
management reforms.  
 
11 Detailed information and data on Kyrgyz economy, demography and rural context are in the Chapter 2 of the Feasibility Study.  
12 World Bank Country Profile, 2018. 
13 IMF Country Report No. 18/53, Feb 2018 
14 WFP Kyrgyzstan (http://www1.wfp.org/countries/kyrgyzstan), accessed in February 2018.

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
 
41. 
In the last ten years, animal inventories have increased by 41 percent with cattle and sheep – jointly representing 
80 percent of the total stocks – spiking by 37 and 68 percent respectively. The main drivers of growth are low animal 
productivity, non-diversified economies and low financial literacy of rural residents who perceive livestock as both a source 
of cash income and a means of savings accumulation.  
 
42. 
Animal husbandry has been traditionally the main source of livelihood for rural population with farming households 
generating 95 percent of all red meat in the country. Livestock is especially important in remote mountainous areas, where 
cropping is limited due to a shortage of arable land, almost non-existent irrigation, and adverse climatic conditions, such 
as frosts and droughts. In the last ten years, animal inventories have increased by 41 percent with cattle and sheep – 
jointly representing 80 percent of the total stocks – spiking by 37 and 68 percent respectively (Chapter 1, section VI.c of 
the FS).  
43. 
The main drivers of growth are low animal productivity, non-diversified economies and low financial literacy (as well 
as traditional attitudes) of rural residents who perceive livestock as both a source of cash income and a means of savings 
accumulation.  The livestock/pasture ecosystem is trapped in a vicious cycle of productivity collapse: overgrazing and 
degradation cause lower levels of available forage, which reduces animal productivity, causing households to own more 
animals to compensate for productivity declines, which in turn increases grazing pressure and leads to more degradation.  
44. 
Almost all livestock is grazed at pastures year-round. Daily grazing occurs in pastures near villages during the fall-
winter-early spring months with very few herders moving to summer pastures in summer. Livestock productivity is low and 
large seasonal variations in animal body weights indicate that animal feeding is geared towards animal survival rather than 
commercial production.  
45. 
Degraded pastures and inefficient production systems have resulted in animal breeding non-profitable. Animal 
owners are trapped in intermediaries’ network; relations of mistrust and difficulties to reach up the formal markets weaken 
the chain. Simple calculations demonstrate that animal husbandry brings no (or negative) profit to herders who use 
pastures inefficiently (this is the case of the vast majority of herders, except for the most advanced PUUs that apply good 
pasture management techniques). High price volatility is inherent to the Kyrgyz meat market due to unorganized domestic 
market and aggressive speculation on prices by animal traders (intermediaries), the latter obviously aim at price growth. 
Small-scale production has unavoidably led to high production costs. Little to no profit on herder’s side vs. generous 
margins of intermediaries create relations of mistrust compromising the performance of the entire chain. 
46. 
Farmers, and not only smallholders, have limited to no access to climate information and technical knowledge on 
how to improve their production practices and how to factor in climate change into their natural resource management 
strategies. Today in Kyrgyzstan advisory service provision to farmers (both, herders and growers) is largely driven by 
donor support and limited assistance had been delivered to local administrations to support rural economy in the described 
climate change scenario. While heads of municipalities have powerful mandate, failure to understand national priorities 
and lack of climate change and natural resource management related policy’s mainstreaming at the local level result in 
lack of action and “exploitation” attitude vis-à-vis natural resources and settlement development in general. Discussion 
with the local government authorities during various missions fielded for the purpose of design, revealed that the heads of 
municipalities (Aiyl Okmotu) are generally not aware and/or do not fully understand the national strategies with regards to 
climate change, natural resource management and agrifood industry.  
47. 
Considering that only better off farmers can afford technical assistance from private extension services in a business 
scenario and that the large majority of herders and farmers cannot access any sort of assistance, this makes the system 
patchy and non-sustainable in time. 
48. 
Described challenges along with discontinuity in implementation are jeopardizing the positive impact of investment’s 
operations designed to address issues related to climate change and degradation of natural resources. Failure to address 
this issue will – without a doubt – lead to the increased degradation of natural resources further compromising the net 
carbon sequestration profile of the Country.  
49. 
In recent years, climate change and accompanied destruction of ecosystems have deteriorated natural 
resources/capitals and stakeholder’s capacity to manage NR as traditional natural resource management approach with a 
focus on how to use resource resources appropriately and efficiently - cannot cope with this situation. In this context, 
climate change sensitive integrated planning, monitoring, and evaluation of NRM incorporates mitigation / adaptation to 
climate change as a main element in its framework which is a multi-layered approach including the following three 
elements: 1. Prevention of degradation of natural capital, enabling sustainable supply of ecosystem services, 2. Encourage 
various stakeholders to participate and cooperate horizontally, 3. Promote bottom-up activities from local communities and 
connect them with the global network.

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
Alignment to relevant National policies and strategies 
50. 
As reported in the feasibility study (chapter 1), to cope with the described scenario without compromising its 
economic and social development objectives, the country has developed a series of policy frameworks that find their 
ultimate goal in their Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) where mitigation and adaptation targets are 
reported and described and from where a cross cutting approach is derivable to ensure maximization of climate 
investments. Climate change mitigation and adaptation are priority areas for Kyrgyzstan, especially if joined in one 
investment as actions in both are linked to achieving wider sustainable development goals reducing risks to people’s 
livelihoods, the environment and the national economy. The State Agency on Environmental Protection and Forestry 
(SAEPF) was nominated as the Designated National Authority (DNA) to the Green Climate Fund. 
51. 
Kyrgyzstan’s INDC acknowledge the importance of addressing climate change and the challenges related to its 
impacts. The country identifies adaptation and mitigation as main targets of its climate change strategies and identified the 
total cost required to adapt and mitigate in about US$ 3 billion.  
52. 
Although Kyrgyzstan’s INDC is among the few reporting cost estimates related to adaptation and mitigation, the 
document provides limited information in regards of strategies and approaches established or envisaged to ensure climate 
change management and shift from BAU to green economy. Nonetheless, forestry and land use / land use changes are 
presented among the most relevant sectors to target to secure both adaptation and mitigation targets.  
53. 
To assess the potential mitigation actions to achieve the long-term GHG emissions target, three scenarios were 
developed (Figure C.4): Scenario 1: low population growth / high economic growth; Scenario 2: average population 
growth/average economic growth; and Scenario 3: high population growth / low economic growth. It was determined that 
the Kyrgyz Republic’s contribution to mitigation will be to reduce GHG emissions in the range of 11.49 - 13.75 percent 
below business as usual (BAU) in 2030. Under international support, the Kyrgyz Republic could implement mitigation 
measures to achieve total reduction in the range of 29.00 - 30.89 percent below BAU in 2030. Projecting to 2050, the 
Kyrgyz Republic will reduce GHG emissions in the range of 12.67 - 15.69 percent below BAU. Additionally, under 
international support the Kyrgyz Republic could implement the mitigation measures to achieve total reduction in the range 
of 35.06 - 36.75 percent below BAU in 205015. 
54. 
In terms of mitigation targets monitoring, the INDC confirms that the domestic MRV system will be developed and 
established as a basis for monitoring and reporting of the mitigation actions. Reporting will also be carried out in the frames 
of the national communications on climate change and biennial update reports. The MRV is not yet developed and there 
are no clear indication on its timeframe. The document presents as well an estimate of mitigation’s costs related to the 
three identified scenarios assessing total financial needs in more than US$ 1.8 billion. 
55. 
Climate change mitigation and adaptation are also addressed in a series of key policy frameworks and strategies. 
reflected, among the others, in the National Strategy for Sustainable Development 2040,16 and the Action Plan 2017-2022 
(expected to be adopted in 2018) accompanied by the “Forty Steps Programme” (especially Steps 39 and 40).17 These 
recognize the importance of mitigation and adaptation to climate change by supporting mountainous ecosystems, 
regenerating natural resources, and preserving forest ecosystems and their biodiversity. These goals are to be achieved 
by establishing an adequate legal framework and providing state support for environmental protection and 
afforestation/reforestation of fragile mountainous areas.  
56. 
The Climate Change Adaptation Programme and Action Plan for 2015-201718 for the Forest and Biodiversity sector 
and the draft Concept of Forestry Development 2040 aim to reduce poverty of the forest communities by 10 percent, 
increase the contribution of the forestry sector to national GDP by 0.5 percent, and increase forest cover from 5.7 to 6 
percent.  
57. 
Within the framework of the Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience (PPCR), the Government has started developing 
the Strategic Programme for Climate Resilience (SPCR) and established a Climate Finance Coordination Mechanism 
(CFCM), including a Climate Finance Centre (CFC) in 2017. It is expected that the CFCM and CFC will become fully 
operational. This project is aligned with Component 10 of the PPCR, and will support the efforts of the Government of the 
Kyrgyz Republic to ensure that the target sectors are managed in a climate resilient manner and bring co-benefits. 
58. 
UNDP is providing support to the Kyrgyz Government, including the MES, MAFIM of the Kyrgyz Republic, and the 
SAEPF in development of the National Policy for the Adaptation to Climate Change (NPACC).19 FAO is a partner in the 
process focusing on forestry and agriculture sectors. The main findings and policy directions of this document are reflected 
in the CS-FOR proposal. However, while there are several coordination mechanisms available in the country, there is a 
lack of technical capacity and limited inter-ministerial coordination between the SAEPF, MAFIM, MES, and SALGSIR and 
coordination among local self-government bodies. The CS-FOR will be a major contribution to the strengthening of these 
 
15 The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. Intended Nationally Determined Contribution to the UNFCCC (submitted in 2015).  
16 The NSSD is based on the draft Agriculture Development Programme 2017-2020. 
17 Step 39th - Environmental Sustainability - aims at establishing an adequate legal framework and providing state support for environmental protection, and Step 40th - 
Mountainous Forests -- emphasizes the fragility of mountainous forest ecosystems and the need for protection and afforestation. 
18 Currently under update to cover 2018-2022. 
19 CBD defines: “the use of biodiversity and ecosystem services to help people adapt to the adverse effects of climate change”.

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
arrangements and facilitation. From this point, the project will be directly implemented under the government guidance and 
political/cross-sector coordination of the Climate Change Coordination Commission (CCCC) to create a multi-sector 
coordination processes for integrated forest/rangeland ecosystem management to address climate risk.  
59. 
In this context, the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, under the leadership of the Climate Change Coordination 
Commission and the State Agency for Environmental Protection (SAEPF) acting as National Designated Authority (NDA) 
to the GCF, has set clear scope for climate action in the country and provides important guidance with regards to the 
required support from the international community towards achieving the (INDC) targets for climate change adaptation and 
mitigation. 
60. 
In line with this guidance, understanding the agriculture sector presents important opportunities for the 
implementation of adaptation and mitigation actions according to the country’s INDC. The State Agency for Environment 
Protection and Forests (SAEPF), has requested the World Food Programme of the United Nations (WFP) and the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to serve the country as Accredited Entity and to submit two 
complementary funding proposals for priority investments. The WFP and FAO Project proposals have the following 
particularities and represent an important effort to ensure successful implementation of country commitments:  
- 
Climate services and diversification of climate sensitive livelihoods to empower food insecure and vulnerable 
communities in the Kyrgyz Republic (WFP, 10m USD grant, 4 years): responds to the GCF Climate Change 
Adaptation result area.  
- 
Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in Forests and Rangelands in the Kyrgyz Republic (CS-
FOR) (FAO, 30m USD grant, 8 years): responds to the GCF cross cutting Climate Change Mitigation and 
Adaptation results area.  
61. 
The development of these proposals is the result of a long lasting history of collaboration between the Government 
of the Kyrgyz Republic, through the SAEPF and the two United Nations Agencies. The proposed investments are also in 
line with the national support programmes that WFP and FAO have agreed with the country. A note on the complementarity 
of FAO and WFP proposals has been submitted to the GCF secretariat by the NDA of the Kyrgyz Republic in November 
2018; additional details on these complementarities can be found in the referred note in Annex 1 to this Funding Proposal. 
62. 
Given the described scenario: (a) carbon emissions are projected to increase similarly to the period 2000-2016 
where the World Bank reports an increase of 41%; (b) carbon sink from forests and rangelands will decrease; (c) policy 
framework is still too centralized with unclear participation of local communities and resource users to be conducive for 
effective changes in the brief to medium term. The described situation is not conducive to reaching proposed nationally 
determined commitments and reducing both exposure and vulnerability of communities and national economy.  
63. 
As reported by the European Union, the OECD and the World Bank: investing in forests and rangelands play a 
significant role in regulating climate balance, reducing the impact of extreme events, and contributing to carbon 
sequestration. FAO analysis and presented studies concur with such findings with the additional input that reducing 
emissions from Agriculture optimizing and improving the livestock sector (responsible of about 91% of agriculture 
emissions) is paramount and precondition to ensure effective contribution to carbon sequestration from forests and 
rangelands. 
64. 
Particularly for the CS-FOR project, given the presented context and relevant policy frameworks, data and analysis 
reported in the previous sections, and amply presented in the feasibility study, allowed the identification of the proposed 
target areas according to the following criteria: a) mitigation potential in terms of forest and pasture rehabilitation; (b) type 
and exposure of ecosystems and communities to natural hazards triggered by (or worsened by) climate variability and 
change; (c) vulnerability of ecosystems and communities to climate change; (d); high dependency of communities from 
natural resource exploitation; and e) socio-economic vulnerability of communities. Given the five criteria reported above, 
participants of the national engagement process,20 the NDA and the FAO identified the four contiguous districts of Ak-
Talaa in Naryn region, Toguz-Toro  
65. 
Within the four districts selected, the project has identified priority areas (hotspots) where, according to the 
referenced criteria, investments on forest and pasture restoration will have the higher potential impact: a) relevance of 
ecosystem services such as those provided by pastures and forests (i.e., protection, livelihood, water) benefitting 
communities; b) potential sustainable use of products and resources for local communities; c) availability of public land of 
at least 1,000 hectares; and d) agreement of communities for reducing pressure on identified areas.  
66. 
Leskhozes are Forest enterprises in charge of the local management of State Forest Fund territory. They are 
administered by the SAEPF, and depend on it for the resource allocation. The territory under their control includes forested 
land, buffer zones and land for future afforestation. The land classified under the latter is often used as grazing areas, and 
its use is transferred on seasonal basis through agreements between individual users and Leskhozes with fees based on 
the extension of the area. Such mechanism differs from the one promoted by the Pasture Law since 2009 (whereby the 
use of State Land Fund for grazing is under the control of local communities – Pasture Users Unions, with fees depending 
 
20 Throughout the project design, the engagement process involved the NDA as well as other government institutions plus civil society organizations and NGOs, local 
communities and private sector representative.

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
on the herd size), and is one of the elements of inconsistency on which the project will work to ensure harmonization of 
the regulatory frameworks on forests and rangeland use (reference: Component 1).  
67. 
In the Project Areas there are five State Forest Enterprises, one Forestry Unit, and two National Natural Parks which 
make up the core target area. A detailed profile of the Leskhozes in the Project Areas (and in the pre-identified possible 
expansion area), including forest / rangeland coverage, is provided in the CS-FOR WP “Forestry” in Annex 9, and their 
climate change related challenges is in the Project ATLAS (Annex 6.b). The major strength of the Leskhoze staff is their 
generally thorough understanding and knowledge of the local forest resources (trees, nuts, fruits and shrubs for planting). 
However they have often weak capacities (especially when it comes to new technologies and georeferencing tools, which 
are a critical element of the project’s led shift towards evidence based planning and management), and suffer from limited 
staff availability, insufficient to ensure the required planning and management of forest. Also, the Leskhozes do not have 
full financial autonomy (resource allocations are decided at the national level).  The implementation of CS-FOR will depend 
on the collaboration and coordination with the other local institutions leveraged by the project’s facilitation (i.e., for the 
planning and implementation and monitoring of the integrated NRM community resilience plans). Among the opportunities 
for the project’s approach is that several Leskhozes started the introduction of new methods in management of forests, 
such as public private partnerships, outsourcing forestry activities to private sector. The vicinity to the local communities 
and institutions is also an assed, creating opportunities for bottom-up “pull” elements towards joint management of state 
forest fund resources. 
68. 
The project will address the needs and strategies identified by the Kyrgyz Republic in the INDC and in the NAP 
roadmap of 2017 with an approach that maximizes mitigation while capitalizing important co-benefits from adaptation and 
disaster risk reduction. Consequently, the project is in line with the National Strategic Framework for Sustainable 
Development, Environmental and Climate Change Policy (Kyrgyz Republic 2013-2017 National Sustainable Development 
Strategy) as well as with the Priority Directions for Adaptation to Climate Change in the Kyrgyz Republic till 2017, including 
the Program and Action Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change for the Agricultural Sector (2016-2020).  
69. 
Considering the importance of the private sector role in developing alternative economic opportunities that support 
the carbon sequestration potential, especially in the targeted hotspots areas, the project is closely aligned to the Regional 
Development Programme (20 cities – 20 centers of growth), to the National Programme of Digital Transformation (Taza 
Koom / Clean Society), and to the Financial Literacy Programme for 2016-2020 (National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic). 
70. 
The project is in line with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) – in particular, but not limited 
to, SDG 12 (Responsible Consumption and Production), SDG 13 (Climate Action), and SDG 15 (Life on Land)21 framed 
by its core principle of Leaving no one behind (see also specific contributions to SDGs in Sections E.1.2 and E.3.1, and 
detailed contributions to SDG monitoring in Section H). In addition, the project is also aligned to the United Nations 
Partnership for Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF 2018– 2022) for the Kyrgyz Republic, to the FAO Country 
Programming Framework 2018-2022, and to the FAO Regional Initiatives (RIs), in particular: RI3 “Managing natural 
resources sustainably, under a changing climate”; RI1 “Empowering small holders and family farms for improved rural 
livelihood and poverty reduction”; and RI2 “Improving agri-food trade and market integration”.  
 
Coordination with ongoing relevant projects and strategies 
71. 
Climate change initiatives are being supported primarily by UNDP, the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (EBRD), the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), 
IFAD and the World Bank. Support to enhance the national hydro-meteorological service (Kyrgyzhydromet) is being 
provided by the World Bank. A more exhaustive description of past and ongoing experiences and the analysis of the 
respective lessons learned is provided in Chapter 3 of the Feasibility Study. Within the open and inclusive coordination 
supported, CS-FOR will also ensure complementarity with the Readiness related efforts of the country, and will leverage 
the capacity development opportunities, particularly at the local level in the target areas of this project. 
72. 
The CS-FOR project complements the currently ongoing efforts and fills specific gaps in climate change 
mitigation projects in the country. In order to ensure effective results in improving the enabling environment (reference 
to component 1), the project will adopt an inclusive approach to coordinate with all relevant projects and interventions 
implemented by the government and development partners. The main domains and relevant projects include: 
a. On carbon sequestration through forestry and rangeland rehabilitation: Forestry Sector reforms in the 
Kyrgyz Republic were supported for more than a decade by the Swiss Development Corporation (SDC) from 
1995 till 2009. The Kyrgyz-Swiss Forestry Support Programme (KIRFOR) covered a wide range of activities, 
including elaboration of tenure arrangements and legal framework for a collaborative forest management (CFM), 
providing technical support to the SAEPF in developing the Concept of Forestry Development of 1998 and 
corresponding National Action Plan. It also provided support in development of forestry inventory methodologies 
and tools. Additionally, the GIZ has started supporting piloting forest sector reforms in Kyrgyzstan 2015 in the 
 
21 The project will also contribute to SDG 1 (No Poverty) and SDG 17 (Partnership for the Goals)

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
framework of the Sustainable and Climate Sensitive Land Use for Economic Development in central Asia project. In 
Kyrgyzstan, the GIZ facilitated establishing the Coordination and Consultative Council at the national level, 
comprised of representatives of state ministries, international organizations, and civil society representatives to 
discuss various policy issues in the forestry sector. The project has initiated piloting of new management approach 
in six leskhozes. The Biodiversity Conservation and Poverty Reduction Through Community-Based Management of 
Walnut Forests and Pastures in Southern Kyrgyzstan (2015-2018) is another GIZ project focusing on six pilot 
Leskhozes with promotion of sustainable management.    
Coordination and synergies are established with the SAEPF-implemented Integrated Forest Ecosystem 
Management Project (2017-2021), with World Bank and Global Environment Facility (GEF) financing for US$ 16.1 
million). The project aims to strengthen government institutions and communities’ capacities to improve sustainable 
forest ecosystem management through investments in planning, ecosystem restoration, and infrastructure. At 
national level, CS-FOR and IFEM have the opportunity to join forces on the enabling environment for (a) evidence-
based monitoring; and (b) integrated forest and rangeland management for more effective carbon sequestration; at 
the local level, the projects will coordinate to have the largest geographic coverage in their efforts to reinforce forest 
institutions’ capacities. Synergies and collaborations are also critical with the global NDC partnership support 
facility22 (managed by the World Bank and implemented by the SAEPF in the country), for all aspects related to 
monitoring carbon sequestration. Specifically on rangeland rehabilitation, CS-FOR builds upon, and will continue 
coordinating with, the relevant ongoing IFAD-funded Livestock and Market Development Project, and the two 
WB-funded Pasture and Livestock Management Improvement Project and Integrated Dairy Productivity 
Improvement Project. Specific complementarities are around the common aim to improve productivity of 
rangelands and livestock. 
CS-FOR adds value by adopting an integrated approach to rangeland rehabilitation (focusing also on State Forest 
Funds areas) that limits the pressure on rangelands thus increasing the sustainability of investments and ensuring 
carbon sequestration capacities. Specific coordination mechanisms will be established through social mobilization 
at local level, where CS-FOR ensures complementarity in investment and harmonization of approaches.23  
b. On resilience to climate change-related hazards: The World Food Programme (WFP) is planning to expand 
its operations focusing on the most vulnerable populations exposed to climate change through a GCF Funding 
Proposal entitled Empowering Food Insecure and Vulnerable Communities through Climate Services and 
Diversification of Climate Sensitive Livelihoods. This project – expected to be discussed at GCF B.20, will 
contribute to enhancing national capacities to implement climate change adaptation activities in the food security 
and nutrition and agricultural sectors of the country. While the two projects (WFP and FAO) are largely targeting 
different areas, Ak-Talaa district is one area of overlap. Collaborations at local level will focus on planning specific 
investment and support to rural communities, and synergies will be important in identifying specific adaptation 
technologies and practices in agriculture. Additional potential collaborations will also come from the UNDP proposal 
for GCF financing (currently under development, focusing on water management and related infrastructures), where 
the CS-FOR will open dialogue and support harmonized practices on similar fields of intervention.  
c. On biodiversity and ecosystem services: CS-FOR builds on the approach, and will upscale results of the 
Sustainable Management of Mountainous Forest and Land Resources Under Climate Change Conditions 
(FAO-GEF) project, with a more specific focus on carbon sequestration. The CS-FOR’s cross-sectorial approach 
was pioneered also by the GIZ and SAEPF Regional Project on Ecosystem-based Adaptation to Climate 
Change in High Mountainous Regions of Central Asia (2015-2019) that introduced an ecosystem-based 
approach to climate adaptation. In addition, CS-FOR will also interact with the activities of the ongoing GEF-UNDP 
Project24 in Toguz-Toro district.  
d. On value chains and agribusiness support: CS-FOR will collaborate with the IFAD-funded Access to Markets 
Project (ATMP, US$ 55.5 Million), which is also co-financed by RKDF. The coordination will focus especially on the 
support to private sector entrepreneurs working in CS-FOR target areas and their suppliers. The common aim will 
be to unlock investment aimed to improve access and integration of smallholder livestock farmers with remunerative 
markets for their products, with improved and more equitable returns. CS-FOR will add value by focusing on 
stimulating behavioural changes in reducing pressure on forests and rangelands as necessary approach to ensure 
carbon sequestration from forests and rangelands. CS-FOR will coordinate also with the ongoing and future support 
from EBRD’s Kyrgyz Sustainable Energy Finance Facility which adopts the Green Economy Transition 
approach25 aimed at increasing the volume of financing with focus on environmental benefits.  
Building on existing towards the implementation  
 
22 WB NDC Partnership Support Facility (http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/climatechange/brief/the-ndc-platform-a-comprehensive-resource-on-national-climate-targets-
and-action).  
23 The mentioned projects are co-implemented by ARIS which is the executing entity selected for CS-FOR social mobilization.  
24 Titled Conservation of Globally Important Biodiversity and Associated Land and Forest Resources of Western Tian Shan Forest Mountain Ecosystems to Support 
Sustainable Livelihoods (US$ 28.6 million for 2017-2021).  
25 www.ebrd.com/cs/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395250237163&d=Mobile&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FContentLayout.

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
73. 
Within the framework of the GEF/FAO project "Sustainable management of mountainous forest and land resources 
under climate change conditions", reforestation activities were carried out in 8 pilot Leskhozes with broad participation of 
local population using joint forest management approach. Also, restoration of rangelands through seeding of pasture 
grasses, reduces the area of degraded lands, improving and maintaining soil fertility, allowing communities to diversify 
their livelihood sources. 
74. 
One of the most important lessons learned through the implementation of this GEF sponsored project, is the interest 
of local communities in identifying innovative opportunities for forest resources management, allowing to create new forest 
plantations on large areas, which in turn will have a beneficial impact on the environment, reducing greenhouse gases, 
helping to solve social and economic problems in rural areas of the country. 
75. 
Lastly, Kyrgyzstan is one of five project countries which receive support to develop a national criteria and indicator 
set for sustainable forest management through the capacity-building project “Accountability Systems for Sustainable Forest 
Management in the Caucasus and Central Asia”. This first draft national Criteria and Indicators for SFM set was developed 
to monitor the sustainable management of the state forest fund, specially protected natural areas and hunting grounds. 
The set contained 41 indicators under 6 criteria. 
76. 
The objective of the work carried out within the framework of the UNECE / FAO project "Accountability Systems for 
Sustainable Forest Management in the Caucasus and Central Asia" is to develop and adopt, as a separate legal act, a list 
of targets characterizing the performance of the main functions of state forest management and the results of the forest 
sector for annual monitoring and evaluation of effectiveness. 
77. 
During the design, and as an anticipation of the project’s activities, FAO has also complemented the analysis of 
the forest coverage with satellite imageries and produced a detailed Atlas (Annex 6.b ). Before the FAO Forest 
Assessment, the country had an incomplete picture of its forest resources. In 2008, national surveying crews inventoried 
about 60 percent of the state-administered forests, leaving a significant information gap.  Moreover, inventories focused 
mainly on timber production rather than on the multiple ways forests benefit local communities − environmentally, 
socially and economically.  The Forest Assessment, aimed to help the Government design and carry out a 
comprehensive national forest inventory on all forest types and land properties. The Forest Assessment was carried out 
in two phases, in partnership with the State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry and with additional 
funding from the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic and the Swiss-Kyrgyz Forestry Support Programme. This activity 
brought together major stakeholders working on forest management, civil society, NGOs, forest services, scientists, line 
ministries and international partners, to agree on a sector-integrated approach to assess the country’s forestry resources 
and their multiple functions. Such an approach is crucial for meeting national information needs, and for gaining a better 
understanding of the relationship between plant biodiversity and carbon storage. The stakeholders also reached 
consensus on setting up a long-term natural resource monitoring system. 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
 
Project baseline 
78. 
The project baseline for this proposal was established using nationally and locally collected data, including: 
(i) literature review 26 ; (ii) questionnaire-based household survey 27  (project sites n=600; control sites n=300); (iii) 
community focus groups (project sites n=8; control sites n=4); and (iv) extensive remote sensing analysis28. The baseline 
includes both target and control areas selected through the national engagement process used in preparation of this 
proposal. The baseline establishes a benchmark that will support the monitoring and evaluation framework in tracking both 
the progressive impacts achieved through project implementation, and the ability to document changes in conditions 
between project target areas and control sites (‘business as usual’) outside of the Project Areas.   
79. 
The intervention areas of the project are described in detail in Chapter 1 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2). Analysis 
of the study area on the extent and status of range and forest resources and the identification of changes in key climate 
parameters and related hazards are presented in the Project Atlas (Annex 6). 29 In carrying out the analysis, the design 
team utilized a large number of national and sub-national data sets to complete a series of vulnerability assessments to 
identify the project’s core target areas. Target areas were selected according to the following criteria:30 
a. Exposure of ecosystems and communities to natural (rapid onset) hazards triggered by climate change; 
b. Vulnerability of ecosystems and communities to (slow onset) climate change; 
 
26 Literature review is annexed to this funding proposal. 
27 The household survey report and findings of the focus group interviews are available up on request.  
28 Geospatial analysis is presented in the Kyrgyz Republic Baseline Atlas appended to this report, and will be available on Earth Map (the tool is available at this temporary 
link: https://storage.googleapis.com/eetest/EarthMap/index.html).  
29 Data and analysis that allowed the identification of the proposed target areas were organized in the form of an ATLAS that presents the rationale behind the areas 
selected and that form the main part of the baseline in terms of distribution, density, status and vulnerability of target ecosystems (forests and pastures) and communities. 
The ATLAS presents key information on climate variables including trends, demography, agriculture, infrastructure distribution, pasture users unions grazing areas, forest 
fund lands and others. The set of data defines the needs, and details the context by which project impact will be assessed. 
30 This analysis also identified priority and potential expansion areas to guide possible scaling-up of the project approach.

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
c. Mitigation potential in terms of forest and pasture rehabilitation; 
d. High dependency of communities from natural resource exploitation; 
e. Socio-economic vulnerability of communities.  
 
80. 
The core intervention area of the CS-FOR project is located in selected rural municipalities (aiyl aymak) in the four 
contiguous districts of Ak-Talaa, Toguz-Toro, Suzak and Uzgen (“Project Area”). The table below indicates population and 
numbers of rural municipalities and villages by district. Each rural municipality include one or more villages.  
Table C.2.1: Population and Numbers of Rural Municipalities and Villages in Target Area (2016) 
District 
Region 
No of rural 
municipalities  
No of villages 
No of rural 
households 
Total Rural 
Population31 
Ak-Talaa 
Naryn 
13 
18 
8,274  
38,008  
Toguz-Toro 
Jalal-Abad 
5 
13 
5,456  
24,942  
Suzak 
Jalal-Abad 
13 
125 
51,713  
272,096  
Uzgen 
Osh 
19 
102 
40,1431/  
205,517  
TOTAL  
 
50 
258 
105,586 
540,563 
Source: NSC data (2017)  
Note: 1/ extrapolated by the average of the other three, where data on household numbers is available.  
 
81. 
The four target districts (Figure C.2.1) are the most vulnerable to climate related stresses and hazards. 
 
Figure C.2.1: Map of Selected Target Districts  
82. 
As shown in figure C.2.2 (below), the highest percentage of land in the four districts is under grassland (54 percent) 
followed by cropland (17 percent) and forests (13 percent). The availability and location of resources has de facto shaped 
the livelihood strategies of communities that are heavily dependent on forest and pasture ecosystems (FAO, 2018, IFAD 
2013, WB 2013). 
 
 
31 Estimates for 2016 (NSC).

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
Figure C.2.2: Land Use Distribution in Target Areas (FAO 2016)32 
83. 
There are five Leskhozes (Ak-Talaa, Uzgen, Toguz Toro, Kara 
Alma, and Ortok), one forestry unit (Urumbash), and two National Parks 
(Saimaluu Tash and Kara Shoro) in the four target districts. The total land 
area of State Forest Agencies and national parks in the target districts is 
about 262,000 ha, with more 40 percent of the total land area used as 
grassland pastures for grazing livestock of neighbouring communities. 
Forest covered areas make up less than a third of all Leskhoze territories 
(Figure C.2.3).  
Figure C.2.3: Forest: Tree Cover > 10 percent)33 
Forests and rangelands conditions in the target areas 
84. 
Forests: as reported in Chapter 1 of the Feasibility Study and the geospatial analysis presented in the Project Atlas 
(LPD 2001-2017- Figure C.2.4), the forested areas in the project target districts showing signs of widespread degradation, 
extending over 40 percent of forested areas.  
 
Table C.2.2 and Figure C.2.4: Land Productivity Dynamics (LPD) of forests based 
on MODIS NDVI Time Series 2001/2017. 
Degradation class 
Ak-Talaa 
Suzak 
Toguz-
Toro 
Uzgen 
Grand Total 
(%) 
Extremely degraded 
14.8% 
27.3% 
26.7% 
22.2% 
24.7% 
Moderately degraded 
4.3% 
15.3% 
17.2% 
16.6% 
15.5% 
Not degraded 
80.8% 
57.5% 
56.2% 
61.2% 
59.8% 
unclassified 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
Grand Total 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
 
85. 
Pastures: Overall, 40 Pasture User Unions (PUUs) were identified, covering 73.4 percent of the total target area. 
Land cover in Toguz Toro, Ak-Talaa and Uzgen districts are between 80 and 90 percent pasture, while Suzak district is 
nearly 25 percent34 pasture. Pastures in different PUUs have been combined with altitude and slope classes that influence 
ecologies and appropriate management practices to demarcate 165 unique sub-areas for further climatic and vegetation 
analysis. The geospatial analysis (NDVI and LPD 2001-2017 – Figure C.2.5) run by FAO (2018) identified various levels 
of stress in pasture resources with declining trends in above-ground biomass productivity noted in over 32 percent of 
pastures. Reported data are still under evaluation and additional details will be provided once ‘ground-truthing’ of each 
PUU will be concluded.  
Table C.2.3 and Figure C.2.5: Land Productivity Dynamics (LPD) of pastures based 
on MODIS NDVI Time Series 2001/201735 
Degradation class 
Ak-Talaa 
Suzak 
Toguz-Toro 
Uzgen 
Grand Total 
(%) 
Extremely degraded 
5.2% 
27.0% 
16.6% 
24.4% 
15.5% 
Moderately degraded 
16.9% 
20.2% 
15.7% 
16.1% 
17.0% 
Not degraded 
76.3% 
52.9% 
67.6% 
58.8% 
66.8% 
unclassified 
1.6% 
0.0% 
0.1% 
0.7% 
0.8% 
  
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
 
Carbon stocks baseline 
86. 
To monitor and track carbon sequestration in enhanced forest cover and increases in belowground soil carbon 
content of rangeland areas brought under improved management, the CS-FOR has established a carbon monitoring 
system that involves national resources and complementary project specific analyses (see Section H.2 and Chapter 6, 
Section B.4.1, of the Feasibility Study, summarized later in this Section). The proposed system will align with ongoing 
efforts carried out by the State agency for Environmental Protection and Forests (SAEPF) in developing a carbon 
measurement, verification and reporting system with support from the World Bank through the NDC Partnership, of which 
FAO is also a member. The SAEPF will be implementing both the CS-FOR project and the World Bank supported efforts, 
 
32 Data on land use originated from FAO Collect Earth survey executed in Kyrgyzstan in 2014 and 2015.  
33 Source: Forest Cover Change https://earthenginepartners.appspot.com/science-2013-global-forest/download_v1.4.html  
34 The process to complete the coverage of PUUs in the 4 target Rayons (districts) is on-going. 
35 The areas assessed as non-degraded are lands where NDVI trends are positive but where the amount of potential biomass availability is very low due to previous 
degradation processes that cannot be captured by the LPD and NDVI analysis.

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
thus CS-FOR resources will serve to strengthen the institutional capacities of a key Government entity overseeing 
implementation of national mitigation activities.  
87. 
Once the final selection of management areas under the CS-FOR project are made, reference sites will be 
established in the rangeland management, reforestation/afforestation and plantation project areas. Control sites will also 
be established within the project districts, but in locations not benefiting from project interventions. These target and control 
reference sites will be georeferenced, and a measurement protocol established and used throughout the duration of the 
project to track changes in carbon stores, and the further degradation and carbon loss in the control sites under ‘business 
as usual’ management practices. The BAU practices in rangeland management (resulting in overgrazing and reduction of 
forest natural regeneration potential) generate a progressive deterioration of the CO2eq sequestration potential.  
Expected benefits in carbon sequestration and climate change resilience 
88. 
The total national emissions in 2010 [source: TNC] were 13,046 Gg CO2eq / year, with a reported share of 
agricultural emissions in 2010 [TNC] of 33.54% (or 4,375 Gg CO2eq / year). The CS-FOR sequestration potential is 
estimated at 19.8 m tCO2eq (over 20 years), or 0.99 m tCO2eq / year, which correspond to about 22.6% of the 2010 
total agricultural sector portion of emissions. Moreover, with a 20 years life cycle (i.e. by 2038), the project will contribute 
to a total sequestration of 19.8 m tCO2eq, or 0.99 m tCO2eq/year. With a low pop increase scenario (i.e.  6.872 m people 
in 2050, source: INDC, TNC), this corresponds to about 0.14 tCO2eq / year / capita (corresponding to 11.7% of the 1.23 
tCO2eq per capita, or 9.1% of the 1.58 tCO2eq per capita targets). 
89. 
CS-FOR project will use a series of indicators deriving from both GCF core performance indicators and from FAO’s 
established processes.36 Selected monitoring indicators have been discussed and agreed with the NDA (i.e., SAEPF) and 
with implementation partners during the national engagement process of the design stage; they are included in the 
monitoring and evaluation plan. Targets for mitigation, abated resource degradation and household (HH) resilience are as 
follows:  
1. Targets for carbon sequestration: The FAO EX-ACT37 and GLEAM38 methodologies and tools were used to 
calculate an initial estimation of reduced and avoided GHG emissions. These calculations derived a target of 
+1,483,543 tCO2eq emission avoided (projected over 20 years) in the Project Area (at the observed levels of forest 
and pasture degradation), and a contribution of net sequestration of approximately -19,751,354 tCO2eq over the 
same period (see Figure C.2.6). The highest carbon sinks will result from the grassland management (-14,923,368 
of tCO2eq) followed by forest management and degradation activities (-3,479,418 of tCO2eq), perennial system (-
873,500 tCO2eq, 1,117,520 tCO2eq taking into account carbon sequestration from the conversion of degraded land 
to perennial system), afforestation activities (-729,608 tCO2eq), and livestock management (-149,545 tCO2eq). 
Agricultural inputs are a minor source of GHG (160,958 tCO2eq).  
2. Targets of investments in reverting forest and rangeland degradation: The baseline remote sensing 
assessment identified approximately 920,850 ha of degraded rangeland and 93,931 ha of degraded forests in the 
target districts. Through project interventions the area of degraded rangeland will be reduced to 276,255 ha, a 70 
percent reduction, and degraded forests to 31,572 ha, a 60 percent improvement. The NDVI trends show a clear 
decreasing trend in mountain areas (where the highest risks of landslides is generated), and a limited availability of 
forests. These areas will be privileged for afforestation / reforestation. The section of the Atlas specifically dedicated 
to forests (pages 60-73) shows how the degradation of the forest areas is widespread in the four intervention districts. 
Page 71 in particular shows in one map how most of the State Forest Fund lands have a negative NDVI trend, with 
some exceptions in the district of Suzak which contains the largest walnut forest.  
3. Targets towards increased household resilience: From the climate resilience survey of 900 households (n=600 
target districts; n=300 control districts) conducted during the project design, a baseline value of 57/100 on the 
Resilience Composite Index (RCI) has been established. 39  The project will target a minimum 10 percent 
improvement for households in the project target area. A longitudinal monitoring approach will be used with reference 
households within the project and controls areas to track changes in their well-being and resilience during project 
implementation. 
 
 
36
 FAO, 
2016. 
Guidance 
for 
Standardized 
GHG 
Assessment 
of 
Agriculture, 
Forestry 
and 
Other 
Land 
Uses 
(AFOLU) 
Project. 
http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/ex_act/doc/EX-ACT_MRV_Guidelines-lb-20_1_2016.pdf  
37 http://www.fao.org/tc/exact/ex-act-home/en/  
38 http://www.fao.org/gleam/en/  
39 The Resilience composite index is derived from the Resilience Impact measurement Analysis methodology (RIMA II), and is described in Chapter 6 of the Feasibility 
Study. RIMA is an innovative quantitative approach developed by FAO that focuses on explaining how certain households are able to better cope with shocks and stressors 
(i.e., natural hazards and climate change).

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
Figure C.2.6: graphic representation of carbon sink potential of CS-FOR40 
 
 
90. 
The chart shows that the current level of forest degradation under BAU scenario generates an estimated net loss of 
1.5 m tCO2eq in 20 years; through the combined effect of the various interventions, the project will be able to avoid the 
mentioned losses and to generate an additional over 18 m tCO2eq sequestration (15.1 rom rangeland and livestock, 2.9 
from forest activities and 0.2 from other agricultural activities), for a net effect of 19.8 m tCO2eq sequestered. Such expected 
sequestration (4.2m tCO2eq) is composed of: (i) 0.7 m tCO2eq from afforestation and reforestation, and forest enrichment; 
and (ii) 3.5 m tCO2eq from improved forest management of the existing forests. The EX-Act Land Use Change (LUC) 
calculations are based on current degradation trends, showing 25% of the forest as largely degraded, 15% as moderately 
degraded and 60% as non-degraded. The potential net sequestration calculation is based on the current trends (showing 
substantial degradation).   
91. 
One of the main and most innovative elements of the project is the development of green value chains under 
component 3. The Component co-financed by RKDF will ensure the sustainability of the investment in carbon sequestration 
carried out in Component 2 and will create economic opportunities with limited risk, in order to decrease pressure on and 
degradation of natural resources in the project intervention areas, this will result in important contributions to enhanced 
resilience of target communities. 
92. 
Theory of change of the Project is summarized in Figure C.2.7. 
 
Figure C.2.7. Summary diagram of theory of change for the CS-FOR project

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
Project objective and impact indicators  
93. 
In line with the national policies and regulatory framework in the fields of climate change and natural resources 
management (NRM), the goal of the project is to contribute to the development of a low carbon-emission and climate-
resilient economy, while capitalizing important co-benefits from adaptation and disaster risk reduction.  
94. 
The project objective is to increase carbon sequestration through supporting climate investments in forests 
and rangelands and through reducing drivers of degradation and emissions via institutional support, participatory 
ecosystem-based sustainable management of natural resources and green growth investments. 
95. 
Commons,41 including natural resources, have been originally regarded as an open space but there has always 
been a problem of free riders. As a countermeasure to such a situation, traditional natural resource management aimed 
at an appropriate and efficient use of natural resources (ex. estimate its usable period, formulate a sustainable use level, 
develop a usage method with less environmental impact), and also provided a framework to bear the cost of maintenance 
and management by beneficiaries.  
96. 
In this context, it is crucial to consider that at country level there is no unified vision and policy on management of 
lands and ecosystems, this leaves the management of intrinsically linked ecosystem resources such as rangeland and 
forests completely separated and comparted. On the rangeland side, the approval of the Pasture Law in January 2009 has 
started an effective process of reform, putting pastoralists at the center. While such reform has achieved substantial results 
in social and economic empowerment of rural pastoralist communities, it failed to establish an effective integrated 
management framework especially with regard to forest land and forest resources, often adjacent to rangelands. On the 
forest side, the outdated National Forest Policy (1998) has left forest management responsibilities within Forest 
Enterprises, and aims to maximize forest potential and extension more than potential co-benefits with other resources. 
While the new Concept of the Forestry Development 2040 (under finalization and accompanied by the Action Plan for 
2018-2022) promotes sustainable forest management including by decentralizing management to local forestry enterprises 
and local government and enhancing co-management of resources with communities, the existing policies and 
legislation lack of a roadmap that operationalizes a joint management, hampering stakeholders’ capacity to 
coordinate in way that preserves the environmental integrity of rangeland and forests ecosystems.  
97. 
Regarding the integrated approach to natural resources management under a climate perspective, the main 
lessons draw from the country’s experience on sustainable rangeland management. The related activities in the CS-
FOR project (component 1) have incorporated lessons learned from a number of initiatives (donors, government and non-
government). These include: (i) the importance to promote dialogue between state agencies and civil society; (ii) the 
criticality of evidence based management of resources; (iii) in absence of a policy for sustainable rangeland, the growing 
number of livestock would lead to further fast deterioration of fragile resources; (iv) community and private sector 
engagement in afforestation and pasture improvement need to be based on clear and secure tenure arrangements.42 
98. 
In light of the successful experiences and lessons learned, as policy breaking element, CS-FOR’s investment on the 
enabling environment of natural resources aims to break the current discrepancy and lack of coordination by setting in 
participatory and inclusive way rules and regulatory frameworks to facilitate the integration of climate mitigation 
and climate resilience issues in the rangeland-forest policy and legal framework. Moreover, the Project will facilitate 
the integration of climate resilience issues in the rangeland-forest policy and legal framework, and implement the 
adaptation measures identified by the Government in 2013 and reflected in the Priority Directions for Adaptation to Climate 
Change until 2017. 
99. 
This climate change sensitive integrated approach to Natural Resource Management differentiates from attempted 
approached in the area of NRM, because incorporates mitigation / adaptation for climate change as a main element in its 
framework which is a multi-layered including the following three elements: 1. Prevent degradation of natural capital, 
enabling sustainable supply of ecosystem services, 2. Encourage various stakeholders to participate and cooperate 
horizontally, 3. Promote bottom-up activities from local communities and connect them with the global network.    In this 
regard. The approach proposed by CS-FOR, crossed by a strong climate rationale, will include: (a) a role of the 
communities in monitoring and planning natural resources use (including with satellite data) whereby the communities will 
own the plans and the maps of natural resources for climate change mitigation; (b) a surveillance role of the local 
(Leskhozes, municipalities) and central institutions (SAEPF, pasture department of the MoA); and (c) a coordination 
mechanism at national level, for both policy dialogue and for monitoring and evidence-based decision making to mitigate 
GHG emissions. 
100. In this sense, the Community Landscape Management Groups and the INRMCRP will develop and involve all 
relevant institutions (see Annex 9, Working Paper on ‘NRM policy and governance’, pp 9-10) calibrating their interests 
 
40 See also the Carbon Accounting Chapter in the Feasibility Study – linked in the last page of this document.  
41 land or resources belonging to or affecting the whole of a community 
42 The Feasibility Study reports also (in Chapter 3) the successful experience from Balykchy Leskhoze local stakeholders’ partnership that proves how the above lessons 
are critical for a successful joint NRM.

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
to focus also on climate and ecosystem related issues, aiming towards protection and preservation of NR as a basis 
for climate change adaptation and mitigation patterns and disaster risk reduction. 
101.  The facilitation of this approach at local level will be through the support and experience of ARIS (national 
Operational Partner of the project), and the actual decisions on investment will be based after the initial NR mapping 
(evidence based). FAO will provide quality assurance and support throughout the interventions including in mapping. 
Further information on the climate sensitive ecosystem-based interventions are partly identified and described in Chapter 
4 (detailed project description) of the Feasibility Study, with an economic/financial justification in Chapter 7 (Economic and 
Financial Analysis). 
Components  
The project’s investments and activities will be executed through three technical components (each a “Component”):  
1. Evidence-based Strengthening of Natural Resources Management (NRM) Governance;  
2. Green Investments for Forest and Rangeland Rehabilitation; and  
3. Climate-sensitive Value Chains Development.  
 
Component 1: Evidence-based Strengthening of Natural Resources Management Governance  
102. Rationale: The leading element of this Component is to provide Kyrgyzstan with an enabling environment that 
supports investment for carbon sequestration through forest and rangeland management while providing 
economic and social incentives to the users of natural resources, to avoid the depletion of carbon sink potential. The 
key measure in Kyrgyzstan to preserve forest-rangeland ecosystem’s natural resources is to improve governance in their 
management in order to prevent livestock overgrazing, overharvesting of fuelwood and timber, and to create an enabling 
environment that stimulates innovative practices and investments that conserve and regenerate these resources. The 
current policy and regulatory environment is highly fragmented and ineffective. About 1.2 million ha of pastures, located in 
and around forests on the State Forest Fund (SFF) lands are managed differently than the 9 million ha of municipal 
pastures. Forests which grow on the municipal lands are governed by different legislation than forest on the SFF lands. 
The management, use and protection arrangements for the resources within the SFF are regulated by the Forest Code 
and related set of legislation, while municipal lands and their resources are governed by a different set of legislation. The 
major gaps in the regulations for use of natural resources relate to lack of legal framework on management of communal 
(municipal forest), contradictory tenure arrangements for use of pastures located within the forest-rangeland ecosystems 
and managed by different agencies, and lack of legal foundation for private-public partnerships in management of natural 
resources. Other gaps relate to legislation and guidance to the users on preservation of biodiversity of the forest-rangeland 
ecosystem. As a result, the existing regulatory framework fails to support effective and sustainable arrangements 
for natural resources management, hampering: (a) effective investment for carbon sequestration; and (b) adaptive 
investment to reduce the impact of climate related stresses on natural resources (see Chapter 1, Feasibility Study). Several 
institutions in charge of forest-rangeland ecosystem resources operate in isolation, and there are no formal arrangements 
to synergize tenure regimes.  
103. As described in Chapter 1 of the FS), the current (baseline) situation is that the policy and governance mechanism 
in NRM is segmented and limits further inclusion of climate risk in the management schemes in forestry and rangeland 
ecosystem in an integrated manner. In addition there is no enabling environment of public-private partnership in climate 
resilient NRM. The added value proposed by CS-FOR rests in the use of evidence for the identification of resources, and 
in the cohesive and inclusive approach in validation of the evidence, and identification of investment priorities with a view 
at carbon sequestration potential. The GCF additionality in the proposal is therefore focused on establishing an integrated 
climate sensitive NRM mechanism in public-private partnership.  
104. The participation of private sector is essential to realize the theory of change and paradigm shift of the project. In 
this sense the policy and legal framework will enable private sector engagement by enhancing the inclusive policy dialogue 
in public-private partnership for integrated ecosystem management in the context of a changing climate, based on the 
established stakeholder engagement process, which was initiated during the project formulation stage by involving private 
sector and identifying their needs and requirements (see Annex 2, Chapter 4, Appendix 3). The process will be sensitized 
by knowledge management and facilitated by the experts, aiming at institutionalizing policy instrument and governance 
framework to create the enabling environment for public-private partnerships; and sensitizing private sectors in green 
investments (Component 2) and climate-sensitive value chain development (Component 3). 
105. The results achieved under component 1 will build on the work carried out by FAO together with the state Agency 
for Environmental Protection and Forestry to put together the Forest Assessment, as a tool containing an inventory of the 
forests in the Kyrgyz Republic, developed with a very participatory approach with the support of major stakeholders working 
on forest management, civil society, NGOs, forest services, scientists, line ministries and international partners. 
Additionally, the design of the project and especially the enabling environment component (Component 1) is fully aligned 
with the major review carried out by the World Bank (PROFOR) whose lessons are mainstreamed throughout the project,

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
especially when it comes to the local level planning and the need to involve all concerned institutions in the decision making 
process over the use of natural resources.  
106. Component objective: This Component will contribute to the harmonization of procedures and regulations to 
ensure a sustainable and climate change sensitive integrated planning, monitoring and evaluation of natural 
resources management. The key tool to ensure success will be the promotion of evidence-based and inclusive 
processes, involving all institutions responsible for natural resources’ (forests and rangelands) protection and management 
at national and local levels.  
107. Component 1 is structured with the following output (each an “Output”):  
Output 1.1:  
Evidence based natural resources management governance is strengthened across 
stakeholders  
 
108. Objectives: By operating with participatory, inclusive and evidence-based approaches, this output constitutes the 
basis to create a conducive enabling environment and support the harmonization of the regulatory framework related 
to integrated management and use of forests-rangeland resources (see Activity 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3, 1.1.4, and 1.1.5). The 
output will also provide capacity development on climate change risks and natural resource assessments. It will support 
existing natural resources monitoring functions at national level (including measurement, reporting and verification 
within SAEPF) with evidence-based tools and methodologies for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation, and will facilitate 
linkages between evidence and data from the ground, information systems and the forest-rangeland ecosystem 
planning processes (see Activity 1.2.1). The output is dedicated to strengthening the existing national system for 
monitoring natural resources, with the specific additionality to focus on climate-sensitive and evidence-based monitoring 
and decision making (e.g., via Earth Map, Collect Earth, and other tools developed by FAO specifically for climate 
monitoring and decision making). Furthermore this output will create and improve skills and capacity in planning climate-
resilient and adaptive natural resources management and use in beneficiary communities (see Activity 1.3.1). 
Activity 1.3.1 under this output is where communities’ planning and monitoring capacities are strengthened. The investment 
for monitoring in Activity 1.2.1 are instrumental to the communities’ integrated climate-resilience plans for Activity 1.3.1.  
109. The first group of activities implemented within this output will support the development of a set of knowledge 
products, aimed to enhance the quality, effectiveness and harmonization of the policy and regulatory framework on natural 
resources management. Specifically, the work under this output will promote: (a) Support to review and harmonize the 
current regulatory framework on forest and rangeland management for identification of legal gaps and ambiguities in 
sectoral policies and regulations; conduct special assessments on impacts of existing legislation on biodiversity, 
environmental resources, and livelihoods for women and men, including on gender equality. The major gaps in regulations 
relate to lack of legal framework on tenure and management of communal (municipal forest), contradictory tenure 
arrangements for use of pastures located within the forest-rangeland ecosystems and managed by different agencies, and 
lack of legal foundation for private-public partnerships in management of natural resources. Other gaps relate to legislation 
and guidance to the users on preservation of biodiversity of the forest-rangeland ecosystem. These analyses together with 
the consultations with the local government bodies, district administrations, forest institutions, PUUs and other community 
groups representing the interests of both women and men and users in four target districts will identify critical policy 
elements for integrated and participatory natural resources management and use. (b) Capacity development and 
mobilization of an Expert group for technical assistance. The project will support the establishment of an Expert Group 
– which will become integral part of the Project Management Unit (PMU), comprised of various technical expertise with 
engagement of local research and outreach organizations will develop and deliver capacity-development interventions to 
enhance capacity on policy making and management of natural resources among key stakeholders. The Expert Group will 
include Gender and Social Development Specialist, and TOR of each member includes gender mainstreaming. The output 
will seek to provide evidence to inform the policy and legislation framework and plans for priority climate financing activities 
and investments. The project will also finance studies to advise on forest-rangeland ecosystem zoning, stratification and 
planning, spatial and territorial development. This Output 1.1. is comprised of the following activities (each an “Activity”):  
1.1.1. 
Prepare communication material and organize information awareness campaigns to mobilize 
national stakeholders. This Activity will support the preparation of material for the mobilization of 
stakeholders at the local level to advance participatory management of natural resources.  
1.1.2. 
Organize fora/ international conferences meetings to sensitize the stakeholders. This Activity will 
comprise making and translating short films, social advertisement and other means in the mass media. 
Special attention will be on developing such materials for schools to be incorporated in classes to raise 
awareness in target communities. Various community information events will be held to attract attention of 
resource users to climate change impacts and mitigation measures. 
1.1.3. 
Training sessions/ workshops on forest and rangeland tenure arrangements, policy making, and 
management of natural resources. This Activity will support existing natural resources monitoring 
functions at national level (including measurement, reporting and verification within SAEPF) with evidence-
based tools and methodologies for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation, and will facilitate linkages

=== PAGE 29 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
between evidence and data from the ground, information systems and the forest-rangeland ecosystem 
planning processes.  
1.1.4. 
Propose recommendations for enforcement of sustainable management and use of forest- 
rangeland ecosystems through participatory process. This Activity will support the harmonization of 
legislation on tenure arrangements for forest-rangeland ecosystem and include aspects such as: (a) 
recommendations for enforcement of sustainable management and use of forest- rangeland ecosystems; 
and (b) technical, legal and institutional approaches to advance public-private partnership in promotion of 
integrated natural resources management. More specifically, the project will work on improvement of the 
existing forest-rangeland ecosystem related legislation required for integrated management. The major 
issues to be analyzed, documented and utilized for the policy agenda relate to: i) development and 
introduction of a harmonized approach to sustainable management of livestock grazing in a participatory 
manner on pastures of the State Forest Fund (SFF) and State Land Fund (SLF); ii) elaboration of different 
tenure arrangements for use of various natural resources on the lands of SLF and SFF with engagement 
of beneficiaries in local communities and beneficiary institutions at local level (communities, municipalities, 
users’ groups, and individual women and men farmers) (in line with the Voluntary Guidelines on the 
Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests – VGGT, and its technical guides, 
including on gender equality (Governing land for women and men), governing tenure rights to commons43, 
improving governance of forest tenure, and improving governance of pastoral lands); iii) elaboration of 
legislation and regulations on gender equitable and sustainable management and use of municipal forests. 
The project will also elaborate standards of sustainable use of pastures and forests, methods and tools for 
monitoring and compliance requirements and arrangements while ensuring social equity. 
1.1.5. 
Identify approaches for national stakeholder involvement process and organize National 
Stakeholders Platform Policy Dialogue for the management and use of municipal forest and 
facilitate thematic workshops, and submit the recommendation document to the Parliament. This 
Activity will establish a system of documenting findings and evidences to channel to the CS-FOR National 
Platform for discussions. The national platform aims to facilitate discussion and cooperation between 
agencies engaged in the NRM and advance legislation, and will serve as Steering Committee of CS-FOR. 
The National Platform will include representatives from Government and CSOs knowledgeable about 
gender issues, and its Terms of References will include gender aspects. The project will also support 
inclusive technical discussions to deepen selected topics (via specific consultations, including on impacts 
of existing legislation on biodiversity, environmental resources, and livelihoods for women and men, 
including on gender equality) to inform dialogue and harmonization of regulatory framework. Dialogue on 
biodiversity and environmental resources in target areas will be supported, with the aim to endow the 
country with better chances to ensure ecosystem preservation. 
110. The second set of activities implemented under this Output 1.1 will aim to enhance capacities on climate change 
risks and natural resource assessments, support further enhancement of capacities of the existing monitoring units at the 
central level with evidence-based integrated NRM Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation tools and methodologies, and 
facilitate linkages between the evidences, data from the ground, information systems and the forest-rangeland ecosystem 
planning processes 
1.2.1 
Demonstrate and accompany national and local institutions in adopting the evidence-based 
Natural resources Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation System. This Activity will be twofold, including:  
a. Establishment of a dedicated evidence-based and georeferenced project M&E system, including a 
dedicated NRM and climate-oriented monitoring procedure for central institutions to ensure scalability 
across the country. The activity will support development of standards, methodologies and implementation 
modalities for the state monitoring of rangelands and forests resources, which, in addition to tracking 
investments in climate change-related activities, will also contribute to enhancing the knowledge-base of the 
impact of ameliorated/managed pasture and forest lands to climate change (including human and 
ecosystem resilience). Over time, data generated can show trends in the correlation between management 
practices and climate change mitigation and adaptation. The activity will be developed in the framework of 
the targets of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) agreed by Kyrgyz institutions with the Kyrgyzstan 
National Spatial Infrastructure: central, local institutions, academia, and Civil Society Organizations (CSO). 
b. Supporting use of georeferencing and evidence-based approach.44 This will be done at all levels in 
an interactive manner and through the implementation of the project’s activities. (a) At national level: by 
establishing an NRM communications framework to secure data and information transfer across the country 
and within institutions. Within the framework of the Kyrgyzstan National Spatial Infrastructure Memorandum 
of Understanding and existing policies and laws, the project will ensure that mechanisms, tools and 
approaches will be used to support the dissemination of NRM and climate policies/laws/information across 
 
43 http://www.fao.org/tenure/resources/results/card/en/c/39d3d18f-3ebc-4aa5-bc2a-7c5996788a81 
44 See Georeferencing Strategy, annexed as Working Paper to the Feasibility Study and to the Funding Proposal.

=== PAGE 30 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
the country, and to update central institutions with data/information/needs originating from local 
administrations and rural communities. Trainings will develop the capacity of central and local institutions, 
schools, academia and CSOs in bridging policies and management plans with data and information (using 
the FAO approach and tools for Georeferencing and Geospatial Analysis). (b) At local level: by providing 
technical support to beneficiary institutions at local level (PUUs and Leskhozes (local forest institutions)) to 
update and enhance their datasets, working maps and tools to support the evidence-based NRM/climate-
oriented strategies. This will be linked to the implementation of Integrated Natural Resource Management 
and Climate Resilience Plans (INRMCRPs) (under Component 2), where the project will provide PUUs with 
ad hoc tools (i.e., digital maps, GPS, field met-stations) to map and monitor their pastures and forests 
adequately. 
111. The third group of activities implemented under this Output 1.1 will aim to create and improve skills and capacity 
in promotion of climate-resilient and adaptive NR management and use in participating communities. 
1.3.1 
Mobilize communities, establish CLMGs and accompany in formulating INRMCRPs. This Activity will 
be threefold, including:   
a. Establishment of Community Landscape Management Groups (CLMGs). Through social 
mobilization, this Activity will support the establishment of CLMGs as informal institutions at the local level 
to advance participatory management of natural resources. Specific members of the CLMGs will be selected 
as part of the Community Mobilization, and will include beneficiaries in local communities and institutions at 
local level, for example, the representatives of district administration, local self-government bodies (aiyl 
okmotu and aiyl kenesh), management of Leskhozes and national parks, representatives of the Pasture 
Users Unions (PUUs), Water Users’ Association (WUAs), other civil society and community organizations 
and private sector representatives. The selection criteria and mechanism are outlined in Table C.3.1 below. 
The CLMGs would also include active forest and pasture resources users and local entrepreneurs, as well 
as representatives of women’s and youth committees. ARIS will facilitate the establishment of such groups 
in the four target areas. Community representatives will be selected at the general village meetings; CLMGs 
will form a cluster at the district level chaired by the District Akim. When necessary, the CLMG cluster would 
invite representatives of the State Registration Offices and district tax bodies to participate in meetings. The 
informal status of CLMGs will ensure flexibility of the group and wider participation of stakeholders. The 
legal status of the CLMG will be reviewed at the mid-term stage.     
b. Methodologies for integrated natural resources management and climate resilient plans 
(INRMCRP) elaboration. This Activity will develop methodologies, guidelines and materials on the 
elaboration of INRMCRPs considering all issues of environment, biodiversity protection and ecosystem 
functions as related to climate change mitigation and adaptation, but also to improve livelihoods. The 
methods will be based on assessment and mapping of CLMG resources. The plans will incorporate various 
resource use regimes, including agreed schedule and migratory routes of the livestock grazing on the SFF 
and SLF land. Joint decisions will be made on number of livestock to be grazed on different pastures to 
preserve fragile resources and allow regeneration, and on various improvements to the pasture and forests. 
CLMGs will propose different tenure arrangements for use of forest and rangeland resources, such as 
municipal forests, including shelterbelts and windbreaks, as well as private and community-based tree 
plantations, and sustainable fuelwood resources and alternative rural fuel sources. The CLMGs will report 
to their communities on the preparation and implementation of INRMCRPs. This Activity will develop training 
methodologies and materials on INRMCRPs and other issues of pasture-forest ecosystem management 
and use, and organize training for beneficiary institutions at local level (local government, Leskhozes and 
CLMGs) on new arrangements for management and monitoring. 
c. Design of INRMCRPs in all communities in the target districts. In order to develop INRMCRPs, the 
project will build the capacity of stakeholders on georeferencing and community mapping of natural 
resources and livelihood strategies. This activity will serve also as on-the-job training and it will be an 
additional opportunity for communities to gradually contribute to governance of natural resources. This 
activity will also guarantee ground-truthing of geospatial analysis and GIS managed at the central level. An 
information dissemination and capacity-building programme will be developed to target decision makers on 
various sources of funding for sustainable natural resources management that includes carbon finance, 
especially in the international context of carbon sequestration in grasslands. Lastly, this activity will also 
inform the policy and legislation framework, providing recommendations to relevant sectorial strategies and 
plans for priority climate-financing activities and investments.  
 
Component 2: Green Investments for Forest and Rangeland Rehabilitation

=== PAGE 31 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
112. Rationale. Forest ecosystems hold the largest shares of terrestrial carbon, and trees and perennial-grass pastures 
are dynamically sequestering CO2 from the atmosphere into long-term biomass in trees and shrubs. The climate rationale 
of green investments in forests and pasture rehabilitation is anchored in the imperative of maintaining the health of these 
ecosystems to perform their carbon cycle functions. This capability has been weakened in the Kyrgyzstan forests and 
pastures due to their poorly governed use and unsustainable management. The project aims at mainstreaming the 
principles and benefits of their sustainable management into broader user groups than their traditional custodians. Equally 
important is that management planning becomes integrative and goes beyond the sub-sectorial boundaries, which seem 
to lead to policy contradictions and only partial solutions that do not lead to sustainable development.  
113. Private sector’s involvement in forestry investment. The key returns of forestry investment are essentially 
represented by carbon sequestration, which in the current absence of carbon pricing initiatives, makes financial returns 
largely unattractive for the private sector. The financial benefits of pure forestry investment are too low even in a 20 years 
horizon to mobilize private capitals. However, considering the strong interlinkages between forestry and rangelands 
especially in their use by local rural communities as amongst the primary sources of livelihood, the project approach 
envisages private sector’s participation in forestry investment. Even if the investments are local native (not 
commercial) tree species, communities and individuals will contribute with own resources (as also reflected in the project 
budget). The level of concessionality for such investments has been set according to the potential returns of the forestry 
investment (reference: Chapter 7 of the Feasibility Study, where the individual forests financial and economic returns are 
described). Varieties such as Juniper, Spruce, Poplar, and Mixed tree species give particularly low returns (the related 
financial performance indicators such as IRR and NPV are all negative), making public resources (including GCF grant) 
necessary for about 90 percent of the investment. On the other side, walnut and pistachio reforestation, even with the 
selected non-commercial local varieties, generate some higher financial results (IRR at 20-year horizon result positive only 
for walnut forests, barely positive for pistachio), and the concessionality is set at 65 percent. Such level, when accompanied 
by a leasehold agreement on the use and harvest of non-timber forest products, generate private sector’s interest to 
provide an actual contribution even when the major benefit of the investment is a public good as mitigation. As per the 
EFA (Annex 3), for Pistachio and Walnuts the concessionality is 65% of the investment. Even considering the grant, the 
returns are barely positive. For Pistachio Forests (non-commercial varieties, afforestation activities), the IRR for a grant-
supported investment over 20 years is 16% and the NPV is positive at barely 1,000 USD. Walnut (same, non-commercial 
indigenous varieties) is slightly more viable, with 20-yrs IRR at 19% and NPV 5,000 USD.) All forest investment envisage 
the participation of private sector, with direct investment in land, labour, and other costs. The concessionality has been set 
at a level that raises the interest of possible private investors – that could access to credit lines generated by RKDF. See 
also Feasibility Study (Annex 2), Chapter 4, Appendix 3, which summarizes the significance of private sector involvement 
in the project. 
114. Private sector’s participation in rangelands development. Rangelands play a critical role in the project’s 
expected carbon sequestration potential, and are one of the key elements of innovation compared to previous interventions 
and to the existing regulatory framework. In the project’s framework, improvement of rangelands conditions contributes by 
over 70 percent of the carbon sequestration potential of the project (14.9 m tCO2eq over a total expected sequestration of 
19.7 m tCO2eq in a 20 years horizon). Thus, the importance of rangeland investment is critical and cost effective: when 
considering the sole investment in rangeland (i.e., excluding the associated cost of capacity development and for improving 
the enabling environment) the cost of sequestration is about 0.26 USD / tCO2eq, very low compared to average 
sequestration investment. Rangeland are at the centre of the livelihoods of rural communities in the target areas, but the 
currently prevailing livestock management is incompatible with considering rangeland as a carbon sink. In order to provide 
incentives to the behavioral change of private sector, the project has, on one side, set an attractive level of concessionality 
to the rangeland investment (yet with a private sector contribution of at least 10 percent). On the other side, the project 
has established an innovative associated investment (Component 3) that stimulates private sector’s investment in value 
chains that will contribute to reducing the pressure on rangeland. 
 
115. Component objective. Through investment on afforestation/reforestation and forest enrichment, and productive 
investment in pasture restoration, this Component will contribute to increasing the resilience of populations in the target 
areas and to decrease their exposure to climate change related risks and hazards.  
Component 2 includes one single Output: 
Output 2.1:  
Green investments for forests and rangelands rehabilitation are made available 
116. Improved management of forests and rangeland on SLF and SFF with the aim to increase carbon sequestration, 
besides direct investment in forestry and pasture, can be achieved only through training and mentoring of the principal 
actors involved in livestock and forest management. As such, this component will have a preparatory section dedicated to 
accompany the local-level stakeholders (members of CLMGs) and their institutions through a capacity development 
process with technical and institutional features, to implement and monitor the INRMCRPs. The second phase will be 
dedicated to the actual implementation of forest and rangeland investments at community level (see paragraphs for 
activities related to supporting the investment under Component 2). Key results of the capacity development investment 
will include: reaching a consensus among the involved institutions of the need to change current pasture management

=== PAGE 32 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
practices; a general understanding of the risks to community resilience if current practices are not amended; awareness 
of the ecological justification and livelihoods rationale for rotational grazing and how to implement and monitor pasture 
rotation. This will lead to the application of rotational grazing to pastures in the target areas. This Component will carry out 
five Activities, with a first set (Activities 2.1.1 to 2.1.3) dedicated to strengthening stakeholders capacities to manage 
integrated natural resource management climate resilient plans, and a second (Activities 2.1.4 and 2.1.5) dedicated to 
support these investments in accordance with the description in the Logframe. Definitions of forest, 
afforestation/reforestation/ deforestation, and degradation are summarized in Addendum 2 of this Funding Proposal. 
Capacity development activities:  
2.1.1 
Conduct training to 50 communities and institutions on technical/ legal matters on forest 
enrichment and afforestation/ reforestation, and provide technical/legal assistances on forestry 
PPP establishment. All trainings will address gender issues as appropriate in the thematic topic. More 
specifically, within this activity, the activity will perform the following:  
a. Carry out community mobilization and training for 50 aiyl aymaks (municipalities) and their 
communities, including gender training and institutional support, as well as the establishment of task forces 
and fire management teams at Leskhoze level. Training of trainers (TOT) will be provided on technical and 
institutional matters and facilitate dialogue among beneficiaries in local communities and beneficiary 
institutions at local level including Leskhozes, NGOs, CSOs, forest and pasture experts, PUUs, WUAs and 
other natural resource users. Forest and pastures stakeholders’ meetings will be supported to promote 
information-sharing and organization of CLMGs and focus on change management in the forest sector. 
Local (between districts) and regional study tours for Leskhoze staff and leaders should stimulate improved 
forest investments. Training sessions will be also provided to women on leadership, decision-making and 
participation in local institutions with a view to supporting women’s further engagement in PUUs, WUAs and 
other community resource user groups. 
b. Provide technical assistance on forestry, to ensure covering all technical requirements for Leskhoze 
staff as well as municipal administration and forest users for sustainable management of forests and 
Integrated Pest Management. As part of the evidence-based approach, all natural resources will be mapped 
and georeferenced to facilitate the M&E of progress in planting, safeguards, carbon sequestration, etc.  
c. Provide technical and legal assistance on Public-Private Partnerships for forest management, to 
ensure that individual households benefit from the introduction of the new regulation which allows leasing 
of SFF forest land (in five-year renewable leases) for tree planting on low-productive land.  
d. Provide technical assistance on land tenure matters, to ensure that all actors at local level are aware 
of and apply the principles of responsible governance on tenure arrangements for forest-rangeland 
ecosystem management (with support from FAO expertise),45 and follow the approaches proposed through 
the regulatory framework harmonization under component 1.  
2.1.2 
Provide technical assistance to the Pasture Department on climate-sensitive pasture management, 
assessment and monitoring, and conduct INRMCRP assessment and monitoring. This Activity will 
provide support for technical assistance, training and study tours to the pasture department, including via 
national and international expertise. This will include one short term international and two long-term 
national consultants (GIS and pasture specialists) based in the pasture department with specific task to 
reinforce the monitoring capacities and coordinate the department’s efforts in pasture management 
awareness and capacity development, along with the technical support of the gender and social 
development specialist. The tangible result of this support will be the participation to the monitoring of the 
INRMCRP implementation. 
2.1.3 
Conduct training of trainers on pasture rotation and evidence-based rangeland M&E to local cadres 
as well as training of trainers on INRMCRP management and implementation, and training sessions 
to the CLMGs and local stakeholders to implement INRMCRPs on rangeland management. Within 
this Activity, the project will: 
a. develop local cadres capacities on pasture rotation and evidence-based rangeland M&E. Through 
a system of TOT, trainings and refresher trainings, administrators and CLMGs will be educated on the 
ecological wisdom and benefits of rotational grazing and erosion control, and the need for policies and 
regulations that support improved resource management and land-use planning. The output is a cadre of 
extension staff created within existing organizations to provide guidance and technical assistance to ayil 
okmotus and PUUs in implementing change in grazing management practices and land use. 
b. Strengthen CLMGs’ capacities to implement INRMCRPs on rangeland management. This activity 
will include TOT organized by ARIS and provided through the mobilization of national and international 
 
45 Reference to the in-country analysis and policy dialogue and the related FAO policy notes land tenure (2016 - 2017).

=== PAGE 33 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
expertise. Capacities of beneficiaries at local level listed in Table C.3.1 (ayil okmotus, Leskhozes, PUUs, 
etc.) to implement INRMCRPs on pasture management will be strengthened through a set of initial trainings 
and refresher training on technical and institutional issues (mainstreaming both gender aspects and land 
tenure within the framework of the VGGTs). The project will support the participation of stakeholders in local 
and international study tours (of which at least 30% will be women). The work will target all 49 PUUs/Pasture 
Committees and the 6 Leskhozes in the Project Area. Under this activity, capacity development will focus 
on the following aspects: 
- 
Livestock owners and their immediate supervisory organizations (Pasture Committees, local self-
governing organizations, and district level leadership) will be coached on implementing on-ground 
measures to achieve outcomes that enhance resilience to climate change. Livestock owners and 
shepherds who care for livestock grazing on pastures will be trained in improved grazing management 
practices, and their performance monitored under project supervision.  
- 
CLMGs will recognize livestock producers’ incentive to own as many animals as possible to compensate 
for low productivity her head and the vicious cycle of resource degradation driven by this incentive. The 
project will try to change the incentive structure by introducing an appreciation of the benefits from 
managing for higher production per head, and how that can be achieved. It will also promote change in 
pasture management by anticipating higher livestock productivity, higher income, reduction in total 
animal numbers as production per animal rises, and opportunities for enterprise diversification. 
- 
Training on genetic selection of livestock in current herds to cull unproductive or less-productive animals, 
and on the careful use of Artificial Insemination (AI) to achieve cross-bred livestock that yield more meat 
and milk, and therefore reduce the need for large herds.  
- 
Training on how to integrate and harmonize pasture management of SLF and SFF lands. Training also 
on the benefits of planting trees on municipal land and in Leskhoze grazing land to create shelterbelts 
and copses for shade, and windbreaks to protect against cold winds. 
 
117. In line with FAO’s comparative advantage and with the objective to support forest investments that will directly 
respond to the core impact of the project, land tenure activities are being co-financed by a grant. These activities will also 
aim to contribute to the sustainability of the CO2 sequestration potential; however, direct climate change related activities 
will be mostly financed under the GCF grant.  
118. Investment activities under Component 2. The economic behaviour in rural areas responds to economic and 
market incentives. The project, mainly under Component 2, will stimulate the required incentives by: (a) Facilitating the 
development of sustainable forests as repository of CO2eq and (in DRR prone areas) as disaster risk reduction measure; 
(b) providing concessional investment and technical assistance that demonstrate success in rangeland management and 
to ensure breaking the vicious circle of poor NR management (under Activity 3.1.3); and thus (c) Facilitating the 
development of diverse value chains, sensitive to the changing climate pattern and all aiming at ensuring the sustainability 
of rangelands and forest. 
119. Such activities represent the bulk of investment for carbon sequestration through restoration and improvement of 
forests and pastures in the target area through INRMCRPs developed by CLMGs. The total estimated sequestration of 
about 19.8 m tCO2eq (break down by investment type is provided in Sections E.1.2 and E.6.5). The investment will be 
discussed and decided by the Project Steering Committee and final confirmation of decisions by Accredited Entity within 
the INRMCRP framework. 
120. The component includes two main branches of investment, comprising the following activities.   
2.1.4 
Provide climate investment in restoration and improvement of forests based on INRMCRP 
developed, and execute afforestation/ reforestation and forest enrichment work by Leskhozes with 
technical assistance. The focus of this Activity is supporting investment and has financial support under 
Component 2. More specifically, within this Activity, in accordance with the Logframe, the project will 
support investment in Afforestation / Reforestation and Forest Enrichment. The project will provide 
the required concessional forestry investment (where the investments are budgeted as equipment and 
professional/contractual services, e.g.: seedlings, fences, labour) to stimulate the required economic 
behavioral change of involved institutions and communities in rural areas. Activity 2.1.4 will be supported 
by Activities 2.1.1, 2.1.2, and 2.1.3, comprising the bulk of technical assistance and support to the rural 
communities and their institutions to implement the INRMCRPs at local level. The carbon sequestration 
potential for this investment is 4.2 million tCO2 equivalent (corresponding to 21 percent of the total project’s 
carbon sequestration potential). Supported investments include: (a) at least 3,000 hectares of new forests 
successfully planted on degraded lands; (b) at least 3,000 additional ha of existing degraded forests 
enriched; (c) about 56,000 ha of existing forests (slightly above half of the existing forests in the four 
districts) under improved management. For a. and b., all selected tree species are indigenous and non-
commercial varieties, which makes their financial returns very low to stimulate private sector investment. 
Non-commercial trees will be used in forest areas owned by the state only where forests are established

=== PAGE 34 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
and maintained in order to ensure primarily ecosystem services (i.e., public goods and services) without 
specific direct economic purposes. Nevertheless, the project still envisages the participation of the private 
sector, especially for local walnut and pistachio tree species (reduced concessionality, as detailed in the 
EFA), considering their potential participation in the export markets.46 A detailed approach in forestry 
interventions is divided into three main areas of work, comprising Afforestation / Reforestation and / Forest 
Enrichment (The specific work areas are selected under Activity 1.3.1 as part of the Integrated Natural 
Resources Management Climate Resilience Plans (INRMCRPs)). The eligibility criteria for the selection of 
the areas are listed in the dedicated box and in further technical details are presented in Annex 2, Chapter 
4 (page 113). The beneficiaries of investment in Afforestation/ Reforestation and Forest Enrichment will 
be the State Agency for Environment Protection and Forestry and the local communities according to the 
INRMCRPs developed under Activity 1.3.1. Beneficiaries will contribute with own work as a contribution to 
the investment. Besides community mobilization, including a contribution from beneficiaries represents an 
additional way to ensure interest and ownership. Being in-kind (labour of communities and of SAEPF) it 
implies no transfer of ownership. Being the investment decided within the INRMCRPs where local 
communities and their institutions are represented, all beneficiaries have incentives to participate in the 
investment with own labour time, and possibly material. The contributions amounts will be according to the 
level of concessionality mentioned in paragraph 113 (regarding Private sector’s involvement in forestry 
investment). The supported forestry investments will include:    
- 
Afforestation/reforestation (A/R), covering at least 3,000 ha spread over five years (yr. 2-6) of the 
project: (a) on public land, where urgently needed due to high levels of degradation of forest, on failed 
or delayed reforestation sites, and on open grasslands of SFF which have been totally deforested by 
grazing. The project will use fencing and reforest patches of highlands/grassland between and around 
the remnants of forest, on roadsides, and extending forest margins. In walnut and pistachio forests 
households sign up long-term leases (5 years renewable) to plant/sow new plantations with a 
combination of selected varieties that are (i) early-maturing (3rd year) to bear nuts; and (ii) are early-
ripening to yield harvest in August. (b) As private tree planting activities through long-term leases from 
the municipalities (mostly in combination of fruit trees and endemic deciduous trees and trees for 
fuelwood) on SLF low-productive lands, riparian zones and landslide-prone areas around floodplains. 
Responsibilities. For effectiveness, the investment model takes into account the region, altitude, 
climate, tree species, forest legal status, custodianship and the competent partners. Three investment 
models refer: (a) Leskhoze-cantered investments in high-altitude spruce and juniper forests (long 
rotation timber forest, but devoid of direct economic incentives to private partners); (b) Collaborative 
Forest Management (Leskhozes, private individuals, households) through long-term leasing of walnut 
and pistachio forests on SFF lands from Leskhozes to households: here economic interest is high and 
competition is intense); and (c) Individuals investing in tree-planting on SLF lands, with a long-term lease 
tendered from ayil okmotu (mix of poplar, willow, fruit trees, etc., to combine short-term income with 
long-term timber, fuelwood and carbon benefits). 
Benefits for carbon sequestration: A/R and enrichment planting intensifies sequestration of CO2 in 
young forests (<20 years) and lowers emissions from forest die-back. A healthy forest cover/canopy has a 
lower albedo: forests reflect only around 5-15% of sun’s radiation and mitigate its impact of radiation in 
warming up the lower spheres of the atmosphere.  
Co-benefits for CC adaptation: net forest cover (new planting area minus deforested area) increases 
and holds soil and water from uncontrolled erosion. Selected local tree varieties are bred to form the basis 
for future climate-resilient forests. Additional rural income, greening of less-productive lands, and livelihood 
options to supplement restrictions in livestock. Rural infrastructure and accessibility with remote roads. 
 
- 
Forest enrichment, covering at least 3,000 ha planted throughout five years (yr. 2-6) of the project. 
Activities will support the restoration of moderately degraded growing forests through enrichment 
planting of walnut (in Uzgen and Suzak), and spruce and juniper in Ak-Talaa and Toguz-Toro and in 
the buffer zones of Saimaluu-Tash and Kara-Shoro National Parks.   
- 
Improved forest management of another 56,400 ha of growing forests. This will be achieved through 
training of Leskhoze staff and implementation of INRMCRPs. Accountability to plan and implement 
thinning and sanitary cutting to stimulate the growth rate and health of standing forests, and the 
harvesting residues for fuelwood for rural households will be strengthened. The INRMCRPs will 
stimulate a positive spill-off effect of the improved practices in nurseries (see also Component 3 
supported activities), planting and tending of growing forests to elsewhere in the adjacent Leskhozes. 
 
46 Experiences such as Vega Plus, Gedik, Lesnoy Produkt, Golden Walnut, Farmers Organic Garden, and others have shown how it is possible to benefit from 
economically vibrant sector of NTFP and dried fruits and integration with well-functioning export markets.

=== PAGE 35 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
- 
Support to establishment of climate-resilient tree nurseries will include training to local Leskhoze 
nurseries on planning (design and operational); standards of production for closed-root spruce and 
juniper seedlings. Walnut and pistachio seeds will be collected from ‘’Plus-trees’’ and grown. Support 
will include improved greenhouses, rootstock collection and training on growing resistant and endemic 
varieties of wild apricot, apple, pear, cherry, plum. Under Component 3 (climate sensitive value chains), 
the project may support investments in nursery establishment, aiming at establishing sustainable 
businesses that can produce high quality seedlings both for commercial and restoration purposes. The 
investment package will mainly include young seedlings, drip irrigation, fence and fertilizers. It is planned 
to support 100 business cases with the establishment of relatively small-scale nurseries (100 m2). IRR 
at 28% signals about financial attractiveness of such business under the condition of access to markets. 
100 beneficiaries are expected to benefit from these activities. 
 
Box. The eligibility criteria of sites selected for Project’s interventions take stock of the past experiences 
in forestry: 
- Spruce forests in the lower zones of the Ak-Talaa and Toguz-Toro districts (2200-2400 m above sea 
level) should preferably be done in northern exposures. Above 2500 m above sea level, plantations can 
be carried out both on the northern slopes, and on the eastern and western slopes. Juniper mainly grows 
in southern exposures, where no spruce grows. 
- Pistachios: lower zones in 700-1000 meters above sea level should be selected. These zones are 
pistachio’s natural distribution area. For walnut, the most suitable growing zone is from 1200-2000 m 
above sea level, mainly in the northern slopes. On higher altitudes, the walnut can grow on the western 
and eastern exposures, and sometimes on southern exposures. 
- Afforestation/reforestation planting can target be either open areas, clearings, forest fringes, 
roadsides, as well as in light forest with a crown cover of less than 10 percent, with slope steepness not 
over 50 percent. 
- For enrichment planting, the areas where the crown cover is less than 30 percent and/or areas with 
low-value species are eligible.   
 
Environmental safeguards. The main tree species have been matched per target Leskhoze future 
conditions that will follow the climate scenarios presented in this Proposal for their respective regions, and 
in accordance with the scientific knowledge from the Kyrgyz Forest Institute under the Academy of Science 
and validated with SAEPF. The project supports only the planting of endemic or non-invasive domesticated 
tree species from the Central Asia region, or introduced from the Russian Federation. The list of most 
preferable sub-species and varieties is presented in Appendix 1 to Chapter 4 of the Feasibility Study. 
 
2.1.5 
Develop and execute INRMCRP pasture investment plans for catalyzing green investment in 
rangeland rehabilitation and livestock production. More specifically, the project will support 
investments in Pasture rehabilitation and livestock production. The carbon sequestration potential for this 
investment is 15.1 million tCO2eq47 (or 76 percent of the project’s potential sequestration). Resilience of a 
grazed ecosystem, and of the communities that depend on livestock grazing, depend primarily on the 
ecological health of pastures. The activity will guide and support communities (CLMGs) to overcome 
pasture degradation through adoption of pasture rotation and a change in land use practices through 
training, mentoring and monitoring. The activity will increase carbon sequestration and enable local 
communities to become more resilient to the adverse impacts of climate change. Higher HH incomes are 
expected from more productive animals (e.g. greater milk yield) and opportunities to invest in alternative 
or complementary enterprises. In order to facilitate these investments, ARIS will support the procurement 
of goods and services required for the investment and facilitate training and technical assistance (TA). A 
critical activity is to improve access to remote pastures through bridge and road repair, and thereby spread 
livestock grazing impacts more evenly. When large areas of pastures are inaccessible, the grazing 
pressure is high on those pastures that are easily reached, exacerbating localized degradation. 
Complimentary activities include the establishment of shade shelters and windbreaks aiming at having 
multipurpose tree species to form the major part of these breaks, in order to increase the use of them, 
construction of seed-increase fields, harvesting and broadcasting seeds to increase fodder production, 
construction of watering points or small bridges to unlock inaccessible pasture, and procurement of large 
equipment for infrastructure improvement. All investment will be combined with technical support for 
integrated and improved pasture management. Key recommendations comprise the following elements 
(see Appendix 2 to Chapter 4 of the Feasibility Study for reference). Beneficiaries of the investment in 
pasture rehabilitation and livestock production will be Pasture Users Unions (PUUs) and members of the 
CLMGs. Beneficiaries will contribute with own work and possibly some simple construction material as a 
form of ownership of the investment. Being the investment decided within the INRMCRPs where local 
communities and their institutions are represented, all beneficiaries have incentives to participate in the 
 
47 Combining the sequestration from rangeland rehabilitation and livestock management.

=== PAGE 36 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
investment. The activity will focus on: 
- 
Rotational grazing. The main method for achieving higher pasture production, and therefore greater 
carbon sequestration over 644,595 ha of grazing land, is rotational grazing (pasture rotation). The 
essential feature of pasture rotation is a focus on long periods of rest from livestock grazing to allow the 
growth of pasture vegetation to approach its potential. By allowing pastures to approach maximum 
growth, above-ground plant biomass rises from an estimated 1 tonne DW/ha on degraded land to 3 
tonnes DW/ha under pasture rotation. The root:shoot ratio for perennial grasses is at least 2:148, so total 
plant biomass rises from 3 tonnes DW/ha to 9 tonnes DW/ha. Successful adoption of pasture rotation 
will mean transforming traditional grazing practices and will require coordination among members of the 
PUU and supervision from the PC or its delegate. A set of technical assistance will be provided in this 
activity. The activity will also identify incentives that may be necessary to make management changes 
more attractive. Incentives to be considered in the activity will include for example, adoption of pasture 
rotation as a condition for receiving a particular project benefit, such as water-point development.49 
- 
Windbreaks and shelterbelts. Another activity that while improving livestock and rangeland 
management addresses also potential adaptation to climate change and contributes directly to carbon 
sequestration is the planting of trees in small areas on municipal pastures and Leskhoze land. The 
activity will promote shelterbelts and copses to provide shade and reduce wind velocity. Windbreaks of 
trees with lower strata of shrubs are especially beneficial for protection against winter wind. Trees will 
be protected by fencing, which can be removed and re-located after trees have grown to safe heights. 
Trees will be procured with SAEPF. Tree seedlings will require maintenance, including watering in 
summer months, for the first 3 years. 
- 
Promotion of improved grassland seeds. Pasture rotation will improve plant composition because 
palatable leafy grasses have a competitive advantage during the long rest periods over less palatable 
plants. Broadcasting seed of desirable indigenous perennial plants can accelerate pasture improvement. 
The activity will promote the establishment of 1-ha seed-multiplication fields near PUU villages, separate 
from the 1-ha demonstration sites promoted by the IFAD-funded LMDP. A 1-ha seed-increase field in 
each PUU requires fencing materials of 400m per PUU, or 19,600m for 49 PUUs. 
- 
Livestock investment. Reflecting the centrality of livestock to ensure forests and rangeland 
management for carbon sequestration, the project will promote investment in improved livestock 
production and productivity. Complementing the activities and investment carried out by ongoing 
livestock and dairy development projects in the area (IFAD and WB funded), the INRMCRPs will support 
investment in livestock productivity in this activity. Investment will include among others, promoting more 
productive and more palatable pasture vegetation composition, improved livestock herd management 
and improved breeds (large ruminant releases less methane per kg of body weight than smaller 
animals). In the activity, specific principles of improved herd management will include culling and/or sale 
of intermittently productive or barren cows and weak or injured or low-productive small ruminants. By 
simply applying aggressive culling to existing herds, and selling 80% of male calves at 2 years old and 
male small ruminants at 1.5 years, livestock production is expected to rise by at least 10%. 
Component 3: Climate-sensitive Value Chains Development  
121. The role of Component 3 is to strengthen the sustainability of the investment in carbon sequestration carried 
out in Component 2 by creating economic opportunities with limited risk, in order to decrease pressure on and 
degradation of natural resources in the project intervention areas, thus contributing also to the enhanced resilience. The 
investment under Component 3 is referring to the provision of concessional investment through activation of special credit 
lines and provision of loans by RKDF (Activity 3.1.3) and technical assistance that demonstrate success in rangeland 
management. Through provision of capacity development and the increased access to credit (via RKDF co-financing), 
Component 3 will support the development of the selected value chains’ participants towards higher efficiency and 
competitiveness of the marketed product. Project activities in Component 3 will facilitate access to the external credit line 
provided by RKDF (senior loan as co-financing). This would eventually contribute to decreasing pressure on and 
degradation of natural resources in the project intervention areas. The component will promote Forest Stewardship Council 
(FSC) Ecosystem Services Certification that will enable local producers market their products and services with the specific 
FSC label, e.g. water from responsibly managed forests” or support running green tourism businesses. The main selection 
criteria 50  for the value chains will include low carbon footprint, market potential, financial viability, environmental 
 
48 See Sainju et al. (2017) Root biomass, root/shoot ratio, and soil water content under perennial grasses with different nitrogen rates. Field Crops Research 210:183-191. 
This research was carried out in the northern Great Plains of America in an environment of cold winters and warm summers similar to Kyrgyzstan. One of the three perennial 
grasses studied was Bromus inermis which is endemic to Kyrgyzstan. 
49 An important consequence of pasture rotation is that greater ground cover by plants and leaf litter traps rainwater where it falls and increases water infiltration into the 
soil, promoting root growth. A deeper and more extensive root system will confer greater resilience to drought. The mechanism of benefits from pasture rotation is control 
over grazing pressure and more soil water available for plant growth. Moreover, a complement to higher infiltration rates is a reduction in overland water movement and 
the associated erosion. Erosion is manifest in mudslides and land slumps accompanied by muddy streams, flooding and bridge destruction. Erosion must be addressed at 
a landscape scale, and rotational grazing management achieves that objective. 
50 Reference: Appendix to Chapter 5 of the Feasibility Study.

=== PAGE 37 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
sustainability and raw material sourcing area within the core Project Area (the four districts of Ak-Talaa, Toguz-Toro, Suzak 
and Uzgen). Specifically on the livestock sector, the Component will also support operations that aim to reduce pressure 
on pastures through accelerated offtake of animals. Ultimately, the component will not only foster sustainable use of natural 
resources but will also provide economic opportunities for entrepreneurial growth among women engaged in non-timber 
forest product (NTFP) activities. Households in target areas are highly dependent from the direct use of forests and 
rangelands and the ecosystem services provided by both (see the baseline assessment carried out by FAO with Kyrgyz 
institutions and communities in Annex 6.b Baseline Atlas (Part 3 and 4)). Target areas are exposed to climate change, and 
the main agri-food value chains where rural households are involved (e.g. livestock, non-timber forest products such as 
nuts and other dried fruits and beekeeping) are vulnerable due to lack of diversification, limited adaptation capacity of 
stakeholders and prevalence of unsustainable practices (see Annex 2, Feasibility Study, Chapter 1 (pages 42-46)).  
122. Component 3 includes one output:  
3.1:  Selected value chains are climate sensitive and producers adopt carbon optimization technologies and 
practices  
123. Objective. This Component will provide capacity development across a number of carefully selected value chains, 
and will support establishing direct linkages between producers and corporate buyers operating on end markets and having 
strong green orientated corporate social responsibility. This Component will support the investment in carbon sequestration 
under Component 2 by providing local communities with the access to skills and technologies conducing to 
sustainable use of forests, improved livestock management practices and strong linkages to the corporate 
markets. Component 3 is structured in a first preparatory phase (see Activities 3.1.1 and 3.1.2) and an investment phase 
(see Activity 3.1.3). Targeted value chains include non-timber forest products (NTFP) such as tree nuts (walnuts, almonds, 
pistachio), dried fruits (dried apricot, dried plum), and fruit orchards (cherries, apples), beekeeping, but also other value 
chains that can complement the rural smallholders income (as an incentive for diversification), including poultry, turkey, 
etc. Certification of NTFP according FSC standard51 and other voluntary international standards such as HACCP, Fair 
Trade, Organic and GlobalGAP to enable direct linkages with end markets will be the driving force towards a paradigm 
shift in forest use and local economies growth. The FSC certification will guarantee gender equality in employment 
practices, training opportunities, awarding of contracts, processes of engagement and management activities. By 
implementing innovative climate-resilient agricultural practices, value addition must be achieved using resource-efficient 
technologies such as solar dryers, drip irrigation, solar pumps, no-till technique, etc. The Project will also support livestock 
operations that aim to reduce pressure on pastures and improve their health (e.g., rational feeding practices) (cf. Annex 2 
Feasibility Study, Chapter 7 (Section: Climate-sensitive Value Chain Models). The main selection criteria for the value 
chains will include low carbon footprint, market potential, financial viability and raw material sourcing area within the core 
Project Area. In addition, the value chains and the actors will be selected according to the potential to contribute to income 
diversification from unsustainable livestock or forestry practices, which represents in turn a contribution to their resilience 
to climate change, and a way to ensure sustainability of the forestry and rangeland investments promoted under 
Component 2 (cf. Annex 2 Feasibility Study, Chapter 4 (paragraph 55: General criteria and approach for identification of 
eligible private sector actors and value chains)). Additional criteria for identification of the potential End-borrowers is their 
capacity to procure raw materials from the Project Area. Due review and selection of the End-borrowers will be performed 
under Component 3. Final selection of beneficiaries and their value chains will be carried out by the AE. The analysis for 
investment under Component 3 shows substantially positive financial benefits and rate of return (cf. Annex 2 Feasibility 
Study, Chapter 7, Section: Project Benefits). These results are derived from the increased access to the required financing 
(loans) – which will be made available by the project co-financing, coupled with training, demonstrations and advisory 
services, provided by the project. 
124. Preparatory activities.  
3.1.1 
Select value chains in operation and provide technical support to the value chain 
actors/organizations for climate-sensitive business development. This Activity will include:  
a. Conduct and publish an end-markets assessment. This will include: 
- 
End markets assessment, covering key international markets52 for the Kyrgyz NTFPs and periodical 
monitoring of market trends, including supply planning calendars and gaps, existing bottlenecks and 
risks.  
- 
Market prospecting campaign on national and international markets, to identify potential buyers 
operating in premium segments and fostering environmental and social responsibilities as their 
corporate commitment; 
- 
Resource inventory, using geospatial tools followed by a thorough Market Development Plan (will 
include introduction of Geographic Indication, especially for the walnut).  
 
51 FSC-NEPCon Interim National Standard of Kyrgyz Republic. The project builds largely on the existing positive experience of FSC-certified forest users in Jalal-Abad.   
52 See Working Paper on NTFP.

=== PAGE 38 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
b. Raise awareness on market opportunities and requirements, including the design and rollout of the 
Kyrgyz Tree Nuts & Dried Fruits information and trade portal. The portal will provide buyers with a 
comprehensive information on the Kyrgyz offer in tree nuts, dried fruit and other NTFPs (including 
beekeeping, see details in the EFA, in Annex 2, Chapter 7, and details in Annex 3), sustainably and 
responsibly sourced, enhancing practices for marketing and increasing business opportunities for FSC 
certified leaseholders.  
c. Support to agribusinesses operating in the selected value chains, targeting Kyrgyz companies 
sourcing (or interested to source) raw material within the core Project Area to upgrade their supply chain by 
introducing good farming practices, voluntary certification, optimized logistics and robust marketing. 
Potential for women’s participation in and benefitting from the value chains will be considered in selecting 
the operators (FAO guideline on gender sensitive value chains will be a reference). 
3.1.2 
Identify and mobilize operating agribusinesses in the selected value chains via information 
campaign and value chain mapping for climate-sensitive business practices. This Activity will 
include:  
a. Map and analyse selected value chains actors, comprising: (i) performance assessment of businesses 
interested to take part in the project, receive assistance to conduct digital mapping of their respective value 
chains; and (ii) analysis of the raw material suppliers’ performance, for value chain upgrade business 
(action) plan.  
b. Develop and upgrade climate-sensitive value chains, following experimented practices such as:  
- 
Accompanying the preparation business proposal. Agribusinesses, where necessary, jointly with 
the supplying communities, prepare and submit for appraisal business proposals for value chain 
upgrade/development. Project provide support to properly design and evaluate business plans; 
- 
Developing technical capacity through training and reference material provision to collectors of NTFP, 
farmers, mediators and agribusinesses;  
- 
Providing financial literacy. Regardless of involvement in value chains supported by the project, 
villagers’ awareness on green economy will be raised and training on financial literacy provided. At least 
50% of the trainees will be women. 
- 
Support certification. Based on targeted market/specific client, project participants will receive support 
to adopt international standards requirement and undergo the third party audit.  
- 
Enhancing transparency within the value chains, using geotagging and block-chain principles, 
established of certified logistical centres, and other modalities conducive to transparent transactions;  
- 
Promote marketing. These activities include project-supported product marketing, testing of chemical 
parameters of selected NTFP, co-financing of exporters’ participation at international trade shows, 
design and dissemination of promotional material. It will include also the facilitation of the establishment 
of an apex organization to promote export (Export Promotion Secretariat).  
- 
Promote women participation. The project will provide assistance in establishment of the chain of 
custody and empowerment of woman through trainings and opportunities for business development. 
 
125. Investment activities under Component 3.  
3.1.3 
Activate special credit lines and provide loans for eligible value chain actors in communities/ 
entrepreneurs/ enterprises in the project-relevant value chains. 
The key investment activity under Component 3 will include the activation of special credit lines for project-
relevant value chains and entrepreneurs beneficiaries under Activity 3.1.1 (“End-borrowers”). Supported by 
the technical assistance provided under Activity 3.1.1 and 3.1.2, small, medium and larger enterprises in the 
Project Area (as well as other areas with economic connections to the Project Areas) will have access to the 
credit lines. The loans will range from US$ 10,000 to US$ 300,000, with the average amounts about 
US$100,000 extended to about 150 End-borrowers (as part of project’s beneficiaries). The loans will be 
provided by RKDF, as the Executing Entity and Co-financier, through pre-identified five commercial banks 
(see Involved Institutions below), sub-contracted by RKDF, at 5 percent p.a. in US$ and at 10 percent in 
local currency, for a term of about 3-5 years, to existing enterprises representing eligible value chains. 
Indicative loan purposes include: packaging equipment, equipment for laboratories, vacuum and solar driers, 
agricultural machinery, greenhouses, nurseries for tree plantations and commercial orchards, eco-tourism, 
agricultural produce processing, etc. In addition to these favourable lending conditions, the capacity 
development support implemented under this component will provide further incentives to the financial

=== PAGE 39 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
institutions to on-lend to the target beneficiaries through the reduction of credit risk and increased 
creditworthiness of loan recipients. 
In order to reduce forest and pasture degradation and to change the behaviour of keeping an alarming 
number of unproductive animals as a source of cash income for safety net, communities need a parallel path 
towards increased efficiency and productivity of the livestock production system along with a progressive 
continuous creation of alternative (to livestock) income opportunities able to offer at least the same incentives 
for economic return (e.g., orchards and high value non-timber forest products). This shift will not only reduce 
the pressure on resources (increased carbon sink and enhanced ecosystem benefits) but also reduce 
emissions (as more productive animals raised using good practices emit less). These models will be 
regarded in the activity as a potential set of project investments and this set can be flexibly adapted within 
the project implementation.  
This Activity will select value chains including walnut; however, value chains or raw material is not the only 
entry point for this Component, which besides development of orchards, nurseries, greenhouses, 
beekeeping, beef, includes logistics, cold storages, and solar driers (See Annex 2, Chapter 7 and Annex 3, 
as well as Annex 9, Working Paper “Value Chains Development”).  
Involved institutions. The credit line funding will be provided by RKDF through local commercial banks that 
already reach out to the project target areas. Initially, 5 commercial banks will participate in the disbursement 
of the credit line (listed alphabetically): (i) Ayil Bank; (ii) Bank Kyrgyzstan; (iii) BTA Bank; (iv) Kompanion 
Bank; and (v) RSK Bank. 
The activity will be carried out in close collaboration with RKDF and the partner banks to identify prospective 
beneficiaries within the eligible value chains and ensure the complementarity of the technical assistance 
provided under Component 3 and related credit resources. While criteria will be set within the project 
inception phase, following the rationale of Component 3 and in line with the project’s theory of change, as 
first and utmost criterion for the identification of eligible value chains and private sector actors is the potential 
contribution to the solidification the efforts of the project for mitigation through forestry and rangeland 
investment. At first, the value chains and actors will be selected according to the potential to contribute to 
income diversification from unsustainable livestock or forestry practices. This will constitute the building block 
for both the mitigation and the increased resilience objectives. Additional general principles will be developed 
during the project inception phase, and will include criteria such as: (a) readiness to expand the business 
and include / procure from smallholders in the project target areas; (b) readiness to follow international and 
EU standards; (c) Experience to work with sustainable technologies of harvesting / drying / processing; and 
(d) overall past financial / economic performance.  
This senior loan input by RKDF will follow the grant inputs considered under Component 3, sequentially as 
a co-financing of the grant component by RKDF. The project will provide de-risking for the participation of 
private entrepreneurs beneficiaries (“End-borrowers”) in the financial market, and will work in parallel to 
enhance the overall financial literacy in rural areas (in collaboration with the National Bank) and financial 
inclusion. Moreover, the approach of Component 3 is to first identify selected value chains, and map their 
actors, before working with selected entrepreneurs and leading entities beneficiaries with (a) potential for 
expansion of their activities in the Project Area; and (b) potential for expansion of outsourcing their raw 
material in the target areas. See Annex 2, Chapter 4, Appendix 3, which summarizes the significance of 
private sector involvement in the project. 
Indicative outputs and respective targets will include about 150 entrepreneurs beneficiaries (End-
borrowers) in selected value chains who will access the loans financed by RKDF.  
126. The proposed approach of the Component will support the required diversification and enhanced efficiency, 
productivity and competitiveness of existing economic activities in the highly degraded target areas, based on leveraging 
available local financial resources and the provision of highly targeted technical assistance to carefully selected value 
chains. The total estimated value of the investment is US$ 16.5 million, including US$ 15 million of the RKDF-financed 
credit line and US$ 1.5 million of beneficiaries’ contributions.  
127. The use of subsidized resources provided by RKDF may present a risk to the sustainability of the project intervention 
in the unlikely situation that such resources are no longer available; at the same time, due to its size (US$ 545 m in assets 
as of Dec. 2017) and the development mandate, RKDF will continue to be able to provide resources at favourable 
conditions to the economy of the country. The technical assistance provided under Component 3 should additionally 
contribute to the mitigation of this risk by supporting the competitiveness of the selected value chains. 
Project Management Component (PMC) 
128. The activity under this Component will establish a Project Management Unit (PMU). The PMU will be physically 
located under SAEPF headquarters. The PMU will be responsible for day-to-day project management, providing human

=== PAGE 40 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
resources management, financial and procurement services and management, coordinate and monitor M&E of the 
project’s activities, generate work plans and budgets, project reporting and documentation. The PMU will be headed by a 
Senior International Technical Adviser for forestry, rangeland and governance will be recruited by the project. The 
Technical Adviser will be recruited and have overall responsibility for preparing the annual work plans and budgets, 
technical documents for procurements, terms of references of technical experts, clearing them with FAO, the OP and the 
donor and obtaining Steering Committee clearances. The Adviser will also have overall responsibilities of capacity 
development of OPs’ and of PMU’s staff and consultants on technical and managerial aspects (including facilitation for 
procurement and financial, human resources and quality assurance for overall project implementation). The Technical 
adviser will be supported by the PMU staff, including a Project Coordinator, in charge of the day to day management of 
the project and coordination between all operating partners and project stakeholders, a Financial Specialist, a Procurement 
Specialist, an M&E team leader, a secretary and a driver. The PMU will include the Expert Group, comprised of various 
technical expertise comprising the Gender and Social Development Specialist and the Safeguards Specialist. The M&E 
and Planning team leader, under the overall supervision of the Project Coordinator, will be in charge of the overall planning, 
M&E and learning process of the project, and will coordinate a team of technical expert (part of the Expert Group) 
composed of an M&E specialist, a GIS specialist and a communication expert. The PMU will also liaise with FAO-KG, 
ARIS, MAFIM and RKDF to ensure coordination of planning and in the achievement of the project’s results, and with FAO 
for technical assistance and support in implementation. 
Project area and beneficiary selection 
 
129. Project support will be delivered in four districts: Ak-Talaa in Naryn region, Toguz-Toro and Suzak in Jalal-Abad 
region, and Uzgen in Osh region (“Project Area”). The selection of these districts, as well as the selection of sites and 
beneficiaries, is further summarized in Table C.3.1. The Project will not foresee any transfer of ownership for the beneficiary 
contribution.  
 
Table C.3.1. Selection of districts, sites and beneficiaries 
Level / type/ 
related 
project 
component 
Criteria / process 
Stage / timing 
Region and 
District 
selection 
The primary target group of the Project are all the users of 
pasture and forest resources (both formal and informal) in the 
target area of the four project Districts (Ak-Talaa, Toguz-
Toro, Uzgen and Suzak) in the selected in three Regions 
(Naryn, Jalal-Abad, and Osh Regions).  
The selection of  the regions and districts of Project Area was 
based on the assessment of a large number of data sets at 
national and sub-national scale and using the Earth Map tool 
as well as a series of vulnerability analysis and according to 
the following criteria: 
a. Exposure level of ecosystems and communities to natural 
hazards triggered by climate change (see Figure C.2.1 of 
the funding proposal, and Figure 19: Map of levels of 
vulnerability to climate change in Kyrgyzstan, Annex 2 
Page 30 for hot spot identification; also see Figure 29-30, 
Annex 2, Pages 41-42); 
b. Vulnerability of ecosystems and communities to climate 
change (Criteria: 1. Fragile mountain ecosystems 
characterized by pastures and limited spruce forests; 2. 
Relevant presence of pasture and of walnuts forests 
(biodiversity hot spot) currently exposed changes of main 
climatic variables; 3. Fragile mountain ecosystems 
characterized by pastures and limited spur forests; and 4. 
Presence of pistachios and juniper forests currently 
decreasing due to climate change). See Table 2, Annex 2 
Page 34; 
c. Mitigation potential in terms of forest and pasture 
rehabilitation (Criteria: Availability of land suitable for 
forest and pasture restoration investments). See also 
Completed during project design. The 
following districts have been prioritized, and 
constitute the ‘Project Area’. 
 
In Naryn region: Ak-Talaa district. 
 
In Jalal-Abad region: Toguz-Toro and Suzak 
districts. 
 
In Osh region: Uzgen district.

=== PAGE 41 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
Para 83-85 of the proposal, and Table 2, Annex 2 Page 
34; 
d. Dependency of communities from natural resource 
exploitation (see Table 2, Annex 2 Page 34 for detailed 
criteria);   
e. Socio-economic vulnerability of communities ((see Table 
2, Annex 2 Page 34 for detailed criteria); and 
f. Livelihood-household resilience survey results  (resilience 
structure matrix, see e.g. Annex 2 pages 45-46) 
 
Beneficiary 
institutions at 
national level 
for the following 
Activities:  
1.1.1; 1.1.2; 
1.1.3; 1.1.4; 
1.1.5; 1.2.1; 
2.1.1; 2.1.2; 
2.1.3.  
The State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry 
(SAEPF), the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and 
Melioration (MAFIM), the Ministry of Emergency Situations 
(MES), the Agency for Local Self Government and Interethnic 
Relations (ALSGIR), the Climate Finance Center (CFC), the 
Ministry of Economy (ME), and the Ministry of Culture, 
Information and Tourism (MoCIT).  
 
Eligibility criteria for national level stakeholders include 
institutions involved in planning, management and monitoring 
of natural resource base (forests, rangeland) in the context of 
climate change, institutions mandated to stimulate on socio-
economic development, and institutions signatories of the 
National Spatial Infrastructure Memorandum of 
Understanding. 
 
 
 
 
Identification of primary beneficiaries was 
completed during project design. Additionally 
research and educational institutions and 
NGOs will be inclusively considered based on 
the discussion at the Project Steering 
Committee and final approval by the 
respective Executing Entity under the overall 
and final confirmation of the AE during the 
project implementation. 
 
Contractual agreements required for co-
financing contribution by selected beneficiaries 
will be signed by: a) SAEPF and ARIS for the 
activities on forest land and rangeland; and b) 
SAEPF, ARIS and FAO for the other co-
financing contribution. Beneficiaries that have 
the role of both Executing Entities and Co-
financiers of the Project will be directly 
contracted with AE (i.e. SAEPF, ARIS).   
Beneficiary 
Institutions at 
local level for 
the following 
Activities:  
1.3.1; 2.1.1; 
2.1.2; 2.1.3; 
2.1.4; 2.1.5. 
 
The beneficiaries are:  
Leskhozes (Forest Enterprises), National Parks, self-
government bodies (ayil okmutu and aiyl kenesh), women’s 
councils, Pasture Users’ Unions, Community Landscape 
Management Groups (CLMGs) and other natural resource 
users groups.  
CLMGs will include all member-based community 
organizations (e.g., Pasture Users Unions, Women’s groups, 
Forest Committees, Water Users’ Associations), forestry 
enterprises and Parks, self-government bodies (ayil okmotu) 
with direct mandate to plan, manage or monitor the natural 
resources base in the Project Area. 
 
Identification of primary beneficiaries was 
completed during project design. The final 
selection of beneficiaries will be carried out by 
the Executing Entity (ARIS under the oversight 
of the AE), reviewed by the Project Steering 
Committee and finally confirmed by AE during 
the project implementation. Contractual 
agreements required for co-financing 
contribution by selected beneficiaries will be 
signed by: a) SAEPF and ARIS for the 
activities on forest land and rangeland; and b) 
SAEPF, ARIS and FAO for the other co-
financing contribution. 
Climate 
sensitive value 
chain producers 
in the Project 
Area supplying 
raw material or 
participating in 
the selected 
value chains 
benefitting of 
Activities: 3.1.1 
and 3.1.2 
The beneficiaries for the technical assistance should include 
(depending on actual demand and on the nature of the 
loans): 
• Fruit and nut orchards: The number of beneficiaries based 
on 1-ha was estimated at 3100 households assuming 
small scale (1-ha) orchards. 
• Small-scale nurseries (100 m2): 100 beneficiaries 
• Solar dryer investments : 100 beneficiaries 
• vacuum dryer investments: at least 10 entrepreneurs with 
265 small-scale suppliers.  
• 10 cold storage facilities plan to source from 2 260 small-
scale suppliers annually.   
• Conservation agriculture: about 400 adopters, each 
assumed to manage at least 10-ha agricultural land.  
• Greenhouses ((1000 m2 and 300 m2): about 70 
entrepreneurs.  
Identification of primary beneficiaries was 
completed during project design. The final 
selection of beneficiaries will be carried out by 
RKDF (Executing Entity and Co-financier of 
the Project) under the oversight of AE (FAO), 
reviewed by the Project Steering Committee 
and finally confirmed by AE during the project 
implementation.  Contractual agreements 
required for co-financing contribution by 
selected beneficiaries will be signed by: a) 
SAEPF and ARIS for the activities on forest 
land and rangeland; and b) SAEPF, ARIS and 
FAO for the other co-financing contribution.

=== PAGE 42 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
• Beekeeping, broiler and turkey raising: about 220 
households / entrepreneurs. 
Agribusinesses 
participating in 
the project 
supported value 
chains 
benefitting of 
Activity 3.1.3 
(“End-
borrowers”) 
The main selection criteria for the entrepreneurs beneficiaries 
(“End-borrowers”) benefitting from RKDF-financed loans will 
include low carbon footprint, market potential, financial 
viability, environmental sustainability and raw material 
sourcing area within the core Project Area, as further 
developed in paragraph 127 above .  While the project will 
prioritize entrepreneurs from the selected 4 districts of the 
Project Area, the project cannot exclude that it may include 
also entrepreneurs from other areas (the total number of 
entrepreneurs beneficiaries will be 150).  The selection 
criteria for “external” entrepreneurs will be as defined above 
plus the level of business linkages with the Project Area.  
For the avoidance of doubt, selected external entrepreneurs 
are also End-borrowers.   
The final selection of entrepreneurs 
beneficiaries (“End-borrowers”) will be carried 
out by the Executing Entity (RKDF) under the 
oversight of FAO, reviewed by the Project 
Steering Committee and finally confirmed by 
AE during the project implementation. 
Contractual agreements with selected End-
borrowers will be signed by RKDF or local 
commercial banks accredited by RKDF 
(including beneficiaries’ co-financing 
contribution). 
 
 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
130. Ensuring Country Ownership, the project will be co-executed by FAO (which will also have a coordinating role as 
Accredited Entity, providing quality assurance to the overall implementation of the project activities), SAEPF and ARIS. A 
detailed description of the roles and responsibilities of the EEs in included below: 
131. The State Agency for Environment Protection and Forestry (SAEPF) under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic 
is responsible for the formulation and implementation of policy around environmental protection, preservation of 
biodiversity, sustainable use of natural resources, development of forestry and hunting enterprises, and ensuring the 
ecological security of the State. The major tasks of the SAEPF are to develop and implement policy; oversee state control 
of the implementation of legislation, protection, and use of natural resources; undertake inventory and assessment of 
natural resources; and disseminate information about the environment. As such, the SAEPF acts as the National 
Designated Authority (NDA) at the GCF, and works in close cooperation with other sectorial ministries in order to integrate 
climate change considerations in the country’s development strategy.  
 
132. The Kyrgyz Republic’s Community Development and Investment Agency (ARIS) was established in October, 2013 
as a non-commercial organization. The supreme body is Supervisory Board with 21 members. ARIS mission is to support 
sustainable poverty alleviation by providing assistance to local communities and local self-governmental bodies in resolving 
local social and economic problems by strengthening their capacity in determining and prioritizing local issues, developing 
investment and action plans, mobilizing resources, as well as developing, implementing and managing investments aimed 
at resolution of local priority issues.     
133. ARIS operates in accordance with the following principles, including: (a) autonomy; (b) impartiality; (c) involvement; 
(d) management; (e) transparency; (f) cost effectiveness; (g) decentralization; (h) sustainability of sub-projects/micro-
projects; (i) environmental conscience.  
134. FAO has extensive experience in supporting countries in the fields of Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation, 
Resilience Building and Disaster Risk Management. Having under implementation more than 138 climate and resilience 
projects worth over US$ 600 million, the Organization has the experience and technical capacity to manage the requested 
grant and to properly support Kyrgyzstan where it is already actively supporting the State in adapting to climate change 
with over US$ 20 million already mobilized to green its main value chains.  
135. FAO has collaborated with Kyrgyzstan since 1993, when the country joined the Organization. First opened in 2009, 
the Country Office was upgraded in 2012 and a FAO Representative appointed in 2014. Technical expertise provided by 
FAO covers the agriculture sector, including crop, livestock and fisheries projects and support to sustainable land and 
forest management in the face of climate change. The FAO assistance in Kyrgyzstan is planned around the 2018-2022 
FAO Country Programming Framework (CPF), with climate change adaptation and mitigation as key strategic elements. 
136. Through the FAO Investment Centre, the Organization is providing technical support to sizable investments by the 
World Bank and IFAD in the following areas, NRM (land, water, forest, and pasture), value chain (VC) development, 
livestock, community development and climate change adaptation. FAO is also active at the regional level where the 
Organization provides analysis and advice in policy reform for agriculture, land tenure and natural resources. The

=== PAGE 43 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
Organization’s technical assistance covers institution building, development of knowledge and competencies, and 
exchange of experience among countries facing the challenges of transition. 
137. Currently FAO is supporting Kyrgyzstan with the GCF Readiness Program and with funds allocated by the GEF to 
address community based natural resource management in five oblasts of the Kyrgyz Republic. While the first is still in its 
starting up phases the second one has already passed its mid-term evaluation. Recommendation from the Mid-Term 
Review (MTR) have been discussed during national consultations and have highly considered in the development of the 
present concept. Additionally, FAO had been assisting SAEPF and the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and 
Melioration since the country’s independence and has sponsored key assessments and reports such as the Integrated 
Assessment of Natural Resources 2008-2010 and the National Forest Inventory of 2011. 
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
138. Non-timber forest products. Natural, low sugar and safe products are the main trends in the international market 
supporting increasing consumption of edible nuts and dried fruit. The production starts to be stimulated by the growing 
demand for “healthy snacks”, following natural processing methods (sun dried vs. industrial dehydration). Importantly, the 
role of traditionally dominating supplying countries is reducing as importers seek to diversify their sourcing options. In 
Kyrgyzstan, government and businesses have in general low awareness on the potential of NTFP. Globally, consumers – 
especially in Europe and North America – are increasingly aware of, and concerned by, the origins of the products they 
buy and the processes that go into producing them. They want to make responsible decisions about what they buy, 
weighing up social and environment credentials. Cosmetics, confectionary and healthy snacks are other potential markets 
for the Kyrgyz NTFPs (see FS for more details).  
139. Thus, Kyrgyz exports of walnut in 2017 has reached 1 253 MT, 44 percent up compared to 2016, generating US$ 5.8 
million. Thanks to several development initiatives launched by the donor community and the certification schemes such as 
FSC, Fair Trade, Organic and HACCP brought into the value chain as its critical element securing quality, sustainability 
and accountability, the average FOB price has doubled: from 2.6 US$/kg in 2016 to 4.6 in 2017. As walnuts exported to 
Turkey – main products exported in NTFP category – are then re-exported, mainly to EU, not carrying any information on 
their true country of origin, during last five years, Kyrgyz economy has “lost” US$ 14 million failing to valorize its unique 
offer: the Arslanbob walnut.  
140. Narrowing down to the core Project Area, walnuts can be harvested on some 24 thousand hectares of forest. Fruit 
orchards occupy 838 ha of land with Suzak representing 51 percent, Ak-Taala 24 percent, and Uzgen – 21 percent. This 
area is specialized in apricot (fresh and dried) and plum (dried).   
141. Red meat market. Exceptional palatability traits of Kyrgyz beef and lamb are valued by consumers in the Eurasian 
Economic Union countries, Islamic Republic of Iran, China and Gulf States. Export performance is, however, significantly 
lower than committed quantities as organizing batches of animals sourced from a multitude of unorganized small producers 
is challenging. Thus, out of 340 tonnes of mutton contacted by the Iranian buyers in 2017, Kirgizstan was able to supply 
only 11 percent. Direct linkages between farmers and agribusinesses coupled with efficiency gains through improved herd 
management, including intensification, are crucial to address the bottleneck on the supply side.  
142. The main reason of such missed opportunity for export lies in the highly fragmented production structure: over 90 
percent of livestock are owned by smallholders raising on average two heads of cattle and about 8 small ruminants. Such 
ownership limits investment and keeps livestock productivity low. In fact, large seasonal variations in animal body weights 
indicate that animal feeding is geared towards animal survival rather than commercial production. Nine animals out of ten 
are sold live in traditional animal markets. Informal marketing model is advantageous for intermediaries but leaves little (to 
zero) income to animal owners and limits modern meat industry development. Little to no profit on herder’s side vs. 
generous margins of intermediaries discourages the participation of smallholders in the value chain and force them to 
increase their stock instead of investing in productivity. 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
143. The total investment and incremental recurrent Project costs, including physical and price contingencies, are 
estimated at about US$ 49.59 million. For activities relating to procurement of services through FAO, according to Project 
Agreement signed with the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, taxers are not applicable. Section 7 of the Convention on 
the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations provide, inter alia that the United Nations and its subsidiary organs 
are exempt from all direct taxes, except for utilities services, and is exempt from customs duties and charges of a similar 
nature in respect of items imported or exported for its official use. For services and goods procured directly by the 
Government of Kyrgyz Republic implementing partners, then national procedures apply, which entail the payment of 
Domestic Tax (VAT) amounting to 12% where applicable. With respect to taxes that maybe levied on any form of 
expenditures to be made out of the GCF Proceeds for the financing of the Project, the Accredited Entity shall apply the 
same treatment that it would apply to its own resources used for the same purposes, and make best efforts to obtain

=== PAGE 44 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
exemptions from tax payments. In the event that the Project is not granted the relevant tax exemptions provided under the 
Project Agreement, any applicable taxes shall be borne by the Project and the GCF will not make additional contributions 
for payment of taxes.  
144. The Project will not foresee any required licenses/permits/land right or rights in relation to land. For forestry, the 
project will invest only in state forests fund land or in municipal land. For rangeland rehabilitation, the project will support 
investments in private lands that are legally owned by beneficiaries and reported in the national cadastre, or in state land 
fund (including rangeland), regulated by the national laws. Investments under climate sensitive value chains will be private 
and on privately owned land. No specific permits are required for the activities of the project. 
145. Any greenhouse gas emission reductions achieved will be treated in accordance with Clause 23.05 of the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) with FAO. CO2eq emission reduction will be treated as public good, monitored by 
the project and by the national authorities and reported to UNFCCC as part of regular reporting under INDCs. 
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
146. Overall governance. The governance and institutional arrangements proposed in this section are fruit of 
discussions and agreement with the selected project operational partners and co-financiers, including the SAEPF, ARIS, 
MAFIM and the Russian Kyrgyz Development Fund (RKDF). The CS-FOR project will be implemented under the overall 
political direction and guidance of the Climate Change Coordination Commission (CCCC), the national institution 
responsible for climate change, chaired by the First Vice-Prime Minister of the Kyrgyz Republic, with the Director of the 
SAEPF as the Deputy Chair. The CCCC ensures multi-sector coordination of all activities in the Kyrgyz Republic related 
to climate change, and is comprised of the heads of all key ministries and divisions, and representatives of the civil, 
academic and business sectors. By establishing the CCCC at the level where it has convening power, the Kyrgyz 
Government intends to make climate change an intrinsic part of economic development. The Commission is already 
operational and has a mandate to coordinate climate change activities across sectors and projects in Kyrgyzstan (see CS-
FOR organization structure in Figure C.7.1). The GCF Accredited Entity of the project is the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO). During the country consultation process, SAEPF, ARIS and FAO Country Office were identified 
primarily as multiple Executing Entities that ensure the execution of the GCF project under the strong country ownership. 
The project beneficiaries will be Leskhozes, national parks, local self-government bodies, community organizations, private 
sector in the Project Area, as listed in detail in Table C.3.1. The co-financers of the project are SAEPF, RKDF, the Ministry 
of Agriculture, Food Industries and Melioration (MAFIM), ARIS, Beneficiaries and FAO. 
Project Steering Committee - country ownership of decision-making process 
147. The CS-FOR will establish a National Stakeholders Platform (NSP) under the CCCC (coordinating with all ongoing 
efforts to ensure stakeholders coordination under the Readiness programme), acting as Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) that will be providing policy and operational guidance to the project’s implementation. The PSC will meet on a 
biannual basis unless there are issues to be discussed in between meetings. The PSC will be integrated and include by 
decision-making officials, appointed as focal points by partner institutions to guarantee the country driven decision-making 
processes to achieve the GCF project target: SAEPF, Climate Finance Centre (CFC), ARIS, RKDF, MAFIM), the Pasture 
Department (under MAFIM), State Agency for Local Self Government and Interethnic Relations (SALSGIER), the Ministry 
of Emergency Situations (MES), Kyrgyz Hydromet (under MES), the State Registration Agency, and the FAO 
Representation in Kyrgyzstan. There will be also selected representatives of the civil society and private sector (women 
and men) participating as observers in the PSC/National Stakeholders Platform. Representatives of beneficiaries such as 
participating communities/CLMGs will be observers of the PSC and will be invited to the meetings of their special interest 
and concern. 
148. The PSC functions will: (i) ensure the quality of results, and the sustainability and impacts of the project in line with 
the policy direction; (ii) approve the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) to be sent to FAO; (iii) approve six monthly 
project progress reports to be sent to FAO; (iv) approve adjustments to the distribution of budget between items on the 
basis of information provided by the Project Management; (v) approve proposals of adjustments to indicators and the 
targets of results and outputs, based on information provided by the Project Management Unit; (vi) approve possible 
modifications to the project implementation agreements; and (vii) invite competent professionals to participate in PSC 
meetings, in accordance with the issues under consideration. The PSC will also support project’s activities by promoting 
results and approaches within the Government and ensuring mainstreaming among political decision makers.  
Project execution  
149. Ensuring the country ownership, the project will be primarily co-executed by SAEPF, ARIS and FAO-KG (which will 
also have a coordinating role as Accredited Entity, providing quality assurance to the overall implementation of the project 
activities). Additionally, the Russian Kyrgyz Development Fund (RKDF) will manage and oversee the loan fund (Section 
B.1) under Component 3 as an Executing Entity. SAEPF will be an Executing Entity of the project and host a PMU to be 
located under SAEPF headquarters. SAEPF will be in charge of operationalization of PMU and achieving results under 
selected outputs and activities (or parts of them), where SAEPF holds the highest comparative advantages. ARIS, an

=== PAGE 45 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
Executing Entity of the project, will be in charge of ensuring coordination of planning and in the execution of project activities 
where ARIS holds highest comparative advantages. SAEPF and ARIS will be executing the project activities under FAO’s 
legal agreement instruments such as Letters of Agreement (LOA) and/or the Operational Partner Implementation Modality 
(OPIM) according to the rules and regulations of FAO.  
150. The project will be jointly executed by a Project Management Unit under SAEPF, in coordination with FAO-KG (as 
Executing Entity for quality assurance), ARIS (as Executing Entity including local coordination function) and RKDF53 
according to the respective areas of expertise. FAO will involve national Executing Entities (SAEPF and ARIS) under the 
Operational Partner Implementation Modality (OPIM) according to FAO’s rules and regulations for the Project. OPIM 
provides a framework for informed decision-making on the engagement of FAO in partnership arrangements. Such setup 
will support strong country ownership and execution of the project but also serve the capacity development objectives of 
the project.54 In order to ensure SAEPF and ARIS’ capacity to implement the project as identified potential executing 
entities, FAO has commissioned an independent Operational Partners’ assessment covering their programme, financial 
and operations management policies, procedures, systems and internal controls. The assessment reported an overall low 
risk, with moderate risks in procurement procedures. Based on the risk levels of the assessment results, FAO will mitigate 
potential risks by carefully selecting the scope of executions and identifying e.g. low risk procurement procedures based 
on the type and amount of goods and service contracts. Additionally, FAO will also support in strengthening the execution 
capacity of partner executing entities through the Operational Partners Agreement, to be signed between FAO and the 
respective Executing Entity. 
151. In its role of Accredited Entity, FAO will maintain overall accountability on the project implemented by the OPs, and 
will perform independent audits and spot checks, besides retaining a role of executing entity for quality assurance 
throughout the project. FAO will organize spot checks and audits of the OPs during the implementation of the Project under 
OPIM. Independent spot-checks and audits for OPIM will be performed subject to the standards, scope, frequency and 
timing as decided by FAO in accordance with FAO’s relevant rules. Audits will cover financial transactions and internal 
controls related to the activities implemented by the OPs, which shall include verification to ensure that the OPs’ 
expenditures comply with the eligibility requirements applicable to the OPs. 
152. The Project Management Unit (PMU). Within the above framework, the CS-FOR will establish a Project 
Management Unit (PMU). The PMU will be physically located under SAEPF headquarters. The PMU will be responsible 
for day-to-day project management, providing human resources management, financial and procurement services, 
coordinate the project activities, generate work plans and prepare reports. The PMU will be established within SAEPF and 
will coordinate with ARIS, MAFIM, RKDF and FAO will be responsible for overall management, supervision, guidance and 
technical support.  
153. The PMU will be headed by a Senior International Technical Adviser for forestry, rangeland and governance to be 
recruited by the project. The Technical Adviser will have overall responsibility for preparing the annual work plans and 
budgets, technical documents for procurements, terms of references of technical experts, clearing them with FAO, the OP 
and the donor and obtaining Steering Committee clearances. The Adviser will also have overall responsibilities of capacity 
development of OPs’ and of PMU’s staff and consultants on technical and managerial aspects (including facilitation for 
procurement and financial, human resources and quality assurance for overall project implementation). The Technical 
adviser will be supported by the PMU staff, including a Project Coordinator, in charge of the day to day management of 
the project and coordination between all operating partners and project stakeholders, supported by a Financial Specialist, 
a Procurement Specialist, an M&E team leader, a secretary and a driver. The team will facilitate administrative functions 
and provide support to the technical teams visiting the project on a regular basis to support operations in the districts and 
in Bishkek. The M&E and Planning team leader, under the overall supervision of the Project Coordinator (see functions 
described in Chapter 5 of the Feasibility Study), will be in charge of the overall planning, M&E and learning process of the 
project, and will coordinate a team of technical experts (part of the Expert Group – see functions described in Chapter 5 
of the Feasibility Study) composed of a M&E specialist, a GIS specialist and a Communications expert. The Gender and 
Social Expert and Safeguards Specialist are also part of the Expert Group. The PMU will also liaise with ARIS, RKDF and 
MAFIM to ensure coordination of planning and in the achievement of the project’s results, and with FAO for technical 
assistance and support in execution. See PMU structure in Figure C.7.1 below.  
154. SAEPF: is a State agency under the Government of the Republic. SAEPF is a separate legal entity under the Act of 
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic No. 123 dated 20.02.2012. Currently, SAEPF is implementing a number of projects, 
including the WB/GEF funded Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management Project (IFEMP), total amount of which is US$ 12 
million, scheduled to be completed in September of 2021. For implementation of this project, SAEPF has established a 
Project Management Unit (PMU), which includes a Coordinator, Financial Management Specialist, Procurement Specialist, 
M&E Specialist, and Forestry Expert. Such PMU has been trained and it is fully equipped to undertake complex 
procurement, disbursement, and financial management tasks.  
 
53 RKDF will not receive funds from the GCF or others, but it will execute the activities funded with their share of co-financing.  
54 The OPIM is described in the FAO Manual Section 701.

=== PAGE 46 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
155. In addition to the overall responsibility of the project coordination, the PMU located in SAEPF will be in charge of 
achieving results under selected outputs and activities (or parts of them), where SAEPF holds the highest comparative 
advantages. It will be supported by technical assistance provided by FAO in the form of FAO expert or international/national 
consultants or partners and service providers of its trust. More specifically, the PMU’s responsibility will include the 
achievement of results under Component 1, and parts of Component 2. In its role as EE of CS-FOR, SAEPF will provide 
staff time and office/conference spaces to support project implementation. This will constitute co-financing to project 
implementation.55  
156. The separation between SAEPF’s NDA role and its execution role in CS-FOR implementation will be guaranteed by 
a fully-fledged CS-FOR PMU, operating under the aegis of the CCCC and of the Project Stakeholders Committee, where 
SAEPF is a member together with all relevant government and non-government institutions.  
157. The result from independent Operational Partners’ assessment can highlight some capacity baseline of SAEPF for 
executing the project (see Annex 4.b). The assessment, for example, suggests that the project ensures adequate staffing 
structure for the volume and complexity of operations. SAEPF will be executing the project activities under a legal 
agreement between FAO and Execution Entity (e.g. Letter of Agreement, Operational Partners Agreement (OPA) under 
OPIM) or any formal agreement that needs to be applied under the current FAO rules and regulations based on the risk 
classifications suggested by the Operational Partners assessment. 
158. ARIS: was established in October, 2013 as a non-commercial organization and has a separate legal entity. The 
supreme body is Supervisory Board with 21 members. ARIS mission is to support sustainable poverty alleviation by 
providing assistance to local communities and local self-governmental bodies in resolving local social and economic 
problems by strengthening their capacity in determining and prioritizing local issues, developing investment and action 
plans, mobilizing resources, as well as developing, implementing and managing investments aimed at resolution of local 
priority issues. ARIS operates in accordance with the following principles, including: (a) autonomy; (b) impartiality; (c) 
involvement; (d) management; (e) transparency; (f) cost effectiveness; (g) decentralization; (h) sustainability of sub-
projects/micro-projects; (i) environmental conscience.  
159. ARIS will be executing the project activities with a legal agreement with FAO under an OPA as Operational Partner 
under OPIM or any other applicable legal instrument according to the risk classification suggested by the Operational 
Partners assessment.  
160. ARIS will be in charge of achieving the agreed results related to the project activities where it holds highest 
comparative advantages. This will comprise Component 1; parts of Component 2; and parts of Component 3. Under FAO 
rules and procedures and in conformity with this project document, any legal/formal agreement with FAO and the Annual 
Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), the Project Coordinator will identify expenses and disbursements that should be requested 
to FAO for the timely execution of the project as well as timely reporting to the PMU in the format and with the information 
requested. In its role as EE of CS-FOR, ARIS will provide its structure of central and decentralized officers and offices to 
support the implementation of the activities, which will constitute a co-financing to the project implementation.56 
161. MAFIM will be involved to implement specific outputs via a Letter of Agreement.  
162. Other government and non-government entities will be involved through Letters of Agreement (LOA) while 
commercial service providers through other forms of procurement.  
163. RKDF: As a main co-financier of the project, RKDF will coordinate with the PMU and ARIS to ensure the timely 
delivery of the loans envisaged under Component 3 and will be in charge of the overall monitoring of the financial aspects 
of the related loans. It will ensure that the monitoring reports are available at the time and using the format requested by 
the PMU. In its role as co-financier of CS-FOR, RKDF will provide its structure of central and decentralized officers and 
offices to support the implementation of activities, thereby constituting co-financing to the project implementation.57  
164. RKDF was established in late 2014 as an international organization per the Agreements between the governments 
of the Kyrgyz Republic and the Russian Federation “On the development of economic cooperation in the conditions of 
Eurasian economic integration” and “On the Russian-Kyrgyz Development Fund”. The capital of the Fund is US$ 500 
million. RKDF provides both direct funding to Kyrgyz medium-sized and large enterprises (with loans starting from US$ 1 
million) and indirectly through commercial banks to smaller enterprises (loans below US$ 1 million). RKDF lends to all 
economic sectors and as of April 2018, has funded 926 enterprises for a total amount of over US$ 275 million. Agriculture 
is one of the key focus areas for RKDF: it takes the first place in terms of the number of loans (338 out of 926, or 36.5 
percent) and second in terms of the volume of funding (over US$ 64 million, or 23 percent). In 2016, RKDF has partnered 
with International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) to provide loans to agricultural producers and processors 
identified and assisted through IFAD’s “Access to Markets Programme” in Kyrgyzstan, to be launched later in 2018.  
 
55 A SAEPF co-financing letter of intent is annexed to the Funding Proposal. 
56 A letter of intent for co-financing signed by ARIS is annexed to the Funding Proposal.  
57 The RKDF co-financing letter of intent is annexed to the Funding Proposal.

=== PAGE 47 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
165. The RKDF will provide a credit line through local commercial banks that already reach out to the project target areas. 
Initially, 5 commercial banks will participate in the disbursement of the credit line (listed alphabetically): (i) Ayil Bank; (ii) 
Bank Kyrgyzstan; (iii) BTA Bank; (iv) Kompanion Bank; and (v) RSK Bank. These pre-identified five commercial banks 
have already been accredited by RKDF. They will be sub-contracted by RKDF in the Project and the selection process 
and decision making of the loans will be carried out by the Executing Entity under the oversight of the Accredited Entity. 
The project will work in close collaboration with RKDF and the partner banks to identify prospective beneficiaries within 
the eligible value chains and ensure the complementarity of the technical assistance provided under Component 3 and the 
related credit resources. This senior loan input will follow the grant inputs considered under Component 3 sequentially as 
a co-financing of the grant component.  
166. FAO has been creating an enabling environment for RKDF through a FAO technical cooperation project 
TCP/KYR/3701/C1, “Institutional and technical support to the Russian Kyrgyz Development Fund of Kyrgyzstan”. The 
project assists the RKDF and its implementing partners (e.g. Regional Consultation Centers and intermediary banks) in 
the following: (i) increase awareness in rural areas about the RKDF and its financial products with the purpose of enhancing 
access to such products for agricultural producers; (ii) enhance technical capacity of the RKDF and its implementing 
partners to effectively evaluate potential business proposals and applications submitted by agricultural producers. It is 
envisaged to ensure smooth involvement of RKDF to this project as an Executing Partner but also as a co-financier.  
167. The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO): will serve both as GCF Accredited Entity, being responsible for 
supervising the project; and as CS-FOR Executing Entity, providing quality assurance and technical assistance during 
project implementation. The independency of the two roles will be guaranteed by establishing two separate functions 
as follows:  
A. FAO as Accredited Entity. The FAO’s supervising role will be attributed to the FAO Regional Office for 
Europe and Central Asia (REU, located in Budapest) with support by the FAO Climate, Biodiversity, Land 
and Water Department (CB, located in Rome) and other technical divisions as required. In order to fulfil this 
function, a specific project supervision team will be established, including FAO staff from REU, CB and 
other technical divisions. A Lead Technical Officer will be appointed in the regional office, coordinating the 
supervision functions. The separation from the role of executing entity will be ensured by the establishment 
of: (a) regular system of approval of Annual Work Plan and Budget – exercised by the Lead Technical Officer 
(belonging to REU) and the members of the Project Task Force, composed of FAO technical staff; (b) regular 
independent supervisions of the project activities throughout the project intervention, ultimately to ensure 
that the project management takes corrective measures if and when required, and (c) through the evaluation 
functions carried out by the FAO Office of Independent Evaluation (in Rome) at mid-term and final stage. 
More specifically, the FAO Lead Technical Officer (LTO) will have overall technical responsibility of the 
project implementation. The role of the LTO is central to FAO’s comparative advantage for projects and to 
separate the functions of FAO in its role as Accredited Entity and as Executing Entity. The LTO will oversee 
and carry out technical backstopping to the project implementation. The LTO will support the Budget Holder 
(BH) in the implementation and monitoring of the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), including work 
plan and budget revisions. The LTO is responsible and accountable for providing or obtaining technical 
clearance of technical inputs and services procured by the Organization. In addition, the LTO through 
supervision missions (she/he may call other experts to participate and advise) will provide technical 
backstopping to the Project Team to ensure the delivery of quality technical outputs. The LTO will coordinate 
the provision of appropriate technical support from the PTF to respond to requests from the PSC. 
B. FAO as Executing Entity. Within its CS-FOR Budget Holder functions, the FAO Representation in 
Kyrgyzstan (FAO-KG) will be in charge of the execution of selected activities and of the contractual 
agreements with the executing entities (see below, SAEPF, RKDF and ARIS). A project delivery team will 
be set up in FAO-KG, comprising staff covering all functions relevant to the execution of the envisaged 
activities. More specifically, following the principle to ensure the highest level of ownership and sustainability 
of the project investment at country level (i.e., within local institutions), FAO-KG’s role in CS-FOR will be 
limited to the provision of quality assurance throughout all project components, to enhance the success 
of the project and its potential replicability, and to ensure coordination with SAEPF and ARIS as 
Operational Partners and RKDF as co-financier/ executing entity in charge of specific activities. 
Technical assistance will be provided by mobilizing FAO experts, or FAO supervised consultants and service 
providers. FAO’s mandate as a global stakeholder in the field of agriculture, forests and rangeland 
management, and climate change, and its related expertise represents a comparative advantage in 
providing technical assistance and quality assurance.

=== PAGE 48 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
Figure C.7.1 - CS-FOR - Project organization structure and project cash flow 
 
 
 
168. The FAO Kyrgyzstan Country Office has all the required expertise and capacities to undertake the roles and 
responsibilities described above (as AE and EE). The current structure comprises six Regular Programme staff posts that 
are filled, as well as FIRST Policy Officer and Junior Social Protection Officer. The Representation regularly employs a 
number of consultants and other Non-Staff Human Resources (NSHR). As of October 2018, there are 67 National Project

=== PAGE 49 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
Personnel (NPP) and Personal Service Agreement (PSA) holders working within TCP and TF projects, out of which 10 are 
administrative covering all projects. The current field programme in Kyrgyzstan consists entirely of nonemergency 
developmental activities, mainly funded by Trust funds and TCPs (10-Country projects and 8-Global, regional, sub-regional 
projects). 
169. Implementation of project activities at the field level will be undertaken by responsible entities with project entities. 
The above-mentioned entities have different roles and responsibilities for project components. Table C.7.1 summarizes 
the roles and responsibility of entities at activity level. 
170. Contractual arrangement with beneficiaries: Under Component 1 and 2, contractual agreements required for co-
financing contribution by selected beneficiaries will be signed by: a) SAEPF and ARIS for the activities on forest land and 
rangeland; and b) SAEPF, ARIS and FAO for the other co-financing contribution (see Table C.3.1 for detail). Under 
Component 3, identification of primary beneficiaries for Activity 3.1.1 and Activity 3.1.2 was completed during project 
design. The final selection of beneficiaries for Activity 3.1.1 and Activity 3.1.2 will be carried out by RKDF (Executing Entity 
and Co-financier of the Project) under the oversight of FAO, reviewed by the Project Steering Committee and finally 
confirmed by AE during the project implementation. Contractual agreements required for co-financing contribution by 
selected beneficiaries will be signed by: a) SAEPF and ARIS for the activities on forest land and rangeland; and b) SAEPF, 
ARIS and FAO for the other co-financing contribution (for Activity 3.1.1 and Activity 3.1.2). For Activity 3.1.3. The final 
selection of “End-borrowers will be carried out by RKDF under the oversight of FAO, reviewed by the Project Steering 
Committee and finally confirmed by AE during the project implementation. Contractual agreements with selected End-
borrowers will be signed by RKDF or local commercial banks accredited by RKDF (including beneficiaries’ co-financing 
contribution). 
 
Table C.7.1: Summary of activity-level responsibility of executing entities 
Name of Executing Entity 
Activity-level responsibility 
FAO Representation in Kyrgyzstan 
(FAO-KG 
Activities 1.1.2; 1.1.3; 1.1.4; 1.1.5; 1.2.1; 1.3.1; 2.1.1; 2.1.2; 
2.1.3; 2.1.4; 2.1.5; 3.1.1; 3.1.2; PMC 
SAEPF 
Activities 1.1.1; 1.1.2; 1.1.3; 1.1.4; 1.1.5; 1.2.1; 1.3.1; 2.1.1; 
2.1.4; PMC 
ARIS 
Activities 1.3.1; 2.1.3; 2.1.5; 3.1.1; 3.1.2; PMC 
RKDF 
Activity 3.1.3

=== PAGE 50 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 99 
 
 
 
C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
Note: see Annex 7: Timetable of Implementation.

=== PAGE 51 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
 
D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
171. Kyrgyzstan is a lower middle-income country. The country’s exposure to climate change risks is among the highest 
in Central Asia, ranking third on the World Bank simplified vulnerability index (World Bank, 2013). According to both 
internal documents and published literature, the rural poor are the least resilient and most exposed to natural disasters 
triggered by climate change (see Chapter 1 of the Feasibility Study). The exposure to climate change risks is closely 
tied to the high dependency rural people have on natural resources and ecosystems that support their livelihoods, 
principally including Kyrgyzstan’s pastureland and forests. These same ecosystems constitute important stores of 
sequestered carbon in the form of soil organic matter in pasturelands and above ground forest biomass, with the ability 
to absorb and store significant amounts of additional carbon. By assisting the country to make significant progress 
towards meetings its INDC targets under the Paris Agreement, this investment will initiate a series of reinforcing, 
coordinated actions that will lead to the sequestration of 19.8 million tCO2eq, or 22.6 percent of the agricultural share of 
emissions.  The highest carbon sinks will result from the grassland management (-14,923,368 of tCO2eq) followed by 
forest management and degradation activities (-3,479,418 of tCO2), perennial system (-873,500 tCO2eq, 1,117,520 
tCO2-e taking into account carbon sequestration from the conversion of degraded land to perennial system), 
afforestation activities (- 729,608 tCO2eq), and livestock management (-149,545 tCO2eq). Agricultural inputs are a minor 
source of GHG (160,958 tCO2eq). 
172. The current level of forest degradation under BAU scenario generates an estimated net loss of 1.5 m tCO2eq in 
20 years; through the combined effect of the various interventions, the project will be able to avoid the mentioned losses 
and to generate an additional over 18 m tCO2eq sequestration (15.1 rom rangeland and livestock, 2.9 from forest 
activities and 0.2 from other agricultural activities), for a net effect of 19.8 m tCO2eq sequestered. Such expected 
sequestration (4.2m tCO2eq) is composed of: (i) 0.7 m tCO2eq from afforestation and reforestation, and forest 
enrichment; and (ii) 3.5 m tCO2eq from improved forest management of the existing forests. The EX-Act LUC 
calculations are based on current degradation trends, showing 25% of the forest as largely degraded, 15% as 
moderately degraded and 60% as non-degraded. The potential net sequestration calculation is based on the current 
trends (showing substantial degradation).   
173. The carbon sequestered will be achieved at a low cost of US$ 2.5 per tCO2eq (or 1.5 US$ per tCO2eq considering 
GCF financing only). Of equal or greater importance, the design of this investment is intended to put Kyrgyzstan’s 
agricultural sector on a net low-CO2 pathway by harmonizing national policies and strategies and establishing national 
capacities to introduce and support innovative practices that lead to the sequestration and safeguarding of carbon stocks 
as described in Section C. Given the country’s economic standing, these achievements would likely be much delayed, 
if forthcoming at all, in the absence of catalytic financing from the GCF. One of the main and most innovative elements 
of the project is the development of green value chains under component 3. The Component co-financed by RKDF will 
ensure the sustainability of the investment in carbon sequestration carried out in Component 2 and will create economic 
opportunities with limited risk, in order to decrease pressure on land degradation of natural resources in the project 
intervention areas, this will result in important contributions to enhanced resilience of target communities. 
174. The shortage of domestic resources for internal investments in the agricultural sector overall is evidenced by the 
country’s debt rate. Despite a sharp decline of external public debt in 2016 (expected to reach 54.5 percent of GDP in 
2017), the Kyrgyz Republic is still considered at moderate risk of debt distress. The current national debt rate will also 
affect targeted investments into climate change mitigation and adaptation actions. As reported by OECD (2016) the 
level of climate finance made available for Kyrgyzstan, as well as the committed finance “per capita,” is considerably 
lower than the average in Central Asia (US$ 10.3 per person vs US$ 33.2 per person). To date, the largest amount of 
climate-related development financing has been directed towards the energy sector (mostly hydropower), with very 
limited support given to forest and rangelands improvement. The actions detailed in this proposal fill an important gap, 
directing additional resources to areas of high potential gains in carbon sequestration and storage. GCF involvement is 
critical to initiate a national transition in forest and rangeland management from a business as usual scenario leading 
to further resource degradation and carbon loss, to a more carbon-rich agricultural rural economy. Investments in 
mitigation efforts to enrich the carbon stocks of the country’s most vulnerable agricultural systems will simultaneously 
deliver important co-benefits of enhancing the resilience of those ecosystems to climate change stresses as well as the 
communities that directly depend on these resources for their livelihood (65 percent of the population). 
D.2. Exit Strategy

=== PAGE 52 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
 
D 
175. The continued delivery of benefits from activities initiated under the CS-FOR project will be sustained beyond the 
investment period by four critical elements, as follows:  
- 
National ownership: In preparing this funding proposal, the design team initiated an extensive national 
engagement process over a 15-month period. As a result, the proposal is fully aligned with the Kyrgyzstan’s 
INDCs and national policies / frameworks, and the interests of those key actors necessary to the success of the 
planned activities and who helped to plan the investment. The process of inclusive engagement in project 
planning was pursued to ensure that a high level of felt ownership over the project and the supported activities 
was instilled from the outset. It is hoped that as a fully owned initiative the project activities will become deeply 
integrated into the work plans and mandates of the executing entities over the eight-year investment period, and 
that this will carry over into the post-investment period and subsequent cycles of activity planning. After the 
implementation of the project is finalized, the investment will be fully funded by the institutions and private sector 
actors involved (communities, private entrepreneurs, local banks, others).  
 
a. 
On the private sector’s side, the loans generated by RKDF and de-risked by the project will act as a 
revolving fund for the local banks. The economic activities will be self-standing and the most successful 
investment and credit lines will be repeated by the banks even without RKDF senior loans.  
b. 
The project places substantial emphasis on strengthening capacities of institutions and individuals (at all 
level) while at the same time working on the enabling environment (policies and regulatory framework). The 
use of free tools for NR and climate monitoring (Collect Earth, Earth Map, and the support to the network 
of agencies using sat imageries ) will ensure institutional and implementation sustainability. The project will 
upgrade existing systems, for example, the geo-referenced monitoring and evaluation system (Output 1.2) 
instead of installing new systems. The operation and maintenance of such large system has already 
integrated as a part of government structure.  Accredited Entity will follow the standard handover procedure 
of project assets accordingly. 
 
- 
Economic rationale: In order to reduce forest and pasture degradation and to change the behaviour of keeping 
an alarming number of unproductive animals as a source of cash income for safety net, communities need a 
parallel path towards increased efficiency and productivity of the livestock production system along with a 
progressive continuous creation of alternative (to livestock) income opportunities able to offer at least the same 
incentives for economic return (e.g., orchards and high value non-timber forest products). This shift will not only 
reduce the pressure on resources (increased carbon sink and enhanced ecosystem benefits) but also reduce 
emissions (as more productive animals raised using good practices emit less). The overall impact of agricultural 
investments is generally dependant on high levels of adoption and sustained use of new practices and 
technologies by targeted farmers / pastoralists. For resource poor farmers the potential for significant financial 
gain and increased control over critical assets are among the most powerful motivating forces leading to 
behaviour change. In response, the project has carefully selected supportive activities that respond to the self-
interests of farmers / pastoralists and other key target groups within selected value chains to stimulate high 
adoption rates and sustained action. The results of the financial and economic analysis show solid positive 
returns on the investment, affirming the selection of value chains. In the case of investments in the high mountain 
forest areas a social value of carbon sequestration was calculated, rather than direct monetary returns, to show 
their value in contributing to the national INDC targets. By working with the banking sector, with support from 
the Russian Kyrgyz Development Fund, and providing technical assistance to enhance the credit worthiness of 
select value chain enterprises, the project will further leverage the self-interest of these businesses that will long 
out live the investment period of the project. 
  
- 
Future expansion: An important outcome of the engagement process used in preparing the CS-FOR proposal, 
was the expressed interest on the part of key governmental agencies implementing the project, and other 
stakeholders, for the continued and expanded use of the approaches presented here as part of an evolved 
national strategy involving carbon sequestration through integrated forest and pasture management.  As the 
processes initiated through this investment are taken up and expand to a larger scale of  implementation, they 
effectively make the transition from a (time-bound) project to a more permanent programme, creating 
momentum for planning, budgeting and accountability supporting the sustained maintenance and continued 
growth of the activities (see Section E.2.1 for further details). Moreover, the project’s strategy for carbon

=== PAGE 53 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
 
D 
 
sequestration presents high potential for replication within other countries in Central Asia, where large portions 
of agricultural land are rangeland and the holding structure is similar.  
 
- 
Enabling Environment: By targeting policy harmonization, and strengthening the capacities of key national and 
local institutions in the use of new approaches and tools, including local management groups, the project will 
significantly influence the policy and operational environment necessary to support effective implementation. 
These changes will immediately benefit the implementation of project activities and will equally support future 
efforts of expansion. In terms of maintenance, the proposed activities and use of new technologies will not 
increase operational costs of the institutions or beneficiaries involved. On the contrary, the planned changes will 
strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of planning and management, increasing natural resource 
monitoring capacity and therefore decreasing the risks of ineffective expenditures and potential that negative 
effects of climate change occur without detection.

=== PAGE 54 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
176. The Kyrgyz Republic submitted its INDC (Intended Nationally Determined Contribution) in September 2015 
Kyrgyzstan’s INDC acknowledge the importance of addressing climate change and the challenges related to its 
impacts. The Country identified 6 main sectors with the highest vulnerability to climate change impacts and estimated 
the economic impact in over USD 1 billion58. The Country identifies adaptation and mitigation as main targets of its 
climate change strategies and identified the total cost required to adapt and mitigate in about USD 3 billion  
177. The project will mainly contribute to the Paradigm Shift Objective of the GCF related to (i) Shift to low-emission 
sustainable development pathways, with co-benefits in the GCF objective related to (ii) Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development. 
- 
Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways. According to the INDC document submitted by 
the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, it was determined that the Kyrgyz Republic’s contribution to mitigation will be 
to reduce GHG emissions in the range of 11.49 - 13.75% below business as usual (BAU) in 2030. Under international 
support, the Kyrgyz Republic could implement mitigation measures to achieve total reduction in the range of 29.00 - 
30.89% below BAU in 2030. Projecting to 2050, the Kyrgyz Republic will reduce GHG emissions in the range of 12.67 
- 15.69% below BAU. Additionally, under international support the Kyrgyz Republic could implement the mitigation 
measures to achieve total reduction in the range of 35.06 - 36.75% below BAU in 205059. As detailed in this Funding 
Proposal, the project will support the reduction of emission and enhance carbon storage of about 19.8 million tCO2eq. 
through: (i) the creation of legal and management enabling environments supported by an innovative evidence-based 
climate and natural resource planning and monitoring system; (ii) community-based investments in natural forest 
regeneration, sustainable forest management, afforestation and reforestation; (iii) rehabilitation of rangelands and 
prevention of further degradation; (iv) diversification of options for community livelihoods; and (v) reduction of emission 
intensity per unit of animal protein. The country will thus shift from a local economy that is currently negatively impacting 
on carbon storage potential of ecosystems (forest and rangelands) to a low-carbon emission economy where mitigation 
investments will trigger and enhance resilience of ecosystems as well as of communities that, in addition to provisioning 
ecosystem services, will also benefit from supporting and regulating services (e.g. improved climate regulation, flood 
regulation, soil retention, habitat provision). The project will measure its success by assessing the degree to which it 
will have contributed to low-emission sustainable development. 
The current level of forest degradation under BAU scenario generates an estimated net loss of 1.5 m tCO2eq in 20 
years; through the combined effect of the various interventions, the project will be able to avoid the mentioned losses 
and to generate an additional over 18 m tCO2eq sequestration (15.1 rom rangeland and livestock, 2.9 from forest 
activities and 0.2 from other agricultural activities), for a net effect of 19.8 m tCO2eq sequestered. Such expected 
sequestration (4.2m tCO2eq) is composed of: (i) 0.7 m tCO2eq from afforestation and reforestation, and forest 
enrichment; and (ii) 3.5 m tCO2eq from improved forest management of the existing forests. The EX-Act LUC 
calculations are based on current degradation trends, showing 25% of the forest as largely degraded, 15% as 
moderately degraded and 60% as non-degraded. The potential net sequestration calculation is based on the current 
trends (showing substantial degradation). Detailed information on the calculation methodology for emission reduction 
is included in Chapter 9 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2).  
 
- 
Increased climate-resilient sustainable development. Throughout the preparation of the project, the 
household survey has assessed the level of resilience of the target population (compared to a possible project 
expansion areas a control group). The approach used is the FAO-developed Resilience Impact measurement Analysis 
methodology (RIMA II), which allows to derive a Resilience capacity index tailored on the local vulnerability, focusing 
on explaining how certain households are able to better cope with shocks and stressors (i.e., natural hazards and 
climate change).60 The analysis shows, and shows how the control group is more resilient with respect to the 
intervention group. Looking at the resilience structure matrix for the intervention group, adaptive capacity is the 
 
58 Assessment of economic losses is the lower bound, as a result of the specific national assessment methods. The revision of the methods is envisioned (INDC, 2016). 
59 The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. Intended Nationally Determined Contribution to the UNFCCC. Submitted to UNFCCC in 2015.  
60 A Working Paper on Resilience Analysis is enclosed in Annex 9 of the Funding Proposal.

=== PAGE 55 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
most influential pillar, followed by access to Basic Services, Social Safety Nets and Assets. For the control 
group adaptive capacity is the main pillar, followed by Assets, access to basic services and social safety nets.61 
For both the intervention and control groups, the importance of adaptive capacity is mainly driven by the high level of 
education (household head with university degree, which accounts for almost 25 percent on the final Resilience 
Composite Index (RCI) score) and the diversification of income portfolios (which account for almost 16 percent in 
the intervention group and 11 percent in the control group). These findings confirm the need for economic diversification 
as part of the adaptive capacity and help identifying priorities for investment in the country, including for partner 
organizations and parallel projects.  It is noted that the CS-FOR project is complementary with the WFP-GCF 
adaptation project for the country. Through its evidence-based approach, the project will support the diversification of 
sources of rural income ensuring mitigation-oriented productivity with co-benefits for adaptation to climate change-
related stresses and hazards through implementation of systematic INRMCRPs and related investments. The project 
will secure, mainstream and upscale the enabling environment for diversification, increase of efficiency and 
competitiveness by reducing dependency of communities on direct uses of resources (i.e., wood and pasture) and 
improving their livelihoods through benefits gained by improving ecosystem functions and diversification of livelihood 
opportunities for women and men. Ultimately, the experience of this project will serve as a driver for dissemination of 
good practice throughout the country, shifting national agricultural production from a predominantly unsustainable 
subsistence livestock production to a diversified and climate-sensitive value chain business-oriented economy. 
Through the mid-term and final assessment of resilience using the RIMA II approach,62 the project will assess the 
degree to which it will have contributed to climate-resilient sustainable development. To this end, the project will assess 
the degree to which it will have contributed to climate-resilient sustainable development. 
 
178. In addition, CS-FOR will contribute directly to SDGs 12, 13 and 15, and indirectly contribute to SDGs 1, 2, 5, 6, 
8 and 11. 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
tCO2eq -987,568 / year  
Lifetime 
tCO2eq - 19,751,354  (20 years) 
• 
Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) 
Total 
Direct beneficiaries: 432,450 individuals 
(7% of the country’s population) of 
which 246,497 are women; 
 
Indirect beneficiaries:  
540,563 (8% of the country’s 
population) individuals of which 380,121 
are women 
 
Percentage 
(%) 
8 percent of the population (equivalent 
proportion of women) 
 
61 The WP on Resilience in Annex 9 includes an appendix with all statistical references and details on tests used to check the significance of the results. 
62 The Resilience Impact measurement Analysis methodology (RIMA II) is described in Chapter 6 of the Feasibility Study. RIMA II is an innovative quantitative approach developed 
by FAO that focuses on explaining how certain households are able to better cope with shocks and stressors (i.e., natural hazards and climate change).

=== PAGE 56 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
While section H.1 reports the main GCF and project indicators a series of additional relevant sub-targets 
and indicators are available in the M&E methodology in Chapter 6 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2). These 
will also serve to guide the M&E unit with its activities and reporting duties.  
 
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyse impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
179. The major constraint to the increase of carbon sequestration and storage in forests and rangelands has been 
the expansion of pasture areas and use of traditional extensive grazing practices at the expense of protecting forest 
cover. These processes will likely continue in the absence of clear incentives for communities to preserve and expand 
forested areas and to limit and more intensively manage grazing lands. Moreover, the number of animals has been 
increasing. The project intends to break these trends by introducing and supporting an integrated, locally 
determined, ecosystem management approach for rangeland and forest resources linked to profitable 
markets. These measures will establish the preconditions for the maintenance and increase of forest cover and at the 
same time improve the ecological status of rangelands leading to greater carbon sequestration and storage, both in 
trees and pasture soils. By establishing linkages with market channels, the changes in management practices will 
benefit from and lead to more a diversified and profitable agriculture for beneficiaries in targeted areas. The potential 
for scaling-up of this paradigm shift introduced through the project is supported by the following combination of planned 
actions.  
180. The harmonization of national policies and strategies affecting forest and grassland management (undertaken 
in Component 1) are, by definition, national in scope. Not only will the target areas selected by the CS-FOR project 
benefit, but the resulting clarification, refinement and coordination among these core planning frameworks, governance 
structures and enforcement protocols will establish the same enabling conditions nation-wide. As a result, future 
investments in the expanded use of the local planning processes, institutional support and service provision introduced 
through the project, will encounter a much more conducive policy and institutional environment, greatly improving the 
efficiency by which expanded actions can be undertaken. The investment on the enabling environment will result in 
the improved management of an estimated 56,359 ha of degraded forests resulting in the sequestration of about 3.48 
m tCO2eq. The improved enabling environment is also the condition to ensure the sustainability of the forestry and 
rangeland investment, whereby about 14.9 m tCO2eq can be sequestered through improvement of rangelands in about 
646,275 ha, 0.7 m tCO2eq from afforestation / forest enrichment in 6,000 ha of degraded forests, about 0.5 m tCO2eq 
from new orchards in about 3,100 ha and 0.1 m tCO2eq from improved livestock management.  
181. The design process has taken great care in bringing together key governmental agencies and coordination 
bodies, resulting in a self-identified set of clear roles and responsibilities for project implementation. The degree of 
authentic ownership that this approach has established is essential not only in ensuring a high level of performance 
during project implementation, but also serves as the basis and internal motivation for the continued and expanded 
use of the new, approach to local resource management leading to greater carbon sequestration. The incorporation of 
project activities into the regular annual work plans, and experiences gained through the project implementation period 
will be invaluable in helping to ‘normalize’ these activities as part of the implementing agencies’ vision and approach 
to resource management nation-wide while establishing a solid operational capacity in their use.

=== PAGE 57 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
182. The assessments carried in the 
identification of the CS-FOR project target 
areas was conducted at a national scale. A 
by-product of this analysis was the 
identification and prioritization of expansion 
areas, using the same criteria employed in 
the selection of project target areas (see 
figure E.2.1). This additional step was 
undertaken to assist the implementing 
agencies in their progressive, expanded 
use of the resource management/carbon 
sequestration 
approaches 
introduced 
through the project. The remote sensing / 
GIS management tools being developed to 
assist with the project implementation and 
monitoring are fully designed for being 
used at increasing scales of application. 
183. The engagement of private sector interests in key value chains in the design of the CS-FOR project is strategic 
and purposeful. Investments in strengthening key VCs, specifically nuts and dried fruits, establishes a virtuous cycle, 
rewarding participating beneficiary groups with ready, profitable markets for the produce generated through 
implementing their INRMCRPs, which in turn serves to reinforce the continued use of these plans that enable them to 
participate in new markets. The success of commercial enterprises in the targeted VCs also provides the motivation 
and strengthens their ability to expand into new geographic areas as the approaches introduced through the CS-FOR 
project also move into new locations.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
184. Learning and knowledge management represents a paramount element of CS-FOR. The project will aim at 
transferring not only information and knowledge generated during execution of activities but also tools and skills that 
will support stakeholders in factoring in climate change into the decision making process (institutions and private sector) 
and into livelihood strategies (communities).  
185. The project will ensure transfer of knowledge to stakeholders across the three project Components via trainings 
and knowledge sharing events identified on a yearly basis in the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and described 
in each of the Components. To this end stakeholders’ involvement from planning to monitoring will be among the main 
objectives of the project. Each of the identified Components will support the learning and knowledge management 
process with specific training targeting both communities and institutions. A key objective of the learning and knowledge 
management process is to mainstream NRM policy frameworks and climate change-related information to all 
stakeholders involved in project activities as well as to the wider public.  
186. Additionally, the project foresees the organization of at least 5 engagement workshops per year (1 national and 
1 per district) to enhance stakeholders’ participation and exchange of information between communities and institutions 
as well as to create opportunities for local and international media to understand the project and report on its 
achievements. Finally, it will also allow a more stringent and precise follow up of the Environmental and Social 
Safeguards.  
187. To ensure sound and effective management of learning and knowledge processes the project will hire a 
communication and Knowledge Management Specialist that will be assigned to the M&E unit of CS-FOR. The specialist 
will ensure – among the others - socialization of project’s data and information, communication with the media, and 
coordination of the national engagement process. In addition, facilitating awareness campaigns (in Component 1) with 
wide outreach and in schools will increase the engagement including of younger generations.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
188. The CS-FOR Project will pilot a collaborative resource assessment and develop Integrated Natural Resources 
Climate Resilient Management plans using remote sensing, climate maps and various zoning and stratification 
approaches. These plans will be developed with Leskhozes, local governments and Pasture Committees as the drivers 
of the process. The Project will develop and test implementation arrangements for INRCRMPs with the engagement 
Figure E.2.1 Priority expansion area of the project

=== PAGE 58 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
of the private sector and local communities. Improved governance of the pasture-forest ecosystem would create an 
enabling environment for private investments into afforestation. These approaches will feed into an improved policy 
and legal framework for managing rangeland-forest ecosystems.  The project will also work with involved communities 
so to enhance livelihood strategies demonstrating with investments, training and communication campaigns that a 
climate adaptive management of natural resources is the best economic option to secure development and wellbeing. 
189. The reforms conducted in pasture management of the SLF did not translate into any changes for the 
management of forests and their ecosystems. Regulation of management and use of forest and rangeland components 
of one ecosystem in two different sets of legislation has led to contradictions, created confusion on the ground, and 
most importantly translated into inefficient management, fragmentation and resource degradation. Several elements 
of good management of the SLF pastures could be adapted for the tenure of the forest lands to facilitate an integrated 
ecosystem-based approach.  
190. The project will promote an approach to integrated forest and pasture management based on the following 
principles: (a) Transparency: Communities will be aware of rangeland-forest ecosystem resources and will participate 
in the development of INRMCRPs, which will be available to communities and the general public (displayed at local 
government bodies, online); Participation: Community Consultative Groups (CCGs) will be established at the local 
level (level of watershed or other appropriate to area of forestry enterprise) to participate in development of INRMCRPs; 
(c) Accountability: Accountability mechanisms will be developed for CLMGs to report to local communities on the 
planning and implementation of plans; (d) Fairness/Equity: The CS-FOR will develop recommendations for tenure 
arrangements for improved access and sustainable use based on climate resilience assessment and planning; 
(e) Coordination: Mechanisms will be established at the local and national level to ensure synergy amongst all related 
institutions under the Climate Change Coordination Committee (CCCC) and Climate Finance Center (CFC); and 
(f) Capacity Development: The CS-FOR will work with task forces to develop tools and methodologies and train 
stakeholders on community engagement, and on technical issues of planning and management of pasture-forest 
resources; local governments will be trained to mobilize communities for the development of INRMCRPs and will 
commit budget allocation for community participation.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
191. The CS-FOR will support the Government of Kyrgyzstan in pursuing ecosystem-based adaptation as declared 
in the “Climate Change Adaptation Programme and Action Plan for 2015-2017 for the Forest and Biodiversity sector”.63 
It will adopt a participatory, evidence-based approach to Kyrgyzstan’s most vulnerable mountainous areas, enabling 
national institutional capacity to be informed by evidence and lessons learned from the four large pilot areas. 
Strengthening the national institutional and legal framework for climate resilience will provide the umbrella for long-
term transformational change. An improved framework will contribute to a more effective mainstreaming of climate 
resilience in vulnerable economic sectors, such as forestry and livestock, and enable lessons learned from the field to 
be progressively scaled-up. The project will integrate climate risk management into national and sub-national planning, 
thus seeking to change the long-term resilience of vulnerable populations, exposed assets and natural systems to 
climate stresses. It will introduce new approaches and technologies, including innovations in pilot areas. The four major 
priorities are to: (i) set up facilities and tools, and create capacities for assessing and forecasting availability and 
resilience of forest-rangeland resources using innovative technologies in line with climate change trends and risks;  (ii) 
improve the planning process at the national and community level through stratification and zoning of forest-rangeland 
resources based on assessment and climate change trends; (iii) facilitate the creation of sustainable legal and 
institutional conditions, mechanisms and tenure arrangements for communities, local agents and private sector to 
access, use and improve forest-pasture resources, and to arrest degradation and stimulate investments in 
afforestation, resources improvement and maintenance; and (iv) establish mechanisms and arrangements for feeding 
climate change data and information into decision-making in all sectors of the economy. 
192. The CS-FOR Project will dedicate the entire first Component of the project to ensure strengthening the enabling 
environment by accompanying national institutions, project stakeholders and civil society in harmonizing the policy and 
regulatory framework on natural resources management, planning, monitoring and evaluation. More specifically, 
through evidence-based, gender sensitive, participatory and inclusive processes for pasture-forest ecosystem 
management, Component 1 will contribute to harmonize strategies and legislation and to incorporate biodiversity and 
climate change mitigation issues. At national level, the project will operate through facilitation of informed policy 
 
63 Full document available here.

=== PAGE 59 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
dialogue, combined with: (a) ad hoc technical studies; (b) the evidence generated by the investment in the four target 
districts and of similar operations in the country; and (c) the evidence from geospatial data and an improved 
methodology to monitor and assess pasture and forest degradation. At local level, the project will work with CLMGs, 
which would include member-based community organizations (e.g. PUUs, Forest Committees, WUAs), forestry 
enterprises and self-government bodies (ayil okmotu / municipalities) to develop integrated, gender sensitive, and 
adaptive INRMCRPs and monitor their execution. Through harmonization of forest-rangeland ecosystem policies, 
output 1.1 will aim to facilitate the creation of an enabling environment for carbon emission reduction from land use 
and opportunities for co-benefits for climate change adaptation. It will seek to support the government’s vision of 
institutional reforms to strengthen the legal and institutional frameworks governing forests and rangelands resources. 
During the preparation phase, an evaluation of these frameworks identified key strengths and weaknesses and 
suggested some recommendations and options to strengthen these frameworks. Output 1.2 will support and enhance 
capacities of the existing monitoring units at the central level with Evidence-based Integrated NRM Planning, 
Monitoring and Evaluation tools and methodologies. The activity will be developed within the framework agreed by 
Kyrgyz institutions with the Kyrgyzstan National Spatial Infrastructure Memorandum of Understanding Target: central, 
local institutions, academia and CSOs. At local level, while supporting planning and negotiation of the INRMCRPs, 
output 1.3 will guide communities and local institutions in georeferencing and mapping their territory, its natural 
resources and livelihoods of residents. The activity will also act as on-the-job training and it will be an additional 
opportunity for communities to gradually contribute to governance of natural resources management. The activity will 
guarantee ground-truthing of geospatial analysis and GIS managed at the central level to guarantee monitoring of NR.  
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
193. The project will mainly contribute to the Paradigm Shift Objective of the GCF related to (i) Shift to low-emission 
sustainable development pathways, with co-benefits in the GCF objective related to (ii) Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development. In addition, the project will generate a critical mass of additional co-benefits, as follows.  
Environmental co-benefits 
194. In addition to carbon sequestration, investment in afforestation/reforestation and forest enrichment will contribute 
to improved soil fertility and stability, reduce land degradation, improve water retention in soils, provide additional 
habitat to beneficial animals such as pollinators, and enrich biodiversity. Some of these benefits, including the valuation 
of the expected carbon sequestration, the increased availability of drinking water and of non-timber forest products 
were valued in the economic analysis (Section F.1).   
195. By allowing pastures to approach maximum growth through pasture management, above-ground plant biomass 
rises from an estimated 1 tonne DW/ha on degraded land to 3 tonnes DW/ha under pasture rotation. The root:shoot 
ratio for perennial grasses is at least 2:1, so total plant biomass rises from 3 tonnes DW/ha to 9 tonnes DW/ha, or an 
increase of 3.87 million tonnes of plant biomass over 644,595 ha. Pasture rotation will improve plant diversity by 
releasing the growth potential of species that are otherwise suppressed under continuous heavy grazing pressure. 
Social and institutional co-benefits 
196. Community mobilization and training for 50 municipalities and their communities will include social mobilization 
including gender training and institutional support, as well as the establishment of task forces and fire management 
teams at Leskhoze level. Moreover, by facilitating policy dialogue under Component 1, the project will play a prominent 
role in promoting institutional coordination between stakeholders operating on climate change and on forest/rangelands 
management. 
Co-benefits for women and youth 
197. Women and youth (both young women and young men) will benefit from their specific inclusion in project 
activities, as outlined in the Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan. Particular attention will be paid to promote women 
and youth engagement in business opportunities in the project supported value chains by proactively including them 
in business related capacity building activities, and women’s participation in/benefiting from the value chain 
development will be taken into consideration when selecting value chains. Moreover, the project will encourage the 
access for women to improved natural resources (forests and rangelands) to ensure equitable distribution of benefits.

=== PAGE 60 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
Economic co-benefits 
198. Overall, income of rural dwellers is expected to increase through the investment operated by the project. Specific 
financial benefits will come from better herd management, contributing to an expected rise of livestock production by 
at least 10 percent (under the assumption of a decreasing livestock herd number by 20 percent and an increasing 
share of cows, the average financial benefits are positive for the individual households, but the highest benefits are 
when economic benefits are accounted for, with a total net incremental economic benefit of over per households 
including all ecosystem services amount to about 3,000 USD). From fruit trees/nuts plantations, supplying fruits and/or 
nuts to the selected value chains featuring green technologies generate solid financial results, IRRs between 22 and 
39 percent and NPVs between 5,800 and 21,400 USD per ha); also, forest users will benefit from collecting Non-
Timber Forest Products through certification according to the international voluntary standards for sustainable forest 
use and management. As additional benefit, the EFA in Annex 3 shows how the project’s investment can generate up 
to 3,300 new full time equivalent jobs.  
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
199. The geography and topography of Kyrgyzstan make it one of the most hazard-prone countries in Central Asia, 
and climate-induced disasters are already occurring. Hazards such as drought, land and mudslides, avalanches, 
violent winds, downpours, icing, frosts, breakthrough of glacial lakes, floods, river erosion and earthquakes are all 
common occurrences in Kyrgyzstan. The vast majority of the population lives in the valleys and foothills of the 
mountains, where vulnerability to these events is particularly high. On average, natural disasters are responsible for 
US$30-35 million average annual costs in damages and economic losses that represent 1-1.5 percent of the country’s 
GDP64. Limited state and local government resources available for disaster reduction and response exacerbate the 
population’s high vulnerability to natural disasters. The resilience level in the Project Areas (as confirmed by the 
baseline survey carried out during the project design) depend largely on adaptive capacity, access to basic services, 
social safety nets and availability of economic assets. Adaptive capacity is mainly driven by the level of education 
and the diversification of income portfolios. These findings confirm the need for economic diversification as part of 
the adaptive capacity and help identifying priorities for investment in the country, including for partner organizations 
and parallel projects.  
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
200. According to the Kyrgyz State Design Institute of Land Management, large areas of agricultural land are in poor 
condition, and are affected by land degradation (an estimated 50-80 percent). This includes erosion, salinization and 
alkalization, water logging of arable soils, trampling and contamination of pasture vegetation (mainly unpalatable 
plants) and organic soil carbon content that has declined from 3 percent to 1.5 percent, which, cumulatively, lead to a 
reduction of soil fertility and soil depletion. Some estimates by the Land Registry place the total area of land subject to 
erosion at 6.4 million ha, 700,000 has of which is arable land. 11.2 million ha of land (of which 1.3 million irrigated), are 
prone to wind and water erosion; 1.2 million ha (of which 146,600 irrigated), are saline; 480,200 (of which 98,800 
irrigated) are alkalinized65. Inappropriate tillage practices have eroded soil and led to poor soil fertility on an estimated 
770,000 ha of arable land. These factors have damaged soil ecosystem services (chemical, biological, hydrological) 
and led to reduced ecosystem functions which are critical for resilient agriculture, especially in light of climate change.  
201. Forest investments suffer from a systematic shortage of funding in the country. Private sector is not investing 
sufficiently in rural areas due to the remoteness of their markets and to the lack of financial literacy. Investment in 
rangeland benefit of higher attention (including of multilateral financial institutions) but investment in the sector have 
never been focused on carbon sequestration, rather on livelihoods which is not sufficient to ensure contributions to the 
country’s INDC targets. 
 
64 Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery Disaster Risk Management for Priority Countries, Kyrgyz Republic case. 
65 Fitzherbert. Country Pasture/Forage Resource Profiles – Kyrgyzstan. http://www.fao.org/ag/agp/agpc/doc/counprof/kyrgi.htm

=== PAGE 61 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
202. Poverty level remains high with over a quarter of the total population living below poverty line in 2016 (National 
Statistics Committee). About three quarters of the poor live in rural area and mainly rely on agriculture for their 
livelihood. Poverty is the highest in remote mountainous areas where scarce arable land combined with 
underdeveloped irrigation, limited off-farm employment opportunities, distance and poor accessibility and inadequate 
market infrastructure limit income opportunities. Malnutrition remains a problem as evidenced by the fact that 13 
percent of children under five suffer from stunting66. Micronutrient deficiencies, including vitamin and minerals, are also 
evident as 43% of children under five and 39% of women of reproductive age are affected by anaemia. According to 
the WFP, two out of three food insecure people live in remote valleys. Food insecurity is exacerbated by climate-related 
shocks, including floods and mudslides, which affect resilience of families and communities. Livestock is the most 
important source of income and the primary source of nutrition for the rural poor. Animals also serve as an important 
asset for the poor families, which can prevent them from becoming destitute at the time of shocks. 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
203. As specified in Section C.1, the project operates in line with the commitments of the INDCs and their targets in 
terms of mitigation and adaptation. Mitigation. Regarding long-term GHG emissions targets, it was determined that 
the Kyrgyz Republic’s contribution to mitigation will be to reduce GHG emissions in the range of 11.49 - 13.75 percent 
below business as usual (BAU) in 2030. Projecting to 2050, the Kyrgyz Republic will reduce GHG emissions in the 
range of 12.67 - 15.69 percent below BAU. Under international support, the Kyrgyz Republic could implement mitigation 
measures to achieve total reduction in the range of 29.00 - 30.89 percent below BAU in 2030, and total reduction in 
the range of 35.06 - 36.75 percent below BAU in 2050. Co-benefits for climate risks mitigation. While the INDC 
does not identify or clearly analyse adaptation targets, monitoring of implementation of the contribution to enhance 
individuals’ capacities to adapt will be combined with a process of regular updating of the national priorities and sectorial 
adaptation programs and action plans. Preparation of updated programs and plans will be based on assessments of 
the earlier adaptation plans’ outcomes. Reported plans are being processed and will constitute the initial policy 
framework to reach both mitigation and adaptation targets. 
204. A National Adaptation Plan is not approved yet in the country. UNDP is leading the process under GCF 
readiness process. The whole policy dimension is addressed under the project’s overall support to the enabling 
environment. The project links partly to the development of the NAP.  
205. The Climate Change Coordination Commission (CCCC), headed by the First Vice Prime Minister of the Kyrgyz 
Republic, coordinates all the activities in the Kyrgyz Republic related to climate change. The CCCC is composed of all 
heads of key ministries and divisions, representatives of the civil, academic and business sectors. SAEPF, the lead 
governmental body for climate change, acts as its secretariat and is the UNFCCC and GCF Focal Point. SAEPF is 
also a key stakeholder in the CS-FOR project; it is a member of the CS-FOR Steering Committee and the Project 
Management Unit. The key objective of the CCCC is to lead and coordinate activities of various agencies and ministries 
in implementation of the country’s commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
and the Kyoto Protocol.  
206. The project conforms to and is aligned with all national climate change strategies and action plans developed for 
various sectors including emergency situations, biodiversity and forestry, and agriculture and water management. 
207. The “Priority Directions for Adaptation to Climate Change in the Kyrgyz Republic until 2017” is being revised and 
meetings held with representatives of concerned ministries and agencies confirmed that the project will be coherent 
and in alignment with the updated versions of national climate change-related frameworks covering the period 2018-
2022. 
208. The National Strategy for Sustainable Development 2013-2017 (NSSD) emphasizes the importance of climate 
change considerations as part of a sustainable development approach for the sustainable use of natural resources and 
sustainable economic growth. Currently, the Kyrgyz Government is in the process of finalizing the country’s National 
Strategy for Sustainable Development 2040, which is expected to be adopted in 2018. It is accompanied by the “Forty 
 
66 Data from WHO/World Bank Group Joint Child Malnutrition Estimates 2017, cited in Global Nutrition Report, 2017 Nutrition Country Profile: Kyrgyzstan, 2017.

=== PAGE 62 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
Steps Programme,” aiming, among other things, to preserve forests and biodiverse ecosystems through social forestry 
and joint forest management, and by regenerating natural resources. Actions on climate change are reflected in the 
"National Sustainable Development Strategy of the Kyrgyz Republic for 2013-2017" and the "Program of the Kyrgyz 
Republic on Transition to Sustainable Development for 2013-2017."  
209. The National Action Plan (NAP) and its Activity Frameworks for Implementing the UNCCD in the Kyrgyz Republic 
for 2015-2020 has many actions on land degradation that are highly relevant to climate change adaptation measures 
for the agricultural and livestock sectors, and particularly for pasturelands. Particularly relevant is the inclusion of 
adaptation measures to climate change in local plans for social and economic development of the regions of the 
country. Strategic Target 4.2 under the “Action Plan for implementation of biodiversity conservation priorities of the 
Kyrgyz Republic for 2014-2020” in the Third National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan of the Kyrgyz Republic 
(submitted to the CBD in 2003) is: “Increase the resilience of ecosystems, and thus increase the contribution of 
biodiversity to carbon stocks, contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation and to combating desertification” 
210. CS-FOR not only is in line with national climate change adaptation and mitigation priorities and goals but will 
make concrete contributions to achieving these. The project will support carbon emission reduction and enhance 
carbon storage through: (i) the creation of legal and management enabling environment supported by an innovative 
evidence-based climate and natural resource planning and monitoring system; (ii) community based investments in 
natural forest regeneration, sustainable forest management, afforestation and reforestation; (iii) rehabilitation of 
rangelands and prevention of further degradation; (iv) diversification of options for community livelihoods; and (v) and 
reduction of emission intensity per unit of animal protein.  
- 
Component 1 will contribute to the harmonization of procedures and regulations to ensure sustainable and 
climate change sensitive integrated planning, monitoring and evaluation of NRM. Output 1.1 will support 
strengthening and harmonization of the policy and legislation related to integrated management and use of 
forests-rangeland resources based on an ecosystem approach by supporting stocktaking and analysis of 
current legislation for identification of legal gaps and ambiguities in sectorial policies and regulations; conduct 
special studies on impacts of existing legislation on biodiversity, environmental resources, and livelihoods; 
and facilitate discussion and cooperation between agencies engaged in NRM, and advance legislation. 
Furthermore, by working on improving the existing forest-rangeland ecosystem-related legislation required 
for integrated management, output 1.1 will seek to provide evidence to inform the policy and legislative 
framework and plans for priority climate financing activities and investments. 
- 
Output 1.2 will enhance capacities on climate change risks and natural resource assessments, support further 
enhancement of capacities of the existing monitoring units at the central level with evidence-based Integrated 
NRM Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation tools and methodologies, and facilitate linkages between the 
evidences, data from the ground, information systems and the forest-rangeland ecosystem planning 
processes. Working within the framework agreed by Kyrgyz institutions with the Kyrgyzstan National Spatial 
Infrastructure Memorandum of Understanding Target: central, local institutions, academia and CSOs, 
output 1.2 will facilitate establishment and enhancement of a dedicated NRM and climate-oriented monitoring 
procedure for central institutions to ensure monitoring and evaluation of NR across the country by supporting 
the development of standards, methodologies and implementation modalities for the state monitoring of 
pasture resources. 
- 
Output 1.3 will create and improve skills and capacity in promotion of climate-resilient and adaptive NR 
management and use in participating communities. The project will develop methodologies, guidelines and 
materials on elaboration of INRMCRPs considering all issues of environment and biodiversity protection and 
ecosystem functions. 
- 
Through investment on afforestation/reforestation and forest enrichment, and productive investment in the 
productive capacities for pasture restoration for adaptive livelihood, Component 2 will contribute to increase 
the resilience of the population in the target areas and to decrease their exposure to climate change related 
risks and hazards.  
- 
The use of Georeferencing and Geospatial Analysis (FAO approach and tools) is a key part of the evidence-
based approach of the project, to map and monitor (e.g. planting, carbon sequestration) project 
implementation with regards to project impacts on natural resources. Information from these can be used to

=== PAGE 63 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
validate national targets and help in national reporting to relevant international processes. 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
211. FAO has considerable experience and expertise and a proven comparative advantage in Sustainable Forest 
Management (SFM), Sustainable Land Management (SLM) and climate change. In the field of SFM, FAO (i) promotes 
SFM by placing technical expertise in forestry at the disposal of member countries through field projects; (ii) chairs the 
Collaborative Partnership on Forests (CPF) which brings together 14 major forestry-related international organizations, 
institutions and convention secretariats to support the implementation of SFM; (iii) through its Committee on Forestry 
and Regional Forestry Commissions, provides primary venue for countries, civil society and private sector to convene 
to address common global and regional issues related to forests and forestry; and (iv) implements the National Forestry 
Program (NFP), National Forest Monitoring and Assessment Program, Global Forest Resources Assessment (FRA), 
Forest Sector Outlook Study, Forests and Climate Change, and GEF projects. 
212. FAO’s work on natural resources management in the Kyrgyz Republic and the wider region includes projects for 
capacity development on the assessment and systematic development of modernization plans for irrigation schemes, 
including training on irrigation management transfer to improve performance and tools and methods to improve water 
productivity, and identification of priorities for investment on water saving technologies in watersheds and training in 
the development of national drought preparedness plans and projects. FAO has also piloted its tools and methods for 
assessing and mapping land use systems, land degradation and SLM (LADA-WOCAT) through training on national 
mapping and assessment with Central Asia Countries Initiative on Land Management (CACILM) and on local level 
assessment and analysis with the Palm Alai SLM project of UNU shared by Tajikistan and Kyrgyz Republic. 
State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry (SAEPF)  
213. At national level, SAEPF comprises the Department of Protection and Use of National Resources, the 
Department of Development of Forest Ecosystems, the Center for State Regulation in Area of Environmental Protection 
and Security and State Enterprise for Hunting and Forest Management. At decentralized level, SAEPF is structured 
along seven Territorial Divisions for Environmental Protection and the Development of Forestry Ecosystems. It also 
includes Republican and Local Funds for Environmental Protection and Forestry Sector Development, the Issyk -Kul 
Biosphere Territory, Forest Management Institutions (Leskhoze), Forest Ranges, National Parks and Nature Reserves. 
At local level, SAEPF implements its activities through Leskhozes, whose planning and budgeting functions are 
mandated directly by the central body. Limitations of the current institutional structure, combined with a lack of 
resources and capacity at SAEPF has led to inefficiencies in the management of forest resources for the maximum 
benefit of local communities.  
214. The SAEPF has extensive experience working with bilateral and multilateral donors in the field of environment 
and forestry. FAO and GEF have been implementing the project Sustainable Management of Mountain Forests and 
Land Resources of the Kyrgyz Republic under Climate Change Conditions, whose experience was considered during 
CS-FOR design. SAEPF has been actively engaged in several projects related to sustainable resources management 
funded by the GIZ. 
215. On policy and regulatory frameworks, SAEPF is piloting a process of forest management reform in selected 
Leskhozes with a broadened stakeholders’ involvement (Decree of the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic dated 16 
June 2015 #367). In addition, the Government of Kyrgyzstan had programs and action plans for adaptation to climate 
change on "Forest and Biodiversity" 2015-2017. These were aimed to strengthen the resilience of the Kyrgyz’s forest 
and biodiversity to the adverse effects of climate change on natural ecosystems and communities. Leskhoze 
management reforms are underway supported by the WB-funded IFEMP. 
ARIS 
216. There are also seven oblast representatives providing support and administrative basis to the work of regional 
consultants on-site – Community Development Support Officers (CDSO) are responsible on average for 5-6 village 
districts. CDSOs are regional representatives of ARIS and provide consultations and training to communities, local 
self-governmental bodies and local public institutions on matters related to social mobilization and mobilization of local 
resources, development of local development strategies and pasture management plans, development of social and 
infrastructure micro-projects, environmental assessment of micro-projects, business planning and basic marketing, 
development of local budget and public hearings, consultations on procurement procedures at the level of communities,

=== PAGE 64 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
accounting etc. ARIS is managed by an Executive Director assisted by the Coordinators of each implemented project. 
The organization has a solid and extensive Management Information System (MIS). All data on conducted activities is 
entered into the MIS which can be also used to generate various reports (activities on social mobilization, capacity 
development, procurement, disbursements, electronic document management, beneficiaries’ satisfaction on project 
implementation etc.). 
217. ARIS will be Operational Partner of the project and will have specific responsibility to contribute achieving the 
results of selected outputs and activities according to its comparative advantages. The role and functions are described 
in Section C.7 and in Chapter 5 of the Feasibility Study. 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
218. CS-FOR was developed and prepared following a request by the Government of Kyrgyzstan, and a No-Objection 
Letter was signed by the NDA (SAEPF). SAEPF, who was, and will be involved, in the stakeholder engagement 
process, is also a member of the CS-FOR Steering Committee and the PMU. The CS-FOR proposal was developed 
in consultation with stakeholders to ensure that the project design is appropriate and meets national and local needs, 
to verify the feasibility of the activities included in the project Components, and to obtain feedback from all stakeholders 
on all aspects of the project, including the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and its 
components (including GRM and Gender). Project disclosure during stakeholder involvement is crucial especially at 
the local level where CLMGs will be heavily involved in the process of INRMCRP development which will decide the 
exact activity areas and precise beneficiary identification. 
219. Stakeholder engagement was undertaken during the Funding Proposal development stage and will continue 
during project implementation. Consultations during the Funding Proposal development stage were held through: 
workshops with potential stakeholders, meetings with potential stakeholders, and structured consultations. During 
project formulation missions, “non-structured” bilateral meetings were also held on both technical and project 
management/implementation issues.  
220. The following stakeholders were consulted: State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry (SAEPF); 
Ministry of Emergency Situations (MES); Ministry of Economy; Agricultural Projects’ Implementation Unit and the 
Department of Pastures, Livestock and Fisheries under the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and Melioration 
(MAFIM); ARIS (Community Development and Investment Agency); Association of Pasture User Unions “Kyrgyz 
Jaiyty”; Russian-Kyrgyz Development Fund (RKDF); local NGOs Rural Development Fund (RDF) and CAMP Alatoo; 
Kyrgyz Scientific-Research Institute of Livestock and Pasture; Kyrgyz Scientific-Research Veterinary Institute; Climate 
Financing Secretariat; “KyrgyzHydromet”; State Design Institute for Land Management “Kyrgyzgiprozem”; other donor 
agencies and civil society. 
221. The following consultations were held: National Facilitation Workshop on Green Climate Fund Project 
Formulation (Bishkek, 28-29 March, 2017, and bi-lateral meetings on 20 March, 2017); Meeting of the Working Group 
on discussion Green Climate Fund project proposal concept. Bishkek, 15 June 2017; Initiating Funding Proposal 
Development (September-October 2017); Furthering Funding Proposal Development (December 2017); and 
Structured Consultations (District-level Consultation Meeting (Jalalabad, 6 April 2018); Consultations with CSOs 
(Bishkek, 12 April 2018) and National Workshop (Bishkek, 13 April 2018)). 
222. During consultations, stakeholders identified activity priority areas and gaps, project target areas, and main 
stakeholders. Other issues that were discussed included the climate rationale, the relevant climate change mitigation 
and adaptation targets, the proposed project approach including the investment criteria, the sustainability and the 
expected paradigm shift. Stakeholders agreed on needs to be addressed, targets, methodology, timeframe and budget. 
Targeted district-level consultations involved over 40 stakeholders including representatives of local self-governments 
(ayil okmotu), forest enterprises (Leskhoze), pasture committees, women’s councils and traditional councils of the 
elders. Consultations with CSOs active in related areas (forestry, pasture, community development and value chain) 
saw a strong support to the project by confirming the current challenges which the project attempts to address as well 
as presenting success stories in similar interventions.  
223. Outputs from the Stakeholder Consultations were used to refine and improve the project design, especially in 
the areas related to participation and capacity development of beneficiaries and their institutions, and feed into the 
environmental and social management framework for the Project. The information and feedback obtained at the

=== PAGE 65 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
consultation helped strengthen the overall content of Funding Proposal and associated documents.  Further details on 
the Stakeholder Engagement process can be found in the Stakeholder Engagement Report in Annex 2b. 
224. The design process considered the interests of the stakeholders and established a plan for their involvement, 
laying out specific activities in which stakeholders will participate. A National Stakeholders Platform (NSP) under the 
CCCC, acting as Project Steering Committee (PSC) was established, and which will provide guidance to the project’s 
implementation. It was also agreed that SAEPF and ARIS will be the Operational Partners and key implementing 
agencies, jointly with the RKDF for the implementation of Component 3 (credit lines) and FAO for TA. Additionally, 
there will be direct contact with stakeholders through CLMGs to develop INRMCRPs and which will provide feedback 
for reporting on the technical aspects of the projects, needs for and results of training/capacity building, and annual 
operations plans. 
225. The Department of the State Environmental Review under the SAEPF, of the Government of Kyrgyzstan, will 
disclose all relevant ESMF CS-FOR documentation on their website. However, it’s worth highlighting that the proposal 
has been accepted by the relevant communities and national institutions. 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
226. The Project budget will amount a total of US$ 49.59 million, with a GCF grant of US$ 29.99 million or 60.4 percent 
of the project cost. The level of concessionality of the operation is justified by two main factors: (a) by the substantial 
expected impact in contribution to sequester about 19.8 m tCO2eq through forests and rangelands investment; coupled 
with (b) the limited or negative financial return of investment in forests, and the high transaction costs associated to 
mobilizing different stakeholders for joint investments in rangeland rehabilitation, which would not make the investment 
attractive for the private sector (see financial returns prospects under section F.1).  
227. The estimated benefits in sequestration of tonnes of CO2 equivalent is 19.8 million, with an average cost of 
US$ 2.5 per tCO2eq. The economic benefit of the intervention, including the social value of carbon (as per WB 
estimates, 2017) is US$ 353.7 million, with an average benefit of US$ 498.9 per ha as a result of the improved forests 
and rangelands management and with the support to climate-sensitive value chains. The average economic benefit 
per direct beneficiary in the Project Area is estimated at about US$ 41.1 per year (economic net present value of the 
operation per beneficiary per year), as a result of the project interventions. The project can be considered sound from 
a financially as well as from an economic perspective (see Chapter 7 of the Feasibility Study and Section F. 1) and 
has a significant potential for scaling up for manifested interest from other donors. 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
228. With a contribution of US$ 29.99 million from GCF, the project will have a grant:co-financing ratio of 1:0.7. The 
co-financing will total US$20 million, of which: 77 percent from RKDF, 18 percent from beneficiaries and about 2 
percent each from SAEPF, MAFIM and ARIS. FAO has committed USD 400,000 to: support policy dialogue around 
evidence-based NRM governance (and land tenure) (output 1.1).  
229. The high level of concessionality of the operation is justified by the public good nature of the mitigation 
interventions in the forestry and pasture rehabilitation sectors. Nevertheless, while forestry investment under 
Component 2 are a public good, rangeland investments under the same component are not technically a public good 
itself, as they improve management of common pool resources and provide a global public good in the form of reduced 
GHG emissions. Additionally, the interventions with expected high financial returns, such as the ones in the Climate-
sensitive value chain development Component, with a private good economic nature, will have a substantially lower 
level of concessionality. All private investments generated under Component 3 will be undertaken entirely with private 
funds and GCF funding will not finance any of it, aside from the capacity development to improve management of 
common pool resources mobilized under the same Component. 
230. The specific grant: co-financing ratio of Component 3 is at 1:5.6, including RKDF and beneficiaries’ contributions. 
For high-mountain and slow-growth forestry interventions, the concessionality reaches 90 percent of the cost. The high 
level of concessionality of the operation is justified by the public good nature of the mitigation interventions in the 
forestry and pasture rehabilitation sectors While forestry investment under Component 2 are a public good, rangeland 
investments under the same Component are not technically a public good themselves, as they improve management

=== PAGE 66 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
of common pool resources, but provide a global public good in the form of reduced GHG emissions. For pasture 
rehabilitation interventions the concessionality is lower (with a 25 percent expected contribution from the beneficiaries). 
Such level responds to the twofold aim to: (a) contribute to carbon sequestration (19.8 million tCO2eq sequestration); 
and (b) support to beneficiaries’ co-benefits in reducing climate-related risks. A contribution from the beneficiaries 
stimulates their ownership in the needed shift towards efficient rangeland rotation and smart herd management, and 
reflects the important monetary benefits of the investment for the individuals.  
231. As it happened with the transformation of pasture management in SLF due to the Pasture Law reform in 2009, 
it is expected that the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic and its development partners will continue the investment 
in line with the transformative approach that the project will deploy at a significant scale.  
E.6.3. Financial viability  
232. The financial analyses show that all of the proposed measures show positive Net Present Values (NPVs) and 
Internal Rate of Returns (IRR) significantly above the financial discount rate prevailing in the Kyrgyz economy. The 
details and the findings of the financial analysis are fully described in Chapter 7 of the Feasibility Study as well as in 
Section F.1 of the Funding Proposal. 
233. Private sector operations under Component 3 will be accompanied by technical assistance provided by the 
project as element to enhance the credit worthiness of the entrepreneurs as Agents of Change. The substantial 
financial support from RKDF and the expertise of its accredited partner banks will ensure appropriate financial viability 
of the operations.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
234. The project will support the uptake of technologies and practices that are largely tested in similar contexts but 
with provide an innovative approach to ensure that the interconnected interests generate virtuous spaces for synergies 
instead of vicious circles leading to depletion of natural resources. In Forestry investment, technically sound 
recommendations have been incorporate with improvements in the implementation arrangements, to ensure higher 
survival rates of the trees as well as to ensure using adapted species in the appropriate locations. In Pasture 
management, the main element given by pasture rotation has demonstrated successes throughout the region (e.g., 
Tajikistan); the project will build on such successful cases, emphasizing the need for this practice to ensure the 
appropriate level of carbon sequestration potential. The technologies proposed within the Climate-sensitive value chain 
development have been analysed according to their technical feasibility, financial profitability and market potential, 
both for the domestic and export demand.  
235. The delivery mechanism of the project has also proven to be successful. On one side through local institutions 
mobilization, improved by the integrated cross-sectorial planning instead of a monothematic planning (e.g., not limiting 
the planning to mere pasture development, but embracing also other natural resources and their users); on the other 
side, value chain support through credit lines has demonstrated great successes in the region and in the country, and 
is being adopted also by IFAD in the Access to Market Project (ATMP). For further details, Chapter 7 of the Feasibility 
Study and the Working Paper on Climate-sensitive value chain provide descriptions of the specificities and potential of 
practices and technologies and their expected results.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
 
(a) Total project financing 
US$ 49.99 million  
(b) Requested GCF amount  
US$ 29.99 million  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
19.8 million tCO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
US$ 2.5 / tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c) 
US$ 1.5 / tCO2eq

=== PAGE 67 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
236. The project’s CO2 equivalent potential sequestration was estimated utilizing the FAO developed Ex-
Ante Carbon Balance Tool (EX-ACT)67. The tool assesses the net balance of tCO2eq Greenhouse Gases 
that were emitted or carbon sequestered as a result of project implementation compared to a “without 
project” scenario. The analysis utilized parameters adapted to the Kyrgyz context, utilizing as much as 
possible Tier 2 values specific to the project’s interventions. For the assessment of the dynamics of the 
livestock production, considering the significant contribution of this subsector to emissions and its socio-
economic importance in the area, a specific analysis was carried out using the Global Livestock 
Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM-i) 68  and its interactive user-friendly tool. GLEAM-i 
summarizes a biophysical model of livestock supply chains that calculates animal herd dynamics, feed 
rations, production and greenhouse gas emissions with Tier 2 methodology (IPCC, 2006), with a life cycle 
approach. 
237. The results of the analysis show how effective carbon sequestration can be achieved through an 
integrated approach that takes into account forest management, improved pasture management, and 
livestock management.  
238. The project targets afforestation, forest management, grassland management, perennial crops and 
agro-forestry development activities on a total area of 709,174 ha:  
Carbon sequestration per activity (tCO2eq sequestered):  
On 20 years life 
span 
Per year 
6,000 ha69 under afforestation / reforestation / forest enrichment 
729,608 
36,480 
56,359 ha of forest under Improved management 
3,479,418 
173,971 
646,275 ha of improved rangeland 
14,923,368 
746,168 
3,100 ha new orchards 
469,415 
23,471 
Smart herd management, improved feeding and manure management for 
about 849,226 head of cattle and other ruminants  
149,545 
7,477 
TOTAL 
19,751,354 
987,568 
 
239. As per livestock production, when comparing to a BAU situation with no technology or practice 
improvements (i.e., very low livestock productivity), projecting the results of the improved practices over 
20 years, the project will result in saving 149,545 tCO2eq, with a total extra 8,346 tons of protein produced. 
With a relative herd control (i.e., corresponding to 20 percent of the number of animals), the project would 
result in saving 1,077,451 tCO2eq, for an extra 974 tons of protein produced. 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
240. As described in Section B.1, the project’s approach is to grant higher concessionality for activities 
with higher potential for carbon sequestration. Similarly, the project provides a limited concessionality 
where the investments have an indirect role on sustainability of carbon sequestration investment, but 
guarantee substantial private benefits. As such, most of the project co-financing from RKDF (US$ 15.0m) 
is directed to private enterprises (agents of change).  
241. In order to ensure ownership of the investment in carbon sequestration, the project envisages a 
contribution of the beneficiaries in-kind to both, investment in forests (around 20 percent of the cost of 
investment) and in rangelands rehabilitation (about 25 percent of the cost of the investment), for a total 
amount of US$ 3.6 million or 7 percent of the total project cost.   
 
67 http://www.fao.org/tc/exact/ex-act-home/en/  
68 www.fao.org/gleam/resources  
69 The investments in afforestation / reforestation cover an area of 3,000 ha planted at full density; forest enrichment investments are carried out in an area where forests already 
exist, and correspond to the reforestation of about 440 ha of new forest.

=== PAGE 68 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme) 
 
 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.  
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Financial and economic analysis 
242. CS-FOR Financial and Economic analysis focuses on selected economic activities supported by the project. 
Following the project investment structure, the analysis presents two sets of illustrative models of representative 
investments:  
 
Green Investments for forest and rangeland rehabilitation models (Component 2), including 
afforestation, reforestation, forest enrichment, rangeland rehabilitation. The investment in forests, 
including afforestation / reforestation and forest restoration through the INRMCRPs describe a 20 years 
projection of incremental costs and benefits of expectedly low financial performance. Such results are 
associated to the low pace of growth in the local conditions of the adapted tree species selected as most 
suitable for the investment (see Chapter 4 of the Feasibility Study and the attached spreadsheets). The 
investment in improved rangeland present slightly better results, with positive financial returns, and with 
higher resistance in with-project scenario to climate stresses. Both categories of investment present 
substantial results under the economic analysis, which takes into account the valuation of carbon 
sequestration and the ecosystem benefits. In order to ensure financial viability of these investments, the 
project will provide significant level of concessionality. 
 
 
Climate -sensitive value chains models (Component 3), including investment supported by RKDF’s loans 
in fruit / nut orchards; nurseries; conservation agriculture for cereals; greenhouses; beekeeping; broiler; 
turkey; cold storages; solar dryers; vacuum dryers. The models are structured assuming a 5-year loans with 
a 10% interest rate in a local currency. All value chain models show substantially positive financial benefits 
and rate of return. These results are derived from the increased access to the required financing (loans) – 
which will be made available by the CS-FOR co-financing, coupled with training, demonstrations and 
advisory services, provided by the project. 
 
243. The impact of climate pattern. Based on the climate scenario (reference to Section C.1 and Chapter 1 of the 
Feasibility Study), agriculture is mostly affected by a generalized temperature increase and water stress recurrence. 
The impacts of these stressors are applied on both, the without and with project scenarios for all models (except for 
greenhouse, intensive poultry and agrifood processing models).70 For rangelands, the mixed impact of climate changes 
on hayfield productivity (see Third National Communication) is worsened by the significant load on pasture. They yield 
projection for with and without project scenarios takes into account climate related stresses. The impact on yields varies, 
and reaches an average of 20 percent of difference in benefits during the years with highest climate related stresses, 
such as high temperatures and low rainfall (four years frequency based on the last ten years. In a With project scenario, 
yields are supposed to increase mostly due to the adoption of best agricultural practices (e.g., drip irrigation), facilitated 
by the project’s direct interventions and by the increased access to finance.  
 
F.1.1 Impact of climate pattern on the main 
economic activities at maturity 
Expected average yields (on 20 yrs 
projection) 
Expected average yields in high 
climate stresses years (every 4 yrs) 
Crop / Product 
Unit 
Without project  
With project  
Without project  
With project  
Wheat  
t/ha 
2.1 
2.7 
1.7 
2.6 
Corn 
t/ha 
6.0 
7.8 
4.8 
7.5 
Alfalfa 
t/ha 
2.5 
3.3 
2.0 
3.1 
Barley 
t/ha 
1.8 
2.4 
1.5 
2.3 
Honey  
kg/bee-family 
24.0 
28.0 
20.0 
22.4 
Meat sold  
kg/LU/year 
15.8 
22.2 
13.5 
21.1 
Milk production  
l/LU/day 
5.3 
6.0 
4.5 
5.7 
 
70 Activities performed in closed environments, with limited or no impact of climate change.

=== PAGE 69 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
Nursery (seedling/100m2) 
Seedl./100m2 
1,000 
2,400 
800 
2,300 
 
Financial analysis: results  
244. The analysis takes into account two time horizon for the projected net incremental benefits. With a 10-year 
horizon, the project shows an overall poor financial performance, affected by the slow realization of benefits from the 
forests related interventions. A 20-years projection period is set in order to account for the phasing and gestation 
period of the proposed interventions, an average adoption rate set at 80 percent, and a financial discount rate of 8 
percent used to assess the viability and robustness of investments.71 In the latter, the FIRR is estimated at 11.1 percent, 
and the net present value (NPV) of the project’s net benefit stream is US$12.0 million. Detailed calculations of 
aggregated financial IRR and NPV are presented in the “Summary” spreadsheet of the Integrated Financial Model. 
Considering the different level of concessionality of the two main sets of investment under Components 2 and 3, the 
results are presented in a disaggregated way to show attribution.  
 
Component 2 investments. On one side, forestry and pasture investments (with 80 percent of investment 
funded by the project) present mixed financial performance, mostly negative NPVs for spruce forestry 
operations (associated with long-term benefits), but positive NPVs with walnut related activities and 
rangeland rehabilitation. In details, the 10-year financial IRR and NPV for aggregated cash flows of forests 
and rangelands investment are -20.9 percent US$ -13.3 mln US$ respectively, while financial IRR and 
NPV achieve 8.8 percent and US$ 1.3 m in 20-years, highlighting weak attractiveness of forest and pasture 
interventions for the private sector (this, in turn, provides a justification for the concessionality associated 
with these investment).  
 
Component 3 investments. On the other side, for climate-sensitive value chain models (where the project 
provides capacity development related costs, for an equivalent of 15 percent of the investment), the results 
show the worthiness of the investments, with a significant increase in gross and net returns. More 
specifically, the financial IRR for aggregated sustainable value chain investments for 20 years is estimated 
at 28.1 percent exceeding the expected rate of return of RKDF loans (10 percent). The financial results 
for 10 years are attractive for RKDF as well: NPV is estimated at US$ 0.7 million, while IRR is 9.0 percent  
Sensitivity analysis on financial performance72 
245. Impacts of climate change. All models take into account the effect of climate change on the economic activities’ 
performance. Incremental costs and benefits streams are adjusted according to the expected effect of climate change. 
In particular, increase of costs due to climate change reflects the need for replanting seedlings due to the influence 
of higher frequency of temperature and rainfall related stresses (or droughts), or increasing inputs quantities and costs, 
or the effect of landslides and mudslides on forests and rangeland infrastructures. Correspondingly, decrease of yields 
and productivity reflects the impact of more intense water and temperature stresses on yields of fruit and nut trees, 
pasture productivity and crop production. With the above elements taken into account, the aggregated project’s 
investment is financially viable within 35 percent (or even more) of costs increase and benefits decrease in 20 years. 
The operation is not financially viable in the unlikely case that costs increase by more than 60 percent, or benefits 
decrease by 40 percent in the 20-year horizon (Table F.1.2). 
F.1.2 Financial parameters’ sensitivity due to impacts of 
climate change  
10 Years 
20 years 
IRR (%) 
NPV (US$ m) 
IRR (%) 
NPV (US$ m) 
Base scenario 
-1,9% 
-12,5 
20,3% 
55,4 
Increase of costs due climate change impacts by 60% 
NA 
-51,7 
8,1% 
0,3 
Decrease of benefits due climate change impacts by 40% 
NA 
-33,6 
7,0% 
-3,5 
 
Economic analysis: results 
246. The CS-FOR economic analysis is based on the aggregation of incremental benefits from all models taking into 
account the associated environmental benefits. The benefits are set under the assumption that about 80 percent of the 
105,000 households beneficiaries benefit of the technologies and practices supported by the project. Moreover, it is 
expected that the Project investments in supportive value chains will generate more than 3,300 full-time equivalent jobs 
when the activities reach their full capacity.  
 
71 Weighted average deposits rate of individuals in local currency (Source: National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic, Apr 2018).  
72 See the “Sensitivity” spreadsheet of the Integrated Financial and Economic Model linked at the end of the Funding Proposal.

=== PAGE 70 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
247. Assumptions. The economic discount rate of 4.75 percent based on the current refinancing rate of the National 
Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic is used in this analysis. The shadow exchange rate (SER) has been calculated at 1 US$ = 
73.4 KGS. Overall conversion factors for inputs and outputs vary between 0.70 and 1.18. An average conversion factor 
of 0.89 has been applied when converting financial prices into economic prices. The derivation and a summary of 
economic prices are presented in the conversion factor (“CF”) spreadsheet of the Integrated Financial Model. At 
aggregated economic level, the analysis takes a 10- and a 20-year horizon, where the latter takes into account the 
phasing and gestation period of the carbon sequestration investment.  
Valuation of environmental benefits 
248. Carbon sequestration potential. Under the community investment in forestry and rangeland rehabilitation, the 
project will contribute to ensuring capturing about 19.8 m tCO2eq via: reforestation-afforestation of 6,000 ha of severely 
damaged forests, rehabilitation of over 645,000 hectares of degraded pastures, improved management of over 56,000 
ha of forests, and other activities. More details are available in the Carbon Accounting Chapter of the Feasibility Study. 
The analysis considered the shadow price of US$ 40/tCO2eq as the social value of carbon (World Bank, 2017).73  
249. Economic benefit from ecosystem services. The incremental economic benefits of the project result from the 
improvement and restoration of ecosystem services in the rehabilitated forest and pasture areas with the Project 
support. These ecosystem services represent public goods, which are not captured by markets or by the Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) and do not monetarily contribute to farmers.74 A regional report prepared by The Economics 
of Land Degradation (ELD)75 Initiative to value land degradation looked beyond the market value for crops; the ELD 
also looked at ecosystem services benefits including from carbon storage and sequestration to nutrient provision and 
cycling. Out of the indicated ecosystem services in the study, the relevant ones for this analysis are non-timber products 
(estimated value of about 6.5 US$/ha) and drinking water (about 0.3 US$/ha) since other services such as pasture and 
forest carbon sequestration were already integrated in financial and economic analysis. For other ecosystem services 
like erosion control, pollination, water flow regulation and habitat provision, no economic values were found in the 
country. Therefore, they were not considered in the economic analysis. 
250. Economic Results. Considering the above-mentioned benefit and cost streams, in the base scenario the net 
incremental benefit stream associated with project interventions and accounting for the carbon sequestration potential 
and related ecosystem services generates an economic rate of return of 71.3 percent and a net present value of 
US$ 353.7 million over 20 years. Especially for the valuation of the carbon sequestration benefits, the component 2 
economic benefits contributes to about 80 percent of the economic results of the project. Component 3 related activities 
have a very robust financial performance, but contribute to the remaining 20 percent to the economic benefits.  
251. Sensitivity Analysis. Various hypothesis were tested to assess the project’s sensitivity to critical variables 
(summarized in table F.1.3). They include:  
(i) Climate change affecting costs and benefits. Sensitivity analysis assessed, among others, the effect of 
variations in benefits and costs due to the potential impacts of climate change on revenues and costs. The 
underlying assumption is that costs increase due to higher climate related stresses, for example additional 
replanting costs in reforestation and afforestation activities due to the droughts. Similarly but in terms of benefits, 
late frosts and droughts adversely impact the yield of fruit and nut trees, while pasture productivity and crop yields 
may suffer from frequent droughts. These factors, combined with low adoption of climate smart practices and 
technologies may have an adverse impact on the Project’s interventions. Considering the potential carbon 
sequestration through the project’s interventions, even with a significant increase of costs (+30 percent) or reduction 
of benefits (-30 percent), the investments show positive net incremental economic benefits.  
(ii) Changes in potential sequestration or in its valuation. The analysis took also into account the possibility of 
a drop of the social value of carbon to half of the current estimated value, showing anyway positive economic 
benefits in both, the 10- and 20-years scenarios.  
(iii) Changes in potential sequestration or in its valuation. The analysis took also into account the possibility of 
a drop of the social value of carbon to half of the current estimated value, showing anyway positive economic 
 
73 World Bank, 2017. Guidance note on shadow price of carbon in economic analysis 
74 See Appendix to this Chapter: Value of forest and pasture-related ecosystem services in Kyrgyzstan 
75 Sabyrbekov, R., & Abdiev, A. (2016). Economics of Land Degradation (ELD) Initiative: Kyrgyzstan Case Study. Evaluating ecosystem services of highland pastures. Report for 
the ELD Initiative from the Consultative International Group on Agricultural Research (CGIAR): Amman, Jordan

=== PAGE 71 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
benefits in both, the 10- and 20-years scenarios. The analysis has also considered the possibility of a substantial 
reduction of the sequestration capacity of the rangelands, either by reducing the sequestration capacity per hectare, 
or the success rate on the targeted rangelands. The results are positive in both scenarios, specifically: (a) when 
carbon sequestration per hectare drop by almost four times (i.e., from 1.15 tCO2eq per year to 0.3 tCO2eq per year); 
(b) when the number of hectares where the practices are adopted drops by half (i.e., with a success on 300,000 ha 
on the above 640,000 assumed target). Similar results are obtained with a reduced general adoption rate.  
(iv) Delays in implementation would cause a reduction of the net present value but would not be significant before 
a three years delay.  
F. 1.4 Economic analysis different 
scenarios 
 
10-year period 
20-year period 
Sensitivity analysis to variations in costs 
and benefits 
 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Base scenario 
 
68,0% 
113,5 
71,3% 
353,7 
Increase of costs due climate change 
impacts by 30% 
 
35,4% 
73,2 
43,2% 
291,5 
Decrease of benefits due climate change 
impacts by 30% 
 
32,8% 
41,2 
41,2% 
170,7 
Sensitivity to social value of CO2  
 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Base case (US$/tCO2eq) 
40 
68,0% 
113,5 
71,3% 
353,7 
 
20 
42,1% 
61,5  
49,1% 
238,4  
 
80 
112,4% 
217,6  
113,3% 
584,3  
Sensitivity to rangelands’ carbon 
sequestration potential  
 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Base case (tCO2eq/ha) 
1,15 
68,0% 
113,5 
71,3% 
353,7 
 
0.30 
27,1% 
34,7  
37,8% 
180,4  
Sensitivity to area of rehabilitated 
rangelands with potential to sequester 
carbon  
 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Base case (thousand ha) 
644 
68,0% 
113,5 
71,3% 
353,7 
 
500 
56,8% 
90,3 
61,4% 
302,6 
 
300 
40,3% 
58,2 
47,7% 
231,9 
Sensitivity to adoption rate of benefits 
 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Base case (%) 
80% 
68,0% 
113,5 
71,3% 
353,7 
 
50% 
35,4% 
45,7 
43,2% 
182,2 
Sensitivity to delay in project activities 
 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Economic IRR 
(%) 
Economic NPV  
(million US$) 
Base case 
 
68,0% 
113,5 
71,3% 
353,7 
1 year delay 
 
39,2% 
74,2 
47,4% 
311,0 
2 year delay 
 
21,8% 
37,8 
36,0% 
270,3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
252. The proposed investment and technologies have been selected and proposed as the most suitable to the project 
target area, considering multiple factors including: the environmental and climate conditions of the area (project 
ATLAS), the socio-economic conditions, livelihoods and balance of empowerment between disadvantaged groups and 
within households including gender aspects (Livelihood Study), technical performance aimed at maximizing carbon 
sequestration and potential market for the products of the related economic activities.  
253. Pasture rotation is the main strategy proposed and driving the investment in pasture rehabilitation. The 
current grazing management practice allows livestock to have access to an entire pasture for the whole season.  By 
the end of the season the pasture is evenly overgrazed, and this situation is repeated and reinforced from year to year. 
Rotational grazing (Pasture Rotation) is designed to maximize pasture growth and available forage on a grazed pasture 
without necessarily reducing the number of grazing livestock. Degraded pastures in Kyrgyzstan have a measured

=== PAGE 72 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
standing forage yield between 0.5 and 1 ton DW/ha. Conservatively, the potential yield of biomass on Kyrgyz pastures 
is at least 3 tons DW/ha. If Kyrgyz pastures can be managed with a pasture rotation so that growth approaches this 
level while they still provide forage for grazing livestock, the contribution to carbon sequestration is substantial. 
However, if belowground growth is also taken into account, the carbon sequestration is magnified. The root:shoot ration 
for perennial grasses can be set conservatively at 2:1. For carbon accounting purposes, the above-ground biomass 
with a root:shoot ratio of 2:1 can be multiplied by 3 to express the total plant biomass. The calculated increase in total 
Kyrgyz pasture biomass (shoots and roots) rises from 1.5 to 3 tons DW/ha in a degraded condition to 9 tons DW/ha 
when plant growth is allowed to approach its potential. 
254. Forestry investment. On the basis of monitoring results of forest conditions, an estimate has been produced on 
the availability of lands in target areas. For afforestation/reforestation planted forests on barren, clear-cut or 
pastureland were selected; and for forest restoration, degraded forests with some tree cover. The selection of tree 
species and the estimates on the potential areas for forestry investment have been made depending on factors including 
the availability of land and the suitability for the survival of tree species. In the Project Area, five zones were identified: 
(1) zone of desert pistachio forests and small semi-shrubs, occupying low and partly high foothills in the range 
from 700 to 900 m above sea level. Vegetation is represented by thickets of bush cherry, rare pistachio thickets (Pistacia 
vera) are encountered; (2) zone of steppe pistachio forest of cereal meadows and steppes is confined to high 
foothills, located at an altitude of 900 to 1,100 m (occasionally 1,300 m) above sea level. Vegetation is diverse: in the 
lower part, there are thickets of pistachio, red-fruited cherry, hawthorn. In the upper and middle parts of the zone Prunus 
aflatunia, barberry (Berberis spp.), cherry plum (Prunus cerasifera), and others species grow; (3) Walnut-apple forest 
zone lies at an altitude from 1,100-1,300 to 2,000-2,200 m above sea level. Woody vegetation of the forest zone is 
represented by walnut-apple forests. Walnut forests here are of seed-bearing origin, of different age and are confined 
to the slopes of northern exposures. Apple forests consist of apple trees of Malus sieversii and Malus kirghisorum. The 
top edge of walnut-apple forests is formed by maple trees, which rise to an altitude of 2,500-2,600 m; (4) subalpine 
shrub-meadow zone, occupying heights of 2,000-2,500 m, in places up to 3,000 m above sea level. The main 
components of this zone are rare maple trees from Acer turkestanica, juniper, fir (Abies spp.), bushes and subalpine 
meadows; (5) alpine low-grass meadow zone, located at an altitude of 2,500 m (or sometimes above). It occupies 
mainly mountain-tops and rocks devoid of vegetation. The smaller part of the belt is occupied by alpine meadows. 
Woody vegetation is almost absent; shrubs are found in individual specimens from 800 to 3,000 m above sea level. 
255. Climate-sensitive value chains. Potential investment under the value chain development component have been 
pre-identified on the basis of the Livelihood Study, on results of ongoing projects (such as the IFAD-funded Access to 
Market), as well as dedicated end-market assessments on selected value chains. These studies have also influenced 
the selection of the models included in the detailed financial and economic analysis. Specific analysis have been carried 
out on: estimated margins along the beef value chain; the current potential for orchards and greenhouses development 
in the Project Area; assessment of lost market opportunities for nuts and dried fruits on nearby markets (which result 
in a total of about US$ 193.9 million – see Appendix to Chapter 7 of the feasibility Study); economic effect of direct 
sales of animals to slaughterhouse; and other analyses. The analyses have confirmed the need to proceed with pre-
assessment of the market potential within value chains that can boost agricultural productivity and competitiveness 
gains in the Project Area, with the potential to adopt energy saving and green technologies (vacuum and solar driers, 
agricultural machinery, greenhouses, eco-tourism, agricultural produce processing etc.). 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
256. During project formulation, an environmental and social management framework was developed as the initial 
phase of the due diligence (see the Environmental and Social Management Framework annexed to this Proposal). An 
initial risk assessment was carried out against FAO´s Environmental and Social Safeguards and the project is 
considered to be moderate risk (for an in-depth description, see Annex 5,Section 5.1 of the attached Environmental 
and Social Management Framework, linked in appendix). Potential environmental risks identified are not major, will not 
extend beyond the area of influence of the project and are neither irreversible nor cumulative.  
257. The project will proactively work with stakeholders to lessen environmental impacts in all target areas: an 
ecosystem-based approach ensures forest restoration/reforestation/afforestation and pastureland rehabilitation 
activities are jointly designed to improve management of natural resources and ecosystem service functions while 
improving livestock productivity; strengthening natural resource management governance will also be addressed. The 
project will not intervene in legally protected areas nor in their buffer zones. The project will not deny access to certain

=== PAGE 73 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
areas a priori. Restoration activities will be selected and executed in agreement with those communities that are legally 
entitled to benefits from targeted lands. Specifically regarding pasture rotation and consequent restriction of access to 
certain areas of pastures, this is determined by the INRMCRPs decided by the CLMGs where all users are represented. 
The regulation on access to SFF is determined by the law and will be agreed within the INRMCRPs mentioned above. 
Restriction of access to certain areas is according to the law (i.e., in SFF or in Parks) and no compensation is envisaged. 
Main tree species have been matched per target Leskhoze conditions according to scientific knowledge from the Kyrgyz 
Forest Institute under the Academy of Science and validated with SAEPF. The project supports only the planting of 
endemic or non-invasive domesticated tree species from the Kyrgyzstan and the Central Asia region. Priority 
consideration will be given to conserving the biodiversity and genetic pool of endemic species that are becoming scarce 
or are under threat (International Union for Conservation of Nature). Selected species have been identified among the 
species that are endemic/autochthonous and naturalized that are not reported in the IUCN invasive species list. Detailed 
selection of species will be done according to ecological and climatic trends and projections of target areas (reference: 
Project ATLAS, Annex 6 and 6.b of the Funding Proposal). Concerning the economic sustainability, the project will 
invest in forest restoration in forest areas publicly owned by the State where the main purpose of forests is not a direct 
economic use but the ecosystem services provided to local communities and overall to the Country. Regarding the 
incentives, trees will be planted only in dedicated public land (State Forest Fund and/or Municipal land), and will be 
maintained by relevant public bodies (SAEPF, Municipalities). 
258. Potential social impacts identified in the assessment are related to unequal participation because of gender 
discrimination or discrimination against other vulnerable groups, including youth. A Gender Assessment and Gender 
Action Plan was prepared; the Livelihood Study prepared during formulation, and stakeholder consultations, informed 
that certain groups in the rural community are socially disadvantaged, particularly poor families, female-headed 
households, and young women and men, due to their weak social and economic standing. The project therefore 
incorporates special actions to ensure their equal participation in the project. For young women and men, in addition to 
ensuring their equal access to project information and benefits, particular attention will be paid to promote their 
engagement in business opportunities in the project supported value chains by proactively including them in business 
related capacity building activities.   
259. The ESMF identified the most relevant mitigation actions, including compliance with standards, and training, as 
appropriate. During project implementation, activities will be identified and FAO´s screening procedures will be 
implemented accordingly. Through the PMU Safeguards Specialist and Environmental Expert, Environmental and 
Social Management Plans will be developed as necessary and mitigation actions will be monitored throughout the life 
of the project. The annual reporting of FAO to GCF will be provided through the Annual Performance Report. The 
project will not fund or be involved in sub-projects / investments rated at high risk. Independent party will deal with all 
sub-project screening and categorization and require preparation of Environmental and Social Analysis (ESA, for 
moderate risk) for sub-project proposals using FAO ESS standards and have FAO approve and then forward to RKDF 
and partner banks for the loans to be provided to borrowers for Component 3 of the Project. Independent party such 
as ESS Management Plan Specialist will be responsible for all sub-project screening and categorization and will ensure 
the preparation of ESA when required under Component 1 and Component 2 of the Project. 
260. A stakeholder engagement process was carried out to identify and engage with all stakeholders of the project, 
from national to local authorities, relevant technical institutions, to NGOs and CSOs, etc. The process (divided into two 
major segments: during project formulation and later, during project implementation) resulted in proactive involvement 
in the initial phase of the proposal. A project level grievance mechanism is being established to ensure all stakeholders 
the possibility to file grievances if needed. Each CLMG will include the representative of women’s council as well as 
youth organization in each Ayil Aimak. At least 30% of the members should be women.    
261. The Gender Assessment found that despite the adequate legal framework and Government’s proclamations of 
gender equality, researchers and development practitioners point out that Kyrgyzstan faces high gender inequalities. 
Deep-rooted patriarchal attitudes and conventional beliefs of women’s roles and responsibilities in the family and 
society serve to perpetuate gender inequality. While women’s councils exist at the rural municipality level to address 
gender issues and support women, many are not strong.76 Economic empowerment of women is lagging behind as 
barriers to their equal employment opportunities and entrepreneurship development continues to remain. Because only 
one pasture ticket is allowed per family, women have limited access to decision making in pastures. Also gender-based 
 
76 From 454 pasture management committees that existed in 2016, only 11 were chaired by women (2.4 percent).

=== PAGE 74 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
inequalities are present in women’s access to land, finance, decision making and management of resources. Gender 
considerations will therefore be mainstreamed into all trainings associated with project implementation and 
opportunities for women’s participation and empowerment in project activities will be promoted. 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
262. The FAO Representation in Kyrgyzstan will be the Budget Holder (BH) of the project, and will be responsible for 
timely operational, administrative and financial management of GCF resources implemented by FAO directly. The 
budget holder will be also responsible for i) managing OPIM for results, including monitoring of risks and overall 
compliance with the OPA provisions; ii) review and clear financial and progress reports received from the OP and certify 
request for funds iii) approve  and clear budget revisions and annual work plan and budgets; iv) ensure implementation 
of the Risk Mitigation and Assurance Plan v) follow up and ensure that the OP implements all actions and 
recommendations agreed upon during Assurance Activities. 
Financial management  
263. Financial management in relation to the GCF resources directly managed by FAO will be carried out in 
accordance with FAO’s rules and procedures. 
264. The Operational Partners (OPs) SAEPF and ARIS are accountable to FAO for achieving the agreed project 
results and for the effective use of resources made available by FAO. Financial management and reporting for the 
funds transferred to SAEPF and ARIS will be done by them in accordance with terms, conditions, formats and 
requirements of FAO and the signed Operational Partners Agreement (OPA). The administration by the OP of the funds 
received from FAO shall be carried out under its own financial regulations, rules and procedures, which shall provide 
adequate controls to ensure that the funds received are properly administered and expended. The Operational Partners 
shall maintain the account in accordance with generally accepted accounting standards.   
265. Financial records. FAO shall maintain a separate account in United States dollars for the project’s GCF 
resources showing all income and expenditures. FAO shall administer the project in accordance with its regulations, 
rules and directives. The OPs shall maintain books and records that are accurate, complete and up-to-date. The OPs’ 
books and records will clearly identify all Fund Transfers received by the OPs as well as disbursements made by the 
OPs under their respective OPAs, including the amount of any unspent funds and interest accrued. 
266. Financial reports. FAO’s BH will prepare project expenditure accounts according to the requirements of GCF 
and in line with FAO Oracle Project budget codes. The OPs will prepare the financial reports in accordance with terms, 
conditions, formats and requirements of FAO and the signed OPAs. The BH will review and approve request for funds 
and financial reports of the OPs. The subsequent instalments can be released only based on the BH confirmation that 
all expenditures are eligible and all OPAs requirements are fulfilled to the satisfaction of FAO. The BH will withhold any 
payment due to the OPs in case of non-compliance with the reporting obligations detailed in the OPAs.  
Procurement  
267. Careful procurement planning is necessary for securing goods, services and works in a timely manner, on a “Best 
Value for Money” basis, and in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of FAO. It requires analysis of needs and 
constraints, including forecast of the reasonable timeframe required to execute the procurement process. Procurement 
and delivery of inputs in technical cooperation projects follow FAO’s rules and regulations for the procurement of 
supplies, equipment and services (i.e., Manual Sections 502 and 507). Manual Section 502: “Procurement of Goods, 
Works and Services” establishes the principles and procedures that apply to procurement of all goods, works and 
services on behalf of the Organization, in all offices and in all locations, with the exception of the procurement actions 
described in Annex 2, Chapter 6 – Procurement Not Governed by Manual Section 502. Manual Section 507 establishes 
the principles and rules that govern the use of Letters of Agreement (LoA) by FAO for the timely acquisition of services 
from eligible entities in a transparent and impartial manner, taking into consideration economy and efficiency to achieve 
an optimum combination of expected whole life costs and benefits (“Best Value for Money”). 
268. The FAO Representative will prepare an annual procurement plan for major items which will be the basis of 
requests for procurement actions during implementation. The plan will include a description of the goods, works, or 
services to be procured, estimated budget and source of funding, schedule of procurement activities and proposed 
method of procurement. In situations where exact information is not yet available, the procurement plan should at least 
contain reasonable projections that will be corrected as information becomes available.

=== PAGE 75 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
E 
269. Before commencing procurement, both FAO (in its role as executing entity) and the OPs will update the project´s 
Procurement Plan for approval by the Project Steering Committee. This plan will be reviewed during the inception 
workshop and will be approved by the BH. The OPs will update their plan every six months and submit the plan to the 
BH for approval.

=== PAGE 76 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 99 
 
 
 
G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Insufficient inter-ministerial coordination between 
SAEPF, MAFIM, MES, and SALGSIR and coordination 
among local self-government bodies, Leskhozes and 
PUUs in implementation of reforms. 
Technical and 
operationalTechnical 
and operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value)Low 
(<5% of project 
value) 
High 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Risk will be mitigated by the establishment by the project of a dedicated National Platform – acting as Project Steering 
Committee (see Chapter 5 of the Feasibility Study), formally established and chaired by the Vice Prime Minister to 
ensure inter-ministerial coordination and cooperation. Embracing an inclusive approach by including representatives 
from all relevant government and non-government institutions, and operating under the aegis of the CCCC, the 
Platform will have a strong catalytic function to ensure the endorsement of policy and regulatory frameworks required 
to support the ecosystem based transformation of NRM. Moreover, it will have the required level of representation to 
promote at the Parliamentary and Governmental level the approval of the proposed harmonized policy and regulatory 
frameworks. Additional information is summarized in Addendum 3. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Since 1995, livestock numbers have been increasing, 
particularly in recent years. From 2010-2016 the number 
of cattle, horses, sheep and goats increased by 17 
percent, 19 percent and 23 percent respectively, 
increasing pressure on pasture reserves. Control of herd 
numbers assumes critical importance for the success of 
improved pasture management and the subsequent 
carbon sequestration potential.  
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Through negotiated INRMCRPs, the project will deliver the required capacity development to ensure that PUUs and 
their Pasture Committees have the knowledge and authority to shift from a low productive livestock grazing to a high 
productivity livestock production system, which requires a significantly lower number of animals to reach parity of 
output. An incentive scheme may be necessary to overcome inertia and to change traditional pasture management 
behaviour into pasture rotation practices that support higher livestock production. Through Component 3 in support of 
climate-sensitive value chains, the project has set a system to ensure diversification from unproductive livestock 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
270. The project is set around an ambitious target of transforming the management of NR towards higher participation 
and higher transparency, ultimately resulting in higher efficiency and effectiveness of the investment. Such change 
will be strengthened through substantial support provided by the project to the investment, and through the availability 
to the larger public of the results of investment in forestry and pasture. Ultimately, any individual will be able to monitor 
the actual situation on the ground of all investment carried out. Such dynamics are expected to encounter some initial 
resistance to change as the current situation generates ambiguities, but that may be turned to the advantage of the 
various interest holders in turn. Nevertheless, the strength of the project in supporting the paradigm shift relies in its 
approach embracing not only the need for investment in NR, but also in the need to provide economic opportunities 
that go beyond the NR use related subsectors (i.e., climate-sensitive value chain support), and also in its support for 
the use of evidence and availability of information. A number of detailed risks are associated with the investment; they 
are described in the following Section.

=== PAGE 77 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 99 
 
 
 
G 
grazing towards more competitive and productive agricultural activities. Additional information is summarized in 
Addendum 3. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Low capacity of local forestry enterprises to work in the 
planned number of hectares. According to assessments 
done by FAO and the WB in the framework of projects 
where local forestry enterprises have been involved, 
human capacities of staff employed in such state 
enterprises require a substantive update to apply the best 
available techniques for reforestation, afforestation and 
pasture rehabilitation. 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will deploy substantial capacity development to Leskhozes in the Project Areas to ensure that their staff 
gain up to date technical capacity to carry out sustainable (and with high survival rates) afforestation/reforestation and 
forest enrichment activities in SFF, but also to guarantee a basis of evidence on successful results of an integrated 
approach. Moreover, the project will provide highly concessional support to forestry investments, with higher guarantee 
that the investments are followed up on the years subsequent to the first. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Changes in the Government’s political vision such as 
the decentralization of resource management with high 
change in the highest decision-making positions may 
affect the project implementation in the way it involves 
local communities. 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
In order to mitigate the risk, the project will establish a continuous engagement process as key strategic element of 
implementation. This follows up on the process already initiated during the project design stage (see ESMF and 
stakeholders engagement reports), involving the technical staff of relevant ministries and local stakeholders in project 
preparation and implementation to ensure buy-in, and supporting communications campaigns to disseminate results 
of the studies in order to raise public awareness on climate change risks and to ensure wide political support. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Saturation of the agricultural lending market when 
expected disbursement rates by RKDF and partner banks 
may not be possible. 
Financial 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
As a mitigation strategy, the project and RKDF will partner with existing domestic banks interested in the development 
of the “green” agricultural sector, and with banks (e.g. Ayil Bank, Bai Tushum Bank, Kompanion Bank, and Mol Bulak 
Finance MFI) that have been active in developing innovative approaches to the provision of financial services. This 
will create assurance in their capacity to develop new innovative financial products and solutions within the CS-FOR 
scope. As an element increasing the credit worthiness of potential clients, the project will ensure complementarity of 
TA and credit resources provided to the eligible VCs and enterprises. Moreover, the project in partnership with the 
National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic will explore new opportunities in agricultural lending for product development in 
cooperation with interested financial service providers and share these learnings among interested parties, for scaling 
up. 
Selected Risk Factor 6

=== PAGE 78 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 99 
 
 
 
G 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Forest investment may suffer from a downward spiral 
of illegal logging due to growth in rural energy 
consumption and in urban construction needs  
Technical and 
operational 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Through an evidence-based approach, the project will be able to ensure significantly higher transparency and faster 
reporting on areas being logged, providing especially SAEPF and the Leskhozes with the information to ensure 
appropriate monitoring and surveillance on their investment and on their territories. On the side of market incentives, 
through the support to climate-sensitive value chains and the associated increase in technical capacity, Component 3 
of the project provides incentives to forest protection via provision of alternative livelihoods. To this end, the partnership 
of the project with banks involved in dissemination of energy-efficient technologies represents an opportunity to ensure 
reduced consumption of fuelwood in the national territory, with higher emphasis in the areas with high potential for 
forest management. Monitoring process of deforestation/ illegal loggings is summarized in Addendum 4 of the Funding 
Proposal. 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
The mobilization at local level and the dialogue around 
the INRMCR may be affected also by vested interests and 
distorted incentives, as well as petty corruption leading to 
resistance to changes.  
Social and 
environmental 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Building upon the experience of ARIS and other partners in social mobilization, the project will adopt an inclusive 
process in the target communities and a strong participatory approach in implementation of all activities to ensure 
transparency and accountability. Moreover, broad and active communication and awareness campaigns will be 
conducted, indicating project engagement rules as well as implementation borders and benchmarks. 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Natural hazards especially mudslides, landslides and 
flash floods can lead to damages in the Project Area, 
affecting the project’s implementation and investments. 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Part of the strategy of the project is to select areas for rangeland and above all forests rehabilitation where the 
investments can be more beneficial in terms of reducing the exposure to such natural disasters.  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon 
The National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic (NBKR, the central bank) officially operates a free floating exchange rate 
with inflation targeting. In the recent years, the country experienced a steady depreciation of the exchange rate with 
the international currencies. No projection on the exchange rate is available for the duration of the project. In the short 
run, the stabilization of the Russian rouble in 2016 and 2017 led to an appreciation of the KGS, which averaged around 
KGS 69 per US$1 in 2017, and in the short term it is expected a modest appreciation. However, under the assumption 
of political and economic stability and with an effective free floating exchange policy with inflation targeting, the 
purchase power parity of the project budget allocation is expected to remain stable.

=== PAGE 79 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework 
under the Results Management Framework. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level77 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Shift to low-
emission 
sustainable 
development 
pathways 
The project will support carbon emission reduction and enhance carbon storage (carbon sinks), while 
capitalizing important co-benefits from adaptation and disaster risk reduction, through: (i) the creation of 
legal and management enabling environment supported by an innovative evidence-based climate and 
natural resource planning and monitoring system (ii) community based investments in natural forest 
regeneration, sustainable forest management, afforestation and reforestation; (iii) rehabilitation of 
rangelands and prevention of further degradation; (iv) diversification of options for community livelihoods; 
and (v) and reduction of emission intensity per unit of animal protein. 
 
The country will thus shift from a local economy that is currently negatively impacting on carbon storage 
potential of ecosystems (forest and rangelands) to a low-carbon emission economy where mitigation 
investments will trigger and enhance resilience of ecosystems as well as of communities that that will be 
less dependent on direct uses of resources (i.e., wood and pasture) and more reliant on ecosystem 
services such as protection (reduced climate vulnerability), biodiversity and diversified livelihood 
opportunities. 
Indicator: ☐ PSM Degree to which the Fund contributes to low-emission sustainable development 
Increased 
climate-
resilient 
sustainable 
development 
Through its evidence-based approach, the project will support the diversification of sources of rural 
income ensuring climate adaptive and mitigation-oriented productivity through implementation of 
systematic INRMCRPs and related investments. The project will secure, mainstream and scale up the 
enabling environment for diversification, increase of efficiency and competitiveness reducing the 
dependency of communities on direct uses of resources (i.e., wood and pasture) and increasing their 
reliance on ecosystem services such as protection (reduced climate vulnerability), biodiversity and 
diversified livelihood opportunities.  
 
Ultimately, the experience of this project will serve as driver for dissemination of good practices 
throughout the country, shifting national agricultural production from a predominantly unsustainable 
subsistence livestock production to a diversified and climate-sensitive value chain business oriented 
economy. 
Indicator: ☐ PSM Degree to which the Fund contributes to climate-resilient sustainable development 
Expected 
Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification78 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
Core 
Indicator 
targets 
Tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (tCO2eq) 
reduced as a result of 
GCF-funded 
projects/programmes  
Reduced or 
avoided 
emissions will 
be monitored 
with FAO EX-
ACT79 and 
GLEAM80 
methodology 
and tools. 
Annual:  
74,177 
tCO2eq  
Lifetime (20y) 
+1,483,543 
tCO2eq 
-2,962,703 
tCO2eq 
Annual 
tCO2eq  
987,568 
 
 
Lifetime (20y)  
-19,751,354 
tCO2eq 
Economic 
growth and 
GHG emission 
remains stable 
 
Forests’ losses 
and 
forest/rangelan
d fires in target 
areas remains 
in the limits 
identified in the 
baseline 
 
Economic 
social and 
Cost per tCO2eq 
decreased for all Fund-
funded mitigation 
projects/ programmes 
Financial 
Reports of the 
Project; 
EXACT; 
GLEAM 
outputs 
N/A 
(incremental 
tCO2eq occurs 
with project 
only) 
US$ 10.7 per 
tCO2eq (based 
on estimated 
disbursement 
over estimated 
tCO2eq 
sequestered) 
US$ 2.5 per 
tCO2eq (GCF 
Fund 
contribution 
US$ 1.5 per 
tCO2eq) 
 
77 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at the following link (Please note that some 
indicators are under refinement): http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/239759/5.3_-_Performance_Measurement_Frameworks__PMF_.pdf/60941cef-7c87-475f-
809e-4ebf1acbb3f4  
78 For Means of Verifications details kindly refer to Chapter 6 of the Feasibility Study. 
79 http://www.fao.org/tc/exact/ex-act-home/en/  
80 http://www.fao.org/gleam/en/

=== PAGE 80 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
H 
Volume of finance 
leveraged by Fund 
funding 
Reports from 
cofinancing 
actors and 
executing 
agencies  
0 
Public:81 
US$ 0.7 
million 
Private:82 
US$ 11.8 
million 
Public: 
US$ 1.4 
million 
Private: 
US$ 18.6 
million 
political 
situation in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
remains stable 
 
Absence of 
major natural 
disaster in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
Total number of direct 
and indirect beneficiaries; 
Number of beneficiaries 
relative to total population 
Independent 
Survey 
reports 
0 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
86,490 
individuals of 
which 49,299 
are women 
Indirect 
beneficiaries:  
108,112 
individuals of 
which 76, 024 
are women 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
432,450 
individuals 
(7% of the 
country’s 
population) of 
which 246,497 
are women 
Indirect 
beneficiaries:  
540,563 (8% 
of the 
country’s 
population) 
individuals of 
which 380,121 
are women 
M4.0 
Reduced 
emissions 
from land 
use, 
reforestation, 
reduced 
deforestation, 
and through 
sustainable 
forest 
management 
and 
conservation 
and 
enhancement 
of forest 
carbon stocks 
M.4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent 
(tCO2eq) reduced or 
avoided (including 
increased removals) as a 
result of GCF-funded 
projects / programmes  
Reduced or 
avoided 
emissions will 
be monitored 
with FAO EX-
ACT83 and 
GLEAM84 
methodology 
and tools. 
Annual:  
74,177 
tCO2eq  
Lifetime (20y) 
+1,483,543 
tCO2eq 
-2,962,703 
tCO2eq 
Annual 
tCO2eq  
-987,568 
  
 
Lifetime (20y)  
-19,751,354 
tCO2eq 
A1.0 
Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of 
the most 
vulnerable 
people, 
communities 
and regions 
A1.2 Number of males 
and females benefiting 
from the adoption of 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood options 
(including fisheries, 
agriculture, tourism, etc.) 
RIMA II Index 
Value85 
(Resilience 
Composite 
Index – RCI) 
against the 
assessed 
project's 
baseline. 
Males:  
324,338 
Individuals 
Females: 
184,873; 
51.7/100.0 
RCI for the 
target 
populations  
n/a (measured 
at end project) 
RCI improved 
by 10 percent 
(i.e. 56.9) for 
at least 75 
percent of the 
project direct 
beneficiaries 
(Males:  
324,338 
Individuals 
Females: 
184,873) 
A4.0 
Improved 
resilience of 
ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
A4.1 Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems 
protected 
and 
strengthened 
in 
response 
to 
climate 
variability and change 
Georeference
d M&E 
Archive and 
reports from 
partners / 
involved 
stakeholders 
(LPD86 and 
NDVI87 
improvements 
against 
baseline). 
Degraded 
Rangeland: 
920,850 ha 
 
Degraded 
Forest: 93,931 
ha 
Degraded 
Rangeland: 
791,931 ha (-
20%) 
 
Degraded 
Forest: 
75,144 ha 
(-20%) 
Degraded 
Rangeland: 
276 255.07 ha 
(-70%) 
 
Degraded 
Forest: 31 
572.43 ha 
(- 60%) 
Absence of 
major natural 
disaster in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
 
81 Including FAO, ARIS, SAEPF, MAFIM.  
82 Including RKDF and Beneficiaries  
83 http://www.fao.org/tc/exact/ex-act-home/en/ 
84 http://www.fao.org/gleam/en/ 
85 RIMA methodology is further described in CS-FOR WP on Resilience Analysis (Annex 9), and can be consulted at: 
http://www.fao.org/emergencies/resources/documents/resources-detail/en/c/416587/. 
86 https://www.unccd.int/sites/default/files/inline-files/Presentation%20of%20UNCCD-%20Monitoring%20and%20Evaluation.pdf 
87 FAO Earth Map 2018.

=== PAGE 81 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected 
Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term (if 
applicable) 
Final 
GCF Outcomes 
 
Number of technologies 
and innovative solutions 
transferred or licensed to 
support low-emission 
development as a result 
of Fund support. 
Georeference
d M&E archive 
and reports 
from partners 
and involved 
stakeholders 
 
Project’s 
Targeted 
Policies 
Scorecard 
verification 
 
Official 
documentatio
n from 
concerned 
ministries, 
agencies and 
local 
institutions 
 
 
None 
2 
6 
Economic, 
social and 
political 
situation in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
remains stable 
 
M5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional 
and 
regulatory 
systemsM5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional 
and 
regulatory 
systems 
M.5.2. Number and 
level88 of effective 
coordination 
mechanisms. 
Georeference
d M&E archive 
and reports 
from partners 
and involved 
stakeholders 
 
Project’s 
Targeted 
Policies 
Scorecard 
verification 
 
Official 
documentatio
n from 
concerned 
ministries, 
agencies and 
local 
institutions 
 
0 - No existing 
mechanism 
allows to 
coordinate the 
integrated 
planning, 
access and 
use of forests 
and 
rangelands 
1 National 
platform and 
national 
institutions 
(level 1) 
coordinate 
with at least 
48 Community 
Landscape 
Management 
Groups 
established. 
(level 3 and 4) 
 
1 National 
platform and 
national 
institutions 
(level 1) 
coordinate 
with at least 
48 Community 
Landscape 
Management 
Groups 
established. 
(level 3 and 4) 
 
Economic, 
social and 
political 
situation in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
remains stable 
 
Additional 
information are 
reported in the 
scorecard 
description 
available in 
Annex 2 page 
166.  
 
M9.0 
Improved 
management 
of land or 
forest areas 
contributing 
to emissions 
reductions 
M9.1 Hectares of land or 
forests under improved 
and 
effective 
management 
that 
contributes 
to 
CO2 
emission reductions 
Georeference
d M&E 
Archive and 
reports from 
partners / 
involved 
stakeholders 
(LPD and 
NDVI 
improvements 
against 
baseline) 
Degraded 
Rangeland:  
920,850 ha 
Extremely 
Degraded: 
 123,517 ha 
Moderately 
Degraded: 
160,984 ha 
No  
degradation  
636,348 ha 
Degraded 
Forest: 
56 359 ha 
Extremely 
Degraded:  
23,238 ha 
Degraded 
Rangeland 
improved :  
55,245 ha 
Extremely 
Degraded:  
7,411 ha 
Moderately 
Degraded 
 9,659 ha 
No  
degradation  
38,181 ha 
Degraded 
Forest (mgt.):  
11,272 ha 
Extremely 
Degraded:  
Degraded 
Rangeland 
improved :  
276,225 ha 
Extremely 
Degraded:  
37,055 ha 
Moderately 
Degraded 
 48,295 ha 
No  
degradation 1 
90,904 ha 
Degraded 
Forest (mgt.):  
56 359 ha 
Extremely 
Degraded: 
Forests’ losses 
and 
forest/rangelan
d fires in target 
areas remains 
in the limits 
identified in the 
baseline 
 
Economic 
social and 
political 
situation in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
remains stable 
 
 
88 Level for each coordination mechanism is expressed on a scale of 0-4. Each ‘level’ refers to a different degree of effectiveness (0 = no coordination mechanism; 1 = National 
coordination, 2 National, Regional and District coordination; 3 Regional, district, Municipality coordination, 4 Regional, District, Municipality and Community coordination).

=== PAGE 82 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
H 
Moderately 
Degraded 
14,536 ha 
No  
degradation 
56,157 ha 
Forest 
Investment  
0 ha 
A/R: 0 ha 
FE: 0ha 
Improvement
s of 
Degraded 
Agriculture 
Land  
0 ha 
1,859 ha 
Moderately 
Degraded: 
1,163 ha 
No  
degradation: 
4,493 ha 
Forest 
Investment  
1,200 ha  
A/R: 600 ha  
FE: 600 ha  
Improvement
s of 
Degraded 
Agriculture 
Land  
430 ha 
9,295 ha 
Moderately 
Degraded: 
5,814 ha 
No  
degradation:  
22,463 ha 
Forest 
Investment:  
6,000 ha 
(+100%)  
A/R: 3,000 ha  
FE: 3,000 ha  
Improvement
s of 
Degraded 
Agriculture 
Land  
2,150 ha 
Absence 
of 
major 
natural 
disaster in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
A5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional 
and 
regulatory 
systems for 
climate-
responsive 
planning and 
development
89 
A5. 5.2 Number and level 
of effective coordination 
mechanisms 
Georeference
d M&E archive 
and reports 
from partners 
and involved 
stakeholders 
 
Project’s 
Targeted 
Policies 
Scorecard 
verification 
 
Official 
documentatio
n from 
concerned 
ministries, 
agencies and 
local 
institutions 
 
0- No existing 
mechanism 
allows to 
coordinate 
allows to 
coordinate the 
integrated 
planning, 
access and 
use of forests 
and 
rangelands to 
incentivize for 
climate 
resilience. 
1 National 
platform and 
national 
institutions 
(level 1) 
coordinate 
with at least 
48 Community 
Landscape 
Management 
Groups 
established. 
(level 3 and 4) 
 
1 National 
platform and 
national 
institutions 
(level 1) 
coordinate 
with at least 
48 Community 
Landscape 
Management 
Groups 
established. 
(level 3 and 4) 
 
Economic, 
social and 
political 
situation in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
remains stable 
 
Additional 
information are 
reported in the 
scorecard 
description 
available in 
Annex 2 page 
166.  
 
A7.0 
Strengthened 
adaptive 
capacity and 
reduced 
exposure to 
climate risks 
A7.1: Use by vulnerable 
households, 
communities, businesses 
and public-sector 
services of Fund 
supported tools, 
instruments, strategies 
and activities to respond 
to climate change and 
variability 
Georeference
d M&E archive 
and reports 
from partners 
and involved 
stakeholders 
 
Independent 
Household 
Survey 
(baseline, 
mid-term and 
closure) 
 
0 
At least 2 tools 
successfully 
used by at 
least 20% of 
households, 
communities, 
businesses 
and public-
sector 
(INRMCRP 
and Evidence 
based 
decision tool) 
At least 6 tools 
successfully 
used by at 
least 20% of 
households, 
communities, 
businesses 
and public-
sector 
(INRMCRP, 
Evidence 
based 
decision tool, 
livestock 
destocking 
methodology, 
sustainable 
forest 
management 
plan, 
sustainable 
rangeland 
management 
plan, 
sustainable 
water 
resource 
management 
plan) 
Economic 
social and 
political 
situation in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
remains stable 
 
Absence of 
major 
emergencies / 
natural disaster 
in the Country 
and in target 
areas. 
 
The scorecard 
addressing the 
qualitative part 
of A7.1 will be 
informed by the 
HH 
survey 
questions. 
 
89 The Project will also monitor SDG Indicator, 15.3.1 Proportion of land that is degraded over total land area. The baseline and final target are identified as 32% (Land 
Productivity Dynamics – LPD degradation value in target Areas) and 17% (LPD degradation value in target Areas), respectively.

=== PAGE 83 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
H 
Project 
Outputs 
COMPONENT 1 
1.1 Evidence 
based natural 
resources 
management 
governance is 
strengthened 
across 
stakeholders  
 
1-CS-FOR: # of 
recommendations/ 
harmonization / revisions 
(for enforcement of 
sustainable management 
and use of forest- 
rangeland ecosystems, 
including technical, legal 
and institutional 
approaches to advance 
public-private 
partnership) are 
approved by deputed 
institutions 
Official 
documentatio
n from 
ministries, 
agencies and 
local 
institutions 
None 
At least 1 for 
Forest Code 
and 1 for 
Pasture Law 
Same as mid-
term 
Economic, 
social and 
political 
situation in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
remains stable 
Economic 
social and 
political 
situation in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
remains stable 
 
Absence 
of 
major 
natural 
disaster in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
2-CS-FOR: # of decisions 
(institutional/regional/loca
l) related to CC and NRM 
supported modified and 
approved. 
Georeference
d M&E archive 
and reports 
from partners 
and involved 
stakeholders 
 
Independent 
Household 
Survey 
(baseline, 
mid-term and 
closure) 
 
Independent 
Institutions 
Survey 
(baseline, mid-
term 
and 
closure) 
None 
Local 
4 (district 
level) 
National 
0 
Local  
15 (12 at 
district level 
and 3 at 
regional level) 
National 
12 
3-CS-FOR: # of 
INRMCRP operational in 
target areas 
Georeference
d M&E 
Archive and 
reports from 
partners / 
involved 
stakeholders. 
 
Official 
Documentatio
n from 
ministries, 
agencies and 
local 
institutions 
 
Independent 
Institutions 
survey 
(baseline, 
mid-term and 
closure) 
0 
39 
39 
Project 
Output 
COMPONENT 2 
2.1 Green 
investments 
for forests 
and 
rangelands 
rehabilitation 
are made 
available 
4-CS-FOR: # of hectares 
afforested / reforested 
with survival rate > 65% 
Georeference
d M&E archive 
and reports 
from partners/ 
involved 
stakeholders 
 
Official 
documentatio
n from 
ministries, 
agencies and 
0 
600 
3000 
Forests’ losses 
and 
forest/rangelan
d fires in target 
areas remains 
in the limits 
identified in the 
baseline 
 
Economic 
social and 
political 
5-CS-FOR: # of hectares 
reporting improved Land 
Productivity Dynamics 
values 
Extremely 
Degraded: 
123,517 ha 
Moderately 
Degraded 
160,984 ha 
No  
degradation 
636,348 ha 
Extremely 
Degraded: 
98,814 ha 
Moderately 
Degraded 
128,787 ha 
No  
degradation 
509,078 ha 
Extremely 
Degraded: 
37,055 ha 
Moderately 
Degraded 
48,295 ha 
No  
degradation 
190,904 ha

=== PAGE 84 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
H 
6-CS-FOR: Average milk 
yields (l/animal/day) 
increased by at least 
40%,  
local 
institutions 
 
Independent 
Institutions 
Survey 
(baseline, 
mid-term and 
closure) 
 
Independent 
Household 
Survey 
(baseline, 
mid-term and 
closure) 
5 
5,5 
7 
situation in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
remains stable 
 
Absence of 
major 
emergencies / 
natural disaster 
in the Country 
and in target 
areas 
 
Barren and 
low-productive 
female 
livestock are 
culled and sold. 
Surplus male 
bulls are sold 
at 2 years old; 
surplus male 
small 
ruminants are 
sold at 1.5 
years. 
7-CS-FOR: Average 
animal live weight 
(kg/animal) increased by 
at least 15% 
Cattle 
Female 350 
Mature male 
32090 
Sheep 
Female 40 
Male 65 
Goat 
Female 35 
Male 38 
 
Cattle 
Female 367 
Mature male 
336 
Sheep 
Female 42 
Male 68 
Goat 
Female 37 
Male 40 
Cattle 
Female 430 
Mature male 
400 
Sheep 
Female 46 
Male 75 
Goat 
Female 40 
male 44 
Project 
Output 
COMPONENT 3 
3.1 Selected 
value chains 
are climate 
sensitive and 
producers 
adopt carbon 
optimization 
technologies 
and practices  
8- CS-FOR: # of 
additional ha of forests 
used and managed under 
voluntary sustainable 
management standards 
Certification 
body (register 
of certificates) 
and Kyrgyz 
Statistic 
Committee 
survey 
 
Independent 
Household 
Livelihood 
(baseline, 
mid-term and 
closure) and 
Kyrgyz 
Statistic 
Committee 
Survey 
312 
712 
2312 
Economic 
social and 
political 
situation in the 
Country and in 
target areas 
remains stable 
 
Absence of 
major 
emergencies / 
natural disaster 
in the Country 
and in target 
areas 
 
Aggregate 
herds’ growth 
does not 
exceed in line 
with observed 
trends. 
 
Funds from 
RKDF are 
disbursed to 
beneficiaries in 
due time. 
9-CS-FOR: # of 
additional ha planted on 
permanent orchards and 
plantations using drip 
irrigation 
Georeference
d M&E archive 
and reports 
from partners 
and involved 
stakeholders 
 
Independent 
Household 
Livelihood 
survey 
(baseline, 
mid-term and 
closure) and 
Kyrgyz 
Statistic 
Committee 
Survey 
650 
1050 
3200 
10-CS-FOR: % of 
targeted animal owners 
achieving improved 
emissions intensity by at 
least 15% per unit of 
animal protein 
None 
10% 
50% 
 
 
 
 
90 Bishkek slaughterhouse data. Male calves reach sexual maturity age earlier than females.

=== PAGE 85 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
H 
 
Project Activities 
Description 
Inputs  
COMPONENT 1 – US$ 5,581,937 
Output 1.1 
Activity 1.1.1 Prepare 
communication material and 
organize information awareness 
campaigns to mobilize national 
stakeholders 
The activities will support the preparation of communication and 
information material for the mobilization of stakeholders at the 
local level to advance participatory management of natural 
resources.  
USD 165,050 
Local consultants, training-
workshop, -conference-
Professional/contractual 
services. 
Activity 1.1.2 Organize fora/ 
international conferences 
meetings to sensitize the 
stakeholders  
USD 568,200 
Local Consultant, 
Equipment, Training 
workshop and conference, 
Travel, Staff. 
Activity 1.1.3 Training sessions/ 
workshops on forest and 
rangeland tenure arrangements, 
policy making, management of 
natural resources 
The activity will support existing natural resources monitoring 
functions at national level (including measurement, reporting and 
verification within SAEPF) with evidence-based tools and 
methodologies for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation, and will 
facilitate linkages between evidence and data from the ground, 
information systems and the forest-rangeland ecosystem planning 
processes.  
USD 1,076,467 
Local consultants, 
International consultants, 
Training workshop and 
conference, Travel, Staff 
Activity 1.1.4 Propose 
recommendations for 
enforcement of sustainable 
management and use of forest- 
rangeland ecosystems through 
participatory process (Dialogues / 
workshops / meetings) 
The activity will support the harmonization of legislation on tenure 
arrangements for forest-rangeland ecosystem and include 
aspects such as: (a) recommendations for enforcement of 
sustainable 
management 
and 
use 
of 
forest- 
rangeland 
ecosystems; and (b) technical, legal and institutional approaches 
to advance public-private partnership in promotion of integrated 
natural resources management.  
USD 379,370 
Professional/contractual 
services, Local consultants, 
International consultants, 
Training workshop and 
conference, Travel, Staff, 
Others 
Activity 1.1.5 Identify approaches 
for national stakeholder 
involvement process and 
organize National Stakeholders 
Platform Policy Dialogue for the 
management and use of 
municipal forest and facilitate 
thematic workshops, and submit 
the recommendation document to 
the Parliament 
Based on the identified legal gaps and ambiguities in sectoral 
policies and regulations, and on special studies on impacts of 
existing legislation on biodiversity, environmental resources, and 
livelihoods, the activity will support the establishment of an Expert 
Group comprised of various technical expertise with engagement 
of local research and outreach organizations will develop and 
deliver capacity-development interventions to enhance capacity 
on policy making and management of natural resources among 
key stakeholders. The activities of the expert group will provide 
evidence 
(e.g., 
on 
forest-rangeland 
ecosystem 
zoning, 
stratification and planning, spatial and territorial development) to 
inform the policy dialogue supported under Component 1 focusing 
on the enabling environment for more effective climate 
investments in line with the Country Work Programme under 
development in Kyrgyzstan.  
USD 533,400 
Professional/contractual 
services, Local consultants, 
International consultants, 
Training workshop and 
conference, Travel, Staff, 
Others 
Activity 1.2.1 Demonstrate and 
accompany national and local 
institutions in adopting the 
evidence-based Natural 
resources Planning, Monitoring 
and Evaluation System  
The activity will secure the establishment of a dedicated evidence-
based and georeferenced project M&E system, including a 
dedicated NRM and climate-oriented monitoring procedure for 
central institutions to ensure scalability across the country. 
Through this Activity, the project will support the development of 
standards, methodologies and implementation modalities for the 
state monitoring of rangelands and forests resources.  
USD 1,406,350 
Professional/contractual 
services, Local consultants, 
International consultants, 
Training workshop and 
conference, Travel, Staff, 
Others 
Activity 1.3.1 Mobilize 
communities, establish CLMGs 
and accompany in formulating 
INRMCRPs 
The Activity will develop methodologies, guidelines and materials 
to support stakeholders with the elaboration of the INRMCRPs 
The activity will also build the capacity of stakeholders on 
georeferencing and community mapping of natural resources and 
livelihood strategies. This activity will serve also as on-the-job 
training and it will be an additional opportunity for communities to 
gradually contribute to governance of NR. This activity will also 
USD 1,453,100 
Professional/contractual 
services, Local consultants, 
International consultants, 
Training workshop and

=== PAGE 86 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
H 
guarantee ground-truthing of geospatial analysis and GIS 
managed at the central level. An information dissemination and 
capacity-building programme will be developed to target decision 
makers on various sources of funding for sustainable NRM that 
includes carbon finance, especially in the international context of 
carbon sequestration in grasslands.  
conference, Travel, Staff, 
Others 
COMPONENT 2 – US$ 22,472,168  
Output 2.1 
Activity 2.1.1 Conduct training to 
50 communities and institutions 
on technical/ legal matters on 
forest enrichment and 
afforestation/ reforestation, and 
provide technical/legal 
assistances on forestry PPP 
establishment 
The activity will mobilize and train 50 aiyl aymaks (municipalities) 
on technical/ legal matters on forest enrichment and afforestation/ 
reforestation and their communities will include social mobilization 
including gender training and institutional support, as well as the 
establishment of task forces and fire management teams at 
Leskhoze level. Training of trainers (TOT) will be provided on 
technical and institutional matters and facilitate dialogue among 
Leskhozes, NGOs, CSOs, forest and pasture experts, PUUs, 
WUAs and other natural resource users. Training sessions will be 
also provided to women on leadership, decision-making and 
participation in local institutions with a view to supporting women’s 
further engagement in PUUs, WUAs and other community 
resource user groups. Technical assistance will include: (i) 
technical assistance on forestry; (ii) Technical requirements for 
Leskhoze staff as well as municipal administration and forest 
users for sustainable management of forests; (iii) Integrated Pest 
Management; (iv) natural resources georeferencing and mapping; 
(v) technical and legal assistance on Public-Private Partnerships 
for forest management; and (vi) technical assistance on land 
tenure and principles of responsible governance on tenure 
arrangements for forest-rangeland ecosystem management. 
USD 2,072,055 
Equipment, Training 
workshop and conference, 
Travel, 
Professional/contractual 
services. 
Activity 2.1.2 Provide technical 
assistance to the Pasture 
Department on climate-sensitive 
pasture management, 
assessment and monitoring, and 
conduct INRMCRP assessment 
and monitoring 
The activity will support the pasture department with dedicated 
technical assistance and will include: (i) training and study tours 
for staff within the Pasture Department, provided by national and 
international expertise; (ii) training on monitoring of INRMCRP 
implementation; (iii) capacity development on pasture rotation and 
evidence-based rangeland M&E. Additionally, through a system 
of training of trainers the activity will promote trainings and 
refresher trainings for administrators and CLMGs on the 
ecological wisdom and benefits of rotational grazing and erosion 
control, and the need for policies and regulations that support 
improved resource management and land-use planning.  
USD 843,048 
Local consultants, 
International consultants, 
Training workshop and 
conference, Travel, 
Professional/contractual 
services. 
Activity 2.1.3  Conduct training of 
trainers on pasture rotation and 
evidence-based rangeland M&E 
to local cadres as well as training 
of trainers on INRMCRP 
management and 
implementation, and training 
sessions to the CLMGs and local 
stakeholders to implement 
INRMCRPs on rangeland 
management 
The activity will strengthen CLMGs’ capacities to implement 
INRMCRPs on rangeland management. This output will include 
training of trainers organized by ARIS and provided through the 
mobilization of national and international expertise. Capacities of 
local stakeholders (ayil okmotus, Leskhozes, PUUs, etc.) to 
implement INRMCRPs on pasture management will be 
strengthened through a set of initial trainings and refresher 
training on technical and institutional issues (mainstreaming both 
gender aspects and land tenure within the framework of the 
VGGTs) for both institutions and livestock owners. The capacity 
development will focus on the following: 
- 
Improved grazing management practices, and their 
performance monitoring.  
- 
Enhanced livestock productivity, higher income, 
reduction in total animal numbers and enterprise diversification. 
- 
Genetic selection of livestock in current herds to cull 
unproductive or less-productive animals, and on the careful use 
of Artificial Insemination (AI) to achieve cross-bred livestock to 
reduce the need for large herds.  
USD 2,932,410 
International consultants, 
Equipment, Training 
workshop and conference, 
Travel, 
Professional/contractual 
services, Others.

=== PAGE 87 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
H 
- 
Integration and harmonization of pasture management 
of SLF and SFF lands and benefits of planting shelterbelts and 
copses. 
Activity 2.1.4 Provide climate 
investment in restoration and 
improvement of forests based on 
INRMCRP developed, and 
execute afforestation/ 
reforestation and forest 
enrichment work by Leskhozes 
with technical assistance 
The activity will support investment in Afforestation / Reforestation 
and Forest Enrichment in target areas: Activity will include: (a) at 
least 3,000 hectares of new forests planted on degraded lands; 
(b) at least 3,000 additional ha of existing degraded forests 
enriched; (c) about 56,000 ha of existing forests under improved 
management; (d)Support the establishment of climate-resilient 
tree nurseries and training to local Leskhoze nurseries on 
planning (design and operational); standards of production. 
USD 12,153,805 
Equipment, Training 
workshop and conference, 
Professional/contractual 
services, Travel, Staff, 
Others 
Activity 2.1.5 Develop and 
execute INRMCRP pasture 
investment plans for catalyzing 
green investment in rangeland 
rehabilitation and livestock 
production 
The activity will support investment in pasture rehabilitation and 
livestock production. Su-activities will guide and support 
communities (CLMGs) to overcome pasture degradation through 
the adoption of pasture rotation, training, mentoring and 
monitoring support. Complimentary activities include the 
establishment of shade shelters and windbreaks aiming at having 
multipurpose tree species to form the major part of these breaks, 
in order to increase the use of them, construction of seed-increase 
fields, harvesting and broadcasting seeds to increase fodder 
production, construction of watering points or small bridges to 
unlock inaccessible pasture, and procurement of large equipment 
for infrastructure improvement. Investment will be combined with 
technical 
support 
for 
integrated 
and 
improved 
pasture 
management including: (i) Rotational grazing; (ii) windbreaks and 
shelterbelts, (iii) adaptation to climate change and contribution to 
carbon sequestration via planting of trees in small areas on 
municipal pastures and Leskhoze land; (iv) promotion of improved 
grassland seeds and seed dissemination of desirable indigenous 
perennial plants to accelerate pasture improvement; and (v) 
improved livestock production and productivity. 
USD 4,470,850 
Equipment, Travel, Staff 
COMPONENT 3 – US$ 19,512,965 
Output 3.1 
Activity 3.1.1. Select value chains 
in operation and provide technical 
support to the value chain 
actors/organizations for climate-
sensitive business development 
The Activity  will include: (i) End markets assessment, covering 
key international markets  for the Kyrgyz NTFPs and periodical 
monitoring of market trends, including supply planning calendars 
and gaps, existing bottlenecks and risks; (ii) market prospecting 
campaign on national and international markets, to identify 
potential buyers operating in premium segments and fostering 
environmental and social responsibilities as their corporate 
commitment; (iii) resource inventory, using geospatial tools 
followed by a thorough Market Development Plan (will include 
introduction of Geographic Indication, especially for the walnut); 
(iv) awareness campaigns on market opportunities and 
requirements, including the design and rollout of the Kyrgyz Tree 
Nuts & Dried Fruits information and trade portal.  
USD 2,677,240 
Local consultants, 
International consultants 
Training workshop and 
conference, 
Professional/contractual 
services, Travel, Staff 
Activity 3.1.2. Identify and 
mobilize operating agribusinesses 
in the selected value chains via 
information campaign and value 
chain mapping for climate-
sensitive business practices 
The Activity will support agribusinesses operating in the selected 
value chains to upgrade their supply chain by introducing good 
farming practices, voluntary certification, optimized logistics and 
robust marketing.  
USD 335,725 
Professional/contractual 
services, local consultants, 
Training workshop and 
conference, Others 
Activity 3.1.3. Activate special 
credit lines and provide loans for 
eligible value chain actors in 
communities/ entrepreneurs/ 
enterprises in the project-relevant 
value chains 
The activity will ensure the activation of special credit lines for 
project-relevant value chains and entrepreneurs.  
USD 16,500,000 
Others

=== PAGE 88 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
H 
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
271. A detailed description of the Means of Verification of the indicators is provided in Chapter 6 of the Feasibility Study. 
Data will be collected by the M&E unit according to the means of verification described in the previous Sections. Data will 
originate from described sources and will be organized in the georeferenced M&E database. Data will be presented 
annually according to milestones fixed by each approved Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB). Specific wrap-up 
sessions will be organized and supported by FAO at midterm and completion so to ensure data availability to external 
evaluators. 
272. CS-FOR will apply FAO’s M&E standard procedures and will be compliant with the GCF performance measurement 
framework. FAO will manage and coordinate reporting to the GCF according to agreed standards and procedures. The 
project will follow an Evidence and Result-Based Management (ERBM) approach, which is intended to aid decision-
making towards the explicit goal, outcomes and outputs identified as part of the Theory of Change. 
273. Project achievements towards approved targets will be monitored via identified indicators and against the project 
baseline as reported in the logframe matrix. As described in the next Sections, the project will ensure georeferencing of 
activities including trainings and capacity development so to allow constant follow up via FAO’s Remote Sensing 
application “Earth Map”. The combination of georeferencing, ground truthing with communities and remote sensing 
analysis via FAO/Earth Map will allow the M&E unit, the NDA, FAO and the GCF to have a clear understanding of project’s 
effectiveness and efficiency. Additionally, the described approach will allow the M&E unit to advise and support the PMU 
with evidence enhancing project’s capacity not only to deliver but also to support stakeholders and beneficiaries in their 
decision-making processes. EX-ACT and GLEAM-I tools will also serve as monitoring tools. Calculations will be updated 
annually. Description of monitoring parameters and M&E framework is summarized in Addendum 4 of the Funding 
Proposal. 
274. CS-FOR project cycle will be monitored using a combination of tools based on: (i) field data collection, (ii) 
georeferencing and (iii) geospatial analysis.  
(i) 
Field data Collection: field data will be collected by the M&E unit via dedicated activities planned with 
communities according to the monitoring exercises planned by the project. To this end the M&E unit will collect data 
from communities following the HH survey methodological approach and specifications. Additionally the project has 
planned to conduct two additional household and institutions surveys at Mid-Term and Project Completion. 
(ii) Georeferencing: This will ensure a unique relation between project’s activities and geographical coordinates 
collected according to a specific procedure (Ref: Georeferencing Procedures). This will allow the project and the 
Country to ensure clear identification of activities and beneficiaries in the precise context identified during project 
identification and design. Georeferencing will allow the project to profit from the vast geospatial data set available for 
the Country and will support involved institutions in sharing and mainstreaming geospatial data as aimed by the 2016 
NSDI MOU. 
(iii) Geospatial analysis: the M&E unit will monitor activities and processes through a series of remote sensing and 
photointerpretation analysis that have been made accessible to the country via the FAO’s Earth Map Application. The 
application will allow the project to factor in climate change variables as well as socio-economic and environmental 
data into the planning and decision-making process. The integration of ‘geo-spatial’ elements will allow stakeholders 
to overlay different classes of data such as climate trends, hydrography, erosion, flood risks, land cover, land use, 
distribution of population and livelihoods that are a non-negligible part of an evidence-based and informed decision-
making process. Finally, the process will contribute to enhancing national and regional data collection activities that 
will support the understanding of climate change impacts at local level.

=== PAGE 89 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 99 
 
 
 
 
H 
 
 
91 See also Chapter 5 of the Feasibility Study and FAO procedures available at: http://www.fao.org/evaluation.   
275.  Having georeferenced investments as well as soft activities (i.e., training, capacity development) will allow the 
project to address indicators with objective elements of evaluation. 
The PMU and all other stakeholders - including the GCF - will be able 
to understand if activities have been executed, if these have been 
successful and finally if there is a specific impact that could be 
objectively linked to the project’s theory of change. The use of such 
an approach will not require special technologies, equipment or 
advanced IT skills. Basic software is available under license (i.e., 
ArcGis/ESRI) or in open source (i.e. QGIS) and most of the currently 
available smart phones/tables, regardless of their operative systems, 
can execute most of the processes required to ensure 
georeferencing and data management. Additionally, FAO will provide 
targeted 
training 
to 
PMU, 
its 
M&E 
unit 
and 
project 
partners/stakeholders during the start-up phase of the project. 
276. The PMU will be responsible for the M&E process. The M&E 
unit (Figure 1) is composed of one team leader and of three officers 
(M&E/GIS/knowledge management and communication). The team 
leader will respond directly to the PMU director and to the PSC.  
277. During execution of the project, the M&E unit will ensure, among the others, support at the following levels: 
(i) 
Monitoring of execution performances: The unit will be responsible for: (a) collecting data from identified 
service providers/partners; and (b) submitting progress reports on approved targets on a quarterly basis to the PMU. 
The M&E unit will ensure correct and efficient filing of collected GPS coordinates. Once coordinates will start 
populating the M&E database, activities will be shared through thematic maps generated by the project and will be 
monitored through consolidated remote sensing practices (geospatial analysis). This aspect of the process is 
paramount to ensure knowledge building within the PMU and among stakeholders and in evaluating direct and indirect 
impacts of project activities. Showing activities in their exact location - visualizing relations with the context - will allow 
a more objective impact’s evaluation and will provide decision makers with an objective, transparent and evidence-
based support to national strategies. Data, collected through reports prepared by service providers/partners and 
verified with beneficiaries, will be disaggregated by gender, among the others, and will be georeferenced. Data will be 
stored in a database accessible to the PSC as well as to FAO. Detailed procedures related to georeferencing are 
available in the specific Working Paper (linked in the last page of this Funding Proposal). 
(ii) Community monitoring and ground truthing: The project will apply a new approach to monitoring the 
participation of target beneficiaries and stakeholders in the process. Given the importance and relevance attributed 
by the theory of change to community’s participation in ecosystem-based NRM, the M&E unit will ensure annual 
consultations in target areas so to support planning and monitor execution of the INRMCRPs. Thanks to the described 
georeferencing process, communities will participate directly both in planning, according to the criteria designed for 
the INRMCRPs, and in ground truthing the results obtained via FAO spatial analysis tools and methodologies. This 
particular aspect of the M&E strategy will also allow for enhanced and evidence-based knowledge sharing with local 
communities and their administrations as well as for mainstreaming climate change knowledge among key 
stakeholders. As with all the other activities, data deriving from this exercise will be part of the Project Atlas and 
available for consultation via KMZ files upon request. 
(iii) Strategic level: Annual results and related analysis, jointly reviewed by FAO and the PMU, will form the basis 
for each annual year planning exercise via the AWPB. These will be presented to the PSC in order to support its 
strategic role and to secure transparency and evidence-based strategy development. 
278. Independent Evaluation. Independent interim and final evaluations will be carried out in accordance to the FAO 
procedures for the evaluation of initiatives funded by voluntary contributions.91 
Figure H.2.1: M&E Unit composition

=== PAGE 90 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
List of Annexed Documents:92  
Folder Annex:  
File(s) 
1. NDA No-objection letter 
SAEPF-NDA-No Objection letter-20June2018 
SAEPF- NDA letter and memo on complementarities FAO-WFP 
2. Feasibility Study 
CS-FOR Kyrgyzstan - Feasibility Study (3 October 2019) 
2.a. Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
CS-FOR - Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
CS-FOR - Gender Assessment 
2.b. Stakeholders Engagement Report 
CS-FOR - Stakeholders Engagement Report 
3. Integrated Financial-Economic Models 
CS-FOR - Economic and Financial Analysis (text) 
CS-FOR - Integrated Economic Model (spreadsheet) 
CS-FOR - Integrated Financial Model (spreadsheet) 
3.a. Carbon Accounting (EX-ACT) 
CS-FOR - Carbon Accounting (spreadsheet) 
3.b. Cost Tables 
CS-FOR - Budget Plan in GCF format 
CS-FOR - Procurement plan in GCF format 
4. Letter of commitment for co-financing 
ARIS-12Jun2018-Letter of confirmation for co-financing commitment; 
ARIS -15JUL2019-Letter of re-confirmation for co-financing commitment; 
FAO - 05November2018-Letter of Intent for co-financing; 
MAFIM-13June2018-Letter of confirmation for co-financing commitment; 
MAFIM-15July2019-Letter of re-confirmation for co-financing commitment; 
RKDF-Oct2019-Letter of confirmation for co-financing commitment; 
SAEPF-08Jun2018-Letter of confirmation for co-financing commitment; 
SAEPF-25SEP2019-Letter of re-confirmation for co-financing commitment 
4.b. Operational Partners' Capacity Assessment 
ARIS Kyrgyzstan - Micro-assessment report – final 
SAEPF PIU Kyrgyzstan - MDLF - Micro-assessment report - final 
5. ESMF 
CS-FOR - Environmental and Social Management Framework 
FAO Environmental and Social Management Guidelines_2015 
6. Map of Project Areas 
CS-FOR Map of Intervention areas 
6.b. CS-FOR Project ATLAS and Earth-Map 
CS-FOR Baseline Atlas 
CS-FOR Atlas Report 
CS-FOR - FAO Earth Map Presentation 
7. Timetable of Implementation 
CS-FOR - Timetable of implementation 
8. References for climate scenarios 
CS FOR - References for Climate Scenario 
9. Working Papers 
CS-FOR WP - Climate change and ecosystem-based NRM 
CS-FOR WP - Forestry 
CS-FOR WP - Georeferencing Strategy 
CS-FOR WP - Livestock Development 
CS-FOR WP - NRM Policy and Governance 
CS-FOR WP - Pastures Sector and Recommendations for CS-FOR  Project 
CS-FOR WP - Value Chain Finance 
CS-FOR WP - Value Chains Development 
CS-FOR WP - Walnuts Value Chain 
CS-FOR WP - Resilience Analysis in the project target areas 
10. Term Sheet 
CS-FOR-Term Sheet 
 
 
 
 
92 All documents are available in the folder accessible at the following link: https://unfao-
my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/rosalie_lehel_fao_org/EtNJ1IqJt6xDiU2YScPEECwBdTjPGaLMzj7P6EsPnBuWbg?e=ST5aYC 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal 
☒ 
NDA No-objection Letter (Annex 1) 
☒ 
Feasibility Study (Annex 2 including: Gender Assessment / Action Plan, and Stakeholders Engagement Report) 
☒ 
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format) (Annex 3) 
☒ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment (If applicable) (Annex 4) 
☒ 
Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, etc.)  
☒ 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
 
(If applicable) (see Annex 5: Environmental and Social Management Framework – ESMF) 
☐ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) 
☐ 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable) 
☒ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme (Annex 6) 
☒ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation (Annex 7)

=== PAGE 91 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
Addendum 1. Additional information on climate rationale for the Project Area  
 
The Kyrgyz Republic has an extreme continental climate, mostly arid that is mitigated by increased 
cloudiness and precipitation due to orography. Therefore, Kyrgyzstan presents a number of regions with 
specific microclimates that are governed by altitude and proximity to water bodies, plains and deserts. 
At lower altitudes, the microclimate is drier, showing the typical characteristics of continental climate with 
marked contrasts between the summer and winter seasons. With increasing altitude, temperatures are 
lower and humidity increases so that diurnal variations and differences between the summer and winter 
seasons are less marked.  
The reported influence of orography, altitude, distance from drier areas such as the Fergana valley, is 
particularly evident when examining the precipitation (sum average) and temperature (MIN and MAX 
average) trends provided by the CHIRPS for the period 1986-2016 (Annex 6 - Baseline Atlas and Annex 2 
Chapter 1 (Section VIII. National Climate Scenario, Vulnerability, Resilience and DRR (pages 2528))). 
Analyzed data shows a growing trend for both minimum and maximum temperatures with higher increases 
in the southwestern regions of the country. Analyzing precipitation trends, such diversification appears even 
more clearly with rainfall decreasing in the southwestern districts nestled between the Fergana valley and 
the West Tien-Shan mountain range (that acts as a barrier) and slightly increasing in the other regions 
(Annex 6 - Baseline Atlas and Annex 2, Chapter 1). 
The southwestern districts of the country are therefore the more exposed to precipitation and temperatures 
changes as well as to disaster risks such as landslides, floods and flash floods (Annex 6 - Baseline Atlas 
and Annex 2, Chapter 1 (pages 2932)). Reportedly93, ecosystems and livelihoods will be impacted as 
there will be less access to healthy pastures, damages in infrastructures, and overall loss of productivity in 
agriculture and forestry and of potential income generation with every disaster recovery process. (Annex 6 
- Baseline Atlas and Annex 2, Chapter 1 (pages 2932)). 
The stakeholders that participated in the national engagement framework (Annex 2, Chapter 1 (Section XI. 
Description of Target Areas (page 34)) and Annex 5) identified the four contiguous districts of Ak-Talaa 
(Naryn region), Toguz-Toro and Suzak (Jalalabad region), and Uzgen (Osh region) as Project Area. 
The districts of the Project Area are part of two climatic zones: the South-western, which includes margins 
of the broad Fergana (Uzgen and Suzak) valley, the Chatkal and Alai valleys and the adjacent mountain 
ranges (Ak-Talaa and Toguz Toro). Climate in the Project Area is heavily affected by topography and can 
be divided in four zones94. 
(i) The valley-sub-mountain zone (from 900-1,200 m) with hot summers, snowless and temperate winters, 
and low precipitation; 
(ii) The mountain zone (from 900–1,200 to 2,000–2,200 m) with a temperate climate, which has warm 
summers and cold, snowy winters; 
(iii) The high-mountain zone (from 2,000–2,200 to 3,000–3,500 m) is cooler in the summer and has 
relatively cold, snowless winters, with temperatures ranging from well below zero to 16 °C; and  
(iv) The nival belt zone (from 3,500 m and higher) with a polar climate and presence of numerous 
permanent snowfields and glaciers. 
Rainfall trends and projections in Project Area: 
Data (1986-2016) gathered from national meteorological stations and remote sensing analysis show a 
tendency in rainfall reduction on the west side of the four Rayons, fully involving Uzgen and Suzak, with a 
 
93 GFDRR, 2011, IFAD, 2013, SAEPF, 2013, Pereladova, 2015  
94 IFAD, 2013

=== PAGE 92 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
hot spot in North Suzak (reduction up to 8 mm/year and more). Additionally, due to presence of the West 
Tien-Shan mountain range, the eastern part of the Project Area shows a tendency towards increased 
rainfall, in the order of 1 to 10 mm/year.  
According to the Climate Profile of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan95 and the Third National Communication, it 
is expected that the annual precipitation will decrease in the future, but at a low rate (-0.0677 mm/year), 
and in 2100, will fall by approximately 6 mm to the current level (RCP8.5). In addition, some volatility in 
precipitation over time is expected, in contrast to the monotonically changing temperature. 
Temperature (Minimum and Maximum) trends and projections in the Project Area: 
Recorded trends in absolute maximum  temperatures (°C) per year based on historical  time series (1989-
2016) show a variation in the order of a fraction of a degree distributed from West (increase) to East (stable 
or decrease): the total change in the period is from 1°C decrease to 1.5°C or more increase. The variation 
is almost only in increasing values from West to East in the order of a fraction of a degree, with slightly 
higher increases in Suzak and Uzgen and the Southern area of Ak-Talaa. 
Maximum temperatures are expected to increase throughout this century. By mid-century, under RCP4.596, 
increases would reach between 2ºC (in the east) and 2.8ºC (in the north). Under RCP8.5 temperatures 
would rise between 2.6ºC (east) and 3.8ºC (north). Minimum temperatures are also expected to continue 
to increase (between 0.5º and 1ºC). Regarding seasonal changes, the results of the intermediate RCP4.5 
show that increases could be between 2ºC (east) and 3ºC (north) in winter and autumn; between 2ºC and 
2.7ºC in summer, and between 1.7ºC and 2.6ºC in spring. 
Exposure, Vulnerability, Resilience and Disaster Risk Reduction in the Project Area: 
Additionally, in order to understand climate change impacts on ecosystems and on communities and 
livelihoods as well as development of relevant mitigation/adaptation strategies (Annex 2, Chapter 1 (Table 
2. Brief description of selected target areas (page 34)), the following data sets have been reviewed and 
analyzed for each district of the Project Area and area97 (georeferenced State Forest Fund and Pasture 
Department areas): 
• 
Rainfall (Monthly time series, and monthly averages); 
• 
Snow cover (% of days with snow cover); 
• 
Minimum and Maximum Temperatures (number of heat days, monthly time series and monthly 
average); 
• 
Water Deficit (Monthly time series, and monthly averages); 
• 
Potential Evapo-traspiration (Monthly time series, and monthly averages); 
• 
Surface Soil Moisture (Annual). 
Findings from the performed geospatial analysis as well as consulted literature confirm the correlation 
between described climate changes and forest stress, with particular relevance on walnut and juniper 
stands in Suzak and Uzgen. Findings from the geospatial analysis (Land Productivity Dynamics, LPD98 
2001-2017) performed over 45 State Forests with forest cover >10%99 confirm a diffuse stress of forest 
resources with declining trends in over 40% of forested areas (Annex 2, Chapter 1 (pages 4041) and 
Annex 6 – Baseline Atlas).  
Concerning rangeland, the FAO analysis identified 40 pastures covering 73.4% of the total Project Area. 
Similarly to the forest sector described above, the geospatial analysis (NDVI and LPD 2001-2017 – Annex 
2, Chapter 1, Figure 30 (page 42)) confirms a diffuse stress of pasture resources with declining trends of 
land productivity in over 32% of pastures. (Annex 2, Chapter 1 (pages 4142) and Annex 6 – Baseline 
 
95 SAEPF, 2013 
96 Representative Concentration Pathways 
97 As reported in Annex 2, page 20 and page 61 as well as in Annex 6 - Baseline Atlas each of the dataset for the selected districts is available at: http://beta.earthmap.org.  
98  LPD classification’s methodology is available at  https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MA6HUHXBLMpicCC_Q2LAOdY7HWBW2QS-rgE-
kNn_l1w/edit?usp=sharing.  
99 Annex 6 – Baseline Atlas. Forest cover was identified using the Hansen Global Forest Change dataset. Data are also available in Earth Map

=== PAGE 93 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
Atlas).  
Finally, the household survey that aimed at assessing – among other – the climate adaptation capacity and 
resilience of communities and of their livelihoods (Resilience Index Measurement and Analysis (RIMA), 
identified income diversification and access to credit as the main needs to increase resilience and reduce 
adaptation deficit in target areas (Annex 2, pages 4245, and in details in Annex 9, WP – “Resilience 
Analysis in the project target areas”).

=== PAGE 94 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
Addendum 2. List of definitions 
 
The project applies the following definitions. Source of definition is provided in brackets.  
• 
Forest (FAO): Land with tree crown cover of more that 10 percent, area covering more than 0.5 
ha, with minimum height of the trees to be 5 m at maturity and in-situ conditions. The land may 
consist either of closed forest formations where trees of various storied and undergrowth cover a 
high proportion of the ground, or of open forest formations with a continuous vegetation cover in 
which tree crown cover exceeds 10 percent. 
• 
Deforestation (FAO): Deforestation is the long term or permanent conversion of forest to other 
(non-forest) land use. 
• 
Afforestation (FAO): is the conversion from other land uses into forest, or the increase of the 
canopy cover to above the 10% threshold. 
• 
Reforestation (FAO): is the re-establishment of forest through planting and/or deliberate seeding 
on land classified as forest. 
• 
Land Degradation (UNCCD): reduction or loss of the biological or economic productivity and 
complexity of rainfed cropland, irrigated cropland, or range, pasture, forest and woodlands 
resulting from land uses or from a process or combination of processes, including processes 
arising from human activities and habitation patterns, such as: (i) soil erosion caused by wind 
and/or water; (ii) deterioration of the physical, chemical and biological or economic properties of 
soil; and (iii) long-term loss of natural vegetation.  
 
Concerning the identified classes of degradation (extremely, moderately, non degraded), the project 
uses the Land Productivity Dynamics (LPD) indicator (UNCCD) for both Forests and Rangelands (Annex 
2, Feasibility Study, Chapter 1, Section: XII. Climate Scenario, Vulnerability, Resilience and DRR in Target 
Areas (pages 40-41), and Annex 6.b, Atlas Report (Section 4 and 5) for supplementary analysis).  
The degradation classes are based on LPD classification developed by the European Commission Joint 
Research Center and adopted by the UNCCD as reference, as follows: Extremely degraded corresponds 
to LPD “declining productivity”; Moderately degraded combines the two LPD classes “Early signs of 
decline” and “Stable but stressed”; and Not degraded corresponds to “Stable but not stressed” and 
“Increasing productivity”. The identified classes are a qualitative combined measure of the intensity and 
persistence of negative or positive trends together with changes of the photosynthetically active vegetation 
cover over the observed period (starting from year 2000).

=== PAGE 95 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
 
Addendum 3. Additional information related to risk factors and mitigation measures for Section 
G.2. 
Risk Factor 1: 
Component 1 puts a significant emphasis on the strengthening of the coordination between relevant 
government bodies and increased participation of local communities (Pasture Users Unions and other local 
member based organizations). The Funding Proposal builds on lessons learned from previous 
experiences. For example, in 2013, there was an attempt to build cooperation between the SAEPF 
(responsible for forests) and the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry (responsible for pasture). The 
cooperation aimed to tackle the problem of pasture ecosystems management in an integrated manner. 
The memorandum had set a condition for Pasture Committees (PCs) to rent pasture lands from the leskhoz 
for three to five years; while this was an improvement, the initiative did not produce all expected results as 
it lacked follow-up support and implementation on the ground (details in Annex 9, WP “Climate change and 
ecosystem-based NRM”).  
Moreover, in 2017, a group of national NGOs and international organization prepared some amendments 
to the State Forest Fund regulation on use of grazing land proposing joint planning on the use of pasture 
by Pasture Committees and Forest institutions. The draft was submitted to the Government Office for 
review but it needs to be followed up. At the time of Project design (2017-2018), this represented a 
substantial momentum showing the willingness and preparedness of civil societies and their 
representatives to start harmonizing the discrepant regulations of State Forest Fund (which includes also 
land used for grazing) and State Land Fund (which includes rangeland), which the project will promote 
through evidence based policy dialogue under Component 1.   
Additionally, in the context of the GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support programme, also implemented 
by FAO, the NDA, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, including local communities, and other 
government institutions is raising awareness and conducting discussions at different levels on the role of 
the GCF in transformational change in the Kyrgyz Republic. Important efforts are devoted under the first 
readiness grant to ensure coordination and country ownership of GCF investments. Additionally, FAO has 
allocated own resources to work specifically with communities where FAO and WFP GCF projects are 
expected to be implemented to prepare the ground for successful implementation of these large-scale 
investments.  
 
Coordination amongst all the key stakeholders will be ensured through the Project Steering Committee, 
which will include: SAEPF, Climate Finance Centre (CFC), ARIS, the Russian Kyrgyz Development Fund 
(RKDF), the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industries and Melioration (MAFIM), the Pasture Department 
(under MAFIM), State Agency for Local Self Government and Interethnic Relations (SALSGIER), the 
Ministry of Emergency Situations (MES), Kyrgyz Hydromet (under MES), the State Registration Agency, 
and the FAO Representation in Kyrgyzstan (cf. Annex 2 Chapter 5, Section A. A. Implementation 
principles and governance(page 146)). Additionally, the establishment of INRMCRP coordination and 
transversal sharing of information (already agreed during the national engagement process (cf. Annex 5, 
ESMF, Section 6.2 stakeholder engagement  (pages 41-45)) will be mainstreamed at the local level to 
ensure participation of local communities and local institutions in the management of NRM. This approach 
has already been proved effective in both Kyrgyzstan (cf. Annex 2, Feasibility Study, Chapter 3, Section II. 
Recent portfolio and performance (page 77)) and other countries such as Armenia and Lebanon where 
FAO is promoting such approach with positive results. 
 
The Pasture Law of 2009 transferred the management of pastures from the State Land Fund (SLF) to the 
local governments, which in turn can further delegate management to the Pasture Users’ Unions (PUUs).

=== PAGE 96 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
So far, all 471 Aiyl Okmotu (local government of the Aiyl Aimak) transferred pasture management to 
established PUUs (Annex 9, Working Paper “WP - NRM Policy and Governance”). The Pasture Law covers 
the following topics: pasture management and use planning and implementation, monitoring of pasture 
conditions, defining and collecting pasture fees, pasture-use-related conflict management, and managing 
funds collected from pasture use for pasture improvement and management.  
The support to the implementation of the Pasture law is key and mainstreamed throughout the community 
mobilization (Activity 1.3.1 under Component 1). The Project will also develop and promote implementation 
of harmonized regulatory frameworks for access to pasture areas (in SLF) and grazing areas on forest land 
(under State Forest Fund (SFF), which is managed by SAEPF), and in the forestry / rangeland investments 
(Component 2 – all activities) (Annex 9, Working Paper “WP - NRM Policy and Governance” for detailed 
analysis; Annex 2 Chapter 1 on previous and ongoing projects on pasture law implementation). 
 
Risk Factor 2: 
The problem of overstocking in Kyrgyzstan is significant, and (as noted in Annex 2, Feasibility Study, 
Chapter 1, Section VI. Sectoral economic performance (page 11)) the number of livestock has 
systematically increased in the recent decades. Increasing animal numbers is often the first strategy for 
farmers to increase incomes. To this end, the Project takes this risk in high consideration, and has 
envisaged a multifold system of incentives from the economic and institutional points of view.  
Regarding rules and regulation, in developing the INRMCRPs under Component 1, the project will support 
the enforcement of existing regulations (Pasture Law, 2009, adopted by the Pasture Department of MAFIM) 
for monitoring pasture condition to assist Pasture Users Union (PUU) in estimating carrying capacity and 
specifying stocking rates in pasture management plans (details also in Annex 9, WP on Pasture 
Management). The Pasture Law of 2009 attributed the management of pasture under State Land Fund to 
the PUUs. Better planning of grazing in terms of spatial management, but also time and animal numbers 
will prevent further overgrazing.  
Additional pastures are available also in State Forest Fund (under management of SAEPF). Under the 
aegis of the Project, the SAEPF will be encouraged to develop grazing land-use protocols and social 
mechanisms that introduce a management arrangement analogous to the PUU/ Pasture Committee 
system (cf. Annex 2, Chapter 4, Section Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements (page 
132)).  
Component 2 will address the problem of low productive livestock by promoting breed-improvements for 
cattle and small ruminants, improved feeding as well improved animal husbandry. Increased productivity 
per head of livestock represents an incentive to limit animal numbers while achieving the same level of 
household income.  
Component 3 will provide significant alternatives to unproductive and unsustainable grazing and livestock 
production practices, by promoting investments in climate sensitive value chains, which as ultimate effects 
will also contribute to income diversification and more sustainable grazing pressure in the Project Area.  
The stakeholders in the project area are aware of the problem generated by overstocking, as expressed 
throughout the consultation process (cf. Annex 5 ESMF, Section V. Structured Consultations (Page 73-
75)). In particular, the stakeholders consulted in participatory meetings throughout the project design 
confirm that poor quality of pastures, danger of natural disasters such as landslides, absence of clean 
water, high number and low quality of livestock, overdependence on livestock production” represent major 
problems for the area. The consulted stakeholders specified also that the project shall include as priorities 
support to the identification of an appropriate number of livestock on pastures, and support the transition 
from quantity to quality of livestock.

=== PAGE 97 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
 Addendum 4. Description of monitoring parameters and M&E framework 
The Project management Unit (PMU) will include an M&E unit, which will be in charge for of the 
monitoring/measurement/collection of identified parameters during the eight years of execution. This will 
happen through direct data collection and analysis as well as by reviewing reports from partners that will 
use the same procedure identified by the project. The M&E unit will be supported in this task by FAO 
technical expertise. National institutions will be trained and accompanied in using remote sensing to ensure 
the hand over of knowledge and expertise and continuation after project completion (under Activity 1.2.1). 
Additionally, calculations will be verified at mid-term and termination by an independent team of evaluators. 
Details on functions and structure of the M&E unit are available in Annex 2 Chapter 6, Page 174. 
The PMU will host a M&E Unit, which will conduct data collection and monitoring of Execution Performances, 
coordinate and supervise community monitoring and ground truthing, provide training and technical advice, 
and provide inputs for project reporting and planning. M&E Unit will provide monitoring results of indicators 
for interim and terminal evaluations. 
As detailed in Annex 2 Feasibility Study, Chapter 6 (P.176), M&E Unit will be responsible for ensuring 
Means of Verification (MoV) of indicators listed in the Table 1 below: 
 
Table 1: CS-FOR Indicators and Means of Verification 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Detailed Means of Verification (MoV) 
Fund-level impacts 
Core Indicators 
Tonnes 
of 
carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent (tCO2eq) reduced as a 
result 
of 
GCF-funded 
projects/programmes 
Tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) emissions 
reduced will be monitored and processed with FAO EX-
ACT / GLEAM methodologies. Results will be 
disaggregated per district, community and type of 
investment. And will be presented annually to the Fund. 
Measurement Unit: tCO2eq 
Cost per tCO2eq decreased for all 
Fund-funded mitigation projects/ 
programmes 
The cost of tCO2eq monitoring will be based on estimated 
disbursement over estimated tCO2eq reduced. The project 
will report at mid-term and closure. Measurement Unit: 
USD per tCO2eq 
Volume of finance leveraged by 
Fund funding 
Volume of finance leveraged by Fund funding will be 
monitored via reports from cofinancing actors and executing 
agencies. The project will report annually. Measurement 
Unit: USD 
Total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries; 
Number 
of 
beneficiaries 
relative 
to 
total 
population 
Via its planned mid-term and terminal independent surveys, 
the project will be able to report on direct beneficiaries, 
intensity of support provided and indirect beneficiaries 
according to Core indicator 1 of the Adaptation Fund and 
will be presented annually. Measurement Unit: Number of 
people 
M4.0 Reduced emissions 
from land use, reforestation, 
reduced deforestation, and 
through sustainable forest 
management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks 
GCF M4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent 
(tCO2eq) 
reduced or avoided (including 
increased removals) as a result of 
GCF-funded 
projects 
/ 
programmes 
Georeferencing of activities and geospatial analysis (Earth 
Map) will provide the project with data on investments' 
distribution and effectiveness. Results will be disaggregated 
per district, community and type of investment. Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) emissions reduced or 
avoided and/or GHG removal by sinks from forestry and 
land use activities including emission intensity per unit of 
animal protein will be monitored and processed with FAO 
EX-ACT / GLEAM methodologies. The indicator will be 
informed according to CIF FIP I1 Table 1. Results will be 
disaggregated per district, community and type of 
investment. And will be presented annually to the Fund. 
Measurement Unit: tCO2eq

=== PAGE 98 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Detailed Means of Verification (MoV) 
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods of 
the most vulnerable people, 
communities and regions  
GCF A1.1 Number of males and 
females 
benefiting 
from 
the 
adoption of diversified, climate 
resilient 
livelihood 
options 
(including 
fisheries, 
agriculture, 
tourism, etc.) 
Georeferenced data will be processed using the RIMA II 
methodology against the assessed project's baseline 
including climate variables. Results will be disaggregated 
per district, community, livelihood practice, exposure to 
climate risk, age and sex. Results will be presented at Mid 
Term and Project’s Completion. Measurement Unit: Index 
0/100 
A4.0 Improved resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem 
services 
GCF 
A4.1 
Coverage/scale 
of 
ecosystems 
protected 
and 
strengthened 
in 
response 
to 
climate variability and change 
Georeferencing of activities and geospatial analysis (Earth 
Map) will provide the project with data on investments' 
distribution, effectiveness and climate variables. Analysis of 
the Land Productivity Dynamics (LPD) via FAO Earth Map 
will allow the assessment of project’s impacts on 
ecosystems (Biological and Land asset). Results will be 
disaggregated per level of degradation, district, community 
and ecosystem. Results will be presented at Mid Term and 
Project’s Completion. Measurement Unit: hectares 
Outcome level results 
 
Number 
of 
technologies 
and 
innovative solutions transferred or 
licensed to support low-emission 
development as a result of Fund 
support. 
The project will build a standardized scorecard of the 
various strategic plans and official documents at regular 
intervals to observe changes in terms of climate change 
streamlining, adopted technologies. The scorecard will also 
be 
informed 
by 
the 
various 
independent 
survey 
(households, institutions, entrepreneurs) planned within the 
M&E process at mid-term and closure. The project will also 
collect and analyze official documents from involved 
institutions and partners to assess impacts at local level. 
Results will be disaggregated per institutions, district and 
community and will include analysis on potential impacts on 
gender equality in target areas. Results will be presented at 
Mid Term and Project’s Completion. Measurement Unit: 
Score card index. 
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory 
systems for low-emission 
planning and development 
GCF M5.2 Number and level of 
effective coordination mechanisms. 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory 
systems for climate-
responsive planning and 
development 
GCF 5.2 Number and level of 
effective coordination mechanisms 
M9.0 Improved management 
of land or forest areas 
contributing to emissions 
reductions 
M9.1 Hectares of land or forests 
under 
improved 
and 
effective 
management that contributes to 
CO2 emission reductions 
Georeferencing of activities and geospatial analysis (Earth 
Map) will provide the project with data on investments' 
distribution, effectiveness and climate variables. Analysis of 
the Land Productivity Dynamics (LPD) via FAO Earth Map 
will allow the assessment of project’s impacts on 
ecosystems. Results will be disaggregated per level of 
degradation, altitude, district, community and ecosystem. 
Results will be presented at mid-term and closure. 
Measurement Unit: hectares 
SDG: 15.1.1 Forest area as a 
proportion of total land area 
SDG:15.2.1 
Progress 
towards 
sustainable forest management 
SDG: 15.3.1 Proportion of land that 
is degraded over total land area 
SDG: 
15.4.2 
Mountain 
Green 
Cover Index 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced 
exposure to climate risks 
Strengthened adaptive capacity 
and reduced exposure to climate 
risks 
The project will monitor through surveys the implementation 
of commercial arrangements between agribusinesses and 
primary producers in the project intervention areas, and will 
monitor the implementation of technologies and practices. 
The project will also verify the diversification of income 
sources at mid-term and at project completion. The 
assessment will be done via a standardized scorecard of 
the adopted technologies. The scorecard will also be 
informed by the various independent survey (households, 
institutions, entrepreneurs) planned within the M&E process 
at mid-term and closure.  Measurement Unit: Score card 
index

=== PAGE 99 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Detailed Means of Verification (MoV) 
Output 1.1: Evidence based natural resources management governance is strengthened across stakeholders 
Project Monitoring activities and related indicators 
1.1.1: By Y3 Studies, 
analysis and information / 
awareness material are 
developed and accessible to 
all project stakeholders in 
the intervention areas and 
among the institutions at a 
national level.  
1-CS-FOR: % of people aware of 
materials in project areas and in 
the target institutions 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Data will be collected via a series of independent 
household / institutions surveys (baseline, mid-term and 
closure) Measurement Unit: # and % 
2-CS-FOR: # of institutions 
accessing and using project's 
data. 
1.1.2. By Y5  Community 
Landscape Management 
Groups (CLMGs) are 
established and operative 
3-CS-FOR: # of groups regularly 
meeting. 
4-CS-FOR: # of meetings of  
GLMG out of the project’s 
framework and timeframe 
1.1.3: By Y5 targeted key 
institutions have capacity to 
make evidence based 
decisions on CC/NRM  
5-CS-FOR: # of decisions 
(institutional/regional/local) related 
to CC and NRM supported 
modified and approved. 
The project will collect and analyze official documents from 
involved/exposed institutions. Data will be collected via a 
series of independent institutions’ surveys (baseline, mid-
term and closure) Results will be disaggregated per 
institutions, district and community. Results will be 
presented at Mid Term and Project’s Completion. 
Measurement Unit: #  
1.1.4: By Y5 
Recommendations for 
enforcement of sustainable 
management and use of 
forest- rangeland 
ecosystems, including 
technical, legal and 
institutional approaches to 
advance public-private 
partnership, are proposed to 
stakeholders for reflection in 
policy and legislation. 
6-CS-FOR: # of enforcement 
recommendations /  harmonization 
revisions approved by deputed 
institutions  
1.1.5: Y7 Concept for 
management, including legal 
arrangements for 
management and use of 
municipal forest of municipal 
forest developed / presented 
to the Government / 
Parliament for approval. 
7-CS-FOR: One approved concept 
for management of municipal 
forest development approved by 
the National Platform and adopted 
by deputed institutions 
8-CS-FOR% of people benefitting 
of project activities reporting that 
their capacity in engaging with 
relevant institutions has increased 
thanks to project interventions 
1.2.1: By Y3 One Evidence-
based integrated NRM 
Climate Resilience Plans’ 
Planning, Monitoring and 
Evaluation and 
communication protocol is 
9-CS-FOR: 80% of annual working 
plans and budgets of involved  
local institutions parts of CLMGs in 
target areas include results of the 
transferred evidence based 
practice 
The project will collect and analyze official documents from 
involved/exposed institutions (mainly from the signatories 
of the Kyrgyzstan National Spatial Infrastructure 
Memorandum of Understanding). Data will be collected via 
a series of independent PUU surveys (baseline, mid-term 
and closure). Results will be disaggregated per institutions,

=== PAGE 100 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 94 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Detailed Means of Verification (MoV) 
active at Community 
Landscape Management 
Group (CLMG) level in the 
target areas. 
PUU, SFF, district and community and will be presented at 
Mid Term and Project’s Completion. Measurement Unit: # 
and % 
1.2.2. By Y2 Forest and 
rangeland resources 
monitoring system 
developed and presented to 
the Government / 
Parliament. 
10-CS-FOR: One handover 
document from the project to 
involved authorities 
1.3.1: By Y2 All Leskozes / 
Pasture Committees/ Aiyl 
Okmotu (AOs) involved in 
CLMG in target areas are 
mobilized and receive 
adequate and adapted 
training in technical and 
managerial aspects related 
to the design and 
implementation of the 
INRMCRP, including on 
climate change mitigation 
and adaptation 
11-CS-FOR: # of institutions and 
local organizations / committees 
involved during the formulation of 
the INRMCRP 
Data will be collected via a series of independent HH and 
institutions’ surveys (baseline, mid-term and closure) 
Results will be disaggregated per institutions, district and 
municipality and presented at Mid Term and Project’s 
Completion. Measurement Unit: # and % 
1.3.2: By Y4 INRMCRP are 
developed, negotiated and 
agreed within all Community 
Landscape Management 
Groups (CLMGs) and the 
plans are ready for 
implementation and 
monitoring. 
12-CS-FOR: # of INRMCRP 
agreed in target areas 
13-CS-FOR: # of INRMCRP 
operational in target areas 
Output: 2.1: Green investments for forests and rangelands rehabilitation are made available 
Project Monitoring Sub Outputs and related indicators 
2.1.1. By Y6, relevant local 
institutions from the target 
districts are able to execute 
the INRMCRPs 
14- CF-FOR: % of INRMCRP 
executed and related O&M 
mechanisms are in place 
Data will be collected via a series of independent surveys 
(baseline, mid-term and closure). Results will be 
disaggregated per institutions (eg, PUU, SFF, district and 
community) and will be presented at Mid Term and 
Project’s Completion. Measurement Unit: # and % 
2.2.1. By Y8, at least 62.359 
ha of forest lands are 
afforested/ reforested/ 
restored (3,000 ha of mostly 
dry high-altitude 
deforested/severely 
degraded forests afforested/ 
reforested; 3,000 ha of 
degraded forests (Tree 
Cover – TC- < 10%) 
restored via natural forest 
enrichment practices; and 
56,359 ha of forests under 
improved management; 
644,595 ha at least 644,595 
ha of rangelands under 
improved management) 
15-CS-FOR: # of hectares 
afforested / reforested with 
survival rate > 65% 
Georeferencing of activities and geospatial analysis (Earth 
Map) will provide the project with data on investments' 
distribution and effectiveness and improvements against 
baseline (LPD, NDVI, Hansen Forest Cover Change). 
Results will be disaggregated per district, community and 
type of investment. Results will be presented on an annual 
base and will be included in the Project Annual Report. 
Measurement Unit: hectares 
 
Data will also be collected via a series of independent HH 
and institutions’ surveys (baseline, mid-term and closure) 
Results will be disaggregated per institutions, district and 
community and presented at Mid Term and Project’s 
Completion. Measurement Unit: # and % - Liters - Kg 
16-CS-FOR: # of hectares 
reporting TC > 10% in targeted 
areas. 
17-CS-FOR: # of hectares 
reporting improved LPD values 
18-CS-FOR: # of hectares 
reporting improved LPD values 
19-CS-FOR: Average milk yields 
(l/animal/day) increased by at least 
40%,  
20-CS-FOR: Average animal live 
weight (kg/animal) increased by at 
least 15% 
Output 3.1: Selected value chains are climate sensitive and producers adopt carbon optimization technologies and 
practices 
Project Monitoring Sub Outputs and related indicators 
3.1.1. By Y8 the number of 
producers adopting carbon 
optimization technologies 
23-CS-FOR: # of additional 
leaseholders (HH) certified by 
voluntary sustainable 
management standards   
Certification body (register of certificates) and Kyrgyz 
Statistic Committee survey. Measurement Unit: # and %

=== PAGE 101 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Detailed Means of Verification (MoV) 
and practices is increased 
by 20%. 
24-CS-FOR: # of additional ha of 
forests used and managed under 
voluntary sustainable 
management standards   
Independent Household Livelihood (baseline, mid term 
and closure) and Kyrgyz Statistic Committee Survey 
25-CS-FOR: # of additional ha 
planted on permanent orchards 
and plantations using drip 
irrigation 
Data will also be collected via a series of independent HH 
surveys (baseline, mid term and closure) focused on 
livelihood. Results will be disaggregated per district, 
community, gender, age and type of product and will be 
presented at Mid Term and Project’s Completion. 
Measurement Unit: hectares -  # - tons – USD 
 
Improved Emission intensity will be monitored processing 
data collected by the project with FAO-GLEAM. Results 
will be disaggregated per district, community, type of 
product and will be presented at Mid Term and Project’s 
Completion. Measurement Unit: tCO2eq/kg of animal 
protein (Milk and Meat) 
26-CS-FOR: % of the total volume 
and value of products (including 
live animals) sourced by 
entrepreneurs participating in sub-
component 3.2 
27-CS-FOR: % of targeted animal 
owners achieving improved 
emissions intensity by at least 
15% per unit of animal protein 
3.1.2. By Y8 entrepreneurs 
and producers in selected 
agricultural value chains are 
able to access and utilize 
the information provided in 
the end-market 
assessments. 
28-CS-FOR: % of target 
entrepreneurs / producers 
requesting financial assistance 
(disaggregated by sex) 
M&E Archive and reports from partners and involved 
stakeholders. HH Livelihood Survey and Kyrgyz Statistic 
Committee Survey. Data will be collected from Dried Fruits 
and Nuts business platform, RKDF business plans 
depositary, Survey of Kyrgyz agribusinesses. 
Measurement Unit: # 
3.2.1. By Y8  US$ 15 000 
000 worth loans from 
component 3.2  
29-CS-FOR: Value of loans 
disbursed by RKDF and partner 
banks in the framework of sub-
component 3.2 
RKDF data. RKDF data;  
This output is under the full responsibility of RKDF, co-
financier of the project. Measurement Unit: # and USD 
 
 
The project will look at a series of parameters to monitor and assess forests, orchards and rangelands and 
calculate carbon stocks. These are: 
• 
Land productivity dynamic indicator for each parcel identified and georeferenced (cf. Annex 2 
page 179); 
• 
Forest cover changes >10% via Hansen Forest Cover Change methodology and field 
observations (cf. Annex 2 page 179);  
• 
Hectares with survival rate >65% (cf. Annex 2 page 179).  
Monitoring metrics will also depend from:  
• 
Tree species data according to existing composition of forests in target areas (Spruce forests, 
Walnut forest, Juniper forest, Pistachio forest, Poplar forest and Willows and Gummy forests 
as shrub and riparian forests). References include: Baseline Atlas (Annex 6.b), the Feasibility 
Study (Annex 2, pages 22-23; 31-32: 110-114), and the Working Paper (WP) on Forestry in 
Annex 9. 
• 
Age of trees/Growth rate: for the purposes of the monitoring carbon benefits during the 
project, the age of existing stands in target areas is classified according to Kraft classification 
as reported in the Forest Typology in the Kyrgyz Republic of 2008 as well as in the National 
Forest Assessment carried out by FAO and SAEPF in 2010. (Forestry Working Paper), the 
FAO’s Global Ecological Zones of 2011 and consultation with national and local stakeholders. 
Growth rates of forests in target areas are reported in Annex 2 (pages 225-226). 
• 
Forest cover according to Hansen forest cover of georeferenced plots. 
• 
Land Productivity Dynamics (LPD) of georeferenced plots.

=== PAGE 102 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 96 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
FAO confirms that the default parameters will be monitored during the project and reported annually. 
Georeferencing of activities and geospatial analysis (Earth Map, introduced in Chapter 6 of the 
Feasibility Study, page 173, as well as in Chapter 1 (page 20, paragraphs 78) and subsequent of the 
FS, and presented in details in Annex 6.b of the submission package) will provide the project with data 
on investments' distribution and improvements against baseline (e.g. LPD, NDVI, Hansen Forest Cover 
Change). Results will be disaggregated per district, community and type of investment. Results will be 
presented on an annual basis and will be included in the Project Annual Report. 
Georeferencing of all investments and using remote sensing combined with ground monitoring (jointly 
with stakeholders) will allow identifying impacts and attributions. The georeferenced archive will 
provide precise indication of where activities are executed (quantitative analysis) and associate to them 
the attributes identified by the baseline (qualitative analysis). This approach will allow the project and 
the AE to follow up via ground-based surveys and remote sensing analysis the evolution of the default 
parameters. 
 
The two main relevant institutions to ensure long-term sustainability of carbon accounting and of other 
geospatial tools are the SAEPF (GCF NDA), the Pasture Department in the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Food Industry (MAFIM) and the Statistic Committee. Knowledge transfer to these institutions will start 
from the initial stage of the project until full handover at the end of the project. The SAEPF, also 
covering the role of NDA, is the institution tasked to report to the UNFCCC. This element represents a 
significant institutional incentive to embed carbon accounting within its functions. FAO has already 
provided stakeholders with a tailored Russian version of both EX-ACT and GLEAM-i to ensure full 
ownership and control of the tool and related processes. For example, SAEPF has already received 
exposure and training to EX-ACT and trainings. Refreshers trainings are budgeted within Activity 1.2.1 
throughout the project duration. This will be coupled with on-the-job learning during project 
implementation. Additionally in addition to the work done during the national engagement process, 
identified stakeholders will be trained on GLEAM-I. MAFIM also showed interest in receiving training 
on GLEAM-i, and a draft Russian version of the tool has been prepared specifically for this project. 
 
Additional opportunity for long term adoption of the relevant monitoring tools and techniques (including 
remote sensing) is provided by the signature in 2016 of the Kyrgyzstan National Spatial Infrastructure 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) (cf. Annex 9, WP on Georeferencing Strategy,). This MoU, 
signed among others by SAEPF and MAFIM, aims at the standardization and sharing of national spatial 
data, including in the use of remote sensing for natural resources monitoring, management and 
planning. These signatory institutions will be trained (as part of Activity 1.2.1) to use the appropriate 
remote sensing tools and technologies. The momentum generated by the signature of the 
memorandum constitute a unique occasion to promote further georeferencing among national  
institutions and other development actors, such as the WB, GIZ, IFAD and FAO.  
 
Deforestation/illegal loggings 
 
According to different sources, including 2017 Collect Earth assessment within the framework of the 
FAO implemented project “National Forest Monitoring and Information Systems for a transparent and 
truthful REDD+” (https://www.international-climate-initiative.com/en/details/project/332/), and the 
University of Maryland and the Hansen’s forest cover change dataset results (2000-2018), the 
deforestation rate for Kyrgyzstan ranges from 0 to 0.38% at national level and 0.3% in target areas.  
 
Each of the areas identified for forest investments is georeferenced and accurately analysed in the 
baseline (Baseline Atlas, Annex 6.b). The project will constantly monitor the state of forests in target

=== PAGE 103 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 97 OF 81 
 
 
 
 
I 
areas via dedicated remote sensing analysis and involvement of communities in the monitoring 
processes as described in Annex 2 Chapter 6 as well as in the georeferencing strategy working paper 
(Annex 9). Furthermore, FAO will identify a control area external to project’s intervention to better 
quantify and follow up on project’s impacts. The identified procedure will allow the project and FAO to 
constantly monitor activities against the baseline and to provide objective and tangible data for carbon 
calculation and independent impact evaluations.  
 
Given the nature and scope of the project and as part of the project’s aim to support the country in 
creating  the enabling environment for an innovative evidence-based climate and natural resource 
planning and monitoring system, deforestation is already part of the project monitoring activity in target 
areas. . Furthermore, the tools developed by FAO (e.g. Collect Earth, Earth Map, EX-ACT, GLEAM-i) 
and practices (e.g. Georeferencing, geospatial analysis and community monitoring) have already been 
introduced to the SAEPF and the Pasture Departments in order to ensure full ownership of the process 
as well as scaling up of this approach at the national level. Finally, local administrations and 
communities will be involved not only in the monitoring of forested areas but also in the using the tools 
and practices introduced by the projects.

=== PAGE 104 ===
THE STATE AGENCY
ON ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
AND FORESTRY
OF THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC
KbIPIbI3 PECIIYEJIITKACbIHbIH
OKMETYHO KAPAIIITYY
KYPqAN TYPTAH qEfrPEHY KOPTOO
XAHA TOKOfr qAPEACbI FOIOHIIA
MAMJIEKETTI{K AIEHTTI,IK
Bishkek, 142 Gorkiy Str.
Ph.. + (996-312) 54-50-57, Fax: + (996-312) 54-50-91
E - rnail: min-eco@Blcat.kg , envforest@elcat.ks
N,_01 !_4-_4wJ4_
19, P6, int,Sr.
Eumcer m, foprxnfi Ko.rocY, 142
Te . + (996-312) 54-59-57, 6tff(s: + (996-312)54-50-91
Sr.gapex: min-eco@elcat.ke. envforest@elcat.ks
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF")
R:e Funding proposal for the GCF by Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) regarding the project <Carbon Sequestration through Climate
Investment in Forests and Rangelands (CS FOR) in Kyrgtzstan>
Dear Madam, Sir,
We refer to the project <Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in
Forests and Rangelands (CS FOR) in Kygyzstan> as included in the funding proposal
submitted by Food and Agricultwe Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to us on
June 1, Friday,2018.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the State Agency on
Environment Protection and Forestry (SAEPF), the National Designated Authority of the
Kyrgyz Republic.
Pursuant to GCF decision 8.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the project <Carbon Sequeskation
through Climate Investment in Forests and Rangelands (CS FOR) in Kyrgyzstan> as
included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic has no-objection to the project <Carbon
Sequestration through Climate Investment in Forests and Rangelands (CS FOR) in
Kyrgyzstan> as included in the funding proposal;
(b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the Kyrgyz
Republic's national priorities, strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project
<Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in Forests and Rangelands (CS
"C
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 105 ===
FOR) in Kyrgyzstan> as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with
relevant national laws and reeulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the
project <Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in Forests and Rangelands (CS
FOR) in KlngyzstaD) as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all activities to be implemented
within the scope of the programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Sincerely,
Abdykalyk Rustamov
Director.
NDA of the Kyrgyz Republic to GCF
/
.?

=== PAGE 106 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in 
Forests and Rangelands (CS FOR) 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
The Kyrgyz Republic:  
Naryn region: Ak-Talaa District; 
Jalal-Abad region: Toguz-Toro and Suzak Districts; 
Osh region: Uzgen District. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, October 4, 2019 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Russian 
Explanation on language 
The above-mentioned languages are most commonly 
spoken in the districts targeted by this project. 
Link to disclosure 
English:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6323en/ca6323en.pdf  
 
Russian:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6323ru/ca6323ru.pdf  
Other link(s) 
FAO disclosure portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental-social-
standards/disclosure-portal/en/  
 
FAO publication page at the Regional Office for Europe and 
Central Asia:  
English:  
http://www.fao.org/europe/resources/en/  
 
Russian:  
http://www.fao.org/europe/resources/ru/  
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) that is available at the 
above-mentioned links. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, October 4, 2019 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Russian 
Explanation on language 
The above-mentioned languages are most commonly 
spoken in the districts targeted by this project. 
Link to disclosure 
English:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6323en/ca6323en.pdf

=== PAGE 107 ===
Russian:  
http://www.fao.org/3/ca6323ru/ca6323ru.pdf     
Other link(s) 
FAO disclosure portal:  
http://www.fao.org/environmental-social-
standards/disclosure-portal/en/ 
 
FAO publication page at the Regional Office for Europe and 
Central Asia:  
English:  
http://www.fao.org/europe/resources/en/   
 
Russian:  
http://www.fao.org/europe/resources/ru/  
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the ESMF (Annex 5) that is available 
at the above-mentioned links. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, October 4, 2019 
Place 
FAO disclosure portal at the Regional Office for Europe and 
Central Asia, as a location closer to the project stakeholders:  
Russian:  
http://www.fao.org/europe/resources/ru/  
 
Subsequently, the ESMF will be made available in the 
following: 
 
Web page of NDA Kyrgyzstan (English and Russian):  
http://test.gcfnda.ecology.gov.kg/page/view/id/275 
 
Web page of State Agency for Environmental Protection and 
Forestry (SAEPF): 
http://www.ecology.gov.kg/index  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered

=== PAGE 108 ===
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
Tuesday, November 12, 2019 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Tuesday, November 12, 2019 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 109 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP116 
Proposal name: 
Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in Forests and 
Rangelands in Kyrgyz Republic (CS-FOR) 
Accredited entity: 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
Country: 
Kyrgyzstan 
Project size:  
Small 
I.
Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths 
Points of caution 
GCF grant financing will be used to mobilize 
further financing in forest and rangeland 
sectors creating opportunities for scaling up. 
Coordination and ownership among the 
different partners will be critical for successful 
implementation and to ensure sustainability.  
An enabling environment for climate-related 
green investments will be strengthen and 
capacity-building for all relevant stakeholders 
provided.  
Georeferenced monitoring will be used for the 
evaluation of forest-rangeland ecosystem 
management and will promote evidence-based 
planning informing the business model for 
future replication and scaling up. 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XVII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 
Project background 
3.
Kyrgyzstan is a low-income food-deficit country. Livestock is the most important source
of income, the primary source of nutrition, and the financial safety net for the rural poor.
Cropping is limited due to a lack of irrigation infrastructure and worsening climatic conditions –
increasing temperatures and reducing the amount and duration of rainfalls. Climate change
combined with poor management of natural resources have led to overexploitation and
overgrazing by large groups of unproductive livestock, and to increasing forest degradation and
unsustainable harvesting of timber from mountain slopes.
4.
The objective of the proposal is to enhance carbon sequestration and climate resilience
of ecosystems and livelihoods. The project will store 19.8 million tonnes of carbon dioxide
equivalent (tCO2eq) over 20 years. This represents an annual reduction of 990,000 tCO2eq and
7,920,000 tCO2eq over the eight years of project implementation. The total expected reduction

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 110 
 
 
over 20 years represents 7.6 per cent of the country’s total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, 
and 22.6 per cent of the agricultural share of emissions. 
5. 
Aside from the activities at national scale, the project sites are in selected rural 
municipalities represented by the four contiguous districts of Ak-Talaa, Toguz-Toro, Suzak and 
Uzgen.  
6. 
The project seeks a GCF grant of approximatively USD 30 million, or 60 per cent of the 
total project cost. The project is classified as ESS category B. The project management unit costs 
USD 2.5 million, equivalent to 5 per cent of the project cost. This covers staff time, operational 
costs, and travels.  
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis  
Component 1: Evidence-based strengthening of natural resource management governance (total 
cost: USD 5.58; GCF cost: USD 5.18, or 92.8 per cent) 
7. 
This component aims to provide an enabling environment to support investments in 
forest-rangeland management through two approaches: 1) harmonization of relevant 
procedures and regulations for “climate-change sensitive” natural resource management, 
especially for tenure arrangements (output 1.1); and 2) the promotion of evidence-based and 
georeferenced monitoring and evaluation measures for natural resource and forest-rangeland 
ecosystem management (outputs 1.2 and 1.3). It aims to galvanize multi-stakeholder 
partnerships to promote technically sound integrated natural resource management in 
Kyrgyzstan. It also provides measures for capacity and organizational development – creating a 
national expert group for necessary consultations, providing technical support to pasture users 
unions and Leskhozes (local forest institutions) to update and enhance the needed data to 
implement climate-sensitive plans and strategies, and establishing community management 
groups to support work at landscape scale. 
8. 
The preservation of forest-rangeland ecosystems through the prevention of overgrazing 
and overharvesting of the forest/vegetative cover will be more effectively managed with the 
standardization of different legislation and full stakeholder inclusion. Through policy 
harmonization and capacity development at scale, the project will be able to incorporate climate 
risks in current management schemes in forest-rangeland ecosystems. 
Component 2: Green investments for forest and rangeland rehabilitation (total cost: USD 22.40; 
GCF cost: USD 20.30, or 91 per cent) 
9. 
This component aims to contribute to community resilience through capacity 
development of key stakeholders in natural resource management to promote sustainable 
practices like rotational grazing, to enhance monitoring capacities, and to develop and 
implement integrated natural resource management and climate resilience plans (output 2.1). 
This is combined with investments to restore and improve forest-rangelands (output 2.2) in the 
project sites through key interventions: afforestation, reforestation, forest enrichment, pasture 
rehabilitation and livestock investment.  
10. 
Through an integrated approach, stakeholders will be incentivized to include climate 
risks in forest-rangeland planning and management. The skills needed for proper maintenance 
of the investments will be strengthened (e.g. fire protection, pest management and monitoring), 
which will ensure ownership and sustainability post-project.  
Component 3: Climate-sensitive value chain development (total cost: USD 18.01; GCF cost: USD 
3.01, or 16.8 per cent) 
11. 
This component aims to incentivize sustainable investments in carbon sequestration. 
Activities include market assessments, certifications, awareness campaigns on marketing

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 111 
requirements, and other relevant business skills, such as financial literacy to ensure the 
inclusion of smallholder pastoralists and farmers (output 3.1). This is further supported with 
increased access to special credit lines for project-relevant value chains and businesses via the 
Russian Kyrgyz Development Fund (RKDF) co-financing working with local banks to support 
investments with climate mitigation and resilience objectives (output 3.2).  
2.2.1. 
Overall technical assessment 
12.
In summary, the project’s mitigation and adaptation goals are focused on integrated
rangeland and forestry management guided by the prevention of natural resource degradation
and enhancement of ecosystem services; multi-stakeholder engagement with emphasis on
communities and the private sector; promotion of bottom-up activities with local communities;
and the introduction of market-driven incentives for resource users to adopt and maintain
management practices that sequester and preserve stored carbon. All of which will be
supported by an enabling environment with coherent underlying policies and by the
strengthening of key national and local institutions and planning processes, which overall will
improve governance of forest and rangeland in Kyrgyzstan.
13.
There is a strong connectivity between the three components. Components 1 and 2
provide for the creation of an enabling environment, baseline data sets, and capacity combined
with the restoration and rehabilitation of forests and rangelands. Component 3 provides the
scale and sustainability by promoting investments in the natural resources sector in Kyrgyzstan.
The project’s paradigm shift could be adapted and tested in other districts and neighbouring
countries.
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria
3.1 
Impact potential 
   Scale: High 
14.
Under business as usual (substantial degradation trend), the level of forest degradation
would generate an estimated net loss of 1.5 MtCO2eq in 20 years. The project will be able to
avoid the mentioned losses and to generate an additional 18 MtCO2eq sequestration (15.1
MtCO2eq from rangeland and livestock rehabilitation, 2.9 MtCO2eq from forest activities and 0.2
MtCO2eq from other agricultural activities), for a net effect of 19.8 MtCO2eq sequestered.
15.
The project will support the reduction of emissions and enhance carbon storage of about
19.8 MtCO2eq through: (i) the creation of legal and enabling environments supported by an
innovative evidence-based climate and natural resource planning and monitoring system; (ii)
community-based investments in natural forest regeneration, sustainable forest management,
afforestation and reforestation; (iii) the rehabilitation of rangelands and prevention of further
degradation; (iv) the diversification of options for community livelihoods (i.e. income
portfolios); and (v) the reduction of emission intensity per unit of animal protein (meat and
milk).
16.
Sequestration of 19.8 MtCO2eq in 20 years represents 7.6 per cent of the country’s total
emissions, and 22.6 per cent of the agricultural share of emissions. The cost per tCO2eq is USD
2.5.
17.
Average annual temperatures have increased during the period 1960–2010 (0.025
oC/year) with a higher rate of increase in the period 1990–2010 (0.07 oC/year), with the
greatest rate of warming occurring during the winter months. Annual precipitation has shown a
slight downward trend in the last 20 years (–1.868 mm/year). These small but significant
changes in temperature and rainfall are affecting ecosystems and ecosystem services, and thus
community livelihoods, which depend on natural resources for their living.

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 112 
 
 
18. 
The climate resilience of 432,450 individuals (90,000 households), including 246,497 
women in Leskhozes, national parks, local self-government bodies, community organizations, 
the private sector in the high climate-risk area will be improved, representing 9.8 per cent of the 
country’s total population.  
19. 
As part of a resilience impact measurement analysis methodology, developed by the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the resilience capacity index 
has been calculated for the target and control group. For both, a high education level and the 
diversification of income portfolios are the main variables of adaptive capacity. This finding 
confirms the need for economic diversification as part of building resilience. The project will 
increase the resilience of beneficiaries by reducing their dependency on direct uses of natural 
resources, by improving ecosystems functions, and by diversifying livelihoods and income 
sources.  
20. 
An estimated 3,000 ha of dry, high-altitude deforested or severely degraded forest lands 
will be restored through natural forest enrichment practices. In addition, 56,000 ha of forest, 
and 644,000 ha of rangelands will be under improved management. An additional 20 per cent of 
producers will use carbon sequestration technologies and practices.  
21. 
An analysis of the land productivity dynamics via the FAO Earth Map will allow the 
assessment of project’s positive impacts on ecosystems. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential     
 
 
 
                  Scale: High 
22. 
The project aims to contribute to shifting national agricultural production from a 
predominantly unsustainable subsistence livestock production impacting on the carbon storage 
of forests and rangelands to a diversified and climate-sensitive value chain business-oriented 
economy where investments in mitigation enhance the resilience of ecosystems and 
communities by providing ecosystem services (e.g. improved climate regulation, flood 
regulation, soil retention and habitat provision). 
23. 
The major constraint on the increase of carbon sequestration in forests and rangelands 
has been the traditional extensive grazing practices and expansion of pasture areas. The project 
aims to provide incentives for communities to preserve and expand forested areas and to better 
manage grazing lands through improved management practices and establishing linkages with 
markets leading to diversified and more profitable agriculture for beneficiaries. 
24. 
As diversification of income sources is demonstrated as the main driver of adaptive 
capacity, the project will reinforce policies, legal frameworks and strategies enabling 
diversification through improved forest and grassland management. Coordination will be 
reinforced among these core planning frameworks and governance structures. The more 
conducive policy and institutional environment will ensure sustainability and facilitate the 
replication and scale up of future investments.  
25. 
Integrated natural resources climate resilient management plans will be developed with 
local governments, pasture committees, communities and the private sector. Improved 
governance is important for private sector investments into afforestation and reforestation.  
26. 
The project through training sessions, engagement workshops, awareness campaigns, 
media outreaches, and knowledge-sharing events will also strengthen knowledge generation 
and dissemination of good practices throughout the country, including to young people. 
Moreover, the tools used, and skills strengthened will ensure that climate change is taken into 
account in future decision-making by the communities, public institutions and private sector. A 
dedicated communication and knowledge management specialist will be assigned to the project 
implementation team.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 113 
 
 
27. 
The project will inform the national institutional and legal framework by providing 
climate and gender-sensitive evidences and lessons learned, which will provide for long-term 
transformational change. It will also integrate climate risk management into the national and 
subnational planning processes. Moreover, an improved methodology to monitor and assess 
pasture and forest degradation will be developed and used to generate the evidences from 
geospatial data.  
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
                    Scale: High 
28. 
Community mobilization and training sessions will be undertaken in 50 municipalities 
and will include social mobilization, gender training, institutional support, and the 
establishment of task forces and fire management teams. Women and young people will take 
part in the selection of the project-supported value chains and in the capacity-building activities. 
Access for women to improved natural resources (forests and rangelands) will be encouraged to 
ensure equitable distribution of benefits. The investments under the project will generate up to 
3,300 new jobs. 
29. 
In addition to contributing to carbon sequestration, afforestation/reforestation and 
forest-enrichment activities will improve soil fertility and stability, reduce land degradation, 
improve soil water retention and enrich biodiversity. Plant diversity will also be improved 
under pasture rotation. The expected carbon sequestration will increase the availability of 
drinking water and of non-timber forest products, which were valued in the economic analysis. 
Moreover, climate change mitigation and biodiversity issues will be harmonized across 
strategies and legislation through the planned policy dialogue. 
30. 
Better herd management will contribute to an expected rise of livestock production by 
at least 10 per cent (under the assumption of an increasing share of cows and a decreasing 
livestock herd number by 20 per cent). Individual average financial benefits are positive from 
the selected value chains (internal rates of return between 22 and 39 per cent and net present 
values between USD 5,800 and 21,400 per ha), but the highest benefits are when economic 
benefits are accounted for from ecosystem services. Also, forest users will benefit from 
collecting non-timber forest products.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
         Scale: High 
31. 
Most of the population lives in the valleys and foothills of the mountains, where 
vulnerability to climate events is particularly high and where around 50–80 per cent of 
agricultural land are affected by land degradation. Food insecurity is exacerbated by climate-
related shocks, including floods and mudslides. Thirteen per cent of children suffer from 
malnutrition, and around 40 per cent of children and women suffer from anaemia due to 
micronutrient deficiencies.  
32. 
Few investments are in the forest sector. Rangeland investments have received more 
attention from donors, but the focus was strictly on livelihoods and not on including carbon 
sequestration, which makes a significant contribution to reducing GHG emissions in the country, 
as explained in the country’s nationally determined contribution. 
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
             
      Scale: High 
33. 
The Government of Kyrgyzstan includes ecosystem-based adaptation in its “Climate 
change adaptation programme and action plan for 2015–2017 for the forest and biodiversity 
sector”. Mitigation and adaptation actions in the sector are included in the nationally 
determined contribution. FAO will contribute to the national adaptation planning process by

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 114 
 
 
including forest and rangeland management in the National Adaptation Plan being developed 
with the United Nations Development Programme as GCF readiness partner  
34. 
The project was designed with key governmental agencies, coordination bodies, and 
communities. The main stakeholders identified the project target areas and their roles and 
responsibilities in project implementation. This has created a strong sense of ownership of the 
project, which will contribute to the project performance and sustainability. The private sector 
was also engaged in designing the investments in the key value chains and in the identification 
of target areas and priority expansion areas.  
35. 
Key stakeholders have been part of the project design. In the embodiment of the project 
steering committee, they will continue to be involved in project implementation from planning 
to monitoring. It is expected that the project activities will be included in the government’s 
regular annual work plans. The State Agency for Environment Protection and Forestry (SAEPF), 
the lead governmental body for climate change, acts as the secretariat of the Climate Change 
Coordination Commission (headed by the First Vice-Prime Minister of the Kyrgyz Republic) and 
is one executing entity (EE) in this project, a member of the steering committee and hosting the 
project management unit. Other members of the steering committee include the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Food Industry and Melioration , Community Development and Investment Agency 
(ARIS), RKDF, Climate Finance Center (CFC), Ministry of Emergency Situations (MES), State 
Agency for Local Self Government and Interethnic Relations (SALSGIER), and State Registration 
Agency.  
36. 
The approach for integrated forest and pasture management will be based on a set of 
principles, which are reinforcing country ownership: transparency, participation, 
accountability, fairness/equity, coordination and capacity development. Community 
consultative groups will be established at the local level (watershed or forest enterprise level) 
to participate in the development of integrated natural resources management and climate 
resilient plans. Recommendations for tenure arrangements aiming at improving access and 
sustainable use will be developed.  
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
          Scale: High 
37. 
The level of concessionality is justified by the substantial expected mitigation impact 
coupled with the limited financial return of investment in forests, and the high transaction costs 
associated to mobilizing different stakeholders i.e. government agencies, local self-government 
bodies, Leskhozes, and Pasture Use Unions  for joint investments in rangeland rehabilitation, 
which otherwise would not make the investment attractive for the private sector. 
38. 
Component 3 will ensure the sustainability of the investments in carbon sequestration 
carried out in component 2 and will create economic opportunities to decrease degradation of 
natural resources in the project areas, which will enhance the resilience of target communities. 
All private investments generated under component 3 will be undertaken entirely with private 
funds and not GCF funding, aside from the capacity development support activities. 
39. 
The estimated benefits in terms of sequestration is 19.8 MtCO2eq, with the total 
investment of USD 2.5 per tCO2eq. The project utilizes investment of USD 115 per direct 
beneficiary, and USD 51 per total beneficiary (direct and indirect). The average economic 
benefit per direct beneficiary in the project area is estimated at approximately USD 41.1 per 
year (economic net present value of the operation per beneficiary per year), as a result of the 
project interventions. 
40. 
Overall, GCF grant financing is appropriate for this project given the public nature and 
low financial returns of the GCF-funded investments. Component 1 provides public goods in the 
form of policy and legal framework, monitoring and evaluation systems, and planning and 
monitoring. GCF funds under components 2 and 3 will go toward capacity-building, which

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 115 
 
 
provides broad-based benefits. Additional GCF investments under component 2 will improve 
the management of common pool resources (forests and rangeland), which has a high economic 
return but a low financial return. The revenue-generating activities under component 3 will be 
financed by loans from RKDF and without financing from GCF. 
41. 
This project is co-financed by the Government of Kyrgyzstan at USD 1 million (in kind), 
FAO at USD 0.4 million (in kind), the beneficiaries at USD 3.6 million (in kind) RKDF at USD 15 
million (senior loan). 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
4.1.1. 
Environmental and social risk category 
42. 
The accredited entity (AE) has carried out an initial risk assessment against its 
environmental and social safeguards and considered the project to be of moderate risk. 
Potential environmental and social risks and impacts identified are not considered major, will 
not extend beyond the area of influence of the project and are neither irreversible nor 
cumulative. The Secretariat confirms the AE’s environmental and social risk category 
assessment, which is equivalent to category B. 
4.1.2. 
Safeguard instrument and information disclosure 
43. 
Since exact subprojects are not determined yet and will be decided during project 
implementation based on demand and consultations with the concerned communities, the AE 
has prepared an environmental and social management framework (ESMF) as the platform to 
guide the identification and management of potential negative environmental and social 
impacts of proposed activities. The ESMF is prepared in compliance with the environmental and 
social management guidelines of the AE, taking into consideration the GCF’s environmental and 
social safeguards requirements. The ESMF will be disclosed on the AE’s and GCF’s websites. 
44. 
The ESMF discussed the legal and institutional framework and provided an overview of 
environmental, climate and social considerations in the country and in the target areas. The 
procedures for identifying and risk-screening procedures for subprojects are also presented, 
including the preparation, approval, and execution and determination of potential impacts and 
mitigation measures. While a detailed environmental and social assessment is not envisaged for 
the activities, all subprojects will be further assessed against the FAO screening criteria for 
environmental and social management. Should the activities require further environmental 
assessment by FAO or by the national regulators, these will be conducted. The FAO 
Environmental and Social Screening checklist will be used to determine if an environmental and 
social management plan is needed for each subproject. The nature, magnitude, reversibility and 
location of impacts are the main elements to consider in the screening of subprojects and will be 
complemented by expert judgement. National environmental impact assessment legislation 
requirements will also be referred to. The project will not fund or be involved in 
subprojects/investments rated as high risk, and it has developed an exclusion list that will not 
be supported by the project. 
4.1.3. 
Key environmental and social risks and impacts and mitigation measures 
45. 
The project is designed to have positive environmental and social outcomes. Key 
interventions on strengthening natural resource management governance, afforestation and 
reforestation activities, and pasture rehabilitation are expected to contribute to climate change

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 116 
 
 
mitigation through increased carbon sequestration and adaptive strategies to enhance climate 
resilience. Potential environmental and social risks and impacts of the activities under the 
project relate to soil conservation; agricultural inputs and fertilizer use; crop residues and solid 
waste; pasture and livestock management; water management; pest and pesticide use and 
management; and ecosystems and biodiversity concerns. One of the investment activities under 
the project includes provision of loans to eligible value chain actors through the RKDF and 
participating commercial banks. These loans may be for packaging equipment, laboratory 
equipment, vacuum and solar driers, agricultural machinery, greenhouses, nurseries for tree 
plantations and commercial orchards, eco-tourism, and agricultural processing facilities, among 
others. The ESMF provides for possible avoidance and mitigation measures to manage the 
identified potential risks and impacts of the subprojects. It also provides for the preparation of a 
detailed environmental and social commitment plan that will incorporate the recommended 
mitigations of the environmental and social assessment as well as the inputs from the 
stakeholder engagement process. The project’s interventions and the corresponding 
management measures will be implemented within the context of the integrated natural 
resource management and climate resilience plans developed through the community 
landscape management groups. The AE confirms that there are no communities over which the 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy applies, and the project will not affect cultural heritage. 
Nevertheless, with Kyrgyz pastoralists as a key community stakeholder, the ESMF sets out 
certain safeguards for the communities, including that voluntary agreement by communities for 
any temporary/managed disruption to access to areas of land/natural resources must be 
obtained. Creating synergies with FAO networks, such as the Pastoralist Knowledge Hub, could 
also provide capacity-building opportunities for stakeholders around pastoralist issues. 
4.1.4. 
Institutional arrangements 
46. 
The project will establish a project implementation unit (PIU), which will be responsible 
for the daily management of operations. Among others, a safeguards specialist is expected to be 
based within the PIU. The safeguards specialist is tasked with ensuring overall compliance and 
supporting the safeguard performance monitoring throughout the life of the project including 
all aspects of environmental and social safeguards, grievance redress, stakeholder engagement, 
reporting, coordinating and supervising subproject screening and related environmental and 
social management plan preparation and execution. The project will also provide capacity 
building activities as regards sustainable forest and rangeland management to the involved 
institutions and communities. 
4.1.5. 
Stakeholder engagement, information disclosure and grievance redress 
mechanism 
47. 
Stakeholder consultations with various stakeholders at both national and local levels 
have been conducted during project formulation. It is also planned for stakeholder engagement 
to continue during project implementation through the community landscape management 
groups and various local and national stakeholders and user groups in the development of the 
integrated natural resource management and climate resilience plans. The community 
landscape management groups are informal institutions that, which will be established at the 
local level by the project to advance the participatory management of resources. The AE will 
undertake disclosure for all moderate risk projects and will establish a disclosure portal to 
publicly disclose project documentation, including on environmental and social safeguards. 
Institutional, project-level and internal grievance redress mechanism structures are established 
and time frames to resolve issues and contact details through which to lodge grievances are 
provided. 
4.2 
Gender policy

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 117 
 
 
48. 
The AE has submitted a gender assessment; therefore, it complies with the operational 
guidelines of the GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan. The gender assessment describes the 
context of gender issues at the country level, giving reference to the national policy 
environment for promoting gender equality in Kyrgyzstan. It also describes beliefs that shape 
gender roles and perpetuate gender inequality that, which disproportionately affect women. 
Furthermore, the gender assessment provides information on gender issues in the forestry and 
agricultural sectors, such as the limited access to resources for women and their limited 
opportunities to participate in decision-making platforms, including how this affects their needs 
and priorities being ensured.  
49. 
The gender assessment includes general statements on the entry points offered by the 
project to ensure that the needs and priorities of women and men in relation to the project are 
addressed, such as the participation of women in the project and access to benefits. However, it 
is not clear in which specific project activities women will participate and benefit from the 
project. The findings and recommendations of the gender assessment on which the gender 
strategy should be based have not been elaborated.  
50. 
Though stakeholder consultations were undertaken during the preparation of the 
project, it is not clear how the district-level consultations of the target communities themselves 
were used to identify the needs and priorities of women and men in the target communities, 
besides having women included in the community landscape management groups, and how the 
consultation outcomes were used to inform the project design. The AE is advised to continue to 
undertake stakeholder consultations with beneficiary communities to solicit inputs that ensure 
that their needs and priorities are captured in a revised gender action plan and across the 
activities listed therein. Furthermore, the AE recommended assessing the implications in terms 
of social norms and time constraints on women to engage in the various activities that are being 
proposed and how constraints will be addressed.  
51. 
The AE provided a project-level gender action plan with activities that are aligned with 
the project components and outputs. The gender action plan has indicators with sex-
disaggregated targets. For example, 30 per cent of the beneficiary trainees participating in 
capacity-building for agribusiness entrepreneurs will be women. The AE has also provided 
estimated costs for gender-related activities listed in the gender action plan. The baseline has 
been set at zero for activities in the gender action plan. Timelines for implementation are too 
stretched. For example, many activities have a timeline of by end of year 7 and 8, these are too 
stretched for a project that has an implementation period of 8 years. The AE is requested to 
ensure that actions are scheduled for implementation annually, including during the earlier 
years of the project’s implementation, to allow for reporting on an annual basis.  
52. 
Under component 2, the action plan identifies capacity development activities for 
ensuring participation in training and access to benefits from investment activities by both 
women and men in the target local communities. For example, investments that will support 
small-scale nursery establishment, with inputs such as seedlings and drip irrigation, will also 
benefit women in order to contribute to addressing the issue of limited access to resources 
among women. Under component 3, which supports value chain development, training for 
operating agribusinesses and credit lines will be provided. Regarding the latter, the AE is 
recommended to have a target for the women that will access credit lines. The project will 
promote certification of local products, such as non-timber forest products, and there is 
potential for women to benefit from this. The gender assessment also identifies certification of 
local products in the gender action plan as an important source of income and household 
consumption for families living near forests, particularly for female-headed households and 
poor households. The AE is recommended to consider the roles of women and men in accessing 
and using forestry products as discussed in the gender assessment to ensure that project 
activities address their needs and priorities. In addition, the AE is recommended to target 
female-headed households that are identified as vulnerable in the gender assessment by

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 118 
 
 
including, in the gender action plan, targets on actions that will help to address their needs 
within the scope of the project 
53. 
The gender action plan includes arrangements for its implementation, including 
procuring a gender and social development specialist to be part of the project management unit. 
The specialist will be responsible for ensuring the implementation of activities listed in the 
gender action plan.  
54. 
The number of direct and indirect beneficiaries of the project has been disaggregated by 
sex to demonstrate the impact potential of the project in the funding proposal. 
4.3 
Risks 
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium)  
 
 
 
 
55. 
GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 29.9 million, which will lead to the 
sequestration of 19.8 MtCO2eq in 20 years by investing in rangeland and forestry management 
in Kyrgyzstan. The Government agencies, the AE and beneficiaries are providing co-financing of 
USD 5 million as in-kind contributions and the RKDF is providing a senior loan of USD 15 
million. 
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the project (medium) 
56. 
FAO will serve both as the AE and co-EE for the project. The AE has funded over USD 
600 million for projects supporting countries in the field of climate change and disaster risk 
management. It has collaborated with Kyrgyzstan since 1993 and a country office was opened in 
2009. The country office currently manages 18 projects in the country. It has also been 
providing technical support to investments from other agencies, such as the World Bank and the 
International Fund for Agricultural Development.  
57. 
In addition to FAO, there are three more EEs, namely SAEPF, ARIS, and RKDF. The SAEPF 
is the National Designated Authority, implementing policy related to environmental protection 
and the sustainable use of natural resources. It has a track record of managing a number of 
projects, including a forest management project funded by external donors. ARIS is a non-
commercial organization investing local priority issues and will implement specific activities of 
this project. The RKDF has funded 925 enterprises for a total amount over USD 275 million as of 
April 2018. It will provide a credit line via five commercial banks in this project. It also has 
experience with the International Fund for Agricultural Development in providing loans to 
agriculture producers and processers. All EEs are providing co-financing by way of in-kind 
finance or loans. There is a need for effective coordination among the AE and EEs.  
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium) 
 
58. 
The funding proposal points out that the existing regulatory framework fails to support 
sustainable natural resources management, including the sustainable impact of carbon 
sequestration. For example, there is a lack of legal framework in carbon pricing initiatives, 
carbon emission reduction rights, ownership and retirement in the country. As the key returns 
of project investment are represented by carbon sequestration, this may make the project 
investment unattractive for investors. To mitigate the risk, the project will mainstream climate 
change and effective natural resources management at the policy level.  
59. 
At the investment level, it will invest in non-commercial tree species in state-owned 
forest areas where forests are established and maintained in order to ensure ecosystem services 
without specific direct economic purposes. The project will also provide incentives for forest 
protection via the provision of alternative livelihoods. Given the growth in rural energy

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 119 
 
 
consumption and urban construction needs, the government’s commitment to prevent illegal 
logging in state-owned forests and ensure monitoring and surveillance on its investment will be 
critical to sustain the project impact. 
60. 
The project will try to attract private sector investment in forestry and rangeland 
protection activities. It will enable private sector engagement by enhancing the inclusive policy-
level dialogue and establishing stakeholder engagement process. However, 
afforestation/reforestation activities are unattractive for private sector participation: most of 
the non-commercial local varieties in forestry investments generate no or minimal financial 
returns but do generate ecological co-benefits at a 20-year horizon. As for rangeland 
investments activities, improvement of rangelands conditions will contribute over 70 per cent 
of the carbon sequestration potential of the project. However, rangelands are the centre of the 
livelihoods of rural communities in the target areas, thus, it needs incentives to change the 
behaviour of the private sector to invest in the activities that reduce the pressure of using 
rangelands in livelihood activities. To attract private sector investment in both forestry and 
rangeland protection activities, the project will provide different levels of concessionality 
depending on the return profiles of the investment. RKDF provides concessional co-financing 
for these activities. 
61. 
The AE has identified the risk that expected disbursement rates by RKDF and partner 
banks may not be reached due to the saturation of the agriculture lending market. According to 
the International Monetary Fund report, the agriculture sector accounts for the top second (18.5 
per cent) of the credit portfolio of banks and the first sector (28.3 percent) of microfinance 
organization. The national bank also encourages commercial banks to participate in the state 
programmes related to financing agriculture. The AE stated that the project in partnership with 
the national bank will explore new opportunities in agriculture lending for product 
development in cooperation with interested financial institutions. The AE responded that the 
capacity-building component could also serve as an incentive for the banks to reach the project 
target groups.  
62. 
Financial and economic analysis: the project provides disaggregated accounting of the 
financial and economic returns by type of activity and by component. While the financial returns 
in afforestation/reforestation are negative in 10 years and barely positive (financial internal 
rate of return of 11.1 per cent) in 20 years. The economic returns are expected to be higher 
(economic internal rate of return of 71.3 per cent) as it takes into account the valuation of 
carbon sequestration (USD 40/tCO2eq) and the ecosystem benefits. It also provides sensitivity 
analysis considering variations in climate change affecting costs and benefits, changes in 
potential sequestration and valuation, and also in implementation. Overall, the sensitivity 
analysis estimates economic internal rates of return ranging from 27.1 to 112.4 per cent under 
different scenarios. It is highly sensitive to the one to two-year delay in project activities, which 
emphasizes the importance of the timeliness implementation of the initial phase of the project.  
4.3.4. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low) 
63. 
In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results area and single proposal is immaterial.  
4.3.5. 
Compliance (medium)  
64. 
In reviewing the activities contemplated under the project, it does not appear that the 
activities to be undertaken pose a high risk for money-laundering or financing terrorism. The 
AE has reaffirmed that it will apply its internal anti-money-laundering/countering the financing 
of terrorism policies to the project as required by the accreditation master agreement (AMA). 
Based on the information provided, Compliance assigns a medium compliance risk to the 
project.

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 120 
 
 
4.3.6. 
Summary risk assessment and recommendation  
Summary risk assessment 
Overall programme 
Medium 
Accredited entity/ 
executing entity capability 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF’s portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
65. 
FAO will serve as both the AE, being responsible for supervising the project, and as one 
project EE (trough FAO Representation in Kyrgyzstan), providing quality assurance and 
technical assistance during project implementation. The project will be co-executed by SAEPF, 
ARIS, and RKDF.  
66. 
FAO as AE will carry out project supervision. The FAO supervisory role will be 
attributed to the FAO Regional Office for Europe and Central Asia (located in Budapest) with 
support from the FAO Climate, Biodiversity, Land and Water Department (HQ located in Rome) 
and other technical divisions as required. In order to fulfil this function, FAO will establish a 
specific project supervision team headed by a Lead Technical Officer. The Lead Technical Officer 
will have overall technical responsibility for project implementation and will oversee and carry 
out technical backstopping to this end. 
67. 
As co-EE, FAO-KG will be in charge of the execution of selected activities and of the 
contractual agreements with the project implementing partners. A project delivery team will be 
set up in FAO-KG comprising staff covering all functions relevant to the execution of the 
envisaged activities. The FAO-KG role in CS-FOR will be limited to the provision of quality 
assurance throughout all project components.  
68. 
The project will be jointly executed by  FAO, ARIS, SAEPF and RKDF. The PMU will be 
responsible for day-to-day project management, providing human resources management, 
financial and procurement services, coordinating project activities, generating work plans and 
preparing reports. The PMU will be established within SAEPF and will coordinate with ARIS, 
MAFIM, RKDF and FAO will be responsible for overall management, supervision, guidance and 
technical support. 
69. 
Financial management in relation to GCF resources directly managed by FAO will be 
carried out in accordance with FAO rules and procedures. Financial management and reporting 
for the funds transferred to SAEPF and ARIS will be performed by them in accordance with 
terms, conditions, formats and requirements of FAO and the signed operational partners 
agreement. The administration by the operational partners of the funds received from FAO shall 
be carried out under its own financial regulations, rules and procedures, which shall provide 
adequate controls to ensure that the funds received are properly administered and expended. 
The operational partners shall maintain the account in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting standards. 
70. 
Procurements under the project will be done in accordance with the rules and 
regulations of FAO. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 121 
 
 
71. 
The project is a cross-cutting project with mitigation and adaptation benefits related to 
CO2 sequestration, most vulnerable people and communities, and improved resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem services. The logframe fully reflects the fund-level impact and 
outcomes. In the project outcomes section both qualitative and quantitative indicators are 
included allowing for monitoring for the changes and transformations occurring as a result of 
the project. 
72. 
The implementation table in Annex 7 has been revised and includes the project 
deliverables, as well as the GCF reporting milestones. 
73. 
The Theory of Change description has been revised and is now clearly articulated and 
visualized. The ToC clearly shows the current situation, what the existing barriers are and how 
the project will overcome those barriers, bring transformational change and move towards the 
overarching project goal. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
74. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 8 June 
2018, and it became effective on 4 October 2018.   
75. 
The proposed project will be implemented in Kyrgyz Republic, country in which GCF is 
not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further 
assessed. The Secretariat submitted a draft privileges and immunities agreement to the 
government of Kyrgyzstan on 11 September 2018.  
76. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
77. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) 
Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 122 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of FP116 
Proposal name: 
Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in Forests and 
Rangelands (CS-FOR) in the Kyrgyz Republic 
Accredited entity: 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
    Scale: High 
1.1.1. 
General background 
1. 
Kyrgyzstan has been classified as a low-income, food-deficit country. Two-thirds of the 
country’s 6 million people live in rural areas of the country. Agriculture is the main source of 
livelihood, with livestock the leading source of income and primary source of nutrition; it also 
provides a financial safety net for the rural poor. Crop production has not been thriving well in 
the country due to a combination of inadequate irrigation infrastructure and the negative 
impact on productivity of worsening climate conditions. As fully articulated in the funding 
proposal and some of the annexes, poor management of resources and negative climate change 
impacts are causing overexploitation and overgrazing of large groups of unproductive livestock, 
increasing forest degradation and unsustainable harvesting of timber from mountain slopes. 
The interactions between changing weather patterns, the impact of these changes on 
communities and forests, and the degradation of natural resource systems due to human 
activities has led to an increase in damage from extreme weather events and a growing threat to 
the future provisioning of key ecosystem services. The Government of Kyrgyzstan recognizes 
the need to take action to halt this trend, as is evident from the key interventions for 
investments in rangeland and forest management, which are well elucidated in the country’s 
intended nationally determined contribution (INDC). The interventions will commit the country 
to reducing, by 2050, its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 35 to 37 per cent with 
international assistance. The proposed project has been designed to assist the country in 
meeting these commitments. The sequestration objective, which is well entrenched in the 
proposed strategy of the project, capitalizes on important co-benefits from adaptation and 
disaster risk reduction and is expected to be achieved through the following project 
components: 
(a) 
Component 1: evidence-based strengthening of natural resources management (NRM) 
governance. This component will support the Government’s ongoing efforts to 
harmonize relevant policies and legal frameworks, and strengthen its planning, 
monitoring and evaluation systems; 
(b) 
Component 2: green investments for forests and rangeland rehabilitation. This 
component will introduce a process of local integrated rangeland and forestry resource 
planning built around forest, rangeland and livestock management practices. This will 
sequester carbon and is expected to be responsive to observed changes in the climate 
and enable the diversification of household income earning activities; and 
(c) 
Component 3: climate-sensitive value chains development. This will facilitate market 
opportunities that provide the financial incentives, funded by the Russian Kyrgyz

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 123 
 
 
Development Fund (RKDF), for resource users to adopt and maintain management 
practices that sequester and preserve stored carbon. 
2. 
The targeted project areas were selected due to their high level of exposure and 
sensitivity to climate change stressors, mitigation potential, human poverty and dependency on 
natural resources. 
3. 
The total fund proposed to implement the project is USD 49.99 million. This total 
investment is expected to be provided as follows: 
(a) 
Grant from GCF = USD 29.99 million; 
(b) 
Senior loan from RKDF = USD 15.00 million; 
(c) 
In-kind contribution from Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and Melioration 
(MAFIM) = USD 0.317 million; 
(d) 
In-kind contribution from State Agency for Environment Protection and Forestry 
(SAEPF) = USD 0.340 million; 
(e) 
In-kind contribution from Community Development and Investment Agency (ARIS) = 
USD 0.342 million; 
(f) 
In-kind contribution from the beneficiaries = USD 3.602 million; and  
(g) 
In-kind contribution from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO) = USD 0.400 million. 
1.1.2. 
Climate change element 
4. 
Both the climate change mitigation and adaptation needs of the country are adequately 
justified in this project. First and foremost, reducing GHG emissions in all countries is a very 
important contribution to the contribution to fulfilling the goals of the Paris Agreement. 
Kyrgyzstan’s INDC under the Paris Agreement commits the country to reducing its GHG 
emissions by 35 to 37 per cent by 2050 through international assistance. Although the 
document did not produce clear strategies to achieve the envisaged GHG emission reductions, it 
emphasized that forestry and land use/land use changes appear to be among the most relevant 
sectors to target in the country to secure both adaptation and mitigation targets. In order to 
structure and enrich the mitigation target interventions, FAO, as requested by the Government 
of Kyrgyzstan, began the process of developing a proposal for the project “Carbon Sequestration 
through Climate Investment in Forests and Rangelands in Kyrgyzstan (CS-FOR)”. In developing 
this project, FAO ensured that the climate change mitigation needs of the country were 
adequately and sufficiently built into the project development by using inputs from climate 
change and climate rationale developed earlier for the country. Many of the inputs came from 
documents already submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), given that the inputs for the design of this project were taken from government 
sector planning documents, including those prepared as part of the national climate change 
mitigation and adaptation plans (e.g. the INDC, Third National Communication (TNC), etc.). This 
conclusion is also supported by the report included as annex 9 of the funding proposal, which is 
titled “Climate Change and Ecosystem Based NRM: Implications for the Project”. In this report it 
was stated that the goal of the project is to contribute to the development of a low carbon 
emission and climate-resilient economy. The project objectives, which were clearly elucidated 
in this report, include: 
(a) 
To intervene in key hot spots of target areas with adapted forest and pasture 
investments; and 
(b) 
To clearly transform management of pasture and forest resources at the national and 
local levels to ecosystem-based sustainable NRM by enhancing an integrated and

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 124 
 
 
participatory approach, which is adaptive to climate change and responsive to the needs 
of local communities. 
5. 
The key expected targets and coverage of this project intervention include carbon 
sequestration through investment in rangeland and forest management. Achievement of the 
carbon sequestration results is expected to lead to the capitalization of important co-benefits 
from adaptation and disaster risk reduction by supporting the Government’s ongoing efforts to 
harmonize relevant policies and legal frameworks, and strengthen its planning, monitoring and 
evaluation systems. Carbon sequestration will be achieved through the introduction by this 
project intervention of a process involving local integrated rangeland and forestry resource 
planning built around forest, rangeland and livestock management practices. The process is 
designed to be responsive to observed changes in the climate and is expected to enable the 
diversification of household income-earning activities as part of the process. This process will 
engender market opportunities that will provide financial incentives for resource users to adopt 
and maintain management practices that sequester and preserve stored carbon. The financial 
incentives will be funded by a co-financing senior loan from RKDF. Achievement of the project 
targets and coverage discussed above are well and strongly aligned with the following GCF 
performance measurement framework indicators: impact potential; country ownership; and 
needs of the recipients/beneficiaries. The alignment with the other metrics, including paradigm 
shift, sustainable development potential, and efficiency and effectiveness, can be described as 
strongly medium or weakly high for reasons that will be discussed later in this assessment.  
6. 
From the information provided in the funding proposal and some of the annexes, it can 
be concluded that the estimated target in terms of the carbon that will eventually be 
sequestered by the project intervention will be about 19.8 million tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (tCO2eq) and will be delivered by the following interventions:  
(a) 
The creation of legal and management enabling environments supported by an 
innovative evidence-based climate and natural resource planning and monitoring 
system; 
(b) 
Community-based investments in natural forest regeneration, sustainable forest 
management, afforestation and reforestation; 
(c) 
Rehabilitation of rangelands and prevention of further degradation; 
(d) 
Diversification of options for community livelihoods; and  
(e) 
Reduction of emission intensity per unit of animal protein. 
7. 
The carbon emissions reductions that will be delivered by the sequestration activities 
listed above have been accurately estimated using appropriate methodologies, which were well 
presented in annex 3(a) to the funding proposal titled “CS-FOR – Carbon Accounting”. It is also 
estimated that a total of 432,450 individuals, including 246,497 females, will be direct and 
indirect beneficiaries of this intervention. The approach used for this estimation, which is based 
on the RIMA II methodology of FAO, is found to be appropriate for the analysis, which formed 
the basis of the estimation of direct and indirect beneficiaries. The independent Technical 
Advisory Panel (TAP) therefore concludes that the number of beneficiaries as a core indicator of 
impacts is accurately estimated and calculation methodologies correctly provided.  
8. 
With regard to climate change vulnerability, the project design actually focused on a 
carefully selected locality. The chosen intervention areas were explicitly discussed in detail in 
chapter 1 of the feasibility study. Analyses of the study area, consisting of four districts of the 
country, related to the extent and status of rangeland and forest resources as well as the 
identification of changes in key climate parameters and related hazards; these were presented 
in annex 6(b) to the funding proposal titled “Project Atlas”. The four target districts are said to 
be the most vulnerable to climate-related stresses and hazards. In these four districts, green 
investment interventions for forest and rangeland rehabilitation and livestock management

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 125 
 
 
practices will yield carbon sequestration with co-benefits in adaptive capacity and improved 
disaster risk reduction. While carbon sequestration will be delivered at the level of local regions, 
the global implications cannot be overemphasized. In addition, at the national level, the project 
will promote market-driven incentives (via component 3 and private sector involvement) to 
promote income diversification thus reducing pressure on natural resources. 
1.1.3. 
Time frame of results 
9. 
The critical results expected to be delivered by this project will include: carbon 
sequestration from improved forest and rangeland management; livelihood of people in forest 
productivity activities; and better livestock management activities. Adaptive capacity 
strengthening is also expected to be delivered by component 1 of this project, which will 
strengthen ongoing efforts of the Government of Kyrgyzstan to harmonize relevant policies and 
legal frameworks as well as strengthen its planning, monitoring and evaluation systems. All 
these critical results will be achieved through different levels of impacts during the period of 
project implementation. For example, while reinforcement of government policies in adaptive 
capacity strengthening will start to manifest during the early stages of the intervention, carbon 
sequestration delivery may start to occur during the latter part of implementation due to the 
longer time needed for forested vegetative growth to occur. 
1.1.4. 
Potential mitigation/adaptation impacts and degree of lock-in infrastructure 
10. 
This project intervention covers both mitigation and adaptation responses to climate 
change in Kyrgyzstan. Climate change mitigation and adaptation are priority areas clearly 
articulated in the INDC of Kyrgyzstan that was submitted to the UNFCCC secretariat in 2015. 
The country’s INDC emphasized the importance of mitigation and adaptation as priority areas 
for Kyrgyzstan, especially as they are linked to the risks to people’s livelihoods, the 
environment, the national economy, and achieving wider Sustainable Development Goals. 
National climate change policies and action plans have also been developed in Kyrgyzstan for 
various sectors of the country’s economy, including: emergency situations; biodiversity and 
forestry; agriculture; and water management.1 Climate change is also addressed in other 
national responses to international policy, including the United Nations Convention to Combat 
Desertification (UNCCD) and the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity. The 
national action plan and its activity frameworks for implementing the UNCCD in the Kyrgyzstan 
for 2015−2020 have many highly relevant actions on land degradation that are directly linked 
to climate change adaptation measures for the agricultural and livestock sectors, and 
particularly for pasturelands. The national action plan highlights that strengthening the capacity 
for state management of land resources, effective land-use policies, and achievement of 
sustainable use of land resources will be necessary; it states that a principal condition is to 
maintain and increase the potential productivity of land while maintaining vital ecosystem 
functions of soil. While most of these policy documents stress adaptation intervention, 
mitigating intervention in the form of carbon sequestration was much emphasized in another 
national document, the “Third National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan”, a key emphasis 
of this project. Thus the information provided in the funding proposal and the feasibility study 
utilized much of the important information in these national documents to highlight the fact 
that the interventions foreseen by this project are the most feasible and suitable mitigation and 
adaptation options for Kyrgyzstan.  
11. 
The project is expected to yield an average carbon emission reduction through carbon 
sequestration of about 987,568 tCO2eq, which translates to about 19,751,354 tCO2eq over the 
20-year lifetime of the project. These reductions represent 7.6 per cent of the country’s total 
 
1 See “Priority Directions for Adaptation to Climate Change in the Kyrgyz Republic until 2017”, which was approved 
by Government Decree No. 549 on 2 October 2013.

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 126 
 
 
emissions, and 22.6 per cent of the agricultural share of emissions. In terms of reduction cost, if 
the total project cost of USD 49.99 million will deliver a total of about 19,751 million tCO2eq of 
carbon reduction, this translates to a reduction cost of USD 2.53/tCO2eq. The project will deliver 
benefits to 432,450 individuals, of which 246,497 are females. The total represents 8 per cent of 
the country’s population.  
12. 
The interventions have a critical learning effect that will bring positive outcomes to 
avoid lock-in systems and ensure climate-proof results, and that can be replicated for other 
flood-vulnerable populations not covered in the proposed intervention. Actions that will be 
undertaken in component 1, especially those that will build the capacity of the climate 
governance system, will strengthen government planning, monitoring and evaluation systems, 
ensuring that climate-proof results are obtained. 
13. 
The iTAP therefore concludes that the potential of this project intervention is high. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
    Scale: High 
1.2.1. 
Comprehensiveness  
14. 
In the absence of this project intervention, unsustainable grazing will continue, causing 
the expansion of pasture areas, and exacerbated by the continued use of traditional extensive 
grazing practices, with negative impacts on the protection of forest cover. This has been 
identified as a major constraint to the increase of carbon sequestration and storage in forests 
and rangelands in Kyrgyzstan. Livestock rearing is a longstanding tradition of the Kyrgyz 
people, and so it is not surprising that over the years there has been an increase in the country’s 
livestock population. Consequently, the degradation of forest cover in the country will likely 
continue in the absence of clear incentives for communities to preserve and expand forested 
areas and to limit and more intensively manage grazing lands.  
15. 
The proposed project aims to achieve this key goal through the introduction of an 
integrated, locally determined, ecosystem management approach for rangeland and forest 
resources. This will be introduced by developing the activities as profitable ventures to enhance 
the livelihood of beneficiaries at the same time. The measures that will be delivered by this 
project will enhance maintenance, increase forest cover, and improve the ecological status of 
rangelands, leading to greater carbon sequestration and storage, both in trees and pasture soils. 
Furthermore, beneficiaries in the target areas will learn important climate resilient farming 
techniques that will not only deliver profitable farming, but also contribute to the national 
carbon sequestration objectives and result in more a diversified and profitable agriculture for 
beneficiaries in targeted areas. 
16. 
The harmonization of national policies and strategies relating to forest and grassland 
management, which will be undertaken in component 1of the proposed project, will deliver an 
enabling environment that will enhance the success of the various interventions. It will also 
create a conducive policy and institutional environment that will greatly enhance the 
replicability of the project interventions in other regions of the country.  
17. 
The project design process will bring together key governmental agencies and 
coordination bodies and will ensure identification of clear roles by the stakeholders themselves. 
This process will encourage a high level of performance during project implementation, provide 
a sound basis for expanded use of the new approach to local resource management, and lead to 
greater carbon sequestration in the replication phases. 
18. 
A key component of the intervention that involves capacity-building for the 
implementing entity (IE) is the incorporation of project activities into the regular annual 
workplans of the IE. This will normalize these activities as part of the implementing agencies’

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 127 
 
 
vision and approach to resource management nationwide, and thus establish a solid operational 
capacity that will be invaluable when the interventions are replicated in the other regions of the 
country. 
19. 
Given the fact that the assessment carried out to identify target areas for this project 
was a national review, areas where the interventions can be replicated were also identified. The 
IE thus has a rich database of sites where the resource management/carbon sequestration 
approaches delivered by this project can be replicated. 
20. 
The project will also develop the capacity of some beneficiaries who will engage in key 
value chains, specifically those for nuts and dried fruits as an agricultural business. The fact that 
the project will create profitable markets for their products will also enhance their interest in 
opening up new markets following the intervention. 
21. 
It can therefore be concluded that the objectives of the project are well aligned and 
respond to the proposed theory of change and value chain articulated in the funding proposal. 
1.2.2. 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
22. 
Knowledge management and capacity-building for key stakeholders represent 
innovative solutions that will be delivered by the proposed project. Project stakeholders will not 
only gain new capacities and knowledge about the different interventions, but they will also 
gain tools and skills that will support them to factor climate change into their decision-making 
processes and livelihood strategies. The project will therefore deliver a strong platform for 
knowledge enhancement and learning for stakeholders.  
23. 
The interventions are innovative for Kyrgyzstan, especially when the national efforts to 
mainstream climate change into the project’s key intervention is considered. The project will 
deliver various innovative interventions: capacity-building of stakeholders to mainstream 
climate change considerations into their normal activities; development of market mechanisms 
for their livelihood; and improved farming and animal husbandry, among others. It can 
therefore be concluded that the type of investment proposed will support innovative 
interventions in Kyrgyzstan. 
1.2.3. 
Enabling environment/sustainability of outcomes 
24. 
The plan described in the funding proposal is well structured, covering: identification of 
the regions and sites where the chosen interventions will be carried out; development of an 
enabling environment for the governance and management of the selected interventions; and 
development of an enabling environment for the sustainable development and replication of the 
outcome. The feasibility study (annex 2 of the funding proposal) also describes these features of 
the project. It can also be argued that the use of grant funding from GCF, blended with co-
financing in the form of a senior loan, will not only will provide funds for the private sector and 
other beneficiaries whose livelihoods in sustainable agriculture will be enhanced, but it can also 
offer a very robust financial exit strategy. 
25. 
As presented in the funding proposal and its annexes, the project is planned to bring 
about very explicit behavioural changes in institutions, communities and groups. Component 1 
has been designed to strengthen the Government’s ongoing efforts to harmonize relevant 
policies and legal frameworks, and to strengthen its planning, monitoring and evaluation 
systems. This strategy is based on the awareness that a key measure in preserving the natural 
resources of the forest and rangeland ecosystem in Kyrgyzstan is to improve governance related 
to their management. Improved management will prevent livestock overgrazing, overharvesting 
of fuelwood and timber, will create an enabling environment that stimulates innovative 
practices and investments, and conserve and regenerate these resources.

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 128 
 
 
26. 
It has been recognized that to achieve these goals there will need to be a change in the 
outlook of existing institutional management and the regulation of forest and rangelands. The 
funding proposal explained that the intervention will create a conducive enabling environment 
at existing institutions by supporting and harmonizing the regulatory framework for proper 
management and use of forests and rangeland resources. Not only will the capacity of existing 
institutions be repositioned to utilize modern NRM principles, but the capacity of their staff to 
understand climate change risks and NRM will be improved together with their skills and 
capacity to monitor and regulate the use of forest and rangeland. The project design is therefore 
intended to bring about behavioural change at institutions currently responsible for the 
management and regulation of forest and rangeland activities. This is expected to address the 
fragmented nature of the existing policy and regulatory environment  
27. 
The project design and implementation plans also cover behavioural changes within 
community groups and at the individual level through training and capacity-building activities. 
Some of the key capacity-building and training that will be delivered by this project and will 
lead to behavioural change in groups and relevant individuals with specific responsibility for 
activities that impact the ecosystems of forests and rangeland include: 
(a) 
Capacity development and mobilization of an expert group for technical assistance. The 
project will select personnel from local research and outreach organizations who will be 
trained on policy-making and management of natural resources. The expert group will 
include a gender and social development specialist, and the terms of reference for each 
member will ensure gender mainstreaming. Key activities for which the capacity of the 
expert group will be built and strengthened by the project will include: preparing 
communication materials and organizing information awareness campaigns to mobilize 
national stakeholders; organizing international conferences and meetings to sensitize 
stakeholders; organizing training sessions and workshops on forest and rangeland 
tenure arrangements, policy-making, and management of natural resources; proposing 
recommendations for enforcement of sustainable management and use of forest and 
rangeland ecosystems through participatory processes; identifying approaches for 
national stakeholder involvement processes; organizing a national stakeholders’ 
platform for policy dialogue for the management and use of municipal forest; and 
facilitating thematic workshops, and submitting the recommendation document to 
parliament; and 
(b) 
The capacities of monitoring groups at the central level of the State Agency for 
Environmental Protection and Forestry (SAEPF) and ARIS (the executing entities (EEs) 
for the project with FAO) will be built and/or strengthened by this project intervention. 
Key outputs of the capacity-building activities included in component 1 of this project 
will include enhanced capacities on: climate change risks and natural resource 
assessments; monitoring and evaluation with evidence-based integrated NRM planning, 
monitoring and evaluation tools and methodologies; facilitating linkages across 
evidence, primary data, information systems and the forest-rangeland ecosystem 
planning processes; and using a geo-referencing and evidence-based approach.  
28. 
The iTAP can therefore conclude that behavioural changes in institutions, communities, 
and individuals were fully considered and transparently presented in the funding proposal and 
its annexes. 
1.2.4. 
Replicability and scalability/knowledge and learning 
29. 
The potential for replicability and scaling up of the successes of this project intervention 
is presented in the funding proposal and annexes and can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The harmonization of national policies and strategies, which will be carried out as part 
of component 1 of the project, will not only benefit sound project delivery in the target

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 129 
 
 
areas but will also deliver a more robust policy and strategy framework at a national 
level. This will create a much more conducive policy and institutional environment 
leading to more effective replication and scalability of the successful project activities 
and strategies. This will greatly improve the efficiency with which expanded actions can 
be undertaken in the future;  
(b) 
A key achievement of the project implementation strategy for CS-FOR is to bring 
together relevant government agencies and bodies responsible for management of 
forests, rangelands and animal husbandry in Kyrgyzstan. This achievement will enable 
clear delineation of the roles of agencies in the ecosystem management process, which 
will not only lead to a high level of performance for the current project but will also have 
a positive impact on its replication and scalability in the future in other regions. This will 
provide strong motivation for continued and expanded use of the new approach to local 
resource management leading to greater carbon sequestration; and 
(c) 
There is ample evidence in the description of the project design, given in the funding 
proposal and its annexes, that emphasis will be placed not only on proper monitoring of 
the outcomes but also on their comprehensive documentation using various tools, 
including geographic information systems. This will deliver a robust knowledge base 
that can be shared by others within and outside Kyrgyzstan who may want to replicate 
the ideas in the future. 
30. 
Through trainings, workshops and other knowledge-sharing activities built into the 
project design and delivery mechanism, and the monitoring, reporting and verification 
protocols that will be practised as part of this project, the proposal provides a clear framework 
to share knowledge and contribute to replication and/or scaling up. 
31. 
The project design and implementation strategies as presented in the funding proposal 
and some of its annexes, indicate that throughout the project implementation, government 
agencies and especially its policy and regulatory framework will participate in the delivery of 
the project activities. For example, SAEPF, a state agency with responsibility for regulatory and 
policy settings for forestry, rangeland and livestock management, will serve as the leading 
implementing agency for this project. The participation of SAEPF in that capacity and the 
mobilization of other relevant stakeholders will ensure that the climate change adaptation and 
mitigation measures to be delivered by this project will be mainstreamed into policies, laws, 
sectoral and national strategies and decision-making processes in Kyrgyzstan. 
32. 
Given the discussions above, the iTAP is of the opinion that the CS-FOR project as 
presented in the funding proposal and its annexes has a high potential to deliver a paradigm 
shift in the way forests, rangelands and livestock are managed in Kyrgyzstan. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
    Scale: High 
1.3.1. 
Environmental co-benefits: 
33. 
Apart from contributing to Kyrgyzstan’s shift to low-emission sustainable development 
pathways through carbon sequestration, some of the project’s expected environmental co-
benefits related to afforestation/reforestation and forest enrichment will include: 
(a) 
Improved soil fertility and stability; 
(b) 
Reduction of land degradation; 
(c) 
Improvement in water retention in soils; 
(d) 
Provision of additional habitat to beneficial animals, such as pollinators; and

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 130 
 
 
(e) 
Enrichment of biodiversity in the country’s ecosystem, especially in the areas where the 
project will be implemented. 
34. 
Another environmental co-benefit discussed in the funding proposal will result from 
pasture rotation, another project intervention, which is expected to improve plant diversity by 
releasing the growth potential of species that are otherwise suppressed under continuous heavy 
grazing pressure.  
35. 
The project plan has methodologies in place to measure and monitor delivery of the 
expected outputs. Most of the environmental co-benefits that are expected to be delivered by 
the project are actually components of improved resilience of the forest ecosystem. According to 
the funding proposal, this has been identified as one of the metrics to be monitored and 
methods were presented in the funding proposal such as geo-referenced monitoring and 
evaluation archives and reports that will be prepared regularly, demonstrating positive 
environmental outputs of this project. 
1.3.2. 
Economic/social co-benefits: 
36. 
Key economic co-benefits that will be delivered by this project can be summarized as 
follows: 
(a) 
The income of rural dwellers in the regions covered by this project is expected to 
increase through the investment provided. Specific financial benefits will come from 
better herd management, contributing to an expected rise of livestock production; 
(b) 
Agricultural productivity will also be enhanced leading to increased income for families 
that will participate under project funding related to ecosystem services that include 
fruit trees/nut plantations, supplying fruits and/or nuts and other commercial crops 
covered by the project to the selected value chains adopting green technologies; 
(c) 
Forest users will benefit from collecting non-timber forest products through 
certification according to the international voluntary standards for sustainable forest 
use and management; and 
(d) 
Economic and financial analysis carried out on the project and reported in annex 3 of 
the funding proposal showed that the project’s investment can generate up to 3,300 new 
full-time equivalent jobs. 
37. 
Social co-benefits that are expected to be delivered by the proposed project will include 
the following: 
(a) 
Community mobilization will occur in 50 municipalities of the project regions involving 
social mobilization, including gender training and institutional support; 
(b) 
The community mobilization will also lead to formation of task forces that will deliver 
important social duties such as fire management teams at community levels; 
(c) 
Women and youth (both young women and young men) will benefit from their specific 
inclusion in project activities, as outlined in the gender and social inclusion action plan 
(GAP); 
(d) 
Women and youth engagement in business opportunities in the project-supported value 
chains, through proactive inclusion in business related capacity-building activities; 
(e) 
High priority will be given to women’s participation in the value chain, especially when 
selecting the value chain; and 
(f) 
The project will also provide a platform for women to access improved natural 
resources (forests and rangelands) more directly, thus ensuring equitable distribution 
of benefits.

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 131 
 
 
38. 
The project will therefore provide increased linkages among economic and social actors 
in the selected project regions. 
39. 
Further potential for enhancing sustainable development through the project 
intervention can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The project will contribute to increasing the country’s low emission and climate-
resilient productivity through carbon sequestration in its forests, rangelands and 
through better management of its livestock; and 
(b) 
 
(c) 
The project when implemented is expected to reduce ecosystem losses and induce 
financial benefits to beneficiaries in the target regions. These benefits are expected to 
percolate to other regions of the country by replicating the lessons learned. 
40. 
The iTAP ranked the sustainable development potential of this project intervention in 
Kyrgyzstan as “high”. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
Scale: High 
1.4.1. 
Economic and social needs and climate vulnerability 
41. 
According to information presented in the funding proposal and its annexes and from 
open literature sources, it is clear that the geography and topography of Kyrgyzstan render it 
highly susceptible to hazards and disasters, which are becoming more frequent due to climate 
change. These hazards and disasters include: drought, land and mudslides, avalanches, violent 
winds, downpours, ice and frosts, breakthrough of glacial lakes, floods, river erosion, and 
earthquakes. A large proportion of the Kyrgyzstan population lives in the valleys and foothills of 
the mountains, where vulnerability to these events is particularly high and losses are extremely 
high.  
42. 
Target beneficiaries and their productive assets in the project’s target regions, which are 
those deemed to be the most affected, are exposed to these risks. It has also been established by 
some of the studies on which the intervention strategies were based that many of these 
disasters, and especially their effects, are exacerbated by unsustainable management of forests, 
rangelands and livestock in the country. The proposed project therefore aims at delivering more 
robust resource management for forests, rangelands and livestock to reduce the negative effects 
of these disasters. It can therefore be concluded that given the economic, social and climate 
vulnerability the project interventions are necessary in Kyrgyzstan.  
1.4.2. 
Financial needs 
43. 
Kyrgyzstan is a low-income food deficit country with a population of nearly six million, 
of which two-thirds live in rural areas. Agriculture is one of the key economic sectors in 
Kyrgyzstan, with 48 per cent of the labour force dedicated to this sector, which represents 
almost 15 per cent of gross domestic product. As a result, the country does not have the national 
financial capacity to address the problems targeted by this project from its own resources due 
to the limited nature of national and local resources.  
44. 
The kinds of interventions required cannot attract funding from the very weak domestic 
private finance entities, nor can they attract financing from international sources, as returns are 
low and the payback period is indefinite for such investment in many cases, especially where 
the intervention will not deliver revenue streams. GCF grant funding is therefore needed to 
overcome the financial barriers. The grant funding from GCF will also strengthen the funds from 
RKDF, a private sector entity that will provide its contributions as wholesale credits to local

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 132 
 
 
banks that will on-lend to entrepreneurs involved in the ecosystem enhancing intervention. The 
GCF funding is also expected to incentivize local entrepreneurs who will be involved in 
ecosystem businesses and who are also expected to contribute some level of investment equity.  
1.4.3. 
Institutional needs 
45. 
According to information presented in the funding proposal, institutions in Kyrgyzstan 
involved with management, regulation and policy setting for forests, rangelands and livestock 
lack the strong integrated policy and legal framework needed to deliver public-private 
partnerships in integrated natural resources management. Consequently, the capacities of 
institutions and of other relevant stakeholders will be built and/or strengthened by this 
intervention. For government institutions, areas that will be strengthened will include: policy 
and regulatory capabilities, especially targeted at forest, rangeland and livestock management; 
monitoring, reporting and verification capabilities for ecosystem-based interventions; low-
carbon production systems in forestry and agriculture, including livestock sectors, of the 
Kyrgyzstan economy. For non-government stakeholders, the areas of strengthening will range 
from ecosystem-based entrepreneurial activities, especially those that will deliver carbon 
sequestration opportunities and climate resilient livelihoods, to the financing of such activities.  
46. 
The iTAP ranked the potential for this proposed project intervention to meet the needs 
of the recipients to be high. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
    Scale: High 
1.5.1. 
Alignment with climate change policies 
47. 
Climate change policies: the proposed project is well aligned with the key climate 
change policies of Kyrgyzstan, as evidenced by: 
(a) 
The Climate Change Adaptation Programme and Action Plan for 2015−2017 for the 
forest and biodiversity sector, which includes the Government’s plans for ecosystem-
based adaptation; 
(b) 
The country’s INDC, which was submitted to the UNFCCC secretariat in September 2017. 
Mitigation and adaptation actions in the forest and rangeland management sector are 
included in the INDC; 
(c) 
The Climate Change Coordination Commission (CCCC), headed by the First Vice Prime 
Minister of Kyrgyzstan, which coordinates all activities in Kyrgyzstan related to climate 
change. SAEPF, the lead climate change institution in the country is the secretariat for 
CCCC. Since SAEPF is also an EE for this CS-FOR project, SAEPF is a member of the CS-
FOR steering committee and the project management unit for the project. This ensures 
an alignment of the CS-FOR project design and implementation with the climate policies 
of Kyrgyzstan; and 
(d) 
It is well articulated in the funding proposal that the project conforms to and is aligned 
with all national climate change strategies and action plans developed for various 
sectors, including emergency situations, biodiversity and forestry, and agriculture and 
water management. 
48. 
Other policies: the project is also well aligned with the national strategic development 
plan of Kyrgyzstan as contained in the following national documents: 
(a) 
National Strategy for Sustainable Development 2013−2017, which emphasizes the 
importance of climate change considerations as part of a sustainable development

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 133 
 
 
approach for the sustainable use of natural resources and sustainable economic growth; 
and 
(b) 
The national action plan and its activity frameworks for implementing the UNCCD 
Kyrgyzstan for 2015−2020 has many actions on land degradation that are highly 
relevant to climate change adaptation measures for the agricultural and livestock 
sectors, and particularly for pasturelands. 
49. 
Complementarity and coherence: coordination with ongoing and similar planned 
projects, including GCF projects, is ensured by two important factors: 
(a) 
The support that the United Nations Development Programme is providing to the 
Kyrgyz Government, which includes the Ministry of Emergency Situations, MAFIM, and 
SAEPF, in development of the National Policy for Adaptation to Climate ChangeFAO is 
also a partner in the process focusing on the forestry and agriculture sectors. The main 
findings and policy directions of this document are reflected in the CS-FOR proposal; 
and 
(b) 
A national adaptation plan (NAP) is currently being developed, with the United Nations 
Development Programme leading the process under the GCF readiness process. 
Elements of the ongoing NAP development are mainstreamed into the design of the 
project. FAO is a partner in the process and is supporting the country in preparing the 
NAP. Management of agriculture and forests is included among the already existing 
national strategies and will also be a priority under the NAP. 
1.5.2. 
Implementation capacity: accredited entity 
50. 
FAO has considerable experience and expertise and a proven comparative advantage in 
sustainable forest management, sustainable land management and climate change. It can 
therefore be concluded that FAO as the accredited entity (AE) is a good fit for the activities that 
will be carried out in the key sectors of the planned interventions. In addition, FAO has 
extensive experience in such interventions in Kyrgyzstan and the region. In particular, FAO has 
worked to develop management capacity for natural resources, including the assessment and 
systematic development of modernization plans for irrigation schemes, training on irrigation 
management transfer to improve performance, and tools and methods to improve water 
productivity in Kyrgyzstan and other countries of the region.. 
51. 
FAO has a very strong presence in Kyrgyzstan with field offices and adequate staff in the 
country to supervise the project. 
52. 
FAO has relevant experience in Kyrgyzstan, in terms of similar project funding in forest, 
rangeland, livestock, agriculture and water activities. Through its work in the past, FAO has 
experiences working with all the selected EEs for this project.  
1.5.3. 
Implementation capacity: executing entity 
53. 
The EEs for this proposed project are: SAEPF, ARIS and FAO. 
(a) 
SAEPF is the lead governmental agency for climate change in Kyrgyzstan. Apart from 
being the AE for GCF and the designated national authority for UNFCCC representing the 
country, it also serves as the Secretariat of the CCCC, a Kyrgyzstan national organization 
headed by the First Vice Prime Minister of Kyrgyzstan. CCCC coordinates all the 
activities in Kyrgyzstan related to climate change. The organizational mandate of SAEPF 
is therefore aligned with the project; 
(b) 
ARIS is Kyrgyzstan’s Community Development and Investment Agency and was 
established in October 2013 as a non-commercial organization. The mission of ARIS in

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 134 
 
 
Kyrgyzstan is to provide support and assistance for sustainable poverty alleviation to 
local communities and local self-governmental bodies in resolving local social and 
economic problems by strengthening their capacity to determine and prioritize local 
issues, develop investment and action plans, and mobilize resources as well as to 
develop, implement and manage investments aimed at resolution of local priority issues. 
ARIS will mobilize the participation of communities in the proposed project. Its past 
experience and mandate are well aligned with the objectives of the proposed project; 
and 
(c) 
The considerable experience, expertise and comparative advantage of FAO in 
sustainable forest management, sustainable land management and climate change are 
highly suited to fulfil the role of EE for this project and to act as the overall coordinator 
as an AE to GCF. 
54. 
It can therefore be concluded that the organizational mandates of the three EEs are well 
aligned to their roles in this project.  
55. 
The organizational mandates and experiences of the EEs in related and similar projects 
in Kyrgyzstan demonstrate the capacity to manage the project, including procurement, 
coordination, environmental and social, and other specific and necessary activities to 
successfully execute the project. 
1.5.4. 
Ownership 
56. 
According to the structure of the project’s implementation plan described in the funding 
proposal and some of its annexes, decision-making responsibility for all the critical activities of 
the project lies with the country’s relevant institutions, which will rely on its domestic systems 
coupled with the international due diligence provided by FAO as the AE to ensure 
accountability.  
57. 
The participation level of non-national actors in the delivery of this project will come 
from FAO and RKDF. FAO, as the overall coordinator of the project and as an AE to GCF, will 
ensure that the project is implemented with international best practices while ensuring that the 
funds from GCF (and other financial support) are well utilized as designed. RKDF, the Russian-
Kyrgyz Development Fund, is the other non-national organization participating in this project. 
RKDF was established in late 2014 as an international organization per the agreements between 
the governments of Kyrgyzstan and the Russian Federation. RKDF will carry out a very 
important role in the execution of this project by providing a credit line through local 
commercial banks that already reach out to the project target areas. It can therefore be 
concluded that the level for non-national actors is minimized and is well justified in this funding 
proposal. 
1.5.5. 
Stakeholder consultations 
58. 
CS-FOR was developed and prepared following a request by the Government of 
Kyrgyzstan, and a no-objection letter was signed by the national designated authority (SAEPF). 
According to information included in the project proposal, the CS-FOR proposal was developed 
in consultation with stakeholders:  
(a) 
To ensure that the project design is appropriate and meets national and local needs; 
(b) 
To verify the feasibility of the activities included in the project components; and  
(c) 
To obtain feedback from all stakeholders on all aspects of the project, including the 
environmental and social management framework and its components (including 
grievance redress mechanisms and gender).

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 135 
 
 
59. 
The following pertinent information on stakeholders’ consultation was summarized 
from the funding proposal: 
(a) 
Stakeholder engagement was undertaken during the funding proposal development 
stage and will continue during project implementation; 
(b) 
Consultations during the funding proposal development stage were held through 
workshops with potential stakeholders, meetings with potential stakeholders, and 
structured consultations; 
(c) 
During project formulation missions, “non-structured” bilateral meetings were also held 
on both technical and project management/implementation issues; and 
(d) 
The following stakeholders were consulted: SAEPF; Ministry of Emergency Situations; 
Ministry of Economy; Agricultural Projects’ Implementation Unit and the Department of 
Pastures, Livestock and Fisheries under MAFIM; ARIS; Association of Pasture User 
Unions “Kyrgyz Jaiyty”; RKDF; local non-governmental organizations Rural Development 
Fund and CAMP Alatoo; Kyrgyz Scientific Research Institute for Livestock and Pasture; 
Kyrgyz Scientific Research Veterinary Institute; Climate Financing Secretariat; 
KyrgyzHydromet; State Design Institute for Land Management “Kyrgyzgiprozem”; other 
donor agencies; and civil society. 
60. 
According to information provided in the funding proposal, targeted district-level 
consultations involved over 40 stakeholders, including representatives of local self-
governments (ayil okmotu), forest enterprises (leskhoze), pasture committees, women’s 
councils and traditional councils of the elders. Beyond this, Annex 2 (sub-annex 2a and 2b) was 
included in the funding proposal that dealt with the GAP and gender assessment plan. Pertinent 
issues in these documents, which dealt with how women and vulnerable groups have been 
considered in the design of the project, can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The GAP was prepared to implement the gender strategy and to ensure inclusion of 
disadvantaged groups (poor families, single-parent headed households and youth); 
(b) 
The GAP document presented various plans to cater to the needs of women and other 
vulnerable groups in the project area. The pertinent issues addressed in the GAP 
document can be summarized as follows: 
(i) 
An Expert Group (EG) that will be involved in regular discussion of the project 
and its delivery will be formed as part of the project monitoring and evaluation 
process; 
(ii) 
The EG, which will draw membership from relevant stakeholders, will include 
gender specialists; 
(iii) 
At least 50 per cent of the EG members will be women. Stocktaking tasks (legal 
and policy review and analysis of policies and legislation) will pay attention to 
women’s access to natural resources, and will consult community groups 
representing the interests of women and local women leaders; 
(iv) 
Training of participants from targeted key institutions in Kyrgyzstan whose 
capacity will be built to make evidence-based decisions on climate change and 
natural resource management must include at least 30 per cent women; 
(v) 
The community landscape management group that will be formed as part of the 
project implementation process will include the representative of the women’s 
council as well as of the youth organizations in each subdistrict (ayil aimak). At 
least 30 per cent of the members should be women; 
(vi) 
As part of a component of the project targeting green investment under the 
forest and rangeland rehabilitation subcomponent, service providers who will

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 136 
 
 
carry out this investment will be selected and trained. At least 30 per cent of 
these service providers will be women; and 
(vii) 
Throughout the project implementation, women’s access to and benefits from 
improved natural resources (forests and pasture) will be monitored. 
61. 
The GAP document, which is provided in the funding proposal as annex 2, contains 
references to how the stakeholders will be engaged. Following review by the iTAP, the GAP 
document is found to be adequate. 
62. 
Given the various discussions above, the iTAP considers the country ownership metrics 
of the proposed project to be “high”. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
    Scale: High 
1.6.1. 
Financial structure 
63. 
Of the total funding needed to implement this project (USD 49.99 million), USD 29.99 
million has been requested from GCF as grant funding. This funding request from GCF has been 
justified in the funding proposal according to the following reasons: 
(a) 
Grant funding requested is justified given the substantial expected impact in 
contribution to sequester about 19.8 MtCO2eq through forest and rangeland investment; 
and 
(b) 
In the absence of GCF funding, joint investment in rangeland rehabilitation such as 
planned in this project will result in limited or negative financial return of investment in 
forests. This will be due to the high cost of funds from other sources, when and if they 
can be mobilized, the short-term nature of such funds and the high transaction costs 
associated with mobilizing different stakeholders for joint investments in rangeland 
rehabilitation. This will not make the investment attractive for private sector funding. 
64. 
The project as conceptualized and presented in the funding proposal and its relevant 
annexes does not entail the risk of crowding-out private and other public investments. Success 
will instead produce a convincing argument that a conducive environment exists and should 
catalyse further private sector investments.  
1.6.2. 
Co-financing/leveraging 
65. 
According to the information included in the funding proposal, with a contribution of 
USD 29.99 million from GCF, the project will have a grant to co-financing ratio of 1:0.7. The co-
financing will total USD 20 million, of which: 77 per cent will be from RKDF; 18 per cent from 
beneficiaries; and about 2 per cent each from SAEPF, MAFIM and ARIS. FAO will also contribute 
USD 400,000 to support policy dialogue around evidence-based NRM governance. Given this 
information, it can be concluded that the project will leverage an adequate level of co-financing, 
as determined by project needs from the other partners. 
66. 
As stated in paragraph 64 above, the success of this project will produce a conducive 
environment in Kyrgyzstan that will catalyse further investment, particularly from the private 
sector, to finance similar investments in the future.  
1.6.3. 
Financial viability/best practices 
67. 
Based on credible assumptions, evidence given in the economic and financial feasibility 
analysis of the project (annex 3 of the funding proposal titled “CS-FOR Economic and Financial

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 137 
 
 
Analysis”) provided the following metrics for the expected financial performance of the project 
for a 20-year analysis: 
(a) 
Expected internal rate of return = 71.3 per cent; and 
(b) 
Estimated net present value (E-NPV) = USD 353.7 million.  
68. 
Robust sensitivity analyses covering parameters such as increased cost of the project 
due to climate change impacts, and decrease of benefits due to climate change impacts, were 
carried out. The result of the analysis showed that variation of these parameters between 20 
and 30 per cent will still yield acceptable results with the highest decrease in the estimated net 
present value from the base case of about 52 per cent when the benefits due to climate change 
impacts decrease by about 30 per cent. Even for this scenario, the estimated net present value 
will be USD 170.7 million while the expected internal rate of return will be about 41.2 per cent. 
69. 
From the review of the plans reported in the funding proposal and its annexes, it can be 
concluded that the project incorporated best practices and available technologies in its design. 
Multiple options for each type of intervention proposed were assessed before finalization of the 
design, which has now been presented for implementation. 
70. 
Based on the discussions presented above, the iTAP concludes that the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the proposed CS-FOR project are “high”. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
71. 
The iTAP therefore recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal.

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.24/02/Add.02 
Page 138 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the Independent Technical 
Advisory Panel’s assessment (FP 116) 
Proposal name: 
Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in Forests and 
Rangelands (CS-FOR) in the Kyrgyz Republic 
Accredited entity: 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
 
Impact potential 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Paradigm shift potential 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Sustainable development potential 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Needs of the recipient 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Country ownership 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
FAO takes note of the assessment. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
FAO thanks the iTAP for its review of the proposal.

=== PAGE 139 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
1 
Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in Forests 
and Rangelands (CS-FOR) in Kyrgyzstan 
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
1.
A Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan (GAP) was prepared to implement the gender strategy
and to ensure inclusion of disadvantaged groups (poor families, single-headed households and youth).
Table below presents specific actions in each project component with indicative budget as envisaged at
the proposal stage. Minimum 30 percent was set as a target in accordance with the FAO’s operational
work and budget at the country and regional levels is allocated to women-specific targeted interventions1. 
Female-headed households, unemployed, youth, disabled groups will be prioritized as a vulnerable
groups to be targeted in the project activities. All trainings will have post-training evaluation questionnaires
to track the usefulness of the trainings. Gender assessment and monitoring will help to track how the skills
are being adopted that were acquired in trainings, how knowledge and equipment was used by women to
improve their businesses.
2.
The budget for the Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan (GAP) was calculated according to the
underlying principles:
a.
For activities related to capacity development / training / awareness campaigns: 30% of
the budget is considered gender sensitive. This is related to the project target of
women inclusion in such kind of activities.
b.
For activities involving policy dialogue / regulatory framework: 50% of the budget is
considered gender sensitive. This is due to the estimates on beneficiaries of project
interventions.
c.
For activities involving investment in rangeland and forestry (comp 2 – excluding
training): 50% of the budget is considered gender sensitive. This is due to the
estimates on beneficiaries of project interventions.
d.
For activities related to investment in climate sensitive value chains (comp 3 –
excluding training): 10% of the budget is considered gender sensitive, considering the
estimated potential outreach of the project.
3.
On the basis of the final GAP, the Gender and Social Development Specialist each year prepares
an annual work plan and budget of GAP for submission to the Project Director.
4.
The GAP is in line with the overall project implementation plan and timeline, thus all activities are
incorporated into the relevant components of the project.
5.
Capacity development activities will be carried out not only by providing trainings for beneficiaries
(both women and men) but also ensuring access of women and female headed households to decision-
making processes, such as securing quotas (at least 30%) for memberships in CLMGs, close
collaboration with and promotion of gender sensitization among the local government and core district-
level institutions (PUUs, WUAs) responsible for the management of access to natural resources (water,
pastures, land and other resources). The project will ensure a specific approach for women when
partnering with financial institutions and working on financial education of women entrepreneurs, 
supporting the latter one VCD. Through these activities it is anticipated to work on sustainability of the
project interventions.
1 FAO. 2012. Minimum standards for Women Targeted Interventions. FAO Policy on Gender Equality. 
Gender documentation for FP116

=== PAGE 140 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
2 
 
 
Table 1: Outline of Proposed Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
Component/ Output 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities for 
the implementation 
Cost 
estimate 
(US$) 
Component 1/ Output 1.1. 
Evidence based natural 
resources management 
governance is 
strengthened across 
stakeholders 
Activity 1.1.1 Prepare 
communication material and 
organize information 
awareness campaigns to 
mobilize national stakeholders 
Community awareness raising campaigns and communication 
materials in Kyrgyz and Russian languages introduced in line with 
the developed Gender equality and social inclusion mainstreaming 
communication strategy.  Undertake gender awareness events 
among the project staff and relevant partners (at local and national 
levels) involved in the implementation at least once per year. 
Gender-responsive mobilization and communication channels will 
be developed to reach both women and men, including vulnerable 
groups (such as female-headed households, low income families, 
unemployed).  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- 100% of developed communication materials and campaigns 
are gender-sensitive, in line with communication strategy.  
- At least 4 awareness campaigns on management of natural 
resources conducted in 4 project districts (with 540,563 
residents) are women and youth targeted per year. 
- 100% of project staff and local and national partners have 
participated at gender awareness events   
- # of direct and indirect beneficiaries TBD during inception 
phase, based on baseline survey with mandatory 30% quotas 
for women and youth 
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: 
Communications 
specialist, in close 
collaboration with The 
Gender and Social 
Expert  
49 515 
(30%) 
Activity 1.1.2 Organize fora/ 
international conferences 
meetings to sensitize the 
stakeholders  
Gender-related issues discussed at the fora/international 
conferences, meetings with developed and translated short films, 
social advertisement and other means in the mass media 
screened for gender sensitive content. Number of women and 
men, including vulnerable groups (such as female-headed 
households, low income families, unemployed engaged in the 
fora/international conferences, meetings,  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- 100% of developed and translated short films, social 
advertisement and other means in the mass media are 
screened for gender sensitive content; # of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries TBD during inception phase, based on baseline 
survey with mandatory 30%  quotas for women and youth 
- At least 10 gender-related issues are discussed at the fora 
international conferences 
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: 
Capacity development 
specialist, in close 
collaboration with The 
Gender and Social 
Expert  
170 460 
(30%)

=== PAGE 141 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
3 
 
Component/ Output 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities for 
the implementation 
Cost 
estimate 
(US$) 
Activity 1.1.3 Training 
sessions/ workshops on forest 
and rangeland tenure 
arrangements, policy making, 
management of natural 
resources 
Gender mainstreaming is ensured in session/workshop materials, 
including trainings. Number of individuals who took part in the 
sessions/workshops (data disaggregated by sex, region, age 
group, training topic) 
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- Number of women and men, including vulnerable groups (such 
as female-headed households, low income families, 
unemployed) trained, with mandatory 30% quota (data 
disaggregated by sex, region, age group, training topic).  
- # of women TBD during inception phase, including based on 
baseline survey.  
- gender mainstreamed in all session/workshop materials and 
20% of training time devoted to what kind of 
measures/arrangements could improve women’s and youth 
lives and how and why.  
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: The 
M&E and Planning 
team leader, in close 
collaboration with The 
Gender and Social 
Expert   
202 940 
(30%) 
Activity 1.1.4 Propose 
recommendations for 
enforcement of sustainable 
management and use of 
forest- rangeland ecosystems 
through participatory process 
(Dialogues / workshops / 
meetings) 
 Stocktaking tasks (legal and policy review and analysis) integrate 
gender analysis targeting the assessments of women’s needs, 
access to national resources and consultations are conducted with 
diverse community groups in 4 project districts (during the 
inception phase, mid-term assessment, final assessment)  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- Final report with specific recommendations in the area of 
gender and sustainable management, forest-rangeland 
ecosystems, biodiversity, environmental resources, and 
livelihoods. 
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: The 
Gender and Social 
Expert   
113 811 
(30%)

=== PAGE 142 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
4 
 
Component/ Output 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities for 
the implementation 
Cost 
estimate 
(US$) 
Activity 1.1.5 Identify 
approaches for national 
stakeholder involvement 
process and organize National 
Stakeholders Platform Policy 
Dialogue for the management 
and use of municipal forest 
and facilitate thematic 
workshops, and submit the 
recommendation document to 
the Parliament 
TORs of the National Platform for policy discussions and decision 
making are gender mainstreamed. The National Platform 
representatives (Government and CSO) are knowledgeable about 
gender and social issues on natural resource management. 
Contribute to the facilitation of thematic workshop with the focus 
on gender and social equality principles and provide 
recommendations with identified approaches and principles that 
are in line with the FAO Gender mainstreaming and human rights-
based approach.  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- Gender and social inclusion perspectives and activities taken 
into account in 100% of ToRs developed.  
- TORs of all EG members include gender mainstreaming.  
- At least 50% of the EG members will be women.  
- 100%of thematic workshops are conducted with consideration 
of gender and social issues (data disaggregated by sex, age, 
region, thematic topic).  
- Final document with recommendations include targeted gender-
related aspects, that are line with the FAO Gender 
mainstreaming and human rights-based approach. 
By end 
of 
Project 
year 3 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: Senior 
International 
Technical Adviser will 
have overall 
responsibility for 
preparing terms of 
references of 
technical experts, in 
close collaboration 
with The Gender and 
Social Expert. 
266 700 
(50%)

=== PAGE 143 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
5 
 
Component/ Output 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities for 
the implementation 
Cost 
estimate 
(US$) 
  
Activity 1.2.1 Demonstrate and 
accompany national and local 
institutions in adopting the 
evidence-based Natural 
resources Planning, 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
System  
M&E guidelines include gender-responsive standards, 
methodologies and modalities for the state monitoring of 
rangelands and forests resources to help to generate data that 
shows trends in the correlation between management practices 
and climate change mitigation and adaptation, recognizing and 
capturing that women and men can face differential climate 
change vulnerabilities, risks and impacts based on their gender 
and age. Trainings on introduction of the gender responsive M&E 
guidelines are provided for the key stakeholders. Final 
assessment and annual monitoring provide information on how the 
adoption of skills acquired in trainings and how they were used.  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- 100% of developed and approved methodologies, guidelines, 
materials and tools, including qualitative and quantitative data, 
considering gender and social inclusion aspects, including 
community monitoring;   
- 100% of trainings include gender and human rights standards 
with participants disaggregated by sex, age, region with 
mandatory 30% quotas for women and youth.  
- Data collected and reports are developed on the annual basis 
as well as final assessment is conducted on adoption of Natural 
Resources Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation System, with a 
focus on adoption of gender-sensitive approach.  
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: The 
M&E and Planning 
team leader, in close 
collaboration with The 
Gender and Social 
Expert   
 
Project M&E will 
collect and track sex-
disaggregated and 
gender-specific 
indicators, and 
corrective measures 
will be taken if needed 
during project 
implementation. 
351 588 
(25%) 
  
Activity 1.3.1 Mobilize 
communities, establish 
CLMGs and accompany in 
formulating INRMCRPs 
All members of Landscape Management Groups (CLMGs) trained 
on gender and climate change, forestry an other areas of FAO 
mandate. CLMG includes the representative of women’s council 
as well as youth organization in each ayil aimak. Methodologies, 
guidelines and materials on the elaboration of INRMCRPs 
considering gender issues.  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- At least 30% of the members should be women and youth.  
- 100% of CLMGs trained on gender issues and its links to 
climate change.  
- 100% of developed documents on the elaboration of 
INRMCRPs include gender and social aspect/component.  
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
ARIS facilitates the 
establishment of such 
groups in the four 
target areas, in close 
collaboration with The 
Gender and Social 
Expert   
 
726 550 
(50%)

=== PAGE 144 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
6 
 
Component/ Output 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities for 
the implementation 
Cost 
estimate 
(US$) 
2.1 Green investments 
for forests and 
rangelands rehabilitation 
are made available  
Activity 2.1.1 Conduct training 
to 50 communities and 
institutions on technical/ legal 
matters on forest enrichment 
and afforestation/ 
reforestation, and provide 
technical/legal assistances on 
forestry PPP establishment 
Trainings will address gender and social issues and cover 
participants from 50 aiyl aymaks (municipalities) and their 
communities. Training sessions will be also provided to women on 
leadership, decision-making and participation in local institutions 
with a view to supporting women’s further engagement in PUUs, 
WUAs and other community resource user groups. 
Baseline:0 
Target:  
- At least 50% of participants in 50 aiyl aymaks (municipalities) 
took part in the gender training with mandatory 30% quotas for 
women and youth  
- 20% of the training time needs to address gender issues within 
the thematic topics covered under this Activity.  
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
The Gender and 
Social Expert   
621 617 
(30%) 
Activity 2.1.2 Provide technical 
assistance to the Pasture 
Department on climate-
sensitive pasture 
management, assessment and 
monitoring, and conduct 
INRMCRP assessment and 
monitoring 
Gender aspects are addressed during the study tour and 
workshops targeting the pasture department with specific task to 
reinforce the gender-responsive monitoring capacities and 
coordinate the department’s efforts in pasture management 
awareness and capacity development.  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- At least 50% of all study tour and workshop participants will be 
women.   
- 20% of the training time needs to address gender issues within 
the thematic topics covered under this Activity. 
By end 
of 
Project 
year 7 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: GIS 
and pasture 
specialists,  
Consultant of Pasture 
Management, along 
with the technical 
support of the Gender 
and Social Expert  
252 914 
(30%) 
Activity 2.1.3  Conduct training 
of trainers on pasture rotation 
and evidence-based rangeland 
M&E to local cadres as well as 
training of trainers on 
INRMCRP management and 
implementation, and training 
sessions to the CLMGs and 
local stakeholders to 
implement INRMCRPs on 
rangeland management 
ToT mainstreamed both gender and social aspects and land 
tenure within the framework of the VGGTs.  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- 100% of TOT intervention have gender aspects.  
- At least 30% of participants will be women. 
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: The 
Gender and Social 
Expert  
879 723 
(30%)

=== PAGE 145 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
7 
 
Component/ Output 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities for 
the implementation 
Cost 
estimate 
(US$) 
Activity 2.1.4 Provide climate 
investment in restoration and 
improvement of forests based 
on INRMCRP developed, and 
execute afforestation/ 
reforestation and forest 
enrichment work by Leskhozes 
with technical assistance 
Community contributions to forest restoration is provided with 
active participation of women. 100 business cases with the 
establishment of relatively small-scale nurseries (100 m2) are 
supported. 
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- At least 30% of community contributions will be done by 
women.  
- At least 50% of women will be included in the establishment of 
small-scale nurseries. 
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
The Gender and 
Social Expert   
5 067 403 
(50%) 
Activity 2.1.5 Develop and 
execute INRMCRP pasture 
investment plans for catalyzing 
green investment in rangeland 
rehabilitation and livestock 
production 
Beneficiaries (data disaggregated by sex, age, region) receive 
supporting investment in pasture rehabilitation and livestock 
production, that are aimed at overcoming pasture degradation 
through the adoption of pasture rotation, training, mentoring. 
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- At least 30% of participants will be women (# of women TBD 
during inception phase, including based on baseline survey). 
By end 
of 
Project 
year 7 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
The Gender and 
Social Expert   
2 193 925 
(50%) 
3.1 Selected value chains 
are climate sensitive and 
producers adopt carbon 
optimization 
technologies and 
practices  
Activity 3.1.1. Select value 
chains in operation and 
provide technical support to 
the value chain 
actors/organizations for 
climate-sensitive business 
development 
The value chain performance assessment is done as per FAO 
guiding framework Developing gender sensitive value chains 
(http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6462e.pdf) and guidelines for practitioners 
(http://www.fao.org/documents/card/en/c/I9212EN) 
Women’s participation in/benefiting from the value chain is taken 
into consideration when selecting value chains.  
Assessment will be done using the FAO guiding framework 
Developing gender sensitive value chains (http://www.fao.org/3/a-
i6462e.pdf). VC development interventions will require a degree of 
analysis that goes beyond identification of constraints and 
problems, but focus instead on understanding interlinked root 
causes for CV underperformance, finding the solutions in the 
system.  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- Final report on value chain performance assessment as per 
guidelines is developed. 
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
The Gender and 
Social Expert   
803 172 
(30%)

=== PAGE 146 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
8 
 
Component/ Output 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities for 
the implementation 
Cost 
estimate 
(US$) 
Activity 3.1.2. Identify and 
mobilize operating 
agribusinesses in the selected 
value chains via information 
campaign and value chain 
mapping for climate-sensitive 
business practices 
Climate-sensitive value chains are developed and upgraded as 
per FAO standards on gender mainstreaming.  Capacity 
development through training provided with mandatory 30% 
quotas for women and youth. Information campaigns of the 
availability of credit lines designed to outreach women and men, 
including vulnerable groups (such as female-headed households) 
borrowers.  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- 100% participating entrepreneurs will receive training on gender 
sensitization training.  
- 100% financial education modules on financial literacy 
developed with the project support will include gender and 
social aspects.  
- At least 50% of Information campaign target women and youth 
entrepreneurs.  
- 100% of data on training is disaggregated by sex, age, topic, 
region. 
- Women’s share in financial education training will be 50%. 
- Share of youth in the financial education training will be 50% 
(among them, 50% young women and 50% young men). 
- At least 60% of the participants in trainings for raw material 
suppliers will be women.  
- At least 30% of the participants in trainings for entrepreneurs 
will be women. 
- At least 30% of the participants in trainings for entrepreneurs 
will be youth (50% of them must be women).  
- Reports of the partners banks including disaggregated data by 
sex, age, region. 
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by:  
The Gender and 
Social Expert   
100 718 
(30%) 
Activity 3.1.3. Activate special 
credit lines and provide loans 
for eligible value chain actors 
in communities/ entrepreneurs/ 
enterprises in the project-
relevant value chains 
Activated special credit lines for project-relevant value chains and 
entrepreneurs provide developed new products and services that 
are women and youth-friendly.  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- # of developed special credit lines that are women and youth-
friendly 
By end 
of 
Project 
year 6 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: The 
Gender and Social 
Expert, in close 
collaboration with 
RKDF.

=== PAGE 147 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
9 
 
Component/ Output 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities for 
the implementation 
Cost 
estimate 
(US$) 
PMC Project Management Costs 
TORs of key positions in the PIU (Project Manager, M&E Manager 
and Communication Specialist) include gender competency 
requirement and responsibilities in mainstreaming tasks. Project 
M&E will collect and track sex-disaggregated and gender-specific 
indicators, and corrective measures will be taken if needed during 
project implementation. Senior International Technical Adviser, 
The M&E and Planning team leader, Project Coordinator, M&E 
specialist  
Baseline: 0 
Target:  
- At least 50% of all study tour and workshop participants will be 
women.   
- Developed and approved guidelines on gender and social 
inclusion for the PMU to be used during the project 
implementation.  
By end 
of 
Project 
year 8 
FAO (as Executing 
Entity), led by: Senior 
International 
Technical Adviser will 
have overall 
responsibility for 
preparing terms of 
references of 
technical experts, in 
close collaboration 
with The Gender and 
Social Expert. 
142 345 
(10%) 
Total budget (gender focused budget) 
11 943 381 
(39,8%)

=== PAGE 148 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
10 
 
 
 
6. 
GAP planning and implementation. At the onset of the project implementation, the EG, under the 
overall responsibility of PIU Project Manager, with the technical support of the Gender and Social 
Development Specialist, will organize a workshop to validate the proposed GAP and sensitize key 
stakeholders. This would be followed by briefings and capacity development activities on GAP for the 
project team, implementation partners and other relevant stakeholders (refresher training will be organized 
later on as and when appropriate). A gender focal point will be nominated for each implementing partner, 
who will coordinate all issues related to gender mainstreaming and social inclusion. Gender-responsive 
mobilization and communication channels will be developed to reach both women and men, including 
vulnerable groups (such as female-headed households, low income families, unemployed). On the basis 
of the final GAP, the Gender and Social Development Specialist each year prepares an annual work plan 
and budget of GAP for submission to the Project Director.  
7. 
Project Manager will be held accountable for gender mainstreaming and social inclusion of the 
project, technically supported by the Gender and Social development specialist. This specialist will 
coordinate all work on gender mainstreaming in collaboration with the gender focal points of partner 
institutions and other stakeholders, the FAO Lead Technical Officer (LTO) and other members of the 
project team. 
8. 
Implementation of GAP will be supported by relevant FAO gender equality tools, such as FAO 
Gender mainstreaming and human rights-based approach: guidelines for technical officers 2 and the 
VGGT technical guide: governing land for women and men3. In addition, to promote and share its best 
practices FAO developed policies, guidelines and valuable tools in gender-mainstreaming: 
- 
In 2012, FAO endorsed a Policy on Gender Equality, the goal of which is to achieve equality 
between women and men in sustainable agricultural production and rural development, 
with the aim of eliminating hunger and poverty4. 
- 
Regional Gender Equality Strategy for 2019–2022 represents a common vision of what 
FAO intends to achieve over the next four years in promoting gender equality and women’s 
empowerment through its interventions in the region, and how5 
- 
Gender mainstreaming and human rights-based approach. Guidelines for technical 
officers6. 
- 
Agri-Gender Statistics Toolkit7 
- 
Environment and Social Management Guidelines8.  
- 
Developing gender-sensitive value chains. A guiding framework9 
- 
FAO-Adapt10  
- 
Climate-smart agriculture11 
 
                                                             
2 FAO (2017) gender mainstreaming and human rights-based approach. Guidelines for technical officers (Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6808e.pdf)  
3 FAO (2015) Governing land for women and men. A technical guide to support the achievement of responsible gender-equitable governance of land tenure. (Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/3/a-i3114e.pdf)  
4 http://www.fao.org/3/i3205e/i3205e.pdf 
5 http://www.fao.org/3/ca4521en/ca4521en.pdf 
6 http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6808e.pdf 
7 FAO (2016). http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5769e.pdf 
8 FAO (2015). http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4413e.pdf 
9 FAO (2016). http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6462e.pdf 
10 FAO-Adapt: http://www.fao.org/climatechange/fao-adapt/en/ 
11 Climate Smart Agriculture: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i3325e.pdf

=== PAGE 149 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
 
1 
 
Carbon Sequestration through Climate Investment in Forests 
and Rangelands (CS-FOR) in Kyrgyzstan 
 
Gender Assessment 
Overview of gender inequalities in rural areas of Kyrgyzstan 
 
1. 
FAO conducted a gender assessment in 2016, titled ‘National gender profile of agricultural and rural 
livelihoods: Kyrgyz Republic’1. The assessment has informed the formulation of this project, including this 
section, as it will inform as well its implementation.  
2. 
Prior to its independence in 1991, about three quarters of women of Kyrgyzstan were in the official 
labour force, including those who worked in the state and collective farms2. During the period of transition 
to the market economy Kyrgyz women lost much economic, social and political power. By 2002 the official 
employment rate for women decreased by half. The period also saw weakening and disappearance of 
public services available during the Soviet time for working women, such as daycare centers, 
kindergartens, extended maternity leave, and access to basic health care. The loss of such services meant 
that women’s shouldering of the responsibilities to care children and the elderly increased.  
3. 
The Kyrgyz Republic ranked 90 out of 159 countries on Gender Inequality Index (GII). GII reflects 
gender-based inequalities in three dimensions (reproductive health, empowerment, and economic 
activity), and the higher the GII value the more unequal the country from the gender point of view. 
Kyrgyzstan’s gender inequality, with GII score of 0.394, is higher than neighboring Tajikistan (0.322) and 
Uzbekistan (0.287). While Kyrgyzstan fares well in terms of political representation and education 
attainment, it lags behind the two countries on maternal mortality ratio and adolescent birth rate (see Table 
3).  
Table 3: Gender Inequality Index of Kyrgyzstan and Selected ECA Countries 
 
GII 
value 
GII 
rank 
Maternal 
mortality 
ratio 
Adolescent 
birth rate 
Female 
seats 
in 
parliament 
(%) 
Population with 
at least some 
secondary 
education (%) 
 
Labour 
force 
participation 
rate (%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Kyrgyzstan 
0.394 
90 
76 
39.6 
19.2 
100.0 
99.9 
49.4 
77.1 
Tajikistan 
0.322 
65 
32 
38.1 
14.7 
98.1 
88.2 
59.4 
77.5 
Uzbekistan 
0.287 
57 
36 
17.7 
16.4 
99.9 
99.9 
48.3 
76.2 
ECA 
0.279 
 
24 
26.6 
19.0 
78.1 
85.7 
45.4 
70.5 
Source: Human Development Report 2016, UNDP 
4. Kyrgyzstan’s legal framework guarantees women’s equality. Its constitution mandates equality 
between women and men and prohibits gender-based discrimination. Civil, penal, labour and family 
codes guarantee equal rights for men and women. In 2008 the Law on State Guarantees of Equal 
Rights and Equal Opportunities for Men and Women was promulgated to ban gender discrimination 
in the public administration. The Government has also addressed gender equality in key policy 
measures, and in 2012 approved a comprehensive and forward-looking gender strategy, entitled 
‘Gender Equality Strategy to 2020’. The strategy was translated into the National Action Plan on 
Gender Equality for 2015-2017, which was approved in December 2015 and the latest, as of 2018-
2020, approved in November 2018. Ministry of Labor and Social Development (MLSD) is an entity 
                                                             
1 FAO, National Ggender Pprofile of Aagricultural and Rrural Llivelihoods: Kyrgyz Republic (Country gender assessment series), 
2016. Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5763e.pdf     
2 ADB, Country Gender Assessment: Kyrgyz Republic, 2005

=== PAGE 150 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
 
2 
 
that is responsible for the gender mainstreaming and monitoring the implementation of the National 
Action Plan on Gender Equality (GE NAP). The gender strategy and action plan highlight: (i) women’s 
economic empowerment; (ii) functional education for girls and women; (iii) improving women’s access 
to justice and eliminating discrimination; and (iv) gender parity in decision making and expanding 
women’s political participation (v) regulatory policy to ensure gender mainstreaming across the state 
agencies and the standardization of national gender statistics. The strategy and action plan pay 
special attention to improving rural women’s non-formal education in such areas as information and 
communication technology with a view to facilitating their better access to employment and business 
opportunities3 as well as engaging women in income-generating projects, training for women in 
nutrition education and agrotechnology.   
5. 
Despite the adequate legal framework and Government’s proclamations of gender equality, 
researchers and development practitioners point out that Kyrgyzstan faces high gender inequalities. 
Deep-rooted patriarchal attitudes and conventional beliefs of women’s roles and responsibilities in the 
family and society serve to perpetuate gender inequality. While women’s councils exist at the rural 
municipality level to address gender issues and support women, many are not strong. Some argues that 
gender inequalities are on the rise due to recent revival of Islam4. Economic empowerment of women is 
lagging behind as barriers to their equal employment opportunities and entrepreneurship development 
continue to remain. In 2015, the average wage of men was 1.3 times higher than that of the women 
(14,743 soms for men, compared to 11,125 soms for women) 5. While both men and women take 
agricultural loans from microfinance institutions (MFIs), women borrow smaller sums than men, and are 
more likely to borrow as a group6. A recent study revealed that men are usually the primary decision-
makers within the household on such matters as finance (saving, spending and taking loans), choice of 
crops and the sale of agriculture and livestock products while women have more agency over non-
economic decisions (such as child care) and some economic decisions related to the spheres of their 
influence (i.e. kitchen garden)7.  
6. 
Violence against women is widespread, and there are reported cases of domestic violence, bride 
kidnapping, trafficking, early marriages and physical abuse. In rural areas, in particular, bride kidnapping 
and early marriages remain a matter of great concern. In its 2014 review of Beijing Declaration and 
Platform of Action, the country reported a research finding that ‘60 percent of marriages in the countryside 
in mono-ethnic areas are accomplished through bride kidnapping, of which two thirds are performed 
without consent of the girl’8. According to the 2006 data cited in the same Beijing+20 National Review, 
over 12% of women in Kyrgyzstan get married before the minimum marriage age of 18. The incidence of 
such marriages is higher in rural areas (14.2%) than in urban areas (9.7%). Early marriages are more 
common among poor households (16.5%) than in rich families (9.1%). Although more updated information 
is not available, an increase in fertility rate among young women – 4.4 children per 1,000 women aged 
15-17 in 2006 to 7.7 children in 2012 – may indicate that early marriages are on the rise.   
7. 
According to a population and health survey in 2012, 27% of all households are headed by a 
woman9. Rural area records a lower percentage of FHHs (21%), compared to urban area (36%). Sex of 
the household head is not a strong factor to influence the poverty level of the family. The NSC data 
suggests that female-headed, one-parent families are not poorer than male equivalents, but among the 
two-parent families, poverty is higher if they are headed by a woman (see Table 3 below). Similarly, 
assessments found that FHHs in Kyrgyzstan are not more likely to be food insecure than male-headed 
households (MHHs)10. Although FHHs are slightly more likely to be severely insecure (10% of FHHs in 
comparison to 7% of MHHs), the reverse is true for moderately food insecure households (16% of MHHs 
                                                             
3 FAO (2016). 
4 Muldoon, R. and Casabonne, U., Gender Norms in Flux: Bride Kidnapping and Women’s Civic Participation in the Kyrgyz 
Republic, World Bank, 2017.  
5 UNFPA, Gender in Society Perception Study, 2016. 
6 According to data from Annual Report of the National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic 2015, quoted in FAO (2016).  
7 FAO (2016) 
8 Ministry of Social Affairs, National review of the 20th year anniversary of the Beijing Platform for Action in Kyrgyzstan, 2014. 
9 National Statistical Committee, Ministry of Health, and IFC International, Kyrgyz Republic: Demographic and Health Survey 2012, 
2013. 
10 FAO (2016).

=== PAGE 151 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
 
3 
 
and 12% of FHHs)11.  
Table 3: Poverty Rates by Sex of Household Head (2014) 
   
Female- 
headed 
Male- headed 
 
2-parent family 
1-parent family 
2-parent family 
1-parent family 
Not poor 
64.4 
91.4 
70.0 
81.4 
Poor 
35.6 
8.6 
30.0 
18.6 
 
Source: NSC, Women and Men of the Kyrgyz Republic: 2010-2014, 2015, cited in FAO (2016) 
8. 
Although no data or comprehensive analysis is available on the situation of wives of migrant 
workers, some reports mention extra challenges such women face. Episodes include wives not directly 
receiving remittances, which are instead sent to the migrant’s mother or elder sister12. On the other hand, 
a large number of women migrate for work both to foreign countries, as well as inside Kyrgyzstan. 
According to 2016 data from Russia, nearly 40% of the Kyrgyz citizens among official migrants in the 
country were women 13. Compared to other Central Asian countries, where the migrants in Russia 
originate, Kyrgyzstan records the highest proportion of women among the migrants in Russia. As for 
internal migration, women outnumber men: 64% of inter-regional migrants in 2014 were women, mainly 
rural women migrating to urban areas 14. Women may migrate together with males or alone, and a 
significant proportion of Kyrgyz women migrants are the primary breadwinners15. It is pointed out that the 
massive out-migration Kyrgyzstan has been experiencing is ‘affecting gender norms in multiple and 
conflicting ways’16. While negative consequences, including those for women and girls, may be numerous, 
some argue that such a large social disruption, which makes previous social norms and mental models 
untenable, may bring about some positive changes to women, such as males’ taking more childcare 
responsibilities and women’s seeking more work outside the home 17.  
 
Women in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management 
 
9. 
Agriculture underscores the lives of the rural population as almost all adults engage in some work 
related to crop and livestock production. Rural women work in crop cultivation, livestock production, food 
processing and marketing. In terms of formal labour, agriculture is the largest sector of employment for 
both women and men. Around a third of all working women and men are employed in agriculture, 
according to the statistics18. It must be noted that the share of women employed in agriculture has 
increased considerably in recent years. While women’s share in the agriculture (including forestry and 
fisheries) was about 40% during the decade leading to 2012, it increased to 44.5% in 201419.  This may 
have been caused by the tendency of male labour’s increased entrance into other sectors and their out 
migration. It could be also possible that this reflects women’s limited employment opportunities in other 
sectors.  
10. 
Employment patterns between women and men in agriculture differ. Women are more likely to be 
self-employed, while men are more often engaged as hired (contracted) workers. According to the NSC 
data, 73.9% of all self-employed women worked in agriculture in 2014, compared to 58.4% of all self-
employed men20.  
11. 
Women’s equal rights to properties, including agricultural land, are legally protected. The Land Code 
(1999) and Law on Introduction of Land Code of the Kyrgyz Republic (#46, 1999) are the main documents 
                                                             
11 NSC data cited in FAO (2016).  
12 International Federation for Human Rights, Women and children from Kyrgyzstan affected by migration: An exacerbated 
vulnerability, 2016.  
13 Data from the Russian Federal Migration Service, quoted in FAO (2016). Total number of Kyrgyz citizen among the official 
migrants was 574,194, of whom 351,121 (61.2%) were men.  
14 NSC data quoted in FAO (2016).  
15 Data from A Needs Assessment of Women Migrant Workers: Central Asia and Russia, UN Women, 2009, cited in FAO (2016).  
16 Muldoon and Casabonne (2017).  
17 Ibid.  
18 NSC data from 2015 cited in FAO (2016).  
19 Ibid.  
20 Ibid.

=== PAGE 152 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
 
4 
 
regulating land relations and establishing the grounds for the commencement, procedure for the exercise 
and termination of land titles. The Law on Agricultural Land Management (2006) enable women to ‘obtain 
and register individual rights to land shares by dividing land plots in plots into individual parcels for 
independent management and transactions’21. The law recognizes men’s and women’s equal right to 
inherit land. Only 3 percent of rural women have sole ownership of land, whereas there are about 22 
percent of rural men who own land. About 60 percent of rural women do not own any land22 
12. 
Researchers and development practitioners argue, however, that exercising such rights is a 
challenge for women due to the prevailing notion that males are natural heads of the household. Land is 
usually registered under husband’s name. According to a 2011 country assessment of access to land, the 
formal law in Kyrgyzstan ‘has not in most cases been successful in protecting and improving women‘s 
rights, including rights to access and own land’23. For example, although women who leave her birth 
families to marry have the right to sell her land shares to the families, they seldom do so because such 
a demand is seen as shameful24. Women who are divorcing have similar challenges in claiming their land 
shares. It is pointed out that young wives, ex-wives, daughters-in-law and widows are ‘least likely to 
challenge patriarchal traditions about property rights’25.  
13. 
A Livelihood Study conducted during the project preparation organized focus group discussions in 
the project area, including those with women. The results revealed that women and women's groups are 
not considered as separate groups that have special needs, for which special approach is required. A 
major difficulty that women in the project area face is stereotypes and traditional rights that limit the 
participation of women in the management of natural resources. In communities, the public role of women 
is reduced to solving the problems of benefits and pensions, or to resolving social issues related to the 
upbringing of children and motherhood. Often women are not informed about meetings held on pasture 
and forest issues, so their interests are not taken into account. 
14. 
In spite of this, the participants of the discussion note that in recent years there has been 
opportunities for women and women's groups in solving various issues related to natural resources. 
Despite the fact that there are no women in the forestry and pasture committee, especially in the 
management body, women's committees often became involved in the discussion of problems in the use 
and management of natural resources. 
15. 
Livestock. Women’s engagement in animal husbandry is significant.  Women are particularly active 
in raising young animals, milking, and preparation and sales of dairy products. Women in households 
which graze animals in distant pastures during summer would travel with the husbands and children, 
maintain seasonal home in the pasture and carry out domestic tasks in addition to their responsibility in 
animal raising and other economic and livelihood activities of the family26. However, women’s participation 
in the livestock sector is considered secondary to males’ under social norms prevailing in rural areas which 
label livestock production primarily a male-led activity. Official data on individual ownership of livestock 
are unavailable. Studies found that FHHs are less likely to own livestock (41%) than male-headed 
households (56%), but there is no significant difference in terms of the number of livestock owned by each 
type of household27.  
16. 
Women’s involvement in pasture management is also limited. A recent study on gender and pasture 
management points out that traditionally women’s rights to pastures are secured through their male kin 
members - husbands or, if the family is headed by a woman, her male relative28. Women’s representation 
in the executive committees (Pasture Committees or PCs) of Pasture Users Unions (PUUs) is very low. 
                                                             
21 FAO (2016), page 9.  
22 EuroPlus Consulting & Management Helen Dubok Dilbar Turakhanova. 2018 (p. 39). Gender Study for Central Asia. 
https://eeas.europa.eu/sites/eeas/files/kyrgyzstan_final_report_09.01.2018_approved_workshop_final.pdf  
23 USAID, Property Rights and Resource Governance: Kyrgyzstan, 2011. 
24 Ibid.  
25 Ibid., page 32.  
26 A recent FAO assessment indicates a tendency that women are increasingly staying behind because far-away pastures because 
of danger, lack of services and poor infrastructure (Gender equity and pasture management assessment: Technical report under the 
project TCP/KYR/3503, 2015).   
27 FAO (2016). 
28 Scalise, E. and Undeland, A., Gender and Kyrgyz Community Pasture Management: a Case Study, Paper prepared for 
presentation at the 2016 World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty, 2016.

=== PAGE 153 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
 
5 
 
Of 454 PUUs in total in 2016, only 11 (2.4%) had PCs chaired by a woman29. The aforementioned study 
argues that PUUs’ investment tends to reflect more of men’s priorities, which are related to overseeing of 
the grazing animals, and focuses on infrastructure, such as roads and bridges. On the other hand, services 
and goods prioritized by women during the families’ stay at the pasture land, such as electricity, drinking 
water, child support and health care are often lacking. 
17. 
Forestry. The National Action Plan on Forestry Development for 2006 to 201030 addressed gender 
and included a task to improve gender policy including employment of women in leskhozes (Forest 
Enterprises or FEs), but due to weak implementation of the action plan, gender-related goal (goal 2.4) were 
not achieved. It is important to mention that even though National Action Plan on Forestry Development for 
2006 to 2010 did not achieve its gender-related goals and AE can use this case as an opportunity to learn 
in order to assist the project to contribute to improving the implementation of its action plan and including 
this in the project-level gender action plan of the project. First of all, the National Action Plan on Forestry 
Developement failed because it this sector is poorly funded, where forestry specialists have low wages and 
that fact does not attract youth and women. Secondly, the responsibilites for the implementation of gender-
responsive policies was laid on international projects (not specified) solely, without the involvement of the 
state and community (lack of a sense of ownership, responsibility, and accountability).Third reason is that 
the document does not provide clear mechanisms and tools. Fourth reason, lack of monitoring and control 
over the implemenation of the gender-related activites. To tackle this issue of project allocates special 
budget line for the Gender and Social Inclusion Plan, assigns clear responsibilities in ToRs of EG and PIU 
staff, it also works  in close partnership and cooperation with state representative Ministry of Agriculture, 
Food Industry and Melioration (MAFIM) and its relevant departments, State Agency for Environment 
Protection and Forestry (SAEPF), local councils, communities who support the project and help in planning, 
monitoring and implementation phases.  
 
18. 
Studies found typical leaseholders of forest lands are older males, and women and young men have 
limited access to such arrangements. Young women, in particular, are constrained to accessing pertinent 
information, as well as participating in meetings organized by EFs or community authorities ‘due to their 
domestic responsibilities and also gender stereotypes about women’s role in resource allocation and 
management’ 31 . Another gender bias was identified in collaborative forest management, which was 
designed to provide communities with rights to use and manage the forests for income generation, 
according to a study32. The model did not work due to several factors, such as small plot size and labour 
requirements. It is noteworthy that FHHs and poor households were not given opportunities to participate 
in the scheme because they were seen to be incapable of handling labour requirements or lacking 
sufficient resources to carry out the works.  
19. 
Non-timber forest products (NTFPs) are important sources of income and household consumption 
among families living near the forest land, particularly for FHHs and poor households. FHHs gather 
firewood, make hay and pick fruit for consumption, but collect nuts to sell33. According to Undeland (2012), 
many women access forest land and resources without any agreement or only with informal agreements. 
Poor families and women who do not have other means to access forest resources are allowed by lessees 
to collect leftover nuts and fruits for free under a system called mashak.  
20. 
In order to visualize the gender gaps in agricultural sector, three figures are presenting recent sex-
disaggregated data on misbalanced representation of women and men in the Kyrgyz Republic. (Figure 1, 
Figure 2, Figure 3)34. 
Figure 1. Skilled workers within agricultural sector (disaggregated by gender) 
                                                             
29 FAO (2016). 
30 National Action Plan on Forestry of the KR 2006-2010. Available at http://cbd.minjust.gov.kg/act/view/ru-ru/57841 
31 Biodiversity International, How gender-specific knowledge is inspiring change in Kyrgyzstan’s walnut forests, 2014, quoted in FAO 
(2016).  
32 Undeland, A., Development Potential of Forests in the Kyrgyz Republic, PROFOR, 2012.  
33 Ibid. 
34 The National Statistics Committee. Women and Men in the KR 2013-2017

=== PAGE 154 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Employment status in agriculture sector. 
 
 
Figure 3. Comparative diagram: representation of women and men in small agro-enterprises 2013-
2017.

=== PAGE 155 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
 
7 
 
Gender Dimensions in Climate Change 
 
21. 
It is argued that, generally speaking, women are disproportionately affected by impacts of climate 
change and related weather events due to the existing discriminatory norms and practices that impede 
equal access to land, water and other productive assets for livelihoods. According to a recent WHO report, 
natural disasters, such as droughts, floods and storms, kill more women than men. The report also points 
out that gender-gap effects on life expectancy tend to be higher in severer disasters; and climate-sensitive 
health impacts, such as undernutrition and malaria, show important gender differences35.  
22. 
Women’s unequal participation in the decision making processes also constraints engendering of 
the planning and implementation of climate-related interventions36. In the meantime women actively 
participate in the resilience and mitigation actions by contributing to resilience building and livelihood 
improvements, such as climate smart agriculture37.  
23. 
A 2013 publication on gender and climate change in Kyrgyzstan points out a substantial institutional 
gap between the climate and gender discourses, and a subsequent lack of gender mainstreaming in 
climate programmes in the country38. The report warns that ‘[l]ack of gender analysis of climate change 
effects and other aspects of the ecological crisis leads to a lack of a clear picture of the distribution of risks 
for different social groups’, reducing the effectiveness of the climate programms39. Misbalanced gender-
representation is common at local level institutions, such as local councils, village administration, Water 
Users Associations (WUAs) and the aforementioned Pasture Committees (PCs) 40. Reduction of vital 
natural resources as a result of climate change can fuel conflicts, which could lead to further exclusion of 
women and the poor. In addition, depletion and quality degradation of drinking water could increase water-
related illnesses, which in turn will increase the labour of women and reduces their income earning 
opportunities.  
24. 
The aforementioned Livelihood Study found that women put secure access to water – both in 
pasture and farm land – as the high priority action for climate change mitigation. 
 
Youth 
 
25. 
  Kyrgyzstan is a young country with nearly 50% of its total population in Kyrgyzstan under the age 
of 25. Youth (aged between 15 and 29) account for 27%41. According to an ILO survey, Kyrgyzstan has 
the highest youth labour underutilization rate (55.3%) among six countries in the region42. Female youth 
labor underutilization rate is higher (59.6%) than that of male (50.5%). Informal employment rate of the 
youth is highest in the region (79.5%), and as many as 46.6% of young workers in the country are engaged 
in the agricultural sector – with higher shares among young women than young men.  The majority share 
of young workers (41.9%) is engaged without pay in a family establishment or farm. What the study reveals 
is a picture of typical Kyrgyz rural youth working on family farm as informal labour force with little prospect 
for career and income growth. This would create pressure for migration out of rural areas.  
26. 
It must be noted that the district consultation meetings organized as part of the project’s stakeholder 
                                                             
35 WHO, Gender, Climate Change and Health, 2014.  
36 UNFCCC, Gender and Climate Change (http://unfccc.int/gender_and_climate_change/items/7516.php), accessed in March 2018.  
37 Green Climate Fund and UN Women, Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects: A practical manual to support the 
integration of gender equality in climate change interventions and climate finance, 2017.  
38 Korotenko V.A. (ed.), Gender Environment and Climate Change, UNDP, UN Women and BIOM, 2013.  
39 Ibid., page 67.  
40 Two large and vital associations in the agricultural sector Water User’s Associations (WUAs) and Pasture User’s Association 
(PUAs) play crucial role increasing opportunities and gaining access to resources. Within 486 WUAs there are only 11 percent of 
women working in the leadership positions. There are only 4 pasture committees which are chaired by women out of 454 PCs. 
41 2017 data, NSC.  
42 Elder, S., et al, Labour market transitions of young women and men in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, ILO, 2015. The data in the 
report were derived from School-to-work transitions survey (SWTS) carried out in six countries (Armenia, Kyrgyzstan, Republic of 
Moldova, Russian Federation, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Ukraine). Kyrgyz data is from 2013. Youth labor 
underutilization is defined as ‘the sum of shares of youth in irregular employment, unemployed (relaxed definition) and youth neither 
in the labour force nor in education/training (inactive non-students) as a percentage of the youth population’.

=== PAGE 156 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
 
8 
 
engagement recognized needs for special actions to promote youth participation, which included ensuring 
their access to the project information, involvement in the community level natural resource management 
planning process, and support to business start-up.  
 
Stakeholder Engagement 
 
27. Stakeholder engagement is a process that must be undertaken during the project formulation as well 
as throughout the project implementation phases. During project formulation phase this process took place 
during five project design missions that were held in Kyrgyzstan from March 2017 – April 2018. Different 
formats for stakeholder engagement process (workshops, meetings, structured consultations) were used 
and consultations carried out to date included wide-range of stakeholders (national-vele institutions, local 
government representatives, NGOs, CSOs, donors, private sector). The main objectives of these events 
were to brief participants on the Green Climate Fund, review climate change impact and trends in the 
country, identify gaps and lessons learned, and set priorities for the formulation of a proposal to the Green 
Climate Fund. At one of such events, at the National Facilitation Workshop on Green Climate Fund Project 
Formulation that was held in Bishkek on March 28-29, 2017 the State Agency on Environmental Protection 
and Forestry (SAEPF) under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic (KR) jointly with the Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations when working on preparation of a project proposal for 
the GCF identified gender gaps and actions to fulfill the gaps43:  
Gender gaps 
• 
Management of households by women from vulnerable groups of the population. 
• 
Lack of women on senior positions. 
• 
Lack of gender statistics. 
• 
Misbalance in the profiles of specialists and in public authorities. 
• 
Gender stereotypes. 
• 
Misbalance of profile specialties (forestry faculty and other specialties). 
 
 
Actions (approaches) to fulfill the gaps  
• 
Capacity building of specialists, Evidence-based training, Program monitoring and evaluation. 
• 
Work with decision-makers (parliament, ministries). 
• 
Improvement of public-private partnerships; Attraction of investments in agriculture. 
• 
Data collection (Data disaggregated by sex) methodology. 
• 
Involvement of women in production in greenhouses, nurseries, etc. 
• 
Strengthening of the value chains for processing products. 
• 
The quota for female entrants in environmental specialties (forestry faculty, etc.). 
Based on work of the second day, it was decided to include the results of the working groups in the 
project proposal for the Green Climate Fund. 
 
28. At the district-level consultations participants suggested including members of women council or 
female representatives should be members of the Community Landscape Management Group 
(CLMG). One of the groups stressed that at least 30% of the membership should be women44. 
Moreover, it is important to emphasize that at the district level consultations there was a gender 
misbalance that is quite representative and illustrates the gender misbalanced situation within the 
country - out of about 120 participants of the district-level consultations, women constituted only 
about 10%. Gender gap is formed as it was highlighted in the previous paragraph is strongly related 
to gender stereotypes that leads to misbalance in the positions of socialists and in decision-making 
positions (very low level of women’s involvement in such sectors as pastures, forestry, WUAs, PUUs, 
                                                             
43 CS-FOR Stakeholder Engagement.  
44 CS-FOR Stakeholder Engagement.

=== PAGE 157 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
 
9 
 
local self-government bodies, village councils and etc.). Taking into consideration the cultural and 
structural gender-related inequalities, it is necessary for the project to target vulnerable and 
underrepresented groups such as women, especially, female-headed households, unemployed, 
youth. 
Target Area  
 
29. 
Vulnerability to climate change was the most important parameter for the target area selection. The 
design team collected a large number of data sets at national and sub-national scale and using the Earth 
Map tool, performed a series of vulnerability analysis to identify project’s core target areas45. Target areas 
have been selected according to the following criteria: 
a. Exposure of ecosystems and communities to natural hazards triggered by climate 
change; 
b. Vulnerability of ecosystems and communities to climate change; 
c. Mitigation potential in terms of forest and pasture rehabilitation; 
d. High dependency of communities from natural resource exploitation; and 
e. Socio-economic vulnerability of communities. 
 
30. 
The core intervention area of the CS-FOR project will be located in selected rural municipalities (aiyl 
aymak) in four contiguous districts of Ak-Talaa, Toguz-Toro, Suzak and Uzgen.  . Ayil aymaks are local 
self-government units, comprising the administrative body (ayil okmotu) and the council of elected 
members (ayil kenesh, those are represented only by 8%). Each rural municipality has several villages. 
Suzak and Uzgen have a fairly large ethnic Uzbek population (34.6% of the total district population in 
Suzak; 22.2% in Uzgen), as well as small percentages of Turkish (1.9% in Suzak; 3.1% in Uzgen). Uzbek 
households in Suzak and Uzgen are found in rural villages and engaged in agricultural activities.   
31. 
Livelihoods. Rural households in the target area have several sources of income, most important 
of which are livestock production and crop farming. According to a Livelihood Study conducted during the 
project preparation46, households in the project area have about 1.0 – 1.5 ha of own agricultural land47. 
Among the households with irrigated agricultural land, those in Ak-Talaa have smallest plots (0.7 ha) 
compared to the three other districts which have 1.5 ha (Uzgen) and 1.2 ha (Suzak and Toguz Toro)48. 
Most of the households have homestead garden (often called ‘kitchen garden’) in the size of 0.15 – 0.17 
ha, where vegetables are typically grown for household consumption. The size of leased forest land in 
among the households in the project area is 5.0 ha49. Two thirds of the households who lease forest land 
have long-term (49 years) lease agreements, while and 27.8% have annual contracts. 
32. 
Livestock owning households have on average 3 – 4 cattle and about 20 sheep50. Among the 
households who graze animals on pasture, 65.6% said they send their animals to distant pastures under 
State Land Fund (SLF) during summer in contrast to 11.1% who answered that their animals graze in 
State Forest Fund (SFF)51.  A great majority of the livestock owners who send their animals to summer 
pastures (74.0%) rely on shepherds, while 15.2% answered they graze animals by themselves.  
                                                             
45 Data and analysis that allowed the identification of the proposed target areas were organized in form of an atlas that presents the 
rationale behind areas’ selection and that form the main part of the baseline in terms of distribution, density, status and vulnerability 
of target ecosystems (forests and pastures) and communities. The atlas presents key information such as climate variables, 
including trends, demography, agriculture productivity, infrastructures’ distribution, pasture user associations grazing area s, forest 
fund lands and others. The ensemble of presented data constitutes the context generating the assessed needs as well as the 
context into which the validity of the paradigm shift will be objectively demonstrated. The atlas will include also available historical 
data so to create, in GE, time series analysis as well as interactive videos. 
46 Livelihood Study for CS-FOR collected data from 907 households, 600 of which were in the project area (Ak-Talaa, Togus-Toro, 
Uzgen and Suzak districts). In addition, qualitative information was obtained through interviews and focus group discussions 
(FGDs). Separate FGDs were organized for women.  
47 The figures are based on median values of those with own agricultural land, disaggregated at district level.  
48 Median values.  
49 Median value. Only 8.9% of the total sample use forest land through leasing arrangement.  
50 Average values. Medians are not available.  
51 Of the total sample. No figures for the project area are not available. SLF pastures are managed by Pasture Users Unions (PUUs) 
at ayil aimak level, whereas SFF pasture is under forest enterprises (leskhoz).

=== PAGE 158 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
 
10 
 
33. 
Results of focus group discussions (FGDs) in the Livelihood Study revealed that forest resources 
are popularly used in the Suzak and Uzgen districts as the main source or an additional source of 
income52. The use of forest resources in comparison with the management of agriculture is of greater 
interest to the residents of these districts and constitutes an important part of their income, especially for 
women. Collecting such forest resources as nuts, apples, mushrooms and wild rose brings a significant 
income as residents of these districts have access to the markets of large cities such as Osh, Jalalabad, 
Uzgen. Participants in the FGDs noted that residents invest income from the sale of forest products to 
purchase livestock. In Ak-Talaa and Toguz Toro districts, on the contrary, there are less users of forest 
resources because there are fewer forests and types and volumes of non-wood resources that generate 
income are limited. Marketing channels for products are also limited.  
34. 
Vulnerability. The aforementioned Livelihood Study categorised the surveyed households by the 
economic activity on which the household’s welfare depends (livestock production, crop farming, forest 
resource use, beekeeping, off-farm commercial activities, and employment in the public sector). In 
addition, qualitative information was obtained through interviews and focus group discussions. The results 
indicates that households whose welfare depends on the use of forest resources are vulnerable to climate 
change as forest ecosystems are subject to negative effects of natural disasters. Meanwhile analysis of 
the household data found a relatively higher percentage of vulnerable households (households with low 
income and limited savings and assets) in both livestock and farming households. Those households that 
receive seasonal income are particularly at risk. Less vulnerable households are those in which at least 
one member of the family has is formally employed or those with additional income from businesses.  
35. 
Disadvantaged groups. The same study found that unemployed people (both women and men), 
low-income families, single-parent households (both headed by women and men), and young families are 
in disadvantaged position in the rural communities due to their weak social and economic standing. It was 
highlighted that such disadvantaged groups may further weaken their social and economic situation if their 
access to natural resources decreases or natural disasters intensify.  
 
Target Groups  
 
36. 
The primary target group of the CS-FOR are all the de facto users (both women and men) of pasture 
and forest resources (both formal and informal) in the target area of the four districts where interventions 
will be undertaken. Special attention will be paid to ensure inclusion and informed participation of poor 
families, women and young women and men (for specific project actions to ensure their inclusion and 
participation, see the next section: Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan53). It is estimated that about 
90,000 rural families in the target area will directly benefit from the project as the primary target group.  
37. 
In addition, the project will benefit the following categories of people:  
i. 
Institutions at national level: the State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry 
(SAEPF), the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and Melioration (MAFIM), the Ministry of 
Emergency Situations (MES), the Agency for Local Self Government and Interethnic 
Relations (ALSGIR), the Climate Finance Center (CFC), the Ministry of Economy (ME), the 
Ministry of Culture, Information and Tourism (MoCIT), various research and educational 
institutions and NGOs, with the focus on those, specializing in rural women’s empowerment. 
Institutions at local level: Leskhozes (Forest Enterprises), National Parks, self-government 
bodies (ayil okmutu and aiyl kenesh), women’s councils, Pasture Users’ Unions and other 
natural resource users groups.   
ii. 
Agribusinesses and their raw material suppliers participating in the project supported 
value chains.   
                                                             
52 The study conducted 12 FGDs, in which a total of 197 people participated, including 66 women in FGD for women.  
53 At the onset of the project implementation, the project’s Expertise Group, under the overall responsibility of Gender and Social 
Development Specialist, will organize a workshop to validate the proposed Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan and sensitize 
key stakeholders.

=== PAGE 159 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
 
11 
 
38. 
Direct beneficiaries of the project include 432,450 individuals (7% of the country’s population) of 
which 246,497 are women in the Project Area. By reducing the exposure of rural communities to natural 
disasters such as landslides, mudslides and floods, the project will also include 540,563 (8% of the 
country’s population) individuals of which 380,121 are women, as indirect beneficiaries in the Project Area, 
who will benefit from the significant increase of forest coverage and rangeland rehabilitation in hotspots 
with high risks of hazards.  
39. 
Due to structural, cultural and system-wide barriers women from various groups (rural and urban 
women, religious women, ethnic minorities, young rural women and women from transboundary 
communities and other) face multiple discrimination in decision-making and resource allocation at the 
community and family levels54. The main barriers that women face are related to time poverty55, lack of 
family/public support, extreme economic constraints (poverty, economic marginalization, lack of 
differentiated access to/control over financial resources), lack of experience in politics, business, unequal 
distribution of labor between women and men56, misbalance/lack of women of profile specialties and 
senior positions57.  
 
Gender Strategy 
 
40. CS-FOR, while promoting positive shifts in the natural resource management through policy 
instruments, capacity building and investments for restoration on the ground, presents a major 
opportunity to mainstream gender  empower women and eliminate, where possible, gender 
stereotypes and patriarchal attitudes in the forestry and livestock sectors whereby gender equality 
and women’s rights have had faced a number of challenges. The gender strategy of CS-FOR is 
informed by Gender Assessment (Section B) and recognises that rural women in Kyrgyzstan play a 
key role in the natural resource management, and that they have a high stake in both climate change 
adaptation and mitigation measures. It also reflects the understanding that women’s equal 
participation and as active actors and agents of change in the project needs to be facilitated through 
a set of specific measures, including those, related to leadership and decision-making skills. The 
gender strategy of CS-FOR therefore aims to use every possible opportunity in the project actions to 
advance towards gender equality and women’s rights.  
41. 
The gender strategy is also framed by the FAO Policy on Gender Equality58, the FAO Environmental 
and Social Management Standards 59 and the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of 
Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security60.  
42. 
Underlying principles and key features of the gender strategy of CS-FOR are as follows:  
 
women will equally participate in the project implementation at all levels and benefit from its 
opportunities; for this, pro-active measures will be taken to address existing burdens that could 
                                                             
54 Beijing +25: National-Level Review of the Kyrgyz Republic on the Implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Beijing Platform 
for Action. Progress and Challenges. 2019 
55 Case Study on combating gender inequality in political participation in Kyrgyzstan. UNDP (2016). Regional Human Development 
Report. Progress at Risk: Inequalities and Human Development in Eastern Europe, Turkey, and Central Asia - “survey on time 
budgeting conducted in 2015 showed that the most burdened with domestic work were women living in rural areas, who spent 
roughly 303 minutes per day on housework. Women living in rural areas spend 1.5 times more time on housework than women in 
urban areas (197 minutes per day). Men from urban areas (59 minutes per day) and rural areas (87 minutes per day) spent 3.5 
times less time on domestic work than rural women did”. P.7 
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/kyrgyzstan/Publications/gender/Case%20study_Eng10Oct2016.pdf 
56 Beijing +25: National Level Review of the Kyrgyz Republic on the Implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Beijing Platform 
for Action. Progress and Challenges. 2019 
57 CS-FOR Stakeholder Engagement. National Facilitation Workshop on Green Climate Fund Project Formulation on March 28-29, 
2017 in Bishkek. 
58 FAO (2012) FAO Policy on gender equality. Attaining food security goals in agriculture and rural development. (Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/017/i3205e/i3205e.pdf)  
59 FAO (2015) Environmental and social management guidelines. (Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4413e.pdf)  
60 CFS and FAO (2012) Voluntary guidelines on the responsible governance of tenure of land, fisheries and forests in the context of 
national food security. (Available at: 
http://rs.one.un.org/content/dam/unct/serbia/docs/Publications/Recovery_Needs_Assessment.pdf)

=== PAGE 160 ===
CS-FOR  
Gender Assessment 
12 
limit women’s opportunities to benefit from the project, and where considered necessary a 
minimum of women’s quorums will be set;   

the project, through the inclusive participation of stakeholders will support the strengthening of a
national policy on gender equality, in collaboration with MLSD, targeting such areas as livelihood
adaptation, natural resource management and disaster prevention and warning

project will target female headed households and women to support the opportunities to
participate at decision-making levels: in the executive committees (Pasture Committees or PCs)
of Pasture Users Unions (PUUs)

women’s informed engagement in decision making processes on related matters (e.g. livelihood
adaptation, natural resource management and disaster prevention and warning) – both at
community and household levels – will be facilitated;

opportunities for women’s social and economic empowerment, as well as their leadership and
decision-making opportunities, will be identified and supported

needs for women’s capacity enhancement on relevant topics will be addressed and acted upon,
and all trainings will take gender issues into consideration in the modules, selection of
participants, communication and mobilization channels, selection of venues and logistical issues
(including transportation needs, timing, baby-sitting services, etc); Needs assessment will be part
of the M&E system to collected data on a systematic basis.

all project stakeholders will be sensitized and trained on the importance of gender mainstreaming
under the project and of specific GAP actions;

gender equality and mainstreaming are adequately introduced to the target communities, project
staff and other stakeholders; all communication materials and project messages address gender
aspects and use gender-sensitive languages;

staff in the project unit (Expertise Group) will include a qualified personnel (Gender and Social
Development Specialist) who oversees gender mainstreaming in the project and GAP
implementation; and

knowledge management of the project mainstreams gender, and the project will monitor and
evaluate gender-differentiated outputs and outcomes through sex-disaggregated M&E indicators
and other tools.
43.
Inclusion of the poor, youth and other disadvantaged groups. The Livelihood Study and
stakeholder consultations informed that certain groups in the rural community are socially disadvantaged,
particularly poor families, single-headed households (both headed by women and men), and youth, due
to their weak social and economic standings61. The project therefore incorporate special actions to ensure 
their equal participation in the project. For youth, in addition to ensuring their equal access to project
information and benefits, particular attention will be paid to promote their engagement in business
opportunities in the project supported value chains by proactively including them in business related 
capacity building activities.
44.
Similar to the gender strategy above, the project will raise awareness among stakeholders on the
risks of potential exclusion of the disadvantaged groups and importance of inclusive approach, and ensure
their informed participation through a set of specific actions. The project manager will take the full
responsibility to ensure gender mainstreaming and social inclusion of the project as per FAO standards.
All members of the project team will be held accountable for gender mainstreaming and social inclusion,
and will be technically assisted by the Gender and Social Development Specialist (part of the PMU).
61 Stakeholder consultation meeting for Uzgen and Suzak districts invited Uzbek community leaders. 
________________
