=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20034
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20034
creationDate: D:20190614175315+09'00'
modDate: D:20190614175315+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum IX 
Funding proposal package for FP115 
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
14 June 2019 
Meeting of the Board 
6 - 8 July 2019 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional Agenda Item 20 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Espejo de Tarapacá” submitted by the MUFG 
Bank, LTD; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure; 
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment; 
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s 
assessment; and  
f) Gender documentation of the funding proposal. 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “Espejo de Tarapacá” 
Submitted by the MUFG Bank, LTD is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to 
Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain 
proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                               1 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)               89 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure                                                                                         91 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                             92 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s              111 
assessment 
Gender documentation                                                                                                                                   113

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: Espejo de Tarapacá 
Country/Region: Chile 
Accredited Entity: MUFG Bank, Ltd.  
Date of Submission: 
(First Submission: November 22, 2018)  
(Final Revision Submission: April 16, 2019)

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
 
• 
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 88 
 
A 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Espejo de Tarapacá 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     
Chile 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
Ms. Trinidad Lecaros, Ministerio de Hacienda 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
MUFG Bank, Ltd. (“MUFG Bank”)  
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☐  Direct 
☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entity: Energía de Tarapacá SpA, [Tarapacá Fund], 
Energía Valhalla 
 
Beneficiaries: The inhabitants of the country of Chile, the 
Tarapacá Region in northern Chile and the communities of 
San Marcos and Rio Seco which are located close to the 
Project.  
 
The direct beneficiaries from the reduction in CO2 emissions 
and a cleaner, more resilient electricity system due to the 
Project include the entire population of Chile, equivalent to 
17.6 million people. The Project will supply approximately 
1,500 GWh per year of clean, economic and reliable 
renewable energy to Chile’s national electric grid.  The Project 
will also provide indirect benefits to Chile’s population by 
catalysing the development of additional clean renewable 
energy projects 
 
The direct beneficiaries also include the vulnerable local 
communities located close to the Project with approximately 
550 inhabitants, which will benefit directly from the Project’s 
provision of stable water supply and funds to diversify the local 
economy, which is highly dependent on sea products that 
have been in steady decline in recent years due to over-
exploitation and climate change.   
 
The beneficiaries in the regional community from the 
Tarapacá Region include approximately 330,600 inhabitants 
which will directly benefit from the provision of clean, local 
renewable energy, reduction of CO2 emissions and increased 
resilience of the electric system.  Additionally, the regional 
population will also indirectly benefit from the creation of new 
employment and related service opportunities during 
construction and operation of the Project.  
 
 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, 
million USD) 
☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  
☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☒  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐  Mitigation 
☐  Adaptation ☒  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
November 22nd, 2018

=== PAGE 6 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 88 
 
A 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Chika Fukuyama, Vice President, Social & Environmental 
Risk Assessment Office, Solution Products Division 
Organization 
MUFG Bank 
Email address 
chika_fukuyama@mufg.jp  
Telephone number 
+81-3-6259-2393 
Mailing address 
JP Tower 2-7-2, Marunouchi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100-0005 
Japan 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☒ 
Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ 
Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ 
Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☒ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
☐ 
 
 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C. 
 
Project Description & Objectives 
The Espejo de Tarapacá Project (“EdT” or “the Project”) is an innovative and unique large scale power project which 
combines Chile’s natural resources with proven generation technology in order to provide clean renewable energy supply 
24 hours a day, seven days a week (“24/7”).  The Project is comprised of two commercially integrated power plants: (i) a 
300 MW pumped storage hydroelectric (“PSH”) plant using the Pacific Ocean as its lower reservoir and an existing natural 
concavity as its upper reservoir, and (ii) a 561 MW-AC photovoltaic solar (“PV”) plant with single axis tracking.   
 
The Project will set a precedent by providing a renewable baseload solution at a price competitive with thermal 
technologies, within the context of an electricity grid heavily reliant on high emission electricity sources (~54% 
thermoelectric) and unpredictable hydropower (~30% hydroelectric). The Project is aligned to meet Chile’s target of 70% 
capacity from non-conventional renewable power generation by 2050 and future plans of grid decarbonisation by offering 
a viable replacement to thermal technology (decarbonizing the current national grid by up to 5%). In particular, the Project 
will stimulate a paradigm shift in the Chilean electric market, as the grid transitions from high polluting conventional energy

=== PAGE 7 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 88 
 
A 
generation to zero emissions renewable energy, by providing dispatch flexibility, improving resiliency, and catalysing 
private investments in renewable energy. 
 
 
Through implementation of the first renewable bulk energy storage facility in Latin America utilizing seawater, the Project’s 
paradigm shift potential extends beyond Chile, as this ground-breaking and innovative bulk energy storage facility can be 
replicated in other suitable locations around the globe, enabling multiple markets to resolve the problem of intermittency 
by integrating seawater pumped storage hydro generation with other renewable technologies.  The Project will establish 
an important precedent and track record which can be followed worldwide, particularly in Africa and Latin America, in 
order to help mitigate and adapt to climate change through the provision of 100% renewable 24/7 electricity supply. 
 
Figure 1: EdT Pumped Storage Hydro Plant 
 
 
 
Primary Measurable Benefits 
The Project has cross-cutting impact potential as it provides both climate change mitigation and adaptation.  The Project 
will help Chile comply with commitments in the Paris Agreement and is fully aligned with the 2030 Agenda of the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), supporting at least nine SDGs at national, regional and local levels. 
Through the production of 100% renewable energy, EdT will mitigate global greenhouse gas emissions, avoiding on 
average 1,001,187 tonnes of CO2 per year, with 35 million tonnes of CO2e avoided over the 35-year evaluation period. 
The supporting documentation can be found in Annexes 9 and 10 which include a descriptive procedure report and a 
calculation spreadsheet1.   
 
The Project will also contribute to climate change adaptation at the national, regional and local levels in Chile in three 
principal areas:   
1) Energy Sector Resilience: The Project will help Chile build capacity to adapt to climate change by improving grid 
flexibility (renewable energy storage via natural reservoir in pumped storage, e.g. ramping up and down) and 
catalysing additional private investments in variable renewable energy and also by reducing the national grid’s 
dependence on fossil fuels (decarbonisation) and hydrology affected by droughts (In 2017, Chile’s power generation 
was comprised of 57% thermoelectric and 29% hydroelectric). 
2) Water Security: The Project will provide stable water supply from its own desalination plant to the vulnerable local 
communities of around 550 inhabitants at cost. Currently, these communities located close to the Project do not have 
access to stable drinking water supply, which is currently sourced from groundwater and transported to the 
communities by truck on a bi-weekly basis.  
3) Improvement in Livelihood of Local Vulnerable Communities: Under the long-term collaboration agreements 
executed with the vulnerable fishing communities close to the Project, EdT will provide funds and training for social 
                                                             
1 See the Appendix Methodology Applicability & Emission Reduction Calculation Procedure included in Annex 9 
which was prepared by the consulting firm ImplementaSur Climate Action.

=== PAGE 8 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 88 
 
A 
and productive investments to help diversity the local economy, which is highly dependent on sea products that have 
been in steady decline in recent years due to over-exploitation and higher water temperature due to climate change.  
 
Support of Vulnerable Local Community 
The Project plans to play a key role in the development of the vulnerable local community by providing funds and training 
to help diversify its economy and in particular, promoting empowerment of women and gender equality. The Project has 
pioneered a proactive community engagement model with the community, executing coordination agreements for 
maintaining a mutually beneficial relationship during development, construction and operation.  The Project has followed 
a comprehensive stakeholders’ and community engagement process with prior informed consent and meaningful 
participation.   
 
Need for GCF Support & Proposal 
The GCF’s support is needed during the final development phase of the Project in which traditional private investors are 
not yet willing to enter due to final development risks (e.g. security bonds for energy contracts, final stage of permitting 
and associated guarantees, engineering and design tests, etc.). GCF support will de-risk the Project and help catalyse 
private investment, allowing it to overcome the significant financial and policy barriers to entry for large-scale, innovative 
and socially beneficial projects in the Chilean electricity market.  GCF participation will also promote policy analysis by 
the local regulator to help determine appropriate regulations and remuneration for bulk renewable energy storage, 
considering the multiple electric system and social benefits provided by such facilities.   
 
The GCF funding proposal is comprised of US$ 60 million2 in direct equity, equivalent to approximately 13% equity 
participation in the Project.  The GCF’s participation as an “anchor” equity investor in the Project will provide a “stamp of 
approval” and help attract additional private sector debt and equity investors which will fund the remaining investment of 
US$ 1 billion. 
   
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
N/A 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
2020 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 2020 (initiation of construction) 
End: 2025 (commercial operation date) 
Project/programme lifespan 
35 years, 0 months 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
2 The amount and type of funding provided by GCF is subject to final confirmation.

=== PAGE 9 ===
FINANCING / COST SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 88 
 
B 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
Please provide: 
• 
an integrated financial model in Section I (Annexes) that includes a projection covering the period from financial 
closing through final maturity of the proposed GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a 
sensitivity analysis of critical elements of the project/programme 
• 
a description of how the choice of financial instrument(s) will overcome barriers and achieve project objectives, 
and leverage public and/or private finance 
• 
a breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub-component in local and foreign 
currency and a currency hedging mechanism: 
• 
a breakdown of cost/budget by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, travel, goods, works, services, 
etc.) and disbursement schedule in project/programme confirmation (term sheet) as included in section I, 
Annexes. 
 
Barriers to Entry & Need for GCF Support 
The Project initiated development in 2011 and has successfully completed key pre-construction milestones including 
engineering and design, permitting, community engagement and execution of construction contracts, among others.  The 
initial equity for development of this start-up Project was provided by a group of individual Chilean investors who hold the 
vision that bulk energy storage is key for developing a 100% renewable electric system.  However, these investors do 
not have the financial capacity to implement the Project—and for this reason, the Project requires incorporation of at least 
one strategic investor.  The Project strongly believes that GCF’s participation will facilitate entry of such investor(s).   
 
 
Barrier 1:  Energy policy and regulatory challenges 
At present, Chilean electric regulations do not provide remuneration for the multiple electric system and social benefits 
which can be provided by bulk renewable energy storage.  These benefits, in addition to the provision of energy and firm 
capacity, include enhanced system flexibility, increased system resilience, optimization of the transmission grid, reduction 
of CO2 emissions, decarbonizing of the grid with the replacement of coal facilities, reduced reliance on variable hydro 
power, and catalysation of additional renewable investments, among others, among others. These benefits and services 
are in addition to the significant social benefits related to climate change mitigation and adaptation, which are detailed 
throughout this funding proposal.  
 
It should be noted that the Chilean regulator proclaims “technological neutrality” with no direct subsidies, tax credits or 
other incentives provided to any technologies or energy sources, although in fact, the regulator’s failure to incorporate 
the social costs and benefits (such as the cost of CO2 emissions) in the cost of production effectively provides indirect 
subsidies to certain technologies.  Additionally, the Project’s innovative proposal to provide base-load energy 24/7 from 
local and renewable sources has faced opposition from incumbent generators, since the bulk energy storage component 
would improve system efficiency and as a result, eliminate any excess profit received by existing thermal assets from 
sub-optimal system operation (i.e. inflexibility to quickly respond to energy ramps and transmission congestion during 
certain hours as a result of significant injections of variable renewable energy, both challenges that bulk energy storage 
would help resolve).   
 
Barrier 2:  Securing long-term energy agreement 
The principal financial and market entry barrier for the Project is the absence of a stable source of revenue and cash flow 
which would adequately compensate the Project for the economic and social benefits it can provide and which in turn, 
would allow it to attract strategic equity and debt investors.  As a result, the remaining critical development milestone is 
execution of long-term energy agreement3 to ensure stable future cash flows and enable the Project to secure equity and 
debt funding. Given that the Chilean electricity market is driven strictly by economic competition without regard to potential 
                                                             
3 The Project considers the following two long term sales agreements to be viable alternatives: 1) a power purchase 
agreement (PPA) under which the Project would sell 24/7 energy to one or more creditworthy offtakers; and 2) a 
transmission toll agreement under which the pumped storage hydro plant would be incorporated as part of the national 
transmission system and would receive a toll payment for pumping and generating as required by the independent 
system operator.  Although the regulator has considered incorporation of storage in the transmission system, given that 
such proposal has not yet been implemented, the Project continues to focus on the energy PPA alternative.  It is 
important to note that both of these long term agreements would be awarded in competitive auction processes and the 
Project’s competitive position in both cases would benefit from GCF support.

=== PAGE 10 ===
FINANCING / COST SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 88 
 
B 
social benefits, in order for large scale, unique and ground-breaking investment ideas, such as the Project, to secure a 
power purchase agreement (PPA) with a creditworthy offtaker, it must compete with all alternative sources, which in the 
case of generation includes thermoelectric and other renewable technologies.  
 
The Chilean market is also highly competitive—with participation in the most recent public and private PPA tender 
processes from large incumbent power generators, attempting to maintain market share, and independent power 
producers, attempting to break into the market. The Project applied for GCF support in its “Pitch for the Planet” initiative, 
which called for bold investment ideas to unlock private sector financing and crowd-in capital for low-emission and climate 
resilient projects, in order to overcome barriers to entry into the highly competitive and capital-intensive Chilean electric 
market.  The GCF’s support of the Project as a strategic equity investor will help level the playing field by allowing the 
Project to compete in PPA (and eventually transmission) bid processes with established players with solid financial 
capacity.    
 
Barrier 3:  Market distrust and risk-aversion of investing in innovative start-up project 
The Project innovatively integrates two well-known and proven technologies, pumped storage hydro and photovoltaic 
solar, to provide 24/7 renewable energy supply.  Its original project development formula combines seawater pumped 
storage hydro with PV solar generation, capitalizing on Chile’s superior irradiation and existing geography for large-scale 
energy storage. However, the Project faces significant financial and market entry barriers which include solid financial 
capacity, established experience and track record, and creditworthy strategic partners, among others.  In the particular 
case of EdT, these barriers have prevented the Project from obtaining a solid PPA and in turn, prohibited incorporation 
of strategic equity investors, who as a rule, are not willing to invest without the guarantee of stable future cash flows. 
These barriers represent the principal reason for the absence of sustainable innovation and start-up companies in the 
development of large-scale energy projects; and is the foundation of EdT’s application for support from the GCF.    
 
Need for GCF Support 
The Project is requesting GCF’s support to overcome the following barriers: 
 
1. Energy policy and regulatory challenges 
 
2. Securing long-term energy agreement 
 
3. Market distrust and risk-aversion of investing in innovative start-up project 
 
GCF’s equity participation in Project would improve the viability of the Project by allowing it to participate and compete in 
electricity auctions.  The Project proposes that the GCF participate as an “anchor” equity investor in order to overcome 
barriers to entry by assisting with critical last stage development expenses and providing a “stamp of approval” which will 
help attract additional private sector investors.  The Project’s proposal is for GCF to obtain approximately 13% 
participation in EdT equity, equivalent to approximately US$ 60 million, which would be used principally to fund costs 
during the final stage of development.  The GCF’s equity investment would effectively de-risk the Project, thereby 
stimulating final private investment and financing. The Project proposes that GCF’s equity participation be “pre-payable” 
such that if GCF would like to exit in order to recycle its funds once the Project has been fully funded, the private sector 
investor with controlling participation in the Project have the option to re-purchase or pre-pay for GCF’s 13% equity 
participation.  Nonetheless, GCF would have the option to maintain its equity participation in the Project past start-up of 
commercial operation and beyond to ensure the Project complies with the mandatory ESS requirements. 
 
Cost Structure 
The total cost of the Project is approximately US$ 1,094 million, comprised of the capital expenditures for the 300 MW 
pumped-storage hydroelectric plant, the 561 MW-AC photovoltaic solar plant with single axis tracking and project 
financing costs. The capital expenditure for the PSH plant accounts for 50%, the PV plant for 39% and financing costs 
for 11% of total project costs.  It should be noted that the spot market sales received during construction, principally 
related to the solar plant which will be put into operation in phases, have been included in financing costs, thereby 
offsetting capital expenditures.  For purposes of the Funding Proposal, the Project capital expenditure has been separated 
into three components:  Project Development & Preparatory Work, Project Construction and Community Works as further 
detailed in Section C.3 below.

=== PAGE 11 ===
FINANCING / COST SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 88 
 
B 
 
  
 
The PSH power plant budget totals US$ 543.5 million. More than 80% of the PSH budget, not including contingencies, is 
based on executed contracts or firm contractor bids from tender processes, and the remaining budget items are based 
on internal estimates with information provided by consultants and third parties. In 2017, Leidos Engineering, LLC 
conducted an independent engineer’s limited technical due diligence review to confirm the Project’s engineering, 
construction, and cost estimates, as well as the cost and time contingency levels included in the budget and schedule. 
This independent technical due diligence report has been included in Annex 6. 
 
The PV power plant budget totals US$ 425.7 million. The Project plans to conduct a competitive tender in order to ensure 
the best available EPC terms in light of the increasingly competitive PV market.  The PV plant budget is based on 
individual offers received for principal plant equipment including PV modules, inverters and O&M services, and internal 
estimates. 
 
The cost of financing the Project’s debt is based on indicative financing proposals received from project finance banks 
active in Chile. The estimated financing cost is approximately US$ 125 million.  As mentioned above, the spot market 
sales received during construction have been included in financing costs, assuming that they will be used to offset capital 
expenditures. The support of the GCF is also expected to lead to improved terms and conditions decreasing the projected 
financing cost.   
 
Table 1 below shows the expected sources and uses for the total Project cost of US$ 1,094.0 million.  It should be noted 
that the integrated financial model included in Annex 6 includes the detailed assumptions for the cash flow projections 
from financial closing through final maturity of the proposed GCF financing, including a sensitivity analysis of the principal 
risks. 
 
Table 1: Project Sources & Uses 
  
 
 
GCF Proposal 
The Project proposes that the GCF participates as follows:  
 
1. As an “anchor” equity investor to overcome barriers to entry by assisting with critical last stage development 
expenses and providing a “stamp of approval” which will help attract additional private sector investors. The 
Project’s proposal is for GCF to obtain approximately 13% participation in Project equity, equivalent to US$ 
60.0 million, which is principally required to complete the final stage of development.  GCF’s equity participation 
would be “pre-payable” such that if GCF would like to exit in order to recycle its funds once the Project has 
secured the required amount of financing from the private sector, the Project investor with controlling 
participation would have the option to re-purchase or pre-pay for GCF’s 13% equity participation. Nonetheless, 
GCF would have the option to maintain its equity participation in the Project past start-up of commercial 
operation and beyond to ensure the Project complies with the mandatory ESS requirements. 
2. As a provider of PPA and permit guarantees in order to de-risk and level the playing field.  The final stage of 
development has been particularly challenging given existing cash restrictions and the financial requirements 
involved. The expenses to be incurred during the final stage of development include expenses related to 
permitting, engineering, community engagement, staff and administration, as well as cash funding for 
guarantees required to participate in PPA tender processes and secure granted permits.  With regard to the 
Sources
US$ milion
% Total
Equity
446.7
         
41%
Debt
647.3
         
59%
Total
1,094.0
      
100%
Uses
US$ milion
% Total
PSH Plant
543.5
50%
PV Plant
425.7
39%
Financing & Other Costs
124.8
11%
Total
1,094.0
      
100%

=== PAGE 12 ===
FINANCING / COST SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 88 
 
B 
required guarantees, the Project would deposit certain funds provided by the GCF in order to obtain and 
support guarantees required during the final stage of development, including those needed to participate in 
PPA tender processes4 and secure granted permits.  In the event that the PPA funding is not required due to 
unsuccessful auction bidding, the GCF funding will be fully returned to the AE and GCF. GCF will then 
determine if this funding may be reinvested in the Project. 
3. As an international climate advisor to support the Chilean energy policy and regulatory framework towards the 
recognition of technologies that help decarbonize the grid with renewable 24/7 baseload energy solutions and 
the provision of appropriate incentives for technologies multi-service systemic benefits.  
Table 2 below summarizes the principal cost components and the proposed GCF funding amount, totalling $60.0 million, 
for each component. A more detailed cost breakdown can be found in the integrated financial model included in Annex 
2.  Under the Project’s funding proposal, the majority of GCF’s equity contribution would be used to fund last stage 
development costs prior to initiation of construction, in order to overcome barriers and catalyse final development.   
 
Table 2:  Total Project Costs & GCF Funding Proposal 
 
Components 
Sub-component (if 
applicable) 
Amount 
(for entire 
project) 
Currency  
GCF funding 
amount  
Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient 
1. Project 
Development 
& 
Preparatory 
Work 
Pumped Storage 
Hydroelectric (PSH) Plant 
43.144 
million USD ($) 
7.866 
USD 
Photovoltaic (PV) Plant 
7.050 
million USD ($) 
2.858 
USD 
2. Project 
Construction 
Pumped Storage 
Hydroelectric (PSH) Plant 
497.005 
million USD ($) 
43.287 
USD 
Photovoltaic (PV) Plant 
417.655 
million USD ($) 
0.109 
USD 
Financing Cost 
124.833 
million USD ($) 
5.589 
USD 
3. 
Community 
works 
Pumped Storage 
Hydroelectric (PSH) Plant 
3.301 
million USD ($) 
0.234 
USD 
Photovoltaic (PV) Plant 
1.015 
million USD ($) 
0.057 
USD 
Total project financing 
1,094,003 
million USD 
($) 
60.000 
USD 
 
 
Table 3 below details the final stage development costs which would be funded by GCF’s initial equity contribution, 
totalling approximately US$ 25.4 million.  The additional equity remaining to complete GCF’s 13% participation of US$ 
34.6 million, would not be required until after a PPA is executed and construction is initiated.  Approximately US$ 16.3 
million of GCF’s equity contribution would initially be used to provide cash funding of guarantees required to secure 
participation in PPA bid processes (approximately US$ 13.0 million) and secure granted permits (approximately US$ 3.3 
million).  In order to secure the required guarantees, funds provided by GCF will be deposited as collateral with a financial 
institution.  In the event that these guarantees are not needed, or are replaced or returned, for instance upon entry of a 
controlling strategic investor or financial close, the GCF funds released would then be re-allocated to other Project 
development costs or capital expenditures, maintaining GCF’s 13% participation upon completion of the Project5.  In the 
                                                             
4 The bid bond guarantee required for participation in the PPA tender process would be funded by GCF through the 
deposit of cash collateral with the AE.  In order to obtain the bid bond bank guarantee, the AE would deposit the cash 
collateral with a Chilean bank, who would in turn issue the guarantee which would be provided in the tender process.  
In the event that the Project is not awarded a PPA, the bid bond would be fully returned to the Project.  The Project 
would then return the bond to the Chilean bank, who would in turn return the cash collateral to the AE.   
5 The financial model assumes that the bind bond and permit guarantees funded initially by the GCF will be replaced 
at financial close, as they will be included in the syndicated debt financing agreement and that GCF will then re-allocate

=== PAGE 13 ===
FINANCING / COST SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 88 
 
B 
worst case, assuming that the Project does not achieve financial close and is therefore cancelled, the funds corresponding 
to permit guarantees will be returned to GCF. 
 
 
Table 3: Final Stage Development Expenses 
 
 
 
 
The Project proposes that GCF funding be provided in multiple disbursements as indicated in Table 4 below. The first 
disbursement will be used for Pre-PPA development costs in order to maintain the viability of the Project while preparing 
for the upcoming PPA auction (the Project costs at this stage include financial and engineering advisory services, staff 
and general administrative and permitting costs).  The first disbursement will also include funds to secure two granted 
permits, which would be lost if the guarantees are not issued when requested by the authorities.  The second 
disbursement will be used to obtain the bid bond for the PPA tender process and the third disbursement for Post-PPA 
development costs needed to maintain the viability of the Project while an equity sponsor and project financing 
agreements are being finalized, including a third permit guarantee. The fourth and fifth disbursements will be used 
principally for construction of PSH plant and initial financing costs.  The conditions for each disbursement will be detailed 
in the term sheet.  As GCF’s equity contribution will be disbursed at multiple times, the remaining cash will not be released 
and will be kept in GCF trustee’s account until the conditions are satisfied. 
 
Table 4: GCF Equity Contribution Disbursements 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
these funds to construction related capital expenditures, in order to maintain GCF’s equity participation commitment of 
13% upon completion of the Project. 
Final Stage Development Expenses
%
US$ million
Pumped Storage Hydro Plant
88.5%
22.470
PPA Bid Bond 
51.2%
13.00
Permit Guarantees
5.4%
1.37
Environmental & Permitting
2.7%
0.68
Engineering & Contracts
10.0%
2.53
Social Community Program
0.9%
0.23
Project Team & Admin 
8.0%
2.03
Finance, Market, Legal Advisory
6.9%
1.76
Other Incidentals
3.4%
0.87
PV Solar Power Plant
11.5%
2.92
Permit Guarantees
7.8%
1.97
Environmental & Permitting
0.6%
0.16
Engineering & Contracts
0.7%
0.17
Social Community Program
0.2%
0.06
Project Team & Admin 
1.3%
0.34
Finance, Market, Legal Advisory
0.5%
0.12
Other Incidentals
0.4%
0.10
Total 
100.0%
25.39
Disbursement
Description
Amount (US$)
GCF 
Proceeds 
(%)
Indicative 
indirect GCF 
equity (%) in 
EdT
Pre-PPA Development Costs
4.82
Permit Guarantees (Hydraulic Works Permit, Maritime Concession)
1.37
Disbursement 2
PPA Bid Bond Gurantee
13.00
21.7%
43%
Post-PPA Development Costs
4.22
Permit Guarantees (Solar Land Concession)
1.97
Disbursement 4 & 5
Project Construction
34.61
57.7%
TBD
Total
60.00
100.0%
19%
50%
Disbursement 1
Disbursement 3
10.3%
10.3%

=== PAGE 14 ===
FINANCING / COST SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 88 
 
B 
Initially, in de-risking the Project, GCF equity will exceed the targeted 13% of total final equity until the Project is fully 
funded by all equity investors. 
 
As summarized in Table 5 below, GCF would hold 13% equity participation in the Project and private sector investors 
would hold the remaining 87%, with Valhalla providing 6% and strategic private sector investors being brought in to fund 
the remaining controlling 81% equity interest. 
 
Table 5: Proposed Equity Participation 
 
    
 
Private Sector Funding 
With the support of GCF as an anchor equity investor, the Project is expected to raise approximately US$ 1.0 billion from 
the private sector, excluding Valhalla and GCF equity participation.  Of the total private sector investment, approximately 
59%, equivalent to US$ 647.3 million is expected to be funded with debt from private commercial banks and the remaining 
US$ 360.9 million, representing 81% of Project equity, will be funded by one or more strategic private investors.   
 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
1,094.0 
million USD 
($)million 
USD 
($)million 
USD ($) 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
 
………………… 
………………… 
60.0 
………………… 
………………… 
 
Options 
Options 
million USD 
($)million 
USD 
($)million 
USD ($) 
Options 
Options 
million USD 
($)million 
USD 
($)million 
USD ($) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
60.0 
million USD 
($)million 
USD 
 
Equity Participation
US$ milion
% Total
Valhalla
25.8
6%
Green Climate Fund
60.0
13%
Private Sector Investors
360.9
81%
Total
446.7
         
100%

=== PAGE 15 ===
FINANCING / COST SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 88 
 
B 
($)million 
USD ($) 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Equity 
Equity 
Senior 
Loans 
Options 
25.8 
360.9 
647.3 
…………… 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
Options 
Valhalla 
Strategic 
Private 
Investor 
TBD 
……………… 
 
 
junior 
junior 
senior 
Options 
Lead financing institution: TBD 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped. 
 
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE. 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Choose an item. 
…………………. 
Options 
(  )  years 
(   ) %  
 
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE. 
 
 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non-concessional) determined? 
Please provide an overview of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets which 
could be tapped to finance the proposed project/programme. 
Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1-year T-Bill, 5-year government bond, 5-year corporate bond (specify 
credit rating) and 5-year syndicate loan. 
Provide examples or information on comparable transactions. 
 
Chile is one of the most attractive and stable economies in Latin America and presents an optimal sovereign and market 
environment for development of the Project.  Chile has the highest sovereign credit rating in South America (S&P AA-, 
Moody’s Aa3), the highest GDP per capita in Latin America, sustainable pro-business policies, and developed and liquid

=== PAGE 16 ===
FINANCING / COST SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 88 
 
B 
capital markets. Chile’s investor-friendly market is recognized internationally; it was the first South American country to 
join the OECD and has free trade agreements in place with over 50 countries.  
 
While Chilean capital markets and its electric regulatory framework are well-established, the local banking market lacks 
depth and availability of long-term capital for large scale electric infrastructure projects which require funding in U.S. 
dollars, such as electric generation projects6.  Additionally, the scale of the Project, which requires investment capacity of 
close to US$ 1 billion, including debt and equity, is extremely large for the relatively small Chilean market.   
The debt and equity capital markets for infrastructure in Chile include significant participation from international 
corporations, investors and banks.  At present, international incumbent energy companies, which include Enel, the AES 
Corporation and Engie, represent the largest investors in the electricity market, participating in the distribution, generation 
and transmission sectors. Additionally, multilateral development and international commercial banks have been 
responsible for the majority of long term project financing for electric generation projects over the past decade.  However, 
given the significant amount of exposure to Chile related to recent projects, the development banks have slowed their 
lending activities, leaving a gap in available funding.   
The Project has held meetings with numerous international and local banks and multilateral institutions, which have
expressed interest in participating as lenders in a future financing transaction.  The Project has also requested and received
multiple indicative financing proposals from banks on which the financing terms and conditions in the financial model are
based.  The base case funding plan is to source debt from a group of international and local commercial banks, export
credit agencies and multilateral development institutions, particularly those that have a strong track record with recent
participation and/or leadership roles in Chilean power project financings of similar size.  
 
Recent comparable financing transactions which were financed with a project finance structure with an international bank
syndicate similar to that proposed by the Project include the transactions listed in Table 6 below:   
 
Table 6:  Recent Infrastructure Project Finance Transaction in Chile 
Transaction 
Type of Deal 
Financing Amount (USD) 
Financial Close Date 
Minera Spence 
Desalination 
Water desalination 
$518.2 million 
June 2018 
Cerro Dominador 
Power- Renewable (Solar) 
$758.0 million 
May 2018 
Los Guindos Generación 
Power- Conventional 
$135.0 million 
March 2018 
Generadora Metropolitana 
Power- Conventional 
$175.0 million 
December 2017 
San Juan y el Totoral 
Power- Renewable (Wind) 
$415.0 million 
September 2017 
Aela Generación 
Power- Renewable (Wind) 
$435.4 million 
August 2017 
Transmisora Eléctrica del 
Norte 
Transmission 
$460.4 million 
December 2016 
El Pelicano 
Power- Renewable (Solar) 
$199.7 million 
July 2016 
Interchile S.A. 
Transmission 
$770.6 million 
February 2016 
                                                             
6 Electricity prices in the Chilean market, including PPA and spot energy, and capacity prices, are determined in U.S. 
dollars, although monthly payments are made in Chilean pesos at the effective exchange rate for the corresponding 
period.

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 88 
 
C 
 
C.1. Strategic Context 
Please describe relevant national, sub-national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies 
 
The climate challenges faced by Chile and the government’s commitment to implement mitigation and adaptation 
measures, as demonstrated by its enactment of the Paris Agreement, provides optimal timing for paradigm-changing 
solutions in the electricity sector such as the Project.  The Project will help Chile meet its goals at national, regional and 
local levels.  
 
Contribution to Chile’s International Agreements 
In accordance with Chile’s Third Communication – UNFCCC (2016) Report and the Chilean National Climate Change 
Plan 2017-2022, Chile has identified nine sectors that are vulnerable to climate change: 1) water resources, 2) biodiversity, 
3) health, 4) infrastructure, 5) energy, 6) forestry, agriculture and livestock, 7) fishing and aquaculture, 8) cities and 9) 
tourism. The Project will help Chile achieve its mitigation commitments and will also accelerate the implementation of 
climate change adaptation actions at national, regional and local levels. EdT will directly contribute to the creation of 
adaptation actions and more resilient communities in three of these sectors that are currently experiencing the effects of 
climate change:  1) energy, 2) water resources and 3) fishing and aquaculture. 
 
The most significant and direct mitigation and adaptation contribution by the Project is in the energy sector. The 2016 
National Biennial Update Report prepared by the Chilean Ministry of Environment estimated that 35% of country’s 
greenhouse gas emissions originate from the electricity and heat production sub-sectors. Moreover, this ratio is expected 
to increase as Chile continues developing (on a per capita basis, Chile consumes approximately 50% of electricity per 
capita as compared to other OECD nations) and other sectors move towards electrification, such as the transport sub-
sector, that represents 22% of national emissions. 
 
Prior to its participation in COP21, Chile submitted its climate action plan to the UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) in September 2015. This “Intended Nationally Determined Contribution” (“INDC”) includes the 
following commitments : 
 
1) Reduction in CO2 emissions per capita by 30% versus 2007 levels (i.e., down from 1.02 tCO2e/million CLP$ 2011 
to 0.71 tCO2e/million CLP$ 2011) 
2) Contingent upon receiving international grants, reduction in CO2 emissions per capita by 35-45% versus 2007 
levels (i.e., down from 1.02 tCO2e/million CLP$ 2011 to 0.56-0.66 tCO2e/million CLP$ 2011) 
3) Sustainable management and recovery of 100,000 hectares of forest, representing captures and reduction of 
greenhouse gases estimated at 600,000 tCO2e per annum beginning in 2030 
4) Contingent on extension of Decree-Law 701 and the approval of a new forestry development act, reforestation of 
100,000 hectares, representing captures of 900,000-1,200,000 tCO2e per annum beginning 2030. 
 
Chile has also reaffirmed its commitment  to contribute to the 2030 Agenda of the SDGs. EdT, as described in Section A.2 
above, is fully aligned with this agenda and will contribute directly or indirectly to at least in nine SDGs at national, regional 
and local levels(SDGs: 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 13). It should be noted that Chile will be the host country for the future 
COP25 to be held in Santiago from December 2 to 13, 2019. 
   
Contribution to Chile’s Energy Objectives 
The Chilean electric sector is driven strictly by prices with no subsidies. Although the regulator proclaims “technological 
neutrality” with no direct subsidies, tax credits or other incentives provided to any technologies or energy sources, in fact, 
the failure to include the social costs and benefits, such as CO2 emissions7, in the cost of production effectively provides 
indirect subsidies to certain technologies.  In 1982, Chile was the first country to deregulate and segment the electricity 
market in generation, transmission and distribution markets. In the previous decades, this segmentation was appropriate 
                                                             
7 Since 2017, Chile applies a carbon tax to thermoelectric plants equivalent to $5 per tonne of carbon emitted.  
However, the Ministry of Social Development estimated in 2017 that the social cost of carbon emissions is equal to 
$32.5 per tonne of carbon emitted.

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 88 
 
C 
for conventional technologies serving only one market, but is no longer adequate for projects which simultaneously serve 
different markets by providing multi-service system benefits, such as energy storage.   
 
Although in a forward looking study published in January 2019 the country’s independent grid operator recognizes the 
strategic role that storage can play in the process of decarbonisation of the energy matrix8 (considering the current context 
in which more than 50% of the energy generated in Chile in 2017 and 2018 was sourced from thermal units, mostly coal-
fired plants), presently Chilean electric regulations do not recognize the social benefits and externalities related to the 
installation of multi-functional energy storage.  These benefits include the provision of energy, capacity, enhanced 
flexibility, and increased resilience, in addition to reduction of CO2 emissions, decarbonizing the grid with the replacement 
of coal facilities, reduced reliance on variable hydro power, and catalysation of additional renewable investments, among 
others. 
 
Nonetheless, the Chilean government does promote the incorporation of renewable energy. A Renewable Portfolio 
Standard was approved in 2008 and reformed in 2013 which requires generation companies to supply executed contracts 
with 20% of Non-Conventional Renewable Energy (including small hydro) by 2025, or pay fines.   In 2016, the authorities, 
with a wide consensus from a diverse number of stakeholders, agreed on the 2050 Energy Agenda which includes the 
following goals: 
 
5) At least 70% of total energy generation sourced from renewable energy by 2050; 
6) Increased reliability of the electric system, with downtimes that should not exceed 1 hour per year on a regional 
basis; and 
7) Reduction in electricity prices in order to rank third among OECD countries with lowest energy prices. 
 
Subsequent to the Paris Agreement, the government revised its objectives and in 2018 announced the 2018-2022 Energy 
Plan which includes a program to “decarbonise” the existing energy matrix.  In accordance with this initiative the 
government has formalized a working group lead by the Ministry of Energy with participation from the energy sector, in 
particular the owners of existing coal-fired facilities, to analyse the current situation and design a timetable for the 
retirement of coal facilities which do not possess adequate systems for capture of CO2, subject to maintaining required 
levels of grid reliability and resilience.  In 2017, coal generation represented 39% of total national generation, which means 
that decarbonisation will need to be accompanied with investment in renewable generation alternatives and flexible 
technologies, such as energy storage, in order maintain security of supply.  It should be noted that the 2018-2022 Energy 
Plan also contains other important objectives such as multiplying distributed renewable generation, increasing the 
circulation of electric vehicles, and implementing a regulatory framework for promoting energy efficiency and creating an 
“energy culture” in the country, among others.   
 
Given Chile’s unique geographic conditions, it has abundant natural resources for the production of variable renewable 
energy (VRE), with wind, solar and run-of-river hydroelectric power plants. The desert area in northern Chile where the 
Project is located possesses tremendous potential for the development of solar energy. However, at present more than 
87% of the electricity generated in the area comes from thermoelectric sources. The area has some of the best solar 
irradiation levels in the world (average capacity factors in excess of 35%) and is also relatively flat and sparsely populated. 
According a 2014 report by the GIZ GmbH and the Chilean Ministry of Energy9, the PV solar potential in the area exceeds 
1.4 million MW of installed capacity. The existing installed solar capacity of around 633 MW in this area represents less 
than 0.1% of the total potential.   
 
Similarly, strong wind conditions in various parts of Chile also make wind generation feasible. Even though VRE still 
represents a small fraction of the installed generation mix (approximately 15% in May 2018), the installation of VRE is 
projected to rapidly expand in coming years, reaching approximately 30% and 40% of total installed capacity by 2025 and 
2030, respectively.  It should be noted that VRE represents 100% of the new generation projects awarded PPAs in public 
distribution auctions in the past 3 years. 
 
                                                             
8 See report prepared by Chilean independent grid operator (Coordinador Electric Nacional) in January 2019, “ Study 
of Operation and Development Without Coal Plants”: https://www.coordinador.cl/desarrollo/documentos/estudios-de-
planificacion/estudio-de-operacion-y-desarrollo-del-sen-sin-centrales-a-carbon/informes-estudio-operacion-y-
desarrollo-sen-sin-centrales-a-carbon/ https://www.coordinador.cl/wp-content/old-docs/2019/01/20190102-
Estudio_OPyDES-Sin-carb%C3%B3n_Informe_Principal.pdf 
9 Energías Renovables en Chile, El Potencial Eólico, Solar e Hidroeléctrico de Arica a Chiloé,  Deutsche Gesellschaft 
für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH and the Chilean Ministry of Energy,  Santiago de Chile, 2014.

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 88 
 
C 
Nonetheless, given that VRE output is driven by the weather and it therefore faces greater variability and uncertainty than 
that of conventional power plants, the energy sector now faces a significant challenge in order to incorporate and 
adequately manage VRE without sacrificing flexibility or reliability of the grid. Energy storage represents an opportunity for 
enhancing flexibility in order to integrate low carbon energy and improve resiliency.  At present, Chile has very limited 
battery storage (52 MW with duration of approximately 20 minutes, in a system with 24,000 MW of installed capacity) and 
zero bulk energy storage.  As declared by the International Energy Agency in its Policy Report for Chile (2018), bulk energy 
storage, such as the Project, will play a key role by providing flexibility and catalysing investment in renewable 
technologies, thereby transitioning the system from high polluting fossil fuel-based to zero emission technologies.  
 
Although VRE still represents a small fraction of the generation mix, the country is already facing challenges related to its 
incorporation.  At present, transmission constraints, principally associated with the injection of solar energy during daytime 
periods, result in inefficiencies and curtailment of VRE resources.  The government has attempted to address this issue 
with enactment of a new regulation in 2016 to improve transmission planning and development.  The growth of VRE also 
requires enhanced flexibility in order for the system to rapidly respond to upward or downward changes in the 
supply/demand balance.  At present, there is no ancillary services market. The regulator has recognized the need to 
implement adequate remuneration for ancillary services and the grid coordinator is in the process of designing the 
applicable regulations.  Nonetheless, an operating market and related compensation is still highly uncertain and not 
expected to be functioning prior to 2020. 
 
Implementation of the Project as the first bulk energy storage facility in the Chilean electric market will stimulate the 
paradigm shift, as the grid transitions from high polluting conventional energy generation to zero emissions renewable 
energy, by providing flexibility, improving resiliency, and catalysing investments in VRE.  The Project resolves the 
intermittency problem inherent to solar technology by effectively combining Chile’s abundant sunlight and seawater 
resources to ensure electricity availability 24/7.  As a result, the benefits provided by the Project to Chile’s energy sector 
go far beyond those from other PV-only solar projects located in the same region. 
 
Vulnerability of Chile’s Energy Sector 
In 2015, a publication on disaster risk reduction from the United Nations reported that, on average, between 1980 and 
2011, Chile registered losses quantified as 1.2% of its GDP every year due to natural disasters, some of which are related 
to climate change.  Moreover, a World Bank publication stated that 54% of the country’s population and 12.9% of the land 
are 
exposed 
to 
three 
or 
more 
hazards. 
According 
to 
the 
2017 
Global 
Climate 
Risk 
Index 
(https://germanwatch.org/en/12978), Chile was the tenth most affected country by the impacts of weather-related loss 
events (storms, floods, heat waves etc.).  
 
The past seven years in a row have been catalogued as part of the ten driest hydrological years of the past six decades. 
Additionally, ports more frequently have had to close for fossil fuel imports due to strong swells and cities have suffered 
blackouts due to landslides and extreme temperatures that have provoked extensive wild fires.  In 2017, 57% of Chile’s 
total energy generation was thermoelectric (provided by coal-fired or natural gas-fired plants which utilize imported fuel) 
and 29% was hydroelectric. 
 
Chile is very vulnerable to hydrology.  At present, 30% of the system’s installed capacity, corresponding to dam and run-
of-river hydro power plants, is dependent on hydrology. This is alarming, since climate change has resulted in a decrease 
of more than 20% in available hydroelectric energy, comparing the last 5 years to the last 56 years. This reduction of 20% 
represents more than 5,790 GWh of energy that has not been available each year during the last 5 years. Additionally, 
climate change has not only reduced the amount of available hydroelectric energy, but also increased the number and 
probability of natural disasters occurring on Chile, as presented in the 2017 Global Climate Risk Index. 
 
Chile is also extremely dependent on energy imports from other countries.  Data from the International Energy Agency 
confirms that during the last 10 years, energy imports represented on average more than 66% of the country’s energy 
use. In the Chilean electricity market, 54% of the system’s installed capacity utilizes imported fossil fuels. A concrete 
example of the dependency problem in Chile’s recent history occurred in 2006 when Argentina curtailed 100% of its natural 
gas exports to Chile without warning, resulting in a system shock and leading to extremely high power prices and even 
shortages which lasted for years.  One of the principal impacts of the Argentine gas crisis was the construction of more 
than 3,000 MW in coal capacity, since at the time, this fuel represented the lowest cost baseload alternative available to 
replace the natural gas-fired combined cycle plants.

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 88 
 
C 
 
Contribution to Chile’s Adaptation to Climate Change  
In accordance with Chile’s Third Communication – UNFCCC (2016), Chile possesses seven of nine characteristics that 
the UNFCCC uses to define vulnerability and needs to focus on effective climate change adaptation strategies in these 
sectors: water resources, biodiversity, forestry & agriculture, fishing and aquaculture, energy, infrastructure, cities and 
coastal areas, health and tourism.  EdT will contribute to climate change adaptation in three of the vulnerable sectors as 
detailed below:   
 
The Project will have the following outcomes   
 
1) Electric Sector: The Project will help Chile build capacity to adapt to climate change by improving grid flexibility 
and catalysing additional investments in variable renewable energy and also by reducing the national grid’s 
dependence on fossil fuels and hydrology affected by droughts (In 2017, Chile’s power generation was comprised 
of 57% thermoelectric generation and 29% hydroelectric). 
2) Most Vulnerable People and communities support: Under the long-term collaboration agreements executed 
with the vulnerable fishing communities close to the Project, EdT will provide funds and training for social and 
productive investments which will help diversity the local economy, which is highly dependent on sea products 
that have been in steady decline in recent years due to over-exploitation and higher water temperature due to 
climate change.  
3) Water Security: EdT will benefit the vulnerable local communities by providing stable water supplies from the 
Project’s desalination plant to the communities at cost. Currently, the local communities surrounding the Project 
do not have access to stable drinking water supply, which is currently sourced from groundwater and transported 
to the communities by truck.  
 
National Designated Authority Support 
On January 31, 2018, the National Designated Authority (NDA) of Chile, the Ministry of Finance, provided a “no-objection” 
letter to the GCF with regard to the Espejo de Tarapacá Project, confirming that EdT conforms to Chile’s national priorities, 
strategies and plans and all relevant laws and regulations.   On November 19, 2018, the Chilean NDA later provided an 
updated “no-objection” letter to the GCF recognizing the change in Accredited Entity and confirming its continued support 
for the Project.  Both letters are included in Annex 1 to this Funding Proposal. 
  
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline, key barriers, challenges and/or 
policies) and the outcomes and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline 
scenario. 
 
Baseline Scenario 
In terms of greenhouse gas emissions, in accordance with the Chile’s Second Biennial Update Report on Climate Change 
prepared by the Ministry of Environment in 2016, Chile’s total GHG emissions (excluding FOLU) amounted to 109.9 million 
tCO2e in 2013, which represents an increase of 113.4% since 1990 and of 19.3% since 2010. The main GHG emitted by 
Chile was CO2 (78.4%), followed by CH4 (10.7%), N2O (10.0%), and fluorinated gases (0.9%). The energy sector is the 
largest GHG emitter in Chile (77.4%), mainly due to the consumption of coal and diesel for electricity generation and 
consumption of diesel in road transport.  Energy industries represent the main subcategory of GHG in the energy sector 
(45.3%) and the main source of emissions at the national level (35.0% excluding FOLU). As Chile continues developing 
and other sectors move towards electrification, GHG emissions are expected to continue to increase. On a per capita 
basis, Chile consumes approximately 50% of electricity per capita as compared to other OECD nations. 
 
As described in Section C.1 above, Chile’s electric sector is currently facing significant changes and challenges related to 
growth and curtailment of variable renewable energy, decarbonisation and climate change impacts, among others. At 
present, energy storage is virtually inexistent and no economic incentives are provided for investment in renewable energy 
or energy storage infrastructure.  In addition, unique and ground-breaking investment ideas which provide important social 
benefits face market entry barriers. In the case of the Project, these barriers have prevented the Project from a long term 
energy supply contract in order to secure funding and move forward.

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 88 
 
C 
Finally, given that the Project combines the construction of the first bulk energy storage project in Chile with capacity of 
300 MW with 600 MW of PV solar capacity, the integrated Project meets the "first-of-its-kind" approach for demonstrating 
additionality under the "Tool for the demonstration and assessment of additionality."   
 
Project Objectives 
The Project seeks to achieve multiple objectives by stimulating the paradigm shift in the Chilean electric sector which is 
transitioning from conventional energy generation to renewable energy:  
1) Implementation of the first bulk energy storage project in the Chilean electric system which will provide multi-service 
system benefits including grid flexibility, improved resiliency and catalysation of additional investments in variable 
renewable energy, reducing dependence on fossil fuel and hydroelectric generation; 
2) Reduction in GHG emissions. The Project will avoid a total amount of 35 million tonnes of CO2e, resulting in a cost 
per ton of CO2 avoided of 31.26 USD/tCO2e for the total financing, and 1.71 USD/tCO2e for the GCF financing; 
3) Adaptation to climate change in the three sectors where Chile must build resilience; 1) Energy by increasing reliable 
generation not dependent on hydrology; 2) Water resources, by using the Project’s desalination plant to provide 
potable water access to communities that do not have stable water supply. Indirectly, this will also contribute to 
creating healthier and more resilient local coastal communities; 3) Fishing and Aquaculture by designating a portion 
of funds provided in the social-productive agreements executed with organizations to help the coastal communities 
diversity their local economies, which are highly dependent on natural extraction of sea resources. The social-
productive funds will be aligned with the national adaptation plan for climate change at national, regional and local 
levels;  
4) Social, technical and financial recognition of pumped storage and other energy storage technologies to stimulate 
and facilitate investment and replicability;  
5) Improvement in gender equality, well-being and economic opportunities for low income households in the fishing 
communities located close to the Project. The collaboration agreements executed by the Project and local 
community organizations includes the provision of funds to be invested in social and productive areas of the 
communities. One of the priority areas will be the gender equality and the empowerment of women. The Project will 
apply the 2030 Agenda of SDGs as a framework for the development of the local communities.  
 
Table 7 below summarizes the existing baseline scenario and expected outcomes and impacts for each of the 
abovementioned objectives. 
 
Table 7: Project Objectives, Baseline and Expected Outcome 
Objective 
Baseline Scenario 
Expected Outcome 
Implementation of 
the 1st bulk energy 
storage project in 
Chile to provide 
grid flexibility, 
improve resiliency 
and catalyse 
additional VRE 
investments  
Inexistence of bulk energy storage and 
minimal energy storage (currently only 
52 MW, approximately 20 minutes, of 
battery storage); need for enhanced 
system flexibility for incorporation of 
VRE in Chilean grid 
Construction of Project’s 300 MW PSH plant; 
construction of additional VRE generation in Chilean 
grid 
Reduced dependence on fossil fuel-based 
generation and hydroelectric generation affected by 
climate variability and droughts 
Reduction in GHG 
emissions 
System annual emissions of 35.5 
million 
tCO2e 
from 
the 
electric 
generation sector 
Annual reduction of 1,001,187 tCO2e in emissions 
from the generation of electricity with zero emissions 
Adaptation to 
climate change 
Adaptation to climate change in three 
sectors 
where 
Chile 
must 
build 
resilience: 1) Energy: 21,081 GWh/year 
of energy from hydroelectric plants at 
risk of reduction due to climate change, 
climate variability or droughts, 2) Water 
Resources: providing stable water 
access to the communities from the 
Project’s desalination plant, which 
Net generation of 1,500 GWh/year of clean energy 
with 0 risk associated to climate change, climate 
variability or droughts. 
 
Availability of drinking water supply from the Project’s 
desalination plant for the San Marcos and Rio Seco 
coastal communities for at least 25 years from the 
date of EdT construction.

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 88 
 
C 
helps 
create 
healthier 
and 
more 
resilient local coastal communities, and 
3) 
Fishing 
and 
Aquaculture: 
the 
provision of social-productive funds to 
help diversify the local economy of the  
coastal communities.  
 
Local community agreements (7 agreements with 
local organizations) which will help diversify the 
coastal economies for entire life of the Project. The 
focus of these agreements is enhancing the 
productivity of the communities through aquaculture 
projects, improving overall wellbeing and supporting 
gender equality and the empowerment of women.    
 
 
 
 
Social, technical 
and financial 
recognition of 
pumped storage 
and other energy 
storage 
Inexistence of large scale energy 
storage; inexistence of pumped storage 
infrastructure 
in 
Chile; 
significant 
financial and market barriers to entry for 
unique new projects 
Benchmark and track record for future energy 
storage projects allowing for improved policies and 
sharing of economic benefits 
Improvement in, 
gender equality, 
wellbeing and 
economic 
opportunities for 
low income 
households in 
Project community 
Social 
and 
productive 
investment 
agreements were executed by the 
Project and organizations of San 
Marcos and Rio Seco, the communities 
located close to the Project. The project 
will also prioritize the empowerment of 
women in the fishing villages. The local 
economies of these communities are 
dependent almost exclusively on sea-
related activities dominated by men; the 
community 
is 
vulnerable 
to 
the 
economic impact of climate change as 
detailed in the Gender Assessment.  
Implementation of educational and skill training 
programs, creation of new economic activities and 
development of recreational activities, for adults; 
prioritizing the empowerment of women. For more 
detail, see the Gender Action Plan included in Annex 
5.  
 
 
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
Describe the main activities and the planned measures of the project/programme according to each of its components.  
 
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project/programme 
intends to achieve. The objectives, outputs and outcomes should be consistent with the information reported in the logic 
framework in section H. 
Project Description and Objectives: The Project is a large scale power project located in the Tarapaca Region in 
northern Chile, which aims to make use of Chile’s natural resources and proven generation technology in order to provide 
clean renewable energy supply 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The Project comprises the final development and 
construction of two commercially integrated power plants: (1) a 300 MW pumped storage hydroelectric (“PSH”) plant using 
the Pacific Ocean as its lower reservoir and an existing natural concavity as its upper reservoir, and (2) a 561 MW-AC 
photovoltaic solar (“PV”) plant (together the “Plants”). The Project also includes implementation and funding of community 
works including gender empowerment and climate change adaptation measures for the fishing communities located close 
to the Project.  
The GCF Proceeds will be channelled to the Project through an equity investment in a limited liability vehicle established 
for the purposes of the Funded Activity. The initial GCF Proceeds will be used to cover expenses to be incurred during the 
final stage of development which include expenses related to permitting, engineering, financial and market advisory 
services, community engagement, staff and administration, as well as cash funding of guarantees required to secure

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 88 
 
C 
participation in PPA bid processes and secure granted permits.  Through the use of the GCF Proceeds for the final stage 
of development of the Plants, the Project aims to: (i) de-risk the underlying renewable energy generation and storage 
project; and (ii) obtain a power purchase agreement (“PPA”) for the underlying renewable energy generation and storage 
project. 
The commercial viability of the Project requires execution of a long term PPA (or transmission or other acceptable service 
contract) with a creditworthy customer in order to guarantee stable cash flows for recovery of the investment to be provided 
by equity and debt holders.  GCF Proceeds will be used to assist the Project in securing a PPA (or transmission or other 
acceptable service contract) by funding the bid bonds needed to participate in the tender processes to guarantee the 
binding offers presented. It is estimated that the bid bond for the Project’s participation in such tender processes would be 
up to thirteen million US Dollars (13,000,000). In the event that the bid is not awarded, the bid bonds will be returned. In 
the event that the bid is selected, the bid bond will remain in place until financial close of Project debt financing, at which 
time it would be replaced with a guarantee issued under the syndicated debt financing agreement. 
Project Components: The Project’s objectives will be achieved through the following three components (each, a 
“Component”): 
i) 
Component 1− Project Development & Preparatory Work:  This component encompasses work related to the 
final development phase of the Project until financial close of the debt financing and subsequent initiation of 
construction. This component includes Pre-PPA development costs in order to maintain the viability of the Project 
while preparing to participate in PPA auctions (the Project costs at this stage include financial and engineering 
advisory services, staff and general administrative and permitting costs).  The Pre-PPA development costs also 
include funds for obtaining bid bonds for the PPA auctions and securing granted permits, which would be lost if 
the guarantees are not issued when requested by the authorities.  Component 1 also includes Post-PPA 
development costs, which will be needed after award of a PPA to maintain the viability of the Project while an 
equity sponsor and project financing agreements are being finalized.  
 
ii) Component 2 − Project Construction: This component entails the entire construction process of the two Plants 
until reaching start-up of commercial operation (including construction and commissioning). Given that the Project 
plans to enter into a project finance syndicated credit facility which will be disbursed in accordance with 
construction cash flow requirements, financing related costs are also included in Component 2.  For the avoidance 
of doubt, the implementation period does not include the period for operation and maintenance of the plants.  
 
iii) Component 3 − Community Works: This component encompasses the community engagement works to be 
implemented by the Project during all phases, including development, construction and operation.  This 
component is particularly focused on gender empowerment and climate change adaptation measures for the 
vulnerable fishing communities located close to the PSH plant.  The engagement works will include capacity 
building activities through the implementation of educational and skill training programs, provision of competitive 
funds for social and productive investments for the creation of new economic activities in order to diversify the 
local economy and development of recreational activities.  In addition, this component includes the provision of 
stable and secure water supply for the local community from Project’s desalination plant (which will be constructed 
for operation of the PSH plant).   
As detailed in the Logic Framework in Section H.1 below, a theory of change diagram summarizing the outputs and 
activities needed to achieve the identified goals is provided in Figure 2 below:

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 88 
 
C 
Figure 2: Project Theory of Change 
 
 
 
Output 1.1 – Commercial viability of the Project with full funding: The Project is expected to overcome market barriers 
to entry and raise approximately US$ 1.0 billion from the private sector including equity investors and commercial banks. 
The Project has been funded to date by a group of individual private investors, principally Chilean, who were attracted by 
the Project’s unique vision and committed early but limited financial development support.  It also received support from 
Start-Up Chile (an early stage venture capital fund from the Government of Chile) and Fundación Chile (a public-private 
NGO which aims to foster innovation in order to promote new industries in Chile).  
 
However, the Project faces significant financial and market entry barriers including solid financial capacity, established 
experience and track record and creditworthy strategic partners, among others.  These barriers prevent large scale, unique 
and ground-breaking investment ideas, such as the Project, from moving forward.  In the particular case of EdT, these 
barriers have prevented the Project from obtaining a solid PPA and in turn, prohibited incorporation of strategic equity 
investors, who as a rule, are not willing to invest without the guarantee of stable future cash flows. These barriers to market 
entry represent the principal reason for the absence of innovation and start-up companies in the development of large-
scale energy projects; and is the foundation of EdT’s application for support from the GCF.    
 
The objective of GCF’s support is to help fund last stage development expenses, including cash funding of guarantees 
necessary to participate in PPA tender processes and secure granted permits.  In addition, GCF’s participation as an 
“anchor” equity investor in the Project will provide a “stamp of approval” and help attract additional private sector investors.  
Without the GCF support, the Project’s short to medium-term capital needs will likely be unfunded, risking discontinuation 
and termination of the Project.  GCF funding would be value-add during the early years of the Project, with the possibility 
to “crowd-in” once the Project proves it has overcome market risks.  
 
Output 2.1 – Construction of PV plant which will deliver clean, economic and reliable renewable energy: The 
Project includes the construction and initiation operation of a 561 MW-AC PV solar park which will be constructed in 
phases. 
 
Reduction of at least 35MTCO2eq over 
35-year Project life, on average 1 
MTCO2eq per year
Improvement in livelihood of 
vulnerable communities with 550 
inhabitants, by providing stable 
drinking water supply and diversifying 
local sea-dependent economy
• Implementation of replicable project for production of 100% renewable baseload energy + storage
• Reduction in Co2 emissions 
• Enhanced electric grid flexibility and resilience with reduced dependence on hydrology and fossil fuels 
• Improved livelihood and water security for local vulnerable communities
Key Stakeholders
• Private Investors
• Tarapacá Region
• Communities of San
Marcos and Rio Seco
Assumptions
• Project will be the 1st
bulk energy storage 
facility in the Chilean 
electric market and 
can be replicated.
• Chilean national 
electric grid needs to 
incorporate energy 
storage in order to 
decarbonize and 
increase VRE 
participation.
• Hydrological cycles 
will continue to 
change as a result of 
climate change.
• Stakeholders will 
actively participate in 
implementing the 
social programs and 
agreements between 
the Project and local 
communities. 
Outputs
Indicators
Goals
Activities
Activities
1.
PSH plant 
construction
2.
PSH plant 
initiation of 
commercial 
operations
Output 2.1
Construction of PV 
plant which will deliver 
clean, economic and 
reliable renewable 
energy 
Output 3.1
Improvement in 
economic, gender 
empowerment & 
climate change 
adaptation capacity
Output 1.1
Commercial viability of 
the Project with full 
funding
Output 3.2
Stable and secure 
water supply for local 
community
Output 2.2
Construction of PSH 
plant, including 
desalination plant, 
which will deliver clean, 
economic and reliable 
renewable energy 
storage
Activities
1.
Implementation 
of educational & 
skill training 
programs
2.
Implementation 
of social & 
productive funds
3.
Implementation 
of Gender Action 
Plan
Activities
1.
Construction and 
delivery of water 
from Project 
desalination 
plant
Activities
1.
PPA process
2.
Selection equity 
investor
3.
Debt financing
Activities
1.
PV plant 
construction
2.
PV plant 
initiation of 
commercial 
operations

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 88 
 
C 
Output 2.2 – Construction of PSH plant, including desalination plant, which will deliver clean, economic and 
reliable renewable energy storage: The Project includes the construction and initiation operation of a 300 MW PSH 
plant using the Pacific Ocean as its lower reservoir and an existing natural concavity as its upper reservoir.  The PSH plant 
will include construction of a desalination plant which will be used for operation of the PSH plant and to provide stable 
water supplies to the local communities. 
 
EdT is an innovative and unique large scale power project which combines Chile’s natural resources with proven power 
generation technology in order to provide a renewable ‘solar plus storage’ baseload solution for the Chilean market. The 
objective of the Project is to commercially integrate solar generation with pumped storage hydroelectric generation in order 
to provide renewable 24/7 energy supply.  The Project will help Chile build capacity to adapt to climate change by improving 
grid flexibility and catalysing additional investments in variable renewable energy and also by reducing the national grid’s 
dependence on fossil fuels and hydrology affected by droughts (In 2017, Chile’s power generation was comprised of 57% 
thermoelectric generation and 29% hydroelectric). 
 
The Project’s innovative design resolves the intermittency problem inherent to solar technology by effectively combining 
Chile’s abundant sunlight and seawater resources to ensure electricity availability 24/7.  The Project design fundamentals 
are based upon the availability of solar capacity to provide electricity during daylight hours and hydroelectric pumped 
storage capacity to provide coverage during night-time hours.  As a result, the benefits from the Project which include 
cross-cutting mitigation and adaptation impact potential are significantly higher those produced by smaller scale PV-only 
solar projects located in the same region.  As depicted Figure 3 below, the Project’s pumped-storage hydro plant is 
effectively bulk energy storage—storing solar energy in the form of water which is pumped into the reservoir, until it is 
required by the system. 
 
Figure 3: Integration of Solar with Pumped Storage Hydro 
 
 
 
As shown in Figure 4 below, the Project will be located in the desert in northern Chile where currently, despite being 
among the most privileged places on earth for the development of solar energy, more than 87% of the electricity generated 
comes from thermoelectric sources10.  In fact, this area possesses some of the best solar irradiation levels in the world 
(average capacity factors in excess of ~35%), and is also relatively flat and sparsely populated. According a 2014 report 
by GIZ GmbH and the Chilean Ministry of Energy, the PV solar potential in this area exceeds 1.4 million MW of installed 
capacity. The existing installed solar capacity of around 633 MW in this area represents less than 0.1% of the total 
potential. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: PSH and PV Plant Locations 
 
                                                             
10 The Project is located in Chile’s ex-Greater Northern Electric Grid, which includes the regions of Arica/Parinacota, 
Tarapacá and Antofagasta.

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 88 
 
C 
 
 
By combining the unique natural resources found in the Atacama Desert of northern Chile with recent reductions in the 
cost of photovoltaic solar generation, EdT is able to provide a competitive, reliable and sustainable alternative to traditional 
fossil fuel-fired baseload electric generation. These natural characteristics include: (i) the best solar irradiation in the world, 
(ii) a coastal site with a 600 m cliff and large surface concavity and (iii) proximity to the Pacific Ocean, which provides 
continuous water supply with no hydrological volatility. The Project efficiently utilizes existing geography and conditions 
(including Chile’s superb natural solar and hydroelectric resources, proximity to the Pacific Ocean and the large natural 
concavity utilized for the reservoir) and has been designed to minimize environmental and social impacts during 
construction and operation.  The Project does not require resettlement and will be constructed in barren and sparsely 
populated areas owned by the Chilean government. Nonetheless, it should be noted that the Project has applied the 
highest international standards in its community engagement.   
 
By converting solar energy into a reliable and competitive 24/7 supply, the Project will revolutionize the Chilean electric 
sector and provide significant strategic benefits including:  (i) acceleration of the growth and installation of competitive, 
reliable and sustainable renewable energy capacity, (ii) diversification of Chile’s energy matrix away from contaminating 
imported fossil fuels and weather-dependent hydroelectric resources, toward domestic natural resources—promoting 
energy independence, (iii) enhancement of grid reliability and flexibility to manage load fluctuations that are exacerbated 
by intermittent renewable energy, and (iv) management of price volatility particularly during peak hours.    
 
Output 3.1 – Improvement in economic, gender empowerment and climate change adaptation capacity in 
vulnerable local community:  Under the long-term collaboration agreements executed with the vulnerable fishing 
communities close to the Project, EdT will provide funds and training for social and productive investments which will help 
diversity the local economy, which is highly dependent on sea products dominated by men that have been in steady 
decline in recent years due to over-exploitation and higher water temperature due to climate change.  
 
Output 3.2 – Stable and secure water supply for vulnerable local community: The Project will provide stable drinking 
water supply from the Project’s desalination plant to the local vulnerable communities located at cost. Currently, the local 
communities surrounding the Project do not have access to stable drinking water supply, which is currently sourced from 
groundwater and transported to the communities by truck. 
 
In accordance with the cooperation agreements executed with the local communities, the Project will supply water from 
its desalination plant to the vulnerable local communities.  Most of the water will be sold to the communities at cost.  At 
present, potable water supplied from depleting groundwater sources is currently transported by truck from Iquique 
(approximately 100 km.) twice monthly.

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 88 
 
C 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and financial profile of the Sponsor (Executing Entity) and 
how it will support the project/programme in terms of equity investment, management, operations, production and 
marketing. 
 
Energía  de Tarapacá SpA (Executing Entity) 
Energía de Tarapacá, the Executing Entity, is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Energía Valhalla (“Valhalla” or “the Company”), 
the Sponsor.  Energía de Tarapacá SpA is fully formed and was incorporated in Chile on April 29, 2016. As shown in 
Figure 5 below, at present, Valhalla owns 100% of the Executing Entity, Energía de Tarapacá, which in turn owns 100% 
of the two project companies, Espejo de Tarapacá which is developing the PSH plant and Cielos de Tarapacá, which is 
developing the PV plant.  
 
Figure 5: Current Project Ownership Structure 
 
 
 
Valhalla is now seeking strategic investors to participate as partners in the ownership of the Project.  Figure 6 below details 
the proposed funding structure presented to GCF, under which the shareholders of the Executing Entity, Energía de 
Tarapacá would include Valhalla (6%), GCF (13%) and Strategic Private Investor (81%).  Additionally, as shown in the 
diagram below, the Project’s future revenues will be sourced from a PPA expected to be executed by Energía de Tarapacá 
and a creditworthy offtaker.   
Figure 6: Proposed Project Ownership Structure

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 88 
 
C 
 
 
Tarapaca Fund (the “Tarapaca Fund”) (Executing Entity) 
Tarapaca Fund is a private limited partnership vehicle with limited liability to be incorporated in Canada and governed by 
the laws of Canada. 
 
The Accredited Entity (on behalf of the GCF) will sign a subscription agreement with the General Partner (on behalf of the 
Tarapaca Fund) and a limited partnership agreement with the General Partner (for itself and on behalf of the Tarapaca 
Fund) for the Tarapaca Fund.  
 
The Accredited Entity shall ensure that the General Partner, acting on behalf of the Tarapaca Fund, will carry out the 
Funded Activity in accordance with Funded Activity Agreement and AMA. 
 
The Accredited Entity shall also enter into a multi-partite agreement with the Tarapaca Fund, the General Partner, and the 
Project Company. 
  
Valhalla: Sponsor, Executing Entity, General Partner  
Founded in 2011, Energía Valhalla (“Valhalla”) is a Chilean-owned independent start-up company focused on the 
development, construction and operation of renewable power projects—in order to strategically diversify the country’s 
energy matrix away from overdependence on imported fossil fuels.  Valhalla’s original project development formula 
combines pumped storage hydro with photovoltaic solar generation, capitalizing on Chile’s superior irradiation and unique 
geography for large-scale energy storage.   
 
At present, the Company’s ownership is comprised of approximately fifty shareholders, mostly well-known Chilean 
businessmen, who have funded development of the Project to date.  As of March 31, 2019, development expenses 
incurred by the Project total approximately US$ 26 million.  The principal expenses relate to external advisors contracted 
to assist in preparation of the required engineering, environmental, community engagement, financial, commercial and 
legal studies, administration and staff expenses, and costs associated with securing land and permits. 
 
Valhalla assembled a highly qualified multi-disciplinary team for development of the Project which effectively integrates 
expertise, innovation and extensive local and international experience in the development, financing, construction and 
operation of electric generation plants.  Valhalla’s internal team includes professionals specializing in critical development 
areas such as commercial strategy and planning, logistics and permitting, sustainability and community engagement, and 
finance and administration.  Additionally, Valhalla also engaged an extensive team of expert external advisors to assist in 
development activities, as well as specialized independent consultants to review and verify key Project issues. 
 
Since inception, Valhalla has proactively communicated its vision among authorities, academics, communities and other 
stakeholders positioning the Company as a model for the future development of large scale energy infrastructure in Chile. 
The Company has been recognized with multiple awards, including energy innovation and community related awards, and 
has received extensive media coverage, locally and internationally. The Project has been recognized by well-known 
distinguished public and private figures such as ex-Chilean President and former Special Envoy on Climate Change for 
the United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ricardo Lagos11, ex-Chilean Minister of Energy Máximo Pacheco 
and American Nobel prize winning physicist Steven Chu.12 
 
Valhalla will act as General Partner until new strategic investor(s) joins the Project.  
 
 
 
 
                                                             
11 See letter of support for the Project addressed to the Green Climate Fund from Ricardo Lagos dated November 19, 
2018 which is included in Annex 11.  
12 See video of conference presentation by Steven Chu: https://vimeo.com/280816552

=== PAGE 29 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 88 
 
C 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
 
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts. 
 
Describe the competitive environment including the list of competitors with market shares and customer base and key 
differentiating factors (if applicable). 
 
Provide pricing structures, price controls, subsidies available and government involvement (if any). 
 
Since the privatization of the electric sector market model in 1982, Chile has had one of the most stable and transparent 
regulatory frameworks in Latin America. The market model is based on free market principles, including marginal cost 
pricing and vertical unbundling of the generation, transmission and distribution segments, to promote private investment 
and competition. The regulatory fundamentals remain in place today and the limited adjustments over the last 30 years 
have been driven by encouragement of private investment and most recently, development of renewable energy.  Recent 
developments in the Chilean power sector have targeted lowering electricity prices for consumers via public auctions for 
distribution companies and the greening of the power fuel source by promoting investment in renewables, although no 
economic incentives are provided.   
 
The retail sale of electric power is split into two customer segments based on peak demand: regulated and unregulated 
customers. Regulated customers are those with demand less than 0.5 MW, while customers with demand ranging from 
0.5 MW to 5.0 MW can opt into the unregulated retail market. Customers with a demand over 5 MW are strictly in the 
unregulated retail market.  All large electricity consumers in Chile, including regulated distribution companies and 
unregulated mining and industrial customers, must enter into PPAs for the purchase of electricity. Under the existing 
regulatory framework in Chile, PPA pricing is market driven.  Distribution companies with “regulated” customers, which 
make up approximately 70% of the market, award PPAs in public competitive auctions which are conducted by the National 
Energy Commission.  Large “unregulated” customers, typically mining or industrial companies, bilaterally determine PPA 
prices and terms in private negotiations. 
 
The Chilean electric power grid is organized into three independent systems. The largest grid, the National Interconnected 
System (“SEN”) extends for 3,100 km, encompassing most of the country from Arica in the north, to the island of Chiloe 
in the south.  The SEN was formed in 2017 with inauguration of the transmission line interconnecting the northern and 
central grids.  The SEN, where 98% of the country’s population resides, has installed capacity of approximately 24,000 
MW.  The Project is located in the northern part of the SEN, south of the city Iquique. 
 
The SEN is dominated mainly by four electric generation companies, Enel, AES Gener, Engie and Colbun. Enel owns the 
largest stake of generation capacity with 29% of the total installed capacity, followed by AES Gener (17%), Colbun (14%), 
and Engie (9%). At present, the SEN is comprised primarily of thermal units which represent the 54% of total system 
installed capacity as of December 2017. Hydroelectric power plants represent 30% of the system, considering all the dam-
based plants and the run-of-river plants over 20 MW. The remaining 18% of capacity is principally comprised of renewables 
plants, including solar, wind, biomass, and run-of-river plants of less than 20 MW.  
 
Historically, coal has been a dominant source of power generation in Chile, and is expected to continue to hold a dominant 
share (currently 39% of total generation), considering that many of the coal facilities are relatively new, having been 
constructed in the 2000s13. However, the share of coal in the power mix is expected to decrease with the increasing 
competitiveness of other technologies (i.e., non-hydro renewables) and gradual decarbonisation of the matrix. It should 
be noted that the principal electricity incumbents, Engie, Enel and AES Gener, have all announced their commitment to 
discontinue new-build coal plants in Chile and in 2018, the Ministry of Energy initiated a working group to analyse and 
design a timeline for decarbonisation, subject to maintaining the level of reliability and resilience of the system, which will 
require the incorporation of flexible projects such as bulk energy storage. In fact, in January 2019, the report prepared by 
Chile’s national independent grid operator recognized the strategic role that storage can play in the process of 
decarbonisation of the energy matrix.   
 
 
                                                             
13 The newest coal plant in the system (375 MW) was commissioned in May 2019 by Engie.

=== PAGE 30 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 88 
 
C 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
Provide details of government licenses or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue. 
 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations. 
 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme. 
 
Permits  
Chile’s General Environmental Law regulates the submission and evaluation of environmental impact studies (“EIAs”) for 
electric generation and transmission and the Environmental Assessment Service (Servicio de Evaluación Ambiental or 
SEA) is the governmental authority responsible for managing, coordinating and consolidating the environmental evaluation 
process with participation from all relevant government agencies and local communities close to the projects. The Chilean 
environmental framework is recognized for its high standards and extensive monitoring throughout the life of approved 
projects.  Upon approval of a project EIA, the SEA issues a permit resolution (Resolución de Calificación Ambiental or 
RCA), which serves as the primary environmental permit authorizing the construction and operation of the underlying 
power plant and associated infrastructure. 
 
The Project submitted the EIA for the pumped storage hydro plant and the corresponding transmission line in August 2014 
and approval was unanimously granted by authorities in December 2015.  The Project also submitted the EIA for the PV 
plant and associated transmission line in January 2015 and was approved in January 2016. 
 
A summary description and status of the principal Project permits is provided below. Table 8 describes the key Project 
permits which include the environmental, maritime concession and hydraulic works permits and Table 9 describes the 
principal land concessions which include the electric concessions and land-use concession. 
 
Table 8: Key Project Permits 
 
Permit  
 
Status  
 
Description / Comments 
 
Environmental 
Permit (RCA) for 
PSH and 
Transmission / 
Interconnection to 
Lagunas 
Substation 
 
 
EIA submitted in August 2014. 
 
EIA approved in December 2015. 
 
The RCA, which is issued by the Ministry of 
Environment 
through 
the 
Environmental 
Assessment Service (Servicio de Evaluación 
Ambiental), 
constitutes 
environmental 
approval for the construction and operation of 
the PSH plant and its 65 km transmission line 
and 
interconnection 
to 
the 
Lagunas 
substation. 
 
The EIA was unanimously approved, without 
objections, on December 3, 2015. 
 
 
PSH Maritime 
Concession 
 
Maritime concession request 
submitted in April 2014. 
 
Approved in January 2017, pending 
submission of guarantee. Expected 
2019. 
 
 
The maritime concession, which is issued by 
the 
Ministry 
of 
Defence 
through 
the 
Subsecretary 
of 
the 
Armed 
Forces 
(Subsecretaría para las Fuerzas Armadas),  
grants approval for the construction and 
operation of the underground and offshore 
installations in the ocean from the intake point 
and along the first 80 m of coastline.

=== PAGE 31 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 88 
 
C 
 
PSH Plant 
Hydraulic Works 
Permit 
 
Hydraulic works permit request 
submitted in April 2015.  
 
Process completed, final approval 
pending submission of guarantee. 
Expected 2019. 
 
 
The Hydraulic works permit, which is granted 
by the Ministry of Public Works through the 
National Water Authority (Dirección General 
de Aguas), is required for the construction 
waterways and reservoir of the pumped 
storage plant.  This permit is required for the 
approval of the PSH electric concession.  
 
 
 
PV Plant and 
Transmission 
Line 
Environmental 
Permit (RCA)  
 
EIA submitted in January 2015. 
 
EIA approved in January 2016. 
 
The RCA, which is issued by the Ministry of 
Environment 
through 
the 
Environmental 
Assessment Service (Servicio de Evaluación 
Ambiental), 
constitutes 
environmental 
approval for the construction and operation of 
the PV plant and its 18 km transmission line 
and 
interconnection 
to 
the 
Lagunas 
substation. 
 
The EIA was unanimously approved, without 
objections, on January 27, 2016. 
 
 
Sectorial Permits 
 
Sectorial permits have been and will 
continue to be obtained prior to and 
during construction, based on the 
applicable requirements.  
 
 
Sectorial permits are lower tier permits 
associated with the RCAs which will be 
secured at the appropriate stages of Project 
development and construction. 
 
The Project has identified all required permits 
with estimated application and approval dates. 
 
 
Construction 
Permits (PSH and 
PV Plants) 
 
Construction permits have been and 
will continue be obtained prior to 
initiating construction of specific 
works based on the applicable 
requirements. 
 
 
Construction permits provide approval to erect 
inhabitable structures such as project offices 
and housing. 
 
The Project has identified all required permits 
with estimated application and approval dates 
 
Table 9: Land Concessions 
 
Permit  
 
Status  
 
Description / Comments 
 
PSH Plant Electric 
Concession 
 
Electric concession request 
submitted in April 2015. 
 
Approval expected in 2019. 
 
 
Hydroelectric power projects do not require 
electrical concessions, but they entitle the 
owner to impose perpetual easements upon 
landowners and provide the concessionaire 
with a permanent right to use the land for 
development, construction and operation. 
 
The electric concession is granted by the 
Ministry 
of 
Energy 
through 
the 
Superintendency of Electricity and Fuels 
(Superintendencia 
de 
Electricidad 
y 
Combustibles).

=== PAGE 32 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 88 
 
C 
 
PSH Plant 
Transmission Line 
Electric 
Concession 
 
Electric concession request 
submitted in August 2015.  
 
Approved in March 2017. 
 
 
Transmission service does not require an 
electric concession, but companies may apply 
for a concession to facilitate access to third 
party properties for development of electric 
transmission 
facilities 
by 
means 
of 
easements.  
 
The electric concession was approved by the 
Superintendency of Electricity and Fuels on 
March 24, 2017. 
 
 
Land Use 
Concession (CUO) 
for PV Site 
 
Land use concession request 
submitted in July 2014.  
 
Approval expected in 2019. 
 
 
The CUO constitutes the land use concession 
which allows for utilization of Project site for 
initial 30 year term, which may be renewed 
prior to expiration.  
 
The CUO is granted by the Ministry of Public 
Property (Ministerio de Bienes Nacionales). 
 
 
PV Plant 
Transmission Line 
Electric 
Concession 
 
Electric concession request 
submitted in December 2015.  
 
Approval expected in 2019. 
 
 
Transmission service does not require an 
electric concession, but companies may apply 
for a concession to facilitate access to third 
party properties for development of electric 
transmission 
facilities 
by 
means 
of 
easements.  
 
The electric concession is granted by the 
Ministry 
of 
Energy 
through 
the 
Superintendency of Electricity and Fuels 
(Superintendencia 
de 
Electricidad 
y 
Combustibles). 
 
 
Taxes 
• 
Primary Value Added Taxes: applicable to be refunded after initiation of Project commercial operations  
• 
Income taxes ~35% of pre-tax income 
 
Foreign Exchange  
• 
Electricity prices are indexed to US Dollars 
 
Insurance 
The Project will maintain standard all-risk insurance, including advanced loss of profit and business interruption, policies 
during construction and operation which include earthquake coverage. 
 
MUFG’s policy towards AML/CFT 
MUFG Bank confirms that our Bank adequately controls transactions with Sanctioned Countries and Parties under the 
relevant regulations where applicable, such as UN resolutions, OFAC regulations, Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade 
Act of Japan, etc. 
MUFG Bank does not process any transaction under Sanction imposed by UN and US (OFAC)/Japanese authorities. 
MUFG Bank, as Accredited Entity monitors the Project to ensure that Executing Entity will comply with the policy toward 
AML/CFT.

=== PAGE 33 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 88 
 
C 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the organization 
structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, executing entities 
and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure.  Also describe which of these structures are already in place and 
which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish them. 
Describe construction and supervision methodology with key contractual agreements.  
 
Describe operational arrangements with key contractual agreements following the completion of construction. If 
applicable, provide the credit analysis of key counterparties of key contractual agreements and/or structural mitigants to 
cover the counterparty risks. 
 
Description of Implementation Agreements and Funds Flow Structure 
MUFG Bank, as Accredited Entity will oversee the project administration, monitor the project implementation, and will 
insure project compliance with MUFG Bank’s own relevant policies. MUFG Bank will execute an agreement with Executing 
Entity to make sure that Executing Entity will be responsible for the obligations which the Accredited Entity has under the 
Accredited Master Agreement. 
 
MUFG Bank will review the execution of the projects, monitor the capability and performance of the Executing Entity, and 
assess any change in circumstances that may have a bearing on the plan in general and on the implementation and 
operation of the projects in particular.  
 
More specifically, MUFG Bank will: 
• 
conduct review missions, 
• 
monitor the Executing Entity’s compliance with equity effectiveness conditions, 
• 
monitor the procurement of goods, works, and consulting services, 
• 
monitor implementation and development performance, 
• 
analyse progress reports, 
• 
disburse GCF’s equity proceeds, and monitoring project cash flows, 
• 
review unaudited and audited project accounts and agency financial statements, 
• 
monitor the Executing Entity’s compliance with applicable MUFG Bank’s policies as set out in relevant agreements, 
• 
monitor the project compliance with environmental and social safeguards, social dimensions and gender 
development, 
• 
monitor physical works progress, sector policy changes, sector restructuring, and tariff reform, 
• 
monitor Executing Entity’s compliance with covenants, 
• 
strengthening the Executing Entity’s financial management and developing their capacity, 
• 
prepare project completion reports, and 
• 
assess the achievement of the project outcome and outputs, and the contribution to achieving the development 
impact. 
 
Description of Grievance Mechanism   
Firstly, MUFG Bank has set means to receive claims by phone calls and emails which are set out in the webpages below.  
https://www.mufgamericas.com/contact-us  
http://www.bk.mufg.jp/voice/index.html  
 
Also, Japanese Bankers Association (“JBA”), which MUFG Bank is a member of, provides alternative dispute resolution 
(“ADR”). Japanese Bankers Association concluded the agreement on “Strengthening its support for resolving 
complaints/disputes.” This agreement was made in conjunction with the Mediation Committee, the support organization 
for dispute resolution. The aim is to strengthen support for resolving complaints/disputes and facilitate use of the support 
system for dispute resolution. The following is an outline of the agreement: 
 
1. Strengthening financial alternative dispute resolution (ADR) is a means to enhance customer confidence in banks. 
The banking industry has taken the step to provide a fair and neutral dispute resolution vehicle that can provide

=== PAGE 34 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 88 
 
C 
prompt and transparent dispute resolution, and has established measures to ensure its effectiveness for 
customers. Member banks are committed to endeavouring to listen earnestly to the voices of customers and to 
prevent troubles from occurring. 
2. Member banks engaged in transactions of derivatives and specified deposits, etc. shall agree to becoming the 
“target business operators” of JBA as a certified investor protection organization, unless reasonable reasons for 
not doing so exist. 
3. When the resolution of a complaint forwarded to each bank or consumer relations office appears difficult, the 
member bank shall refer the subject to the Mediation Committee with the consent of the customer, and endeavour 
to promptly resolve the complaints in accordance with the mediation proposals. When a customer wants to utilize 
the Mediation Committee, etc., priority should be given to using the support organization for the dispute resolution 
that the customer wants to make use of. 
4. Member banks shall observe the “Rules for Facilitating Complaint Resolution and Mediation,” and sincerely handle 
the claims to resolve them smoothly. 
5. JBA shall proactively conduct public relations by means of leaflets and posters concerning consumer relations 
offices and the Mediation Committee. 
 
In addition to above, MUFG Bank intends to set out a dedicated page on MUFG Bank’s website to receive comments, 
feedbacks or complains for GCF-funded projects.  The proposed grievance mechanism has been agreed by GCF 
Accreditation Panel and will be implemented on MUFG Bank’s webpage. As for any complain for MUFG Bank and/or 
Executing Entity, before pursuing legal action, MUFG Bank’s GCF Focal Point will receive dispute resolution requests by 
emails or regular mails. Please see MUFG Bank’s Procurement Guidelines draft for details. 
 
Description of MUFG Bank’s Compliance Policy 
MUFG Bank has clarified our group mission, long-term vision and shared values in the Corporate Vision and expressed 
our commitment to meeting the expectations of customers and society as a whole. Furthermore, we have established the 
Principles of Ethics and Conduct as the guidelines for how the group’s directors and employees act to realize the Corporate 
Vision. This expresses our commitment to complying with laws and regulations globally, to acting with honesty and 
integrity, and to behaving in a manner that supports and strengthens the trust and confidence of society. 
 
In addition, as MUFG Bank expands our business globally, we are committed to keeping abreast with developments in 
the laws and regulations of the jurisdictions in which we operate, including those targeting money laundering and bribery, 
as well as competition laws, while paying attention to trends in financial crimes. 
 
Compliance management divisions have been established at the holding company Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, and 
at MUFG Bank, Mitsubishi UFJ Trust and Banking, and Mitsubishi UFJ Securities Holdings. Each compliance management 
division formulates compliance programs and organizes training courses to promote compliance, and regularly reports to 
each company’s board of directors and Executive Committee on the status of compliance activities. The holding company 
has the Group Compliance Committee while the three companies have Compliance Committees which deliberate 
important matters related to compliance. Additionally, the holding company has the Group Chief Compliance Officer (CCO) 
Committee composed of the CCO of the holding company and CCOs of the three companies. This committee deliberates 
important matters related to compliance and compliance-related issues for which the Group should share a common 
understanding.

=== PAGE 35 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 88 
 
C 
 
 
 
 
Description of Construction and Operation Structure and Responsibilities 
The Project management team will supervise and oversee development, construction and operation activities in order to 
ensure an integrated and sustainable process. The engineering and environmental team will provide supporting 
supervision and oversight throughout the construction period and expert external advisors will also be retained to provide 
complementary services and independent advice during construction. Further, commercial and community engagement 
activities will support the Project throughout the development, construction and operation phases. 
 
The construction and operation arrangements for the principal Project components are detailed below: 
 
PSH Plant 
The Espejo de Tarapacá project company will develop, construct and manage the operations of the plant.  
 
Construction 
Construction of the PSH facility will include separate contracts for specific components. Figure 7 below summarizes the 
principal contracts required for construction of the PSH facility and indicates the type of contract to be executed in each 
case.  The contract boundaries have been defined to avoid potential interference among contractor scope of work and to 
ensure that each contractor has exclusive access and control over its relevant work area.  It should be noted that during 
2016, the Project held tender processes in order to select contractors for the principal contracts and as a result, over 80% 
of PSH plant budget, not including contingencies, is based on executed contracts or firm contractor bids.

=== PAGE 36 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 88 
 
C 
Figure 7: Principal Contracts for PSH Power Plant 
 
Operations 
The Project’s PSH Operations team will supervise, control, operate and maintain the pumped storage plant and 
transmission facilities.  However, major maintenance will be performed by third parties and temporary employees. Figure 
8 below details the organizational chart for the PSH plant after start-up of commercial operations.  
 
Figure 8: Organizational Chart for PSH 
 
 
PV Plant 
The Cielos de Tarapacá project company will develop and oversee the construction and operations of the plant.  
 
Construction 
The Cielos de Tarapacá project company will execute a turn-key EPC agreement with a qualified third-party for 
construction of the PV plant and related transmission facilities. Figure 9 below summarizes the principal contracts required 
for construction of the PV facility.  The Project plans to conduct a competitive tender process in order to ensure best 
available EPC terms in light of the increasingly competitive PV market. 
 
Figure 9: Principal Contracts for the PV Power Plant 
 
 
Operations

=== PAGE 37 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 88 
 
C 
The PV plant will be operated and maintained under an O&M agreement with a proven solar operator, at least for the first 
several years of operation until an internal team can be appropriately trained and qualified.

=== PAGE 38 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 86 
 
C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
The Project development schedule summarized in Figure 10 presents an overview of Project’s outputs and activities in delivering impacts on mitigation 
and adaptation. The Project is targeting execution of a PPA during 2019 (with an initial supply delivery date of January 2025) in order to reach financial 
close and commence preliminary construction works in July 2020. Considering a construction period of approximately 4.5 years, which includes a 6 month 
delay contingency period, the estimated commercial operation date of the Project is in Q1 2025. The solar plant will initiate operations in phases between 
Q3 2023 and Q4 2024.    
 
Most of the benefits are derived from the electric generation infrastructure and the stakeholder engagement plan.  It should be noted that the desalination 
plant will be constructed during the preliminary works phase and as a result, the Project will be able to start providing water supplies to the communities 
prior to completion of Project construction. 
 
Figure 10: Critical Project Activities and Milestones
 
 
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
1.1.1 Partipation and award in PPA process
1.1.2 Selection of equity investors
1.1.3 Debt project financing process
2.1.1 Construction of PV plant
2.1.2 Initiation of commercial operation of PV plant
2.2.1  Construction of PSH plant
2.2.2 Initiation of commercial operation of PSH plant
3.1.1  Training programs, new economic activities and recreational activities, focusing on empowerment of women
3.2.1  Construction and delivery of water from Project’s desalination plant
Output 3.2: Stable and secure water supply for vulnerable local community
Component 3: Community Works
Output 1.1: Commercial viability of the Project with full funding
Output 2.1: Construction of PV plant which will deliver clean, economic and reliable renewable energy
Output 3.1: Diversification of economic activities, less dependent on ocean resources, in vulnerable local community
Output 2.2: Construction of PSH plant, including desalination plant, which will deliver clean, economic and reliable renewable energy storage
2026 & beyond
Component 1: Project Development & Preparatory Work
Component 2: Project Construction
2024
2025
2020
2021
2022
2023
Program Implementation
2019

=== PAGE 39 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 86 
 
C

=== PAGE 40 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 88 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme, in consideration of other alternatives. 
 
Summary 
GCF will support the Project, Espejo de Tarapaca, and the beneficiary country, Chile, by providing 1) early equity 
investment and 2) policy guidance as a leading climate institution for the Chilean energy regulatory agency to recognize 
and establish the appropriate economic incentives for the installation of technologies which provide multi-service system 
benefits.  
 
1) Early Equity Investment 
The Project has been funded to date by a group of individual private investors, principally Chilean, who were attracted 
by the Project’s unique vision that bulk energy storage is key for developing a 100% renewable electric system and 
committed early but limited financial development support.   It also received support from Start-Up Chile (an early stage 
venture capital fund from the Government of Chile) and Fundación Chile (a public-private NGO which aims to foster 
innovation in order to promote new industries in Chile). To date, the Project has achieved significant milestones spending 
approximately US$ 26 million in development.  However, given the significant capital expenditure of approximately 
US$1.0 billion associated with this large-scale opportunity, the Project needs to incorporate one or more strategic private 
investors to finalize development and complete construction.  To this end, the Project proposes to hire a financial advisor 
to confirm debt and equity terms and selection of strategic investors. 
 
However, the Project faces significant financial and market entry barriers including solid financial capacity, established 
experience and track record, and creditworthy strategic partners, among others.  These barriers prevent large scale, 
unique and ground-breaking investment ideas, such as the Project, from moving forward.  The Chilean electricity market, 
which is based on private ownership and provides no subsidies or economic incentives for renewable power, is highly 
competitive and includes the participation of established power companies, making execution of a PPA increasingly 
challenging for a start-up renewable energy company without a strong balance sheet.  In the particular case of EdT, 
these barriers have prevented the Project from obtaining a solid PPA and in turn, also prohibited incorporation of 
strategic equity investors, who as a rule, are not willing to invest without the guarantee of stable future cash flows. These 
barriers to market entry represent the principal reason for the absence of innovation and start-up companies in the 
development of large-scale energy projects; and is the foundation of EdT’s application for support from the GCF.    
 
Given the Project’s solid economics, which make it possible to offer an energy price below the average variable cost of 
existing coal units in future PPA tender processes, we are confident that a PPA will be obtained along with the early 
stage equity investors and lenders. The objective of GCF’s support is to help fund last stage development expenses, 
including cash funding for guarantees (security bond) which are required to participate in PPA tender processes and 
secure critical permits in 2019. The GCF funds will back the required guarantees for the PPA bidding. If the bidding 
process is not successful, the GCF funds will be reimbursed. In addition, GCF’s participation as an “anchor” equity 
investor in the Project is expected to provide a “stamp of approval” and help attract additional private sector investors.  
Without the GCF support, the Project’s short to medium-term capital needs will likely be unfunded, risking discontinuation 
and termination of the Project.  GCF funding would be value-add during the early years of the Project, with the possibility 
to “crowd-in” once the Project proves it has overcome market risks.  
 
2) Policy Guidance as a Leading Climate Institution 
The GCF aims to support country ownership and align GCF investment in the Project by strengthening the institutional 
capacities of the Chilean National Designated Authority and energy regulations to enable installation of technologies 
which provide multiple system services by establishing the appropriate economic incentives for remuneration of the 
associated costs and benefits.

=== PAGE 41 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 88 
 
 D 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
 
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long-term financial viability 
demonstrated in E.6.3. This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets 
(if applicable). 
 
The Project’s economic competitiveness, which allows it to generate energy below the average variable cost of existing 
coal units, will ensure its long term sustainability.  The Project business model is based on stable cash flows generated 
under a long term PPA with a creditworthy customer, in addition to firm capacity payments from the system. These two 
principal revenue sources account for approximately 80% of total Project revenues and provide solid economic returns 
to both debt and equity investors. The Project’s financial model also includes all operational and long term maintenance 
costs, including equipment overhaul and replacement in order to ensure the long term viability of the assets. The 
competitiveness of the Project is driven by the combination of excellent solar irradiation, the continuing reduction in PV 
solar technology costs and the ideal geographical characteristics of the pumped storage site.  Together these conditions 
allow the Project to provide a 24/7 energy supply which is price competitive—without associated fuel or hydrological 
risk.   In addition to its economic competitiveness, the renewable nature of the Project is also attractive to consumers, 
such as mining operations in northern Chile, seeking to secure long term energy supplies from sustainable and 
environmentally-friendly generators.  
  
The GCF’s support is initially needed in order to de-risk the project’s financial structure and catalyse much needed 
private investment, and help overcome the significant market barriers in the Chilean electricity market for innovative 
start-up projects.  The objective of GCF’s support is to support the final stage of development and participate in the 
Project as an “anchor” equity investor in order to provide a “stamp of approval” and help attract additional private sector 
investors.  Once private sector investors have been incorporated and the Project has established a track record, no 
additional support will be required and in fact, the Project will serve as an innovative model to be replicated in similar 
locations in Chile and worldwide in order to mitigate and adapt to climate change by providing 100% renewable 24/7 
electricity supply.

=== PAGE 42 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 88 
 
 E 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub-criteria and 
assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework.  
 
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project/programme avoids lock-in of long-lived, high emission or 
climate-vulnerable infrastructure. 
 
Mitigation and Adaptation Impact 
The Project will help Chile meet its goals by both mitigating global greenhouse gas emissions and helping the country build 
capacity to adapt to climate change.  The Project seeks to implement the first bulk energy storage project and stimulate the 
paradigm shift in the Chilean electric sector which is transitioning from conventional energy generation to renewable energy.  
At present, Chile’s electricity grid is highly dependent on thermoelectric plants fired with fossil fuels and hydroelectric plants 
which rely upon rain and snowfall, which together represent nearly 80% of the system’s installed capacity. The Project will 
generate approximately 1,500 GWh (net) of clean energy per year, avoiding on average 1,001,187 tonnes of CO2e every 
year and 35 million tonnes of CO2e over the Project’s 35-year evaluation period. The supporting documentation can be 
found in Annexes 9 and 10 which include descriptive procedure report and calculation spreadsheet. 
 
The paradigm shift in the electric sector will require significant investment and installation of VRE capacity.  Given that VRE 
output is driven by the weather and it therefore faces greater variability and uncertainty than that of conventional power 
plants, the energy sector will need to incorporate and adequately manage VRE without sacrificing flexibility or reliability of 
the grid. Energy storage is an important alternative for enhancing system flexibility in order to integrate low carbon energy 
in electricity networks. At present, Chile has very limited battery storage (52 MW, approximately 20 minutes, in a system 
with 24,000 MW of installed capacity) and zero large scale energy storage.  As declared by the International Energy Agency 
in its Policy Report for Chile (2018), large scale or bulk energy storage, such as the Project, will play a key role by providing 
flexibility and catalysing investment in renewable technologies, thereby transitioning the system from high polluting fossil 
fuel-based to zero emission technologies and improving the resilience of the energy system to climate variability. 
 
The PSH storage technology utilized by the Project will also allow the system to store solar or other renewable energies in 
the form of water which is pumped into the reservoir, until it is required by the system.  By converting solar energy into a 
reliable and competitive 24/7 supply, the Project will revolutionize the Chilean electric sector and provide significant strategic 
benefits including:  (i) acceleration of the growth and installation of competitive, reliable and sustainable renewable energy 
capacity, (ii) diversification of Chile’s energy matrix away from contaminating imported fossil fuels and toward domestic 
natural resources—promoting energy independence, (iii) enhancement of grid reliability and flexibility to manage load 
fluctuations that are exacerbated by intermittent renewable energy, and (iv) management of price volatility particularly during 
peak hours. The diversification of the energy mix will improve the resilience of the energy system in Chile against climate 
variability. 
 
In accordance with Chile’s Third Communication – UNFCCC (2016) Report and the Chilean National Climate Change Plan 
2017-2022, Chile has identified nine sectors that are vulnerable to climate change: 1) water resources, 2) biodiversity, 3) 
health, 4) infrastructure, 5) energy, 6) forestry, agriculture and livestock, 7) fishing and aquaculture, 8) cities and 9) tourism. 
The Project will help Chile achieve its mitigation commitments and will also accelerate the implementation of climate change 
adaptation actions at national, regional and local levels.  
 
EdT will directly contribute to the creation of adaptation actions and more resilient communities in three of these sectors 
that are currently experiencing the effects of climate change:  1) Energy by increasing reliable generation not dependent 
on hydrology; 2) Water resources, by using the Project’s desalination plant to provide potable water access to communities 
that do not have stable supply. Indirectly, this will also contribute to creating healthier and more resilient local coastal 
communities; 3) Fishing and Aquaculture by designating a portion of funds provided in the social-productive agreements 
executed with organizations to help coastal communities diversity their local economies, which are highly dependent on

=== PAGE 43 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 88 
 
 E 
natural extraction of sea resources. The social-productive funds will be aligned with the national adaptation plan for climate 
change at national, regional and local levels. 
 
An additional opportunity that can be evaluated in the future relates to the seawater that will be stored in the reservoir, 
which could be potentially used as a source of water supply.  Given that future water shortages are predicted for the desert 
in northern Chile, in part due to climate change, water stored by the Project could potentially be used for desalination and 
subsequent human consumption and/or to supply water to the region’s large mining industry, which currently principally 
uses depleting groundwater resources in mining processes.   
 
Avoidance of Lock-In of Long-Lived, High Emission and Climate-Vulnerable Infrastructure 
The Project will also make a significant contribution in avoiding the lock-in of long-lived, high emission and climate-
vulnerable infrastructure.  As discussed above, the national electric system, the SEN, is currently highly dependent on 
fossil-fuel based (54% of current capacity) and hydroelectric generation (30% of current capacity). In northern Chile, which 
is mostly desert area, the predominance of thermoelectric generation is even more significant with approximately 25 energy 
generation plants, most of which burn coal, natural gas or diesel. In this sense, the avoidance of high emission infrastructure 
is an important contribution to low emission sustainable development pathways. Additionally, the Project will reduce the 
SEN’s dependence on climate-vulnerable infrastructure which includes both hydroelectric generation plants and port 
infrastructure for the import of fossil fuels. In recent years, Chile has been affected by droughts and the closing of ports due 
to ocean swells, both of which have directly affected electric supply.  
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
1,001,187 tCO2eq 
Lifetime 
35 million tonnes of CO2 
• 
Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) 
Total 
. 
Primary direct beneficiaries in vulnerable 
local communities of water security and 
economic diversification: 550 people 
(59% male / 41% female in San Marcos 
and Rio Seco). 
Indirect beneficiaries of increased 
resilience of the energy system against 
climate variability: Chile’s population of 
17.6 million inhabitants (50% male / 50% 
female). 
 
Percentage 
(%) 
Project’s clean, economic and reliable 
renewable energy generation of 
approximately 1,500 GWh per year 
directly benefits 13% of Chile’s population 
equivalent to 2,368,056 inhabitants.   
 
• 
Total tonnes of CO2 eq to be avoided or reduced per annum

=== PAGE 44 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 88 
 
 E 
The Project will avoid on average the emission of 1,001,187 tCO2eq per annum, with a total amount avoided of 35 million 
tonnes of CO2. This estimate considers total energy generation in the 35-year evaluation period, from the start of commercial 
operations in 2025 to 2059 and an emission factor for the grid of 0.667 tCO2e/MWh which was calculated by the external 
consultant ImplementaSur Climate Action using the methodology ACM0002 from the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. This calculation is detailed in the supporting documentation provided in Annexes 9 and 10 
which include a procedure report and calculation spreadsheet. The spreadsheet details the assumptions and the report 
summarizes the selection and applicability of the methodology utilized.    
 
• 
Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries and number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population (e.g. total lives to be saved from disruption due to climate-related disasters)    
 
Beneficiaries from the Project can be identified at the national, regional and local level. Chile’s entire population of 
approximately 17.6 million inhabitants will benefit from a cleaner, more resilient electricity system.  The Project will contribute 
to this improvement directly with the supply of approximately 1,500 GWh of renewable energy annually, avoiding 1,001,187 
tCO2eq per annum, and indirectly by providing additional flexibility to the system and catalysing the development of 
additional renewable energy projects. 
 
The regional community from the Tarapacá Region of approximately 400,000 inhabitants where the Project is located, will 
benefit directly from the creation of new employment and related service opportunities during construction and operation of 
the Project. It has publicly indicated its objective of becoming a leading region in the development of clean energy and as 
a result, it will also indirectly benefit from additional renewable energy projects being constructed in the area as a result of 
the Project’s energy storage facility.  It should be noted that this region is facing severe water shortages and potential use 
of the Project’s large natural reservoir in the future to desalinate seawater is also an important upside for the Project and 
the region.   
 
The local communities of approximately 550 inhabitants will benefit directly from the provision of a stable water supply and 
funds to diversify the local economy, which is highly dependent on sea products that have been in steady decline in recent 
years due to over-exploitation and climate change.  As part of the collaboration agreement executed with the local 
community, the Project agreed to provide it with potable water (sold at cost) from the desalination plant that will be built for 
the PSH facility and also create funds for fishing and related local organizations for implementation of economic 
development projects.  At present, potable water supplied from depleting groundwater sources is currently transported by 
truck from Iquique (approximately 100 km.) twice monthly.    The Project plans to play a key role not only in the development 
of the local community as a whole, but particularly in the empowerment of women by creating new economic activities, 
providing training opportunities and developing recreational activities.  
 
It is important to note that indicators such as the expected increase in the number of households with access to low emission 
energy are hard to determine as the generation of energy is not for individual or communal use, but all electric generation 
is injected into the SEN for supply to the interconnected system. 
 
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyse impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)

=== PAGE 45 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 88 
 
 E 
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s expected contributions to global low-carbon and/or climate-resilient 
development pathways could be scaled-up and replicated including a description of the steps necessary to accomplish it. 
 
The Project’s large natural reservoir is highly scalable, facilitating the addition of several similar PSH plants.  Moreover, 
additional power plants using the same reservoir can be built at a lower unitary cost by taking advantage of the certain 
portions of the existing infrastructure (powerhouse access tunnel and access roads, among others).  The energy storage 
provided by the pumped storage plant can also be paired with other types of intermittent renewable technologies such as 
third party solar and/or wind—catalysing significant renewable energy investments by enabling them to deliver 24/7 power. 
  
The Project’s innovative seawater pumped-storage hydroelectric design can be replicated in geographic locations with 
suitable topography both in Chile and around the globe, resolving the problem of intermittency by integrating it with other 
renewable technologies.  In 2013, Valhalla together with researchers from Stanford University completed an extensive 
study which identified the natural concavities found along the coasts of Chile, Peru and Mexico.  As shown in Figure 11 
below, this study identified the locations with the natural depressions and greatest energy storage potential.   
 
Figure 11: Study of Energy Storage Potential Estimates14 
 
 
Additionally, as described briefly in last section, it should be noted that the desert region where the Project is located is 
facing severe water shortages and potential use of the large natural reservoir in the future to desalinate seawater is also 
an important upside for the Project and other replicable pumped storage seawater projects.  In fact, an article prepared by 
researchers from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the University of Hawaii suggests co-locating and 
combining pumped hydro plants with reverse osmosis desalination plants in drought stricken mountainous areas and 
describes an algorithm that weights distance from the ocean and mountain height to explore where around the world such 
combined energy and water systems might be located. The paper notes that in addition to resolving supply problems, this 
combination could reduce capital investments and also solve the desalination brine disposal challenge, since much more 
                                                             
14 Charles Barnhart, Reid Parsons and Sally Benson, Energy Storage Potential Estimates Using GIS-Based 
Topographic Analysis, Stanford University’s Global Climate and Energy Project.

=== PAGE 46 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 88 
 
 E 
water is required to generate power than to generate fresh water, allowing brine outflow to be diluted by turbine output 
water.15  
 
Figure 12:  Theory of Change for Scaling Up and Replication 
 
 
Figure 12 above describes a theory of change for the scaling up and replication of renewable bulk energy storage and 
meaningful and effective community engagement model. The logic framework presents the main activities and direct 
outcomes of the Project. Finally, the expected impacts of the Project are presented as they contribute to an overall paradigm 
shift in the Chilean energy sector within the context of low emission development. 
 
 
                                                             
15 Integrated Pumped Hydro Reverse Osmosis systems, Alexander H. Slocum, Maha N. Haji, A. Zachary Trimble, 
Marco Ferrara, Sasan J. Ghaemsaidi, Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments, Volume 18, December 
2016.  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2213138816300492

=== PAGE 47 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 88 
 
 E 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions. 
 
Technical and Community Track Record  
The Project’s innovative design provides an opportunity to gain experience and knowledge in the integration of two proven 
technologies, PV and PSH, to provide firm 24/7 energy.  In this sense, the Project will provide information and establish a 
track record for the design, construction and operation of large scale commercial PSH plants operated with seawater which 
can be replicated in other places, as the Stanford and MIT reports mentioned above suggest. 
 
The Project will also provide an opportunity to gain knowledge and experience in the continued implementation of its 
precedent setting community engagement programs throughout the construction and operating phases.  The Project’s goal 
is to implement the Project while creating benefits –social development– for adjacent communities beyond the generation 
of clean electricity.  The community engagement program will continue to focus on the development of economic activities, 
wellbeing and health, gender equality and the empowerment of women, as well as helping to create local communities 
more resilient to climate change. The community engagement program will be led by the Project NGO, Fundación Espejo 
de Tarapacá, which will work on the execution of the community agreements through the co-construction of governance 
with local organizations. The NGO will take into consideration the needs of the beneficiaries and develop programs oriented 
towards collective learning, with a bottom up approach, and will ensure the development of local institutions.  
 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Sharing of Lessons Learned  
The frequency of results monitoring and evaluation will serve as inputs for sharing lessons learned so that they can be 
incorporated in other projects, as well as in improvements to the Project itself. The Project plans to be open for guided tours 
and meetings for organizations interested in the Project’s development, design and operations.  Furthermore, the Project 
plans to continue to actively participate in distinct local, national and international conferences, seminars and other public 
opportunities, in order to share the Project’s design, track record and lessons learned, openly discussing its experience and 
vision as it has done since Project inception. 
 
An accountability policy will also be implemented. The Project will produce an annual sustainability report in order to 
document and share the progress of the Project in distinct areas.  Accordingly, EdT will continue to work with stakeholders 
in the same transparent manner.  
 
The Project is interested in promoting the replicability of this innovative 24/7 renewable baseload solution in Chile and 
around the globe.  In this sense, the Project is willingly participate in conferences and seminars to explain and promote this 
solution.  It is also willing to prepare presentations and papers which contribute to providing knowledge and learning of this 
solution for application in other locations.   
 
In addition to above, MUFG and the sponsors will prepare some type of media (video or presentation) to disclose and share 
the Project development information and present the Project as a case study for other emerging countries’ governments.  
The Project and MUFG will also prepare a manual which details the communication strategy, publications, outreach to 
communities and industries for sharing of the Project development know-how/experiences.

=== PAGE 48 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 88 
 
 E 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low-carbon and/or resilient development that go beyond the program. 
Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples include: 
• 
Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region 
• 
Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for projects/programme 
 
As demonstrated by the Project’s expected economics in the financial model included in Annex 2, the Project will achieve 
a long term, low carbon and financially sustainable outcome with sustained participation of private sector investors. In this 
sense, the financial viability of the Project will provide multiple benefits to the energy sector in Chile, promoting renewable 
pumped storage hydro and bulk energy storage initiatives. 
 
As a ground-breaking and innovative renewable energy storage project, EdT will stimulate similar investments within Chile 
and internationally—both by setting a precedent and establishing a track record. The Project will also attract create an 
enabling environment within the financial sector by reducing risks and attracting private sector investors and financial 
institutions to invest in innovative climate change initiatives.  
 
The Project’s innovative design also provides an opportunity to gain experience and knowledge in the integration of two 
proven technologies, PV and PSH, to provide firm 24/7 energy. Additionally, the Project will provide information and 
establish a track record for the design, construction and operation of large scale commercial PSH plants operated with 
seawater which can be replicated in other places. Finally, it is important to note that with GCF involvement, the Project will 
be able to contribute overcoming systematic barriers to low carbon development in Chile, as stated in section C.2, catalysing 
impacts beyond the scope of the Project.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low-emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low-emission policies, 
and/or improve climate-responsive planning and development. 
 
Since inception, Valhalla has been proactive in promoting its vision in the definition of electricity storage within the Chilean 
legal framework in order to systematically promote investment in low emission development. In 2015 and 2016, it actively 
participated in the discussion of new standards for PSH technology given the existing regulatory void for this type of 
technology and the need to provide regulatory certainty for investors. In 2016, a new regulation for “Pumped Storage Plants 
Without Hydrological Variation” was enacted to confirm the dispatch and operation of pumped storage plants.   
 
The Chilean regulator is currently implementing a participative process to design new transmission and ancillary service 
regulations which include energy storage as a critical technology type.  Valhalla and the Project plan to continue to 
participate in these and other critical sector discussions in order to actively promote policies which facilitate the installation 
of multi-service energy storage and increase the system’s capacity for the installing VRE while also making it more secure 
and resilient, in order incentivize low carbon development, as well as to promote the mainstreaming of climate 
considerations in national policies.  The successful construction and operation of the PSH plant will provide critical 
experience and demonstrate the effectiveness of proactively incorporating new innovative technologies in the regulatory 
framework,  
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact

=== PAGE 49 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 88 
 
 E 
 
Economic Co-Benefits  
Construction of the Project will be performed by major contractors who will hire temporary workers for a variety of semi-
skilled, skilled, and unskilled jobs. The construction contracts include an incentive for hiring local labour. For the permanent 
operations of the PSH plant, the Company expects to employ approximately 50 employees. For PV plant operations, the 
Company plans to enter into an agreement for operations and maintenance with an experienced supplier who will directly 
contract employees.  
 
Given the Project’s locations in the Tarapacá Region and in particular, its proximity to capital city of Iquique with population 
of around 200,000 (the PSH plant is located 100 km south of Iquique and the PV plant is located 80 km southeast of 
Iquique), it is expected that the city and other surrounding population centres, will benefit from the expenditures made by 
contractors and temporary employees (i.e., accommodations, goods and services, etc.). 
 
Social Co-Benefits  
 
Community engagement based on the establishment of early, transparent, meaningfully participative and empathetic 
relationships with the community—has been an integral and fundamental part of the Project’s development.  Interaction 
with the local communities located close to the PSH plant location (the fishing villages, Caletas San Marcos and Rio Seco) 
was initiated in 2012, approximately 2 years prior to submission of the environmental permit for the PSH plant, in order to 
address community concerns in early development.  Collaboration agreements have been executed with the community 
which govern the Project’s interaction during development, construction and operation of the plant.  These agreements set 
a precedent by recognizing the Project’s responsibility to respect the lives and values of communities affected by its 
development, construction, and operations and work together for mutual benefit.  
 
The agreement executed with local community organizations, which includes the neighbourhood council, fishermen’s union, 
and kelp gatherers’ union, includes the following stipulations which aim to share the benefits of successful Project 
advancement and completion with these affected groups (a detailed summary of the provisions in all executed community 
agreements is included in Annex 5 in the Gender Action Plan):  
 
• 
Creation of a development fund for the San Marcos Fishermen’s Union to help them implement economic 
development projects (~$100K USD/year) upon start of construction; 
• 
Creation of a social fund for Caleta San Marcos to support economic development projects and student 
scholarships throughout the operation of the PSH plant (~$95K USD/year); 
• 
Creation of a development fund for the Kelp Harvesters’ to build a meeting space and other economic 
development projects (~$70K USD one-time payment with $10K USD/year for the first 5 years of operation); 
• 
Creation of a development fund for the Rio Seco Fishermen´s Union to help them implement economic 
development projects (~$100K USD/year for seven years); 
• 
Creation of a social fund for Caleta Rio Seco to support economic development projects and student 
scholarships (~$45K USD/year for four years); 
• 
Provision of potable water for Caletas San Marcos and Rio Seco at a fraction of the current cost (potable water 
is currently trucked in from Iquique), which will help to significantly improve their quality of life and health; 
• 
Incentive for construction contractors to hire local labour.  
 
Additional details regarding the community agreements and their respective investment execution plans can be found in 
Annex 1 of the Gender Action Plan which is attached to this Funding Proposal in Annex 5.  
 
Improved access to education  
During the development stage, a school-levelling program was implemented to help adults finish primary and secondary 
education and in May 2015, the Project’s office was expanded to include a public connectivity centre for use by students 
and other residents, who previously did not have access to the internet.

=== PAGE 50 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 88 
 
 E 
The Company has also implemented training programs for community members interested in taking part in the semi-skilled 
and skilled tasks that will be required during construction and operations. Further, the social fund will support education 
programs during the operating life of the PSH plant. 
 
Improved regulation or cultural preservation 
During the environmental review process for the PSH plant, extensive marine-related modelling and analysis was 
performed, confirming that the Project is compatible with the fishing activity and it will continue to promote maintaining and 
preserving the traditional marine-related culture.   
 
The Project provides a means for families (particularly female-headed households) to sustain a living not solely dependent 
on fishing activities (principally men engage in fishing-related activities) in Caleta San Marcos. At present, the primary 
economic alternative is moving away from existing homes to work in Iquique, the closest urban centre which is at an 
approximately one hour distance by bus. The installation of the Project reservoir in the arid desert also has the potential to 
become a tourist attraction in the area and further facilitate economic opportunities for the community which could be 
indirectly considered as a measure of climate change adaptation for the tourism sector. 
   
The closest community to the PV plant is approximately 8 km from the plant site.  Valhalla initiated contact with the 
communities in the site area prior to submission of the EIA for the PV plant and the Project plans to consider ways to support 
local development in these communities, which are particularly interested in taking advantage of potential opportunities 
during the construction period. 
 
Environmental Co-Benefits  
The main environmental co-benefit from the Project is the provision of a stable large scale source of zero emissions energy, 
as well as the catalysation of investment in other renewable projects, which help clean the Chilean energy grid currently 
highly dependent on fossil fuels.  Similarly, the Project will improve the resilience of the energy system against climate 
variability.  Utilization of the Project for desalinization of seawater in the region would also provide an important future 
environmental co-benefit, reducing the impact of climate variability on groundwater supplies and contributing in this sense 
to the overall health and well-being of the surrounding communities. 
 
Gender-Sensitive Development Impact  
In the community of Caleta San Marcos, a dramatic gender gap remains related to workforce participation and income 
inequality, among others. The historic cultural operation of fishing industries dominated by males is one of the principal 
causes for this inequality. Additionally, low levels of education and the lack of economic opportunities beyond those related 
with the fisheries also contribute to the current realities of women in Caleta San Marcos. 
 
The Project plans to play a key role not only in the development of the community which is vulnerable to climate change, 
but specifically in the empowerment of women.  As detailed in the Gender Action Plan in Annex 5, the Project plans to focus 
on implementing programs to help improve gender equality to ensure that women and men have equal access to the 
opportunities, benefits, and decision-making processes associated with the Project. The contribution of the Project will also 
be monitored on regular basis in order to measure progress and also detect early on any potential cultural friction related 
to gender equality issues or tensions within the community as a result of the new economic opportunities. The Gender 
Action Plan developed by the Project details specific objectives, outcomes and activities that will be followed to improve 
gender equality in Caleta San Marcos.  In implementing successful community engagement, an important goal of the Project 
will be to empower local women to act as agents of change in a community that is already experiencing the negative impacts 
of climate change.  
 
The Gender Action Plan proposed by the Project includes the following specific initiatives for promoting gender equality 
and the empowerment of women: 
 
• 
Psychological training sessions with local men and women during early construction period to educate and sensitize 
the community regarding gender equality and the empowerment of women (~$30K); 
• 
Training sessions with local women during early construction period to promote economic opportunities (~$15K);

=== PAGE 51 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 88 
 
 E 
• 
Counselling/training sessions during early construction period to improve networking capacity and establish 
mentoring relationships with women in business or leadership positions in other communities (~$25K); 
• 
Counselling/training sessions during early construction period to promote social participation and knowledge and 
utilization of networking (~$10K); 
• 
Program during early construction period for providing microcredits to women (~$75K); and  
• 
Training and mentoring sessions related to business management, accounting and credit agreements (~$25K). 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and 
groups, overall income level, etc). 
 
In accordance with Chile’s Third Communication – UNFCCC (2016), Chile possesses seven of nine characteristics 
that the UNFCCC uses to define vulnerability and needs to focus on effective climate change adaptation strategies in 
these sectors: water resources, biodiversity, forestry & agriculture, fishing and aquaculture, energy, infrastructure, cities 
and coastal areas, health and tourism.  EdT will contribute to climate change adaptation in three of the vulnerable 
sectors as detailed below.   
 
Energy Sector 
Chile’s electric grid is very dependent on hydrology.  At present, 30% of the system’s installed capacity is comprised 
of dam and run-of-river hydroelectric power plants. This is alarming, since climate change has resulted in a decrease 
of more than 20% in available hydroelectric energy, comparing the last 5 years to the last 56 years. This reduction of 
21% represents more than 5,726 GWh of energy that has not been available each year during the last 5 years. 
Additionally, climate change has not only increased the vulnerability of the water dependent Chilean electric grid, but 
also increased the number and probability of natural disasters occurring in Chile, as presented in the 2017 Global 
Climate Risk Index. 
The past seven years have been catalogued as part of the ten driest hydrological years of the past six decades. 
Additionally, ports more frequently have had to close for fossil fuel imports due to strong swells and cities have suffered 
blackouts due to landslides and extreme temperatures that have provoked extensive wild fires.  In 2017, 57% of Chile’s 
total energy generation was thermoelectric (provided by coal-fired or natural gas-fired plants which utilize imported 
fuel) and 29% was hydroelectric. 
 
The Project will help Chile build capacity to adapt to climate change by improving grid flexibility and catalysing additional 
investments in variable renewable energy and also by reducing the national grid’s dependence on fossil fuels and 
hydrology affected by droughts (In 2017, Chile’s power generation was comprised of 57% thermoelectric generation 
and 29% hydroelectric). 
 
Water Resources Sector 
In the arid desert of northern Chile, drinking water is a critical issue and at present, the local communities surrounding 
the Project do not have access to stable drinking water supply.  Potable water is currently sourced from groundwater 
and transported to the communities by truck.  The local communities located close to the PSH site, Caletas San Marcos 
and Rio Seco, are extremely vulnerable communities dependent almost exclusively on sea-related economic activities.  
Currently, they receive subsidized water supplies from the regional capital (100 km north) which delivers water in trucks 
twice a month. At present, this provides approximately ~20L/day per person, significantly below the optimum of 100 
L/day recommended by the World Health Organization. As part of the general agreements between the Project and 
San Marcos, a supply of 50 m3/day will be provided at cost by the Project’s desalination plant to the local water council, 
enough to raise the level of water per person to ~150L/day. Additionally, Rio Seco’s rural water council will be provided

=== PAGE 52 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 88 
 
 E 
at cost with a supply of 25 m3/day. The Project’s desalination plant will contribute indirectly to improve the quality of 
health and well-being at the local level. 
 
Fishing and Aquaculture Sector 
The economies of the local communities close to the Project, Caletas San Marcos and Rio Seco, are highly dependent 
on sea products that have been in steady decline in recent years due to over-exploitation and change in water 
temperatures which is attributed to climate change. The Project agreements executed with the communities includes 
annual funds to support development of new lines of work that can help the community adapt to the harvesting of fewer 
traditional resources. Additionally, in San Marcos, the Project will supply 15 m3/day of water for use in a processing 
plant in order to add value to their products. The Project will help these economies adapt by seeking new opportunities 
and enhancing the productivity of aquaculture projects, thereby improving overall community wellbeing.    
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• 
Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market) 
• 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. 
 
As reported by the World Bank, Chile has been one of Latin America’s fastest-growing economies in recent decades, 
enabling the country to significantly reduce poverty.  Between 2000 and 2015, the population living in poverty 
decreased from 26% to 7.9% and the middle class is growing. Nevertheless, GDP growth fell from a high of 6.1%in 
2011 to 1.5% in 2017 because of declining copper prices, which negatively affected private investment and exports. In 
this context, the unemployment rate has remained relatively stable, largely due to rising self-employment in response 
to the stagnation of wage employment. Growth is expected to recover during 2018-2020 as private-sector prospects 
improve and copper prices rise. 
 
The population closest to the Project displays a low socio-economic level and its principal productive activity is fishing, 
or the extraction of sea products. Major barriers for the development of the affected population include lack of access 
to drinking water, sewage service and stable work. Detailed information related to the local community is presented in 
Section E.4 and in the Gender Action Plan included in Annex 5. 
 
Chile’s private market-based electric sector regulation does not recognize the social benefits and externalities related 
to installation of renewable energy or energy storage.  As a result, despite the social economic benefits from emission 
reductions, in addition to the flexibility and resiliency benefits that the Project would provide to the electric system, it 
must compete head-to-head with existing depreciated generation facilities as well as new generation projects. The 
regulator has recognized the need to implement remuneration for ancillary services, primarily in response to the rapid 
incorporation of intermittent wind and solar projects. Additionally, in the past, the regulator has considered the potential 
incorporation of storage as part of the transmission system.  However, operating markets and related compensation 
for both new initiatives are highly uncertain and not expected to be functioning prior to 2020.     
 
While Chilean capital markets and power regulatory frameworks are well-established, the local market lacks depth and 
availability of long-term capital for large scale renewable energy projects, particularly those introducing new and 
innovative concepts, such as energy storage.  Additionally, the scale of the Project, which requires investment capacity 
of close to US$ 1.1 billion, including debt and equity, is extremely large for the relatively small Chilean market.  
Development and international commercial banks have been responsible for the majority of long term project financing 
for electric generation projects over the past 5 years.  Given the significant amount of exposure to Chile related to 
recent projects, the development banks have slowed their lending activities, leaving a gap in available funding.

=== PAGE 53 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 88 
 
 E 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low-emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and 
institutional framework, or includes policy or institutional changes. 
 
Contribution to Chile’s Priorities for Low Emission and Climate Resilient Development  
Prior to its participation in COP21, Chile submitted its climate action plan to the UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) in September 2015. This “Intended Nationally Determined Contribution” (“INDC”) includes the 
following commitments: 
 
• 
Reduction in CO2 emissions per capita by 30% versus 2007 levels (i.e., down from 1.02 tCO2e/million CLP$ 
2011 to 0.71 tCO2e/million CLP$ 2011); 
• 
Contingent upon receiving international grants, reduction in CO2 emissions per capita by 35-45% versus 2007 
levels (i.e., down from 1.02 tCO2e/million CLP$ 2011 to 0.56-0.66 tCO2e/million CLP$ 2011); 
• 
Sustainable management and recovery of 100,000 hectares of forest, representing captures and reduction of 
greenhouse gases estimated at 600,000 tCO2e per annum beginning in 2030; 
• 
Contingent on extension of Decree-Law 701 and the approval of a new forestry development act, reforestation 
of 100,000 hectares, representing captures of 900,000-1,200,000 tCO2e per annum beginning 2030. 
 
In 2016, the authorities, with a wide consensus from a diverse number of stakeholders, agreed on the 2050 Energy 
Agenda which includes the following goals: 
 
• 
At least 70% of total energy generation sourced from renewable energy by 2050; 
• 
Increased reliability of the electric system, with downtimes that should not exceed 1 hour per year on a regional 
basis;  
• 
Reduction in electricity prices in order to rank third among OECD countries with lowest energy prices. 
 
In 2018, the government announced its 2018-2022 Energy Plan which includes initiation of a program to “decarbonise” 
the existing energy matrix.  In accordance with this initiative the government has formalized a working group led by the 
Ministry of Energy with participation from the energy sector, in particular the owners of existing coal-fired facilities, to 
analyse the current situation and design a timetable for the retirement of coal facilities which do not possess adequate 
systems for capture of CO2.  In 2017, coal generation represented 39% of total national generation, requiring 
decarbonisation to be accompanied with investment in renewable generation alternatives in order maintain supply.  It 
should be noted that the 2018-2022 Energy Plan also contains other important objectives such as multiplying 
distributed renewable generation, increasing the circulation of electric vehicles, and implementing a regulatory 
framework for promoting energy efficiency and creating an “energy culture” in the country, among others. Through the 
installation and operation of 900 MW of renewable energy capacity, the Project would make a significant contribution 
to Chile’s energy policy objectives.  
 
In addition to energy, EdT will also directly contribute to two of the other top priority areas in the Chilean National 
Climate Change adaptation plan 2017-2022: water resources and fishing & aquiculture, helping to build communities 
more resilient to climate change.     
 
Support of Chiles Enabling Policy and Institutional Framework 
The Project will help Chile meet its renewable energy targets, address the goals of its national energy agenda and 
comply with its commitments under the Paris Agreement. These goals, centred on environmental and energy reliability 
concerns, indicate that this is the optimal time to implement paradigm-changing solutions in the electricity sector. This 
general agreement has translated into vocal support by public officials and media for the Project.  In this context, the 
Project would help Chile achieve all of its stated goals, strengthening implementation of the Paris Agreement, both by

=== PAGE 54 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 88 
 
 E 
mitigating global greenhouse gas emissions and helping the country to build capacities to adapt to climate change, 
particularly in the energy, water resources and fishing and aquaculture sectors. 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the 
activities that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme. 
 
Energía de Tarapacá: Executing Entity 
The Executing Entity, Energía de Tarapacá, is at present wholly-owned by Valhalla.  Valhalla assembled a highly 
qualified multi-disciplinary team for development of the Project which effectively integrates expertise, innovation and 
extensive local and international experience in the development, financing, construction and operation of electric 
generation plants.  Valhalla’s internal team includes professionals specializing in critical development areas such as 
commercial strategy and planning, logistics and permitting, community engagement, and finance and administration.  
Additionally, Valhalla has also engaged:  an extensive team of expert external advisors to assist in development 
activities, specialized independent consultants to review and verify key Project issues, and qualified contractors to 
confirm technical specifications and capital expenditures.   
 
The Project’s external advisors and consultants have included the following renowned experts, among others:  Poch 
(Engineering & Environmental), Skava Consulting (Engineering), +MG (Environmental), Gestión Ambiental 
Consultores (Environmental), Norconsult & Multiconsult (Engineering), Voith Hydro (Equipment Engineering), PRDW 
Consulting (Intake Coastal Engineering), CDM Smith (Reservoir Membrane), GTD Ingenieros Consultores 
(Transmission), Leidos (Independent Engineering), EN Engineering (Corrosion Engineering), Moray Development 
(Development & Project Finance), Philippi Abogados (Regulatory Counsel), Claro y Cia. (Project Finance Counsel), 
Vergara Galindo Correa Abogados (Environmental & Permitting Counsel), Corpo Communications (Communications), 
E&Y (Auditing), Deloitte (Tax Accounting), Fundación Chile (Stakeholder Engagement), Fundación Casa de la Paz 
(Stakeholder Engagement) and Consensus Building Institute (Stakeholder Engagement). 
 
Since inception, Valhalla has proactively communicated its vision amongst authorities, academics, communities and 
other stakeholders positioning the Company as a model for the future development of large scale energy infrastructure 
in Chile. The Company has been recognized with multiple awards and has received extensive media coverage, locally 
and internationally. 
 
 
MUFG Bank (Accredited Entity) 
Building on over 350 years of financial expertise, Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group (“MUFG”) has grown to become one 
of the largest comprehensive financial groups in the world. Today MUFG’s global network spans over 50 countries and 
regions, and employs 150,000 financial professionals in over approximately 2,300 offices, providing customers with a 
deep and diverse range of services and resources, to meet their local, regional and global financial needs. 
 
The project finance practice within MUFG provides clients access to its global lending and capital markets businesses. 
MUFG has been Global No.1 in MLA League Table of Project Finance International (PFI) 16 for seven years in a row 
from 2012. MUFG was also ranked Global No.1 for the third straight year since 2016 in Clean Energy & Energy Smart 
Technology under Bloomberg New Energy Finance Asset Finance Lead Arrangers League Table. 
 
MUFG Bank plays an active role in the Project, will channel the resources to the Project as a private accredited entity 
and monitor the Project’s compliance with the Fund’s standards (social, environmental, fiduciary and gender). MUFG 
Bank’s supervision of the Project will be based on a periodic review of the Project provided by the Executing Entity. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
                                                             
16 http://www.pfie.com/Journals/2018/01/23/m/i/k/PFILeagueTables2017.pdf

=== PAGE 55 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 88 
 
 E 
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with 
NDAs on the funding proposal and the no-objection letter. 
 
Please also specify the multi-stakeholder engagement plan and the consultations that were conducted when this 
proposal was developed.  
 
National Designated Authority  
In January 2018, the Project met with Chile’s NDA, which is led by the Economic Sustainability and Natural Resource 
Management Department of the Ministry of Finance.  EdT provided the NDA with all documentation related to its 
proposal for GCF funding and a series of meetings were held.  These meetings included presentation of the Project to 
an “Experts Panel” established by the NDA which was comprised of representatives from government and commercial 
banks, electric industry consultants and academics, among others.  The Panel reviewed the Project’s proposal and 
documentation, posed questions and provided comments. 
 
On January 31, 2018, the National Designated Authority of Chile, the Ministry of Finance, provided a “no-objection” 
letter to the GCF with regard to the Espejo de Tarapacá Project, confirming that EdT conforms to Chile’s national 
priorities, strategies and plans and all relevant laws and regulations.   
 
Stakeholder Consultations and Engagement  
The Project conducted a stakeholder engagement process at a national, regional and local level. This process was 
initiated at a very early stage, by preparing a stakeholder map and conducting preliminary interviews.  The Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan implemented was designed to maintain fluent communication and relationships with the distinct 
stakeholders over the life of the Project. Once the stakeholders had been identified, meetings were coordinated with 
the most relevant parties to inform them about the Project and listen to their comments, questions and concerns.  It 
should be noted that as part of the EIA approval processes for the PSH and PV plants, the Project also conducted the 
required formal “meaningful community participation” processes which include numerous community meetings and 
presentations to inform the communities about the Project and address their observations and concerns. 
 
At a national level, the Project has been presented to leading figures in the political, academic, environmental and 
social spectrum. During the last several years, Valhalla has received numerous invitations to present the Project in 
conferences in Chile and abroad. It also organized a local energy storage conference in order to discuss the impact 
storage, and the Project in particular, could have on Chile, attracting more than 100 participants, among them leading 
authorities and figures from the energy sector. The Project has received broad positive support at the national level. 
The energy authorities view it as an opportunity to implement an innovative project which will provide flexibility and 
resilience to the energy grid. Environmental organizations and authorities also view the Project as an opportunity to 
reduce CO2 emissions and diversify away from fossil fuels without sacrificing stability. 
  
The regional stakeholders located in the Tarapacá Region, where the Project is located, are highly dependent on the 
mining industry and local authorities have published plans to boost the renewable industry as an alternative to a more 
sustainable and diverse economy. The Project has been identified as a perfect fit to this end and the region is also 
aware of the Project’s opportunity to serve as an innovative initiative which can be replicated in other areas of the 
world.  A seminar was organized with a local university to present the Project and other relevant energy technologies 
to the broader community. Valhalla’s management also taught a university class on “Sustainable Development” from 
2014 to 2016 at a local university in northern Chile. 
  
On a local level, the Project has prioritized engagement with local communities, establishing an early, transparent and 
empathic relationship, before initiating the preliminary engineering and environmental studies. This process was early 
and included active participation from senior management, in order to understand, consider and address potential 
community concerns during early project development.  In particular, a significant amount of time and effort has been 
invested in establishing a proactive, transparent and solid relationship with the San Marcos fishing village located close 
to the PSH plant. As the community’s principal concerns were related to the impact the Project would have on sea 
resources, most of community team’s time was focused on this issue in the early years of engagement. Local fishermen 
participated in the execution of the marine studies, new studies were executed at the communities’ request and

=== PAGE 56 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 88 
 
 E 
independent consultants were hired for the community which were paid for by the Project. After these issues had been 
advanced, discussions were held regarding how the Project would contribute to local development.  The Project and 
several local organizations finally executed collaboration agreements which govern their interaction during 
development, construction and operation of the Project. These collaboration agreements were submitted to the 
authorities for inclusion in the environmental permits. 
 
Since there are no existing communities close to the PV plant, less community activities have been undertaken.  The 
closest communities believe that solar plants will bring opportunities for local development. Several meetings were 
held in Pintados, Victoria and Pozo Almonte, communities located at 8 km or more from the Project site, prior to 
submission of the environmental impact study and during its processing. The Project has also committed to work with 
local organizations so that the community can develop the skills necessary to work and provide services during 
construction and operation of the Project and other solar projects. 
 
The Project has gained widespread support and recognition from national, regional and especially local stakeholders.  
It should be noted that the environmental impact studies for the Project were both approved unanimously, with no 
appeals or community opposition. The community collaboration process will remain of the highest priority for the 
Project and Valhalla through all phases of development, construction, and operation. 
 
In addition to above, MUFG Bank as Accredited Entity has grievance mechanisms. 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding 
out private and other public investment. 
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq). 
 
Given that the Chilean electricity market is driven strictly by economic competition without regard to potential social 
benefits, supplying 24/7 renewable energy at a price below the average variable cost of existing coal units in Chile is 
not sufficient to make the Project viable. There are significant financial and market entry barriers to which financial 
capacity, experience and established track record and creditworthy strategic partners. As a result, existing market 
mechanisms require minimum concessionality to stimulate a paradigm shift towards low-emission and climate-resilient 
development. Hence, funding from the GCF is requested in order to overcome barriers and appropriately align financial 
incentives with the economic benefits. 
 
In the particular case of EdT, these barriers have prevented the Project from obtaining a PPA with a creditworthy 
offtaker and in turn, also prohibited incorporation of strategic equity investors, who as a rule, are not willing to invest 
without the guarantee of stable future cash flows. These barriers to market entry represent the principal reason for the 
absence of innovation and start-up companies in the development of large-scale energy projects; and is the foundation 
of EdT’s application for support from the GCF. 
 
The proposed GCF financing is comprised of minority equity. As defined in document B.20/19, “in equity, 
concessionality can be extended as first loss shares in junior positions in tiered funds or can be the “anchor” portion of 
the fund that de-risks the investment and thus catalyses further equity participation, with preferred equity returns for 
the private sector to move the flow of financing to climate finance sectors”. The objective of GCF’s support is to help 
maintain the viability of the Project during this period by providing equity to assist with last stage development expenses 
and by participating in the Project as an “anchor” equity investor in order to provide a “stamp of approval” and help 
attract additional private sector investors. Based on the Project’s solid economics, which make it possible to offer an

=== PAGE 57 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 88 
 
 E 
energy price below the average variable cost of existing coal units in future PPA tender processes, it is confident that 
a PPA will be obtained but are not certain of the timing of execution. 
 
With the support of GCF as an anchor equity investor, the Project is expected to raise approximately US$ 1 billion from 
the private sector, excluding Valhalla’s equity participation.  Of the total private sector investment, approximately 59%, 
equivalent to US$ 647.3 million is expected to be funded with debt from private commercial banks and the remaining 
US$ 360.9 million, representing 81% of Project equity, will be funded by one or more strategic private investors.  The 
financing terms and conditions are based on indicative financing proposals provided by international commercial banks. 
 
Based on the competitiveness and solid economic returns offered by the Project, the potential investment universe of 
investors and financial institutions will include both traditional private sector investors, such as strategic energy 
companies, infrastructure funds, private equity funds, pension funds, insurance companies and commercial banks, as 
well as those entities focused on sustainable, responsible and impact investors.  GCF funding would be value-add 
during the early years of the Project, with the possibility to “crowd-in” once the Project proves it has overcome market 
risks. 
 
Considering the total energy generated during the 35-year evaluation period, the Project will avoid a total amount of 
35 million tonnes of CO2e.  This results in a cost per ton of CO2e avoided of 31.26 USD/tCO2e for the total investment. 
Moreover, the CO2 reductions compared to the total amount invested by the GCF results in the cost per ton of CO2 
avoided of 1.71 USD/tCO2e. 
 
 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
Please provide the co-financing ratio (total amount of co-financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme) and/or the potential to catalyse indirect/long-term low emission investment. 
 
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged). 
 
In the case of EdT, co-financing or leveraged financing from third parties is consistent with the objectives of the GCF 
to mobilize funds at scale from private investment, especially private financial institutions and institutional investors.  
 
The GCF funding proposal is comprised of US$ 60.0 million in direct equity. The Project proposes that the GCF 
participate as an “anchor” equity investor in order to help fund final development expenses and attract additional private 
sectors investors, thereby eliminating significant financial and market barriers and enhancing the viability the Project.   
 
The proposal is that the GCF hold 13% equity participation. Private sector investors in the Project would hold 87% 
equity participation, with Valhalla providing 6% and other strategic private sector investors brought in to fund the 
remaining 81% controlling equity interest.  
 
With the support of GCF as an anchor equity investor, the Project is expected to raise approximately US$ 1,008 million 
from the private sector, excluding Valhalla’s equity participation.  Of the total private sector investment, approximately 
59%, equivalent to US$ 647.3 million is expected to be funded with debt from private commercial banks and the 
remaining US$ 360.9 million, representing 81% of Project equity, will be funded by one or more strategic private 
investors.  Considering both equity and debt co-financing sources, the co-financing ratio of the GCF investment is 
17.5x. 
 
We believe that the role of the GCF, as anchor investor, will be pivotal in catalysing additional indirect/long-term low 
emission investment in the Project. This presumption is based on the interest demonstrated to date from potential 
investors, which include private sector investors such as strategic energy companies, infrastructure funds, pension 
funds or private equity funds, among others.

=== PAGE 58 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 88 
 
 E 
MUFG Bank, as Accredited Entity will be responsible for fund administration. MUFG Bank has its own AML/CFT policy 
which depicted in C7 and does not process any transaction under Sanction imposed by UN and US (OFAC)/Japanese 
authorities. 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the 
analysis conducted in F.1. 
 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention. 
 
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.). 
 
A social economic evaluation considers the social cost of CO2 of 40 USD/tCO2e presented by the President of Chile 
in the Chilean State of the Union address on June 1, 2017. Moreover, it considers savings in energy cost with the 
Project, compared to the average energy cost of thermal units (55 USD/MWh). All of the above results in an unlevered 
social economic rate of return of 14.4%.  It is important to note, that the economic return rate is expected to increase, 
as taxes on thermal units and fossil fuels costs are expected to be levied in the future. 
 
The GCF’s support is initially needed in order to catalyse investment in the Project given the significant financial and 
market entry barriers in the Chilean electricity sector.  The objective of GCF’s support is to support the Project during 
the final stage of development and by participating in the Project as an “anchor” equity investor in order to provide a 
“stamp of approval” and help attract additional private sector investors.  Once private sector investors have been 
incorporated and the Project has established a track record, no additional support will be required and in fact, the 
Project will serve as an innovative model to be replicated in similar locations in Chile and worldwide in order to mitigate 
climate change by providing 100% renewable 24/7 electricity supply.  At this point, the GCF could exit by selling its 
equity participation.

=== PAGE 59 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 88 
 
 E 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. 
 
The Project is committed to adopting and applying best international practices in development, construction, operation 
and maintenance of the Project and to manage and monitor safety, environmental, social and financial risks and 
impacts. 
 
EdT’s two principal generation technologies, photovoltaic solar and pumped-storage hydro, are both proven 
technologies with long track records. Power plants utilizing seawater, although limited in number, have been operating 
for nearly 50 years. The Project’s utilization of seawater requires certain design/supply adjustments to mitigate 
corrosion and such specifications have been incorporated into the PSH design. The Project will utilize world-class EPC 
contractors for the principal construction contracts for the PSH plant.  In addition, it plans to hold a competitive bid 
process to select the PV plant EPC contractor in order to ensure best terms and conditions in the increasingly 
competitive PV market. 
 
The Project efficiently utilizes existing geography and conditions (including Chile’s superb natural solar and 
hydroelectric resources, proximity to the Pacific Ocean and the large natural concavity utilized for the reservoir) and 
has been designed to minimize environmental and social impacts during construction and operation.  The Project does 
not require resettlement as it will be constructed in sparsely populated areas. 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
 
(a) Total project financing 
US$ 1,091,0 
(b) Requested GCF amount  
US$ 60.0  
(c) Co-financing Ratio 
1:18 
(d) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
35 million tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
US$ 31.26  / tCO2eq 
(f) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c) 
US$ 1.71 / tCO2eq 
 
Considering the total energy generated for the 35-year evaluation period, the Project will avoid a total 
amount of 35 million tonnes of CO2.  
 
This results in a cost per ton of CO2 avoided of 31.26 USD/tCO2e for the total investment. Moreover, the 
CO2e reductions compared to the total amount invested by the GCF results in the cost per ton of CO2e 
avoided of 1.71 USD/tCO2e. 
 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)

=== PAGE 60 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 88 
 
 E 
With the support of GCF as an anchor equity investor, the Project is expected to raise approximately US$ 
1,008 million from the private sector, excluding Valhalla’s equity participation.  Of the total private sector 
investment, approximately 59%, equivalent to US$ 647.3 million is expected to be funded with debt from 
private commercial banks and the remaining US$ 360.9 million, representing 81% of Project equity, will be 
funded by one or more strategic private investors.  Including Valhalla’s equity participation, 87% of Project 
equity will come from the private sector.  The financing terms and conditions, including leverage, are based 
on indicative financing proposals provided by international commercial banks. 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)

=== PAGE 61 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 88 
 
 F 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3). 
Based on the above analysis, please provide economic and financial justification (both qualitative and quantitative) for 
the concessionality that GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2. 
 
Project Financial Model 
The Project business model is based on the commercial integration of the PV and PSH plants to provide 24/7 energy 
supply under a long-term PPA with a creditworthy off-taker.  The Project is able to provide a 24/7 supply solution by 
utilizing solar generation from the PV plant which is available during sun-hours to serve the PPA during the day and 
utilizing hydroelectric generation which is available during dark-hours to serve the PPA during the night.  The solar 
generation which is not utilized to serve the PPA is available to pump seawater into the PSH reservoir and the water 
stored in the reservoir can then be released for generation dark hours in the during early morning and evening (see 
Figure 3 for a graphic illustration the solar storage concept). Under the base case, approximately 80% of the Project’s 
revenues are derived from PPA sales and firm capacity payments.   
 
The base case financial model for the Project assumes a non-recourse project finance structure with leverage of 59% 
and award of a PPA for 1,500 GWh per year.  The financing assumptions are based on indicative financing proposals 
received from various project finance banks active in Chile.   As mentioned above, GCF support is requested in order 
to support the Project during the final stage of development and by stimulating private sector investment. The financial 
model and related assumptions have been included in Annex 2. 
 
Key Financial Model Outputs 
Key outputs are largely driven by the economic development and construction costs, efficient operating costs, strong 
PPA revenues, and stable cash flow.   
 
Figure 13: Cash Flow Available to Equity 
 
 
 
 
Rationale and Objective for GCF Support 
The Project has been funded to date by a group of individual private investors, principally Chilean, who were attracted 
by the Project’s unique vision and committed early but limited financial development support.  Given the significant 
capital expenditure of approximately US$ 1 billion associated with this large-scale opportunity, the Project needs to 
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 -
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
USD MM
EBITDA
Cash Flow Available to Equity
Annual Cash Yield

=== PAGE 62 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 88 
 
 F 
incorporate one or more strategic private investors to finalize development and complete construction.  The 
incorporation of new investors is challenging in the highly competitive Chilean electricity market, which does not 
recognize the social benefits associated with renewable power and energy storage.  The objective of GCF’s support is 
to provide funds for last stage development expenses and participate in the Project as an “anchor” equity investor in 
order to provide a “stamp of approval” and help attract additional private sector investors. 
 
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme. 
Project’s Design and Technological Solution 
 
The Project’s innovative design resolves the intermittency problem inherent to solar and wind technologies by effectively 
integrating Chile’s abundant sunlight and seawater resources to ensure electricity availability 24/7.  The Project design 
fundamentals are based upon the availability of solar capacity to provide electricity during daylight hours and 
hydroelectric pumped storage capacity to provide coverage during night-time hours.  The commercial integration of the 
two technologies allows the Project to continuously provide reliable power. 
 
EdT’s two principal generation technologies, photovoltaic solar and pumped-storage hydro, are both proven 
technologies with long track records. Grid-connected photovoltaic solar projects have been operating for over 20 years 
and over 230 GWs are in operation around the world. PSH technology using reversible turbines has been operating 
since the 1930s and over 140 GWs are installed globally today.   
 
The PV plant is comprised of a 561 MW-AC PV solar park which will be constructed in phases.  The solar plant 
equipment will consist of solar panels, inverters, underground and aerial cables, in addition to meteorological stations, 
a control room, O&M office and warehouse.  The PV plant will utilize a single-axis tracking system in order to maximize 
energy output by tilting the panels to follow the sun throughout the day from east to west.  The solar park installations 
also include a 220 kV step-up substation and 18 km transmission line from the site to the existing substation.   
 
The PSH plant installations include reversible pumping equipment located in an underground powerhouse.  When the 
Project is dispatched on a relatively continuous basis, during sun-hours, this equipment pumps water from the ocean 
to the upper reservoir on top of the coastal cliff, and during dark-hours, the equipment generates electricity with the 
water stored in the reservoir, which is released and returned to the ocean.  There will be a single underground bi-
directional water conduction system comprised of the ocean intake and tunnels, which will be used for the water flow 
in both pumping and generating modes.  The turbines and substation will be installed in the underground powerhouse 
cavern approximately 45 m below sea level and all waterways will also be underground.  The combined length of all 
tunnelling totals approximately 5.5 km. The PSH plant installations will also include a 65 km transmission line from the 
PSH plant to the existing substation.   
 
Corrosion Measures 
The Project has extensively prepared for the operation of the PSH Plant with seawater both through the careful selection 
of appropriate anti-corrosive materials and the delineation of maintenance and surveillance procedures to prevent any 
operational issues due to corrosion. The PSH plant has been designed to perform reliably and efficiently with seawater 
by inclusion of, among other things, the following tailored design and equipment measures: 
 
• 
Anti-corrosive steel and paint for exposed components 
• 
Cathodic corrosion protection 
• 
Steel liners in shafts 
• 
Special cement in applicable portions of tunnels and discharge/intake

=== PAGE 63 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 88 
 
 F 
• 
Use of copper-nickel alloy for seawater intake 
• 
Highly resistant impermeable membrane lining for the reservoir 
 
In particular, the Project pre-selected and starting working with a Tier 1 international hydroelectric engineering, 
procurement and construction contractor (EPC contractor) in 2014 in order to confirm the equipment and materials 
required for the PSH plant.  During several years, the EPC contractor performed extensive studies, investigations, 
analyses, tests and R&D work related to the design and development of the manufacturing processes and materials 
required for the Project’s PSH plant.  As a result, the EPC contractor was able to conclude that the materials and 
manufacturing processes chosen for the PSH plant’s components will have sufficient durability and reliability for long 
term operation, specifically considering a corrosive seawater environment.  Additionally, a U.S.-based independent 
engineering firm and corrosion expert conducted a specialized review of the proposed design, protective coatings, and 
maintenance/surveillance procedures, and found that “plant performance will not be impacted by corrosion” given the 
proposed measures. 
 
It should be noted that power plants utilizing seawater, although limited in number, have been operating for more than 
50 years. Power plants such as EDF’s La Rance tidal power project in France (1966) and J-Power’s Yanbaru seawater 
pumped storage project in Japan have operated reliably since their respective commissioning dates.  It should be noted 
that the Project team visited the Yanbaru seawater PSH plant in Japan in July 2015 and obtained first-hand information 
regarding construction, operation and maintenance of this experimental plant.  Additionally, seawater is used in many 
other industrial operations including cooling processes for electric generation (coal, natural gas and nuclear plants), 
regasification processes for liquefied natural gas plants, and for pumping at some of the largest copper mines in Chile 
and other parts of the world. The Project’s utilization of seawater requires certain design/supply adjustments to mitigate 
corrosion and any impact on marine life, and such specifications have been incorporated into the PSH design. 
 
The Project’s excavated tunnels will generally be reinforced with anti-corrosive support material including galvanized 
rock bolts, plastic fibre, corrosion-resistant cement and/or steel-based protected linings, which will be determined on a 
case by case basis depending on the geological and structural conditions found during construction.  
 
It should be noted that the Project proposes to hire an independent engineer to prepare a technical due diligence report 
for the PSH plant in order to confirm the engineering and design and associated Project capital expenditure prior to 
presentation of PPA bid.  The independent engineer’s technical due diligence report would also be made available for 
interested debt and equity investors.   
 
Competitive Analysis of Storage Technologies  
As compared to other energy storage technologies, pumped storage hydro is the most efficient alternative, both 
financially and technically, to meet the current challenge of the energy industry: integration of variable renewable 
energy. As shown in Figure 14 below from Techno-Economic Analysis of Different Energy Storage Technologies (H. 
Ibrahim and A. Ilinca, 2013), storage systems need to be closely adapted to the type of application they are meant to 
support. In the case of energy management, which required both high power output and energy storage capacity, PSH 
technologies are the most efficient.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 14: 
Fields of Application of the Different Storage Technologies According to Stored Energy and Power Output

=== PAGE 64 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 88 
 
 F 
 
 
At present, there are three feasible commercial alternatives that allow for the supply of renewable electricity 24 hours 
a day using storage technologies to complement solar production.  These alternatives and the principal characteristics 
of each are summarized below. 
 
i. 
Thermal Storage or Concentrated Solar Power: Involves the heating of molten salts stored in a large tank, 
with electrical resistance to charge during solar hours and then to discharge heat which produces steam and 
generates electricity with a turbine-generator group.  
• 
Unitary cost: 1350 USD/kW 
• 
Roundtrip efficiency: 35% 
• 
Storage capacity: 5.5 hours 
• 
Lifespan: 25 years 
 
ii. 
Chemical batteries: Involves the utilization of different chemicals to configure a cathode and anode to charge 
and discharge through chemical reactions. Lithium-ion batteries currently are the most cost-effective battery 
alternative for bulk energy storage due to their relatively high density, low self-discharge and high charging 
efficiency.   
• 
Unitary cost: 2850 USD/kW 
• 
Roundtrip efficiency: 85% 
• 
Storage capacity: 10 hours 
• 
Lifespan: 25 years 
 
iii. 
Pumped Hydro: Involves utilization of two vertically separated water reservoirs located at different heights to 
allow potential energy to generate electricity with water previously pumped from the lower reservoir to the 
upper reservoir.  The storage system is charged by pumping water to the upper reservoir and discharged by 
releasing the water which passes through an electricity-generating turbine system.  In the case of EdT, the 
PSH plant is charged with solar energy. 
• 
Unitary cost: 1790 USD/kW 
• 
Roundtrip efficiency: 75% 
• 
Storage capacity: >5 days 
• 
Lifespan: >60 years

=== PAGE 65 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 88 
 
 F 
The technological efficiency of PSH, and particularly of the solution offered by Espejo de Tarapacá, is due to: 
 
• 
The extraordinary geographical situation, taking advantage of the sea as lower reservoir and natural concavities 
as upper reservoir, Espejo de Tarapacá’s total cost is in the lower range of PSH costs, which in turn is the 
largest and most-used storage technology in the world. 
• 
The roundtrip efficiency of pumped storage is 75%, allowing the PSH to efficiently take advantage of the amount 
of daylight hours with low energy prices compared to night hours with high energy prices. 
• 
The large upper reservoir provides security of supply to the system, ensuring the Project a stable capacity 
revenue stream (Chilean regulation requires at least 5 hours of stored capacity every hour available at any time 
of the year in order to benefit from 100% of capacity revenues). 
• 
PSH is the most versatile technology to provide the widest range of ancillary services needed by the market in 
order to integrate high variable renewable energy such as Inertia, Frequency Control, Voltage Control, 
Ramping, and Black-Start Capability, among others. 
• 
The PSH lifespan is greater than 60 years and can be extended even further through refurbishment. 
• 
The technology is scalable: the cost to increase the installed capacity (MW) and storage capacity (days) is 
much lower. 
• 
The technology is sustainable: no recycling, rare minerals or chemical components are required for its life cycle. 
 
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard 
(ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and 
Action Plan.  
Environmental Assessment 
Since the inception of the Project in 2011, Valhalla has made it a priority to develop and design EdT in a manner that 
is sustainable and environmentally-friendly. The environmental approval process in Chile is rigorous, requiring detailed 
preparation, modelling and analysis by project developers. The Project submitted an EIA for the PSH plant and the 
corresponding transmission line in August 2014 and approval was unanimously granted by authorities, without 
opposition or observations, in December 2015.  The Project also submitted an EIA for the PV plant and associated 
transmission line in January 2015 which was unanimously approved, without opposition or observations, in January 
2016. 
Chilean environmental regulations also require extensive monitoring throughout the life of approved projects.  
Additionally, as explained in detail in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) included in Annex 
3, the Project plans to avoid and mitigate negative environmental impacts during all stages of construction and operation 
with detailed monitoring and supervision in order to ensure strict compliance with all permit requirements, applicable 
laws, World Bank Guidelines, and Equator Principles by all Project parties.  The Project will also conduct environmental 
compliance audits and inspections and review and approve all contractor environmental plans and manuals prior to 
initiation of activities. 
Social Assessment 
The Project has also prioritized the establishment of an early, transparent, meaningful and inclusive relationship with 
the local communities.  EdT’s PSH plant is located approximately 100 km south of Iquique, adjacent to the Caleta San 
Marcos fishing village with a population of around 300 inhabitants.  A portion of the main works for the Espejo de 
Tarapacá Project, including the entrance to the powerhouse cavern, the ocean intake and the reservoir, are located 
close to the village. Most of the economic activities in San Marcos are related to the ocean, primarily fishing, and as a

=== PAGE 66 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 88 
 
 F 
result, the community’s principal concern relates to a potential impact from the Project on their livelihood.  Interaction 
with the San Marcos community was initiated in 2012, approximately 2 years prior to submission of the environmental 
permit for the PSH plant, in order to address community concerns in early development.  
In 2012, initial contact with community representatives from San Marcos was made by Valhalla’s founders, who 
explained the Project and expressed their desire to establish an open dialogue with the community and involve them 
throughout project development, by identifying and addressing concerns and finding opportunities for mutual 
collaboration.  Valhalla also engaged external local and international advisors to assist in the community engagement 
process, including the Consensus Building Institute, an international NGO dedicated to promoting dialogue and effective 
stakeholder engagement, in order to help design and facilitate a collaborative and interactive process.  In early 2013, 
three open meetings were held with the community and a separate meeting was conducted with the local fisherman’s 
union. During these meetings the team presented the Project and listened to the concerns of community members. In 
October 2013, the team organized face to face visits to every house in San Marcos in order to introduce the Project on 
a more personal level.  
Upon commencement of the environmental studies, Valhalla established and implemented a formal work methodology 
with San Marcos, which included joint working table sessions (mesas de trabajo). One of the outcomes of these 
sessions was the creation of a special commission focused on addressing issues related to ocean studies and impacts.  
By August 2014, more than 20 meetings had been held resulting in a series of measures taken by the Project 
development team, including improved communication lines with community representatives, joint visits to existing 
power plants, and the hiring of a special consultant to support the community with its analysis of the EIA. In August 
2014, prior to submission of the PSH EIA to the authorities, two working plan agreements (planes de trabajo) were 
executed, one with representatives of the general community and another with the fishermen’s union. Both agreements 
constitute a commitment to maintain a constant dialogue between the community and the Project.  
In March 2015, individual collaboration agreements were executed with the Neighbourhood Council (Junta de Vecinos) 
and the Fishermen’s Union of San Marcos (Sindicato de Pescadores) to govern the interaction with the community 
during development, construction and operation of the Project. The Company later signed similar agreements with the 
Kelp Gatherers’ Union (algueros) of San Marcos (April 2016) and the Neighbourhood Council, Fishermen’s union and 
Rural Water Authority of Rio Seco (October 2016), another fishing community located relatively close to certain minor 
Project works. Additional information related to the community and a summary of the provisions of all four community 
agreements executed can be found in the Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan, respectively, included in 
Annexes 4 and 5 to this Funding Proposal. 
The Project’s commitment to establishing a sustainable, transparent and mutually collaborative relationship with the 
community, as demonstrated with the team’s time and active presence, has helped build a trustworthy relationship 
which was fundamental in reaching and addressing difficult issues and reaching constructive agreements. The Project 
continues to actively participate in the community.  In May 2015, the San Marcos office was expanded to include a 
Public Connectivity Centre, a public internet space, for use by students and other residents, who previously did not 
have access to the internet.  The Project has implemented other community initiatives such as an education programs 
to assist adults in finishing high school and surveys to determine the specific areas of interest for establishing technical 
training.  
With regard to community engagement surrounding the PV plant site, Valhalla initiated contact with the communities in 
the site area in August 2014, approximately six months prior to submission of the EIA for the PV plant. The closest 
communities are approximately 8 km from the Project site.  The agricultural village, Pintados, is located approximately 
8 km north of the site and Victoria, a small settlement, is approximately 8 km west of the site. Meetings with both 
communities were held prior the presentation of the EIA, in addition to the community participation meetings held later 
as part of the EIA process.  Despite the distance between the site and the communities, the Project also plans to explore 
ways to support local development in these communities, which are particularly interested in taking advantage of 
potential opportunities during the construction period.

=== PAGE 67 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 88 
 
 F 
Assessment of Project Compliance with IFC Performance Standards (GCF ESS) 
The AE has assigned a Category B to the Project based on IFC Performance Standards.  
 
PS 1: Assessment and management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts (Minimal or No impact) 
The regulations associated with the Chilean Environmental Impact Evaluation Service (SEIA), including its 
technical regulations, the development of EIAs and required approvals will all serve as safeguards. Please see 
Environmental and Social Management Framework for details.  
 
 
PS 2: Labour and Working Conditions  (Minimal or No impact) 
All relations between employers and workers are regulated under Labor Code Book, Sanitary Code Book. 
 
 
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention ( Limited Adverse Impact)  
The Project must comply with regulations for the control of quality standards for environmental variables such as 
air, soil, water, waste management among others, as mandatory compliance in distinct project stages. 
 
 
PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security (Limited Adverse Impact) 
‒ 
(EdT PSH Plant) No residents are identified in the project location (p. 30 of EdT EIA). The closest community 
is San Marcos (fishermen’s community), 750m from the site. The impact is expected to be limited and the 
community will receive clean portable water at cost, which has positive impact to them. 
‒ 
(CdT PV Plant) Victoria (10km from the site), Colonia de Pintados (50km from the site) are the closest cities 
from the site. It has been observed that there is no possibility of affecting the socioeconomic activities in 
Colonia de Pintados and Victoria due to the works or actions of the Project (2.3 of CdT EIA). 
 
 
PS5  : Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement  (Minimal or No impact) 
Most of the Project area, as in most of the northern regions of Chile, is state owned. As a result, the Project has 
or will enter into leases, easements or concessions with the Ministry of Public Property in order to use the seashore 
and marine area, as well as to permanently secure the land needed for the entire generation facility, the 
transmission line and substation. 
 
 
PS 6 : Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources (Limited Impact) 
‒ 
(EdT PSH Plant) The reptiles group may be affected and in accordance with the terms of the EIA and approved 
permit, the Project will implement a mitigation plan for rescue and relocation of certain reptiles found in the 
reservoir area prior to the start of construction.  
‒ 
(CdT PV Plant) No/Minimal impact. 
 
 
PS7 : Indigenous Peoples (Minimal or No impact) 
No Indigenous Peoples. 
 
 
PS8 : Cultural Heritage (Limited Impact) 
‒ 
(EdT PSH Plant) 23 points of archaeological interest were identified, but no historical, anthropological or 
typical monuments are registered. In accordance with the approved permit, any findings from the site must be 
rescued by specialists and the material will be delivered to the regional museum.  
‒ 
(CdT PV Plant) 85 heritage elements were identified. In accordance with the approved permit, any findings 
from the site must be rescued by specialists and the material will be delivered to the regional museum. 
Gender Assessment 
Although as explained in the Gender Assessment included in Annex 4, Chile has implemented and continues to actively 
implement public policies aimed at closing the gap between males and females, in the community of Caleta San Marcos, 
a significant gender gaps remain related to workforce participation and income inequality, among others. In San Marcos, 
as in most other fishing villages in Chile, the historic cultural operation of fishing industries dominated by males is one 
of the principal causes for this inequality. Additionally, low levels of education and the lack of economic opportunities 
beyond those related with the fisheries also contribute to the current realities of women in Caleta San Marcos.

=== PAGE 68 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 88 
 
 F 
The Project plans to play a key role not only in the development of the community which is vulnerable to climate change, 
but specifically in the empowerment of women.  As detailed in the Gender Action Plan, the Project plans to focus on 
implementing programs to help improve gender equality to ensure that women and men have equal access to the 
opportunities, benefits, and decision-making processes associated with the Project. The contribution of the Project will 
also be monitored on regular basis in order to measure progress and also detect early on any potential cultural friction 
related to gender equality issues or tensions within the community as a result of the new economic opportunities. The 
Gender Action Plan developed by the Project details specific objectives, outcomes and activities that will be followed 
to improve gender equality in Caleta San Marcos.  In implementing successful community engagement, an important 
goal of the Project will be to empower local women to act as agents of change in a community that is already 
experiencing the negative impacts of climate change. 
Stakeholder Engagement 
• A history of the Community Engagement Process, was prepared by The Consensus Building Institute (CBI) as 
an independent third party (November 2016) (See attached Gender Action Plan). 
• Interaction with the San Marcos community was initiated in 2012, approximately 2 years prior to submission of 
the environmental permit for EdT. Valhalla’s founders explained the Project and expressed their desire to 
establish an open dialogue with the community and involve them throughout project development, by identifying 
and addressing concerns and finding opportunities for mutual collaboration. Valhalla also engaged external 
local and international advisors to assist in the community engagement process, including the Consensus 
Building Institute, an international NGO dedicated to promoting dialogue and effective stakeholder engagement, 
in order to help design and facilitate a collaborative and interactive process. In early 2013, three open meetings 
were held with the community and a separate meeting was conducted with the local fisherman’s union. During 
these meetings the team presented the Project and listened to the concerns of community members. In October 
2013, the team organized face to face visits to every house in San Marcos in order to introduce the Project on a 
more personal level. 
• By August 2014, more than 20 meetings had been held resulting in a series of measures taken by the Project 
development team, including improved communication lines with community representatives, joint visits to 
existing power plants, and the hiring of a special consultant to support the community with its analysis of the 
EIA. 
• In August 2014, prior to submission of the EdT EIA to the authorities, two working plan agreements (planes de 
trabajo) were executed. In March 2015, individual collaboration agreements were executed with the 
Neighbourhood Council (Junta de Vecinos) and the Fishermen’s Union of San Marcos (Sindicato de 
Pescadores) to govern the interaction with the community during development, construction and operation of 
the Project. 
• Annex 1 of the Gender Action Plan includes a summary of the agreements executed with the local 
organizations of Caleta San Marcos and Caleta Rio Seco (which include agreements for the supply of water, 
and educational and development programs) during the distinct phases of the Project. Annex 2 of the same 
document (also attached) includes the support letter from the Neighbourhood Council Representatives (signed 
on July 13, 2018) of Caleta San Marcos. 
(Related video is disclosed on webpage: short version of the video long version here) 
https://vimeo.com/293459058

=== PAGE 69 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 88 
 
 F 
https://vimeo.com/176210481  
MUFG Bank, as Accredited Entity will establish and maintain grievance mechanisms depicted in C.7.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing. 
The financial resources from the GCF will be managed according to the general provisions of the AMA between the 
GCF and MUFG Bank. In using GCF funding for the Project, MUFG Bank will, unless otherwise specified in the AMA, 
use the same internal financial management policies and procedures when administrating funds. MUFG Bank will 
exercise the same amount of care and diligence in using the GCF funding as when using its own capital resources. 
MUFG Bank internally has a responsible department to monitor the compliance if the administration is within MUFG 
Bank’s policies. 
Procurement 
MUFG Bank has submitted its own procurement guideline and it is currently reviewed by GCF Accreditation Panel, and 
it would be fulfilled prior to the first disbursement by GCF for the Project, as set out in GCF’s board document. Under 
its procurement guidelines, MUFG Bank intends to promote efficiency and effectiveness and minimize credit and other 
risks in MUFG Bank’s operations.  
 
All procurement of goods and works will be in accordance with MUFG Bank’s procurement guidelines. The Project will 
utilize world-class EPC contractors for the principal construction contracts for the PSH plant PV plants, selected through 
competitive tender processes and negotiations in order to ensure best terms and conditions. 
Financial Management 
The Executing Entity, and all project companies (Espejo de Tarapacá and Cielos de Tarapacá) will apply IFRS 
standards which are applicable in Chile. An annual audit of the financials will be performed by an independent auditor. 
The Executing Entity and project companies will provide the auditor with the required information. Further audits on 
social and economic safeguards or impact shall be performed on an ad-hoc or regular basis.

=== PAGE 70 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 88 
 G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
PPA Execution Risk:  Risk that the Project will not be able 
to enter into a long term PPA with a creditworthy offtaker 
Financial 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Given the Project’s solid economics, which make it possible to offer an energy price below the average variable cost 
of existing coal units in future PPA tender processes, it is confident that a PPA will be obtained but are not certain of 
the timing of execution.  The objective of GCF’s support is to help fund last stage development expenses, including 
guarantees necessary to participate in PPA tender processes.  In addition, GCF’s participation as an “anchor” equity 
investor in the Project is expected to provide a “stamp of approval” and help provide security to potential PPA clients 
and attract additional private sector investors.   
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G.2. 
The main identifiable Project risks and applicable mitigation measures are summarized below in G.2.  As discussed 
throughout this Funding Proposal, the principal risk for the viability of the Project relates to financing the last stage of 
development in order to obtain a PPA with a creditworthy offtaker and move forward with equity and debt financing.  
Without GCF support in this stage, it is unlikely that the Project will be developed. 
No 
Risk Factor 
1 
PPA Execution Risk 
2 
Financing Risk 
3 
Regulatory Risk 
4 
Spot Market Risk 
5 
Construction/Completion Risk 
6 
Permitting Risk 
7 
Operating/Technological Risk 
8 
Corrosion Risk 
9 
Environmental Risk 
10 
Social Risk

=== PAGE 71 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 88 
 G 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Financing Risk:  Risk that Project will not attract investment 
and financing from one or more strategic equity investments 
and commercial or multilateral banks 
Financial 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
Based on the competitiveness and solid economic returns offered by the Project, the potential investment universe of
investors and financial institutions includes both traditional private sector investors, such as strategic energy companies,
infrastructure funds, private equity funds, pension funds, insurance companies and commercial banks, as well as those
entities focused on sustainable, responsible and impact investors.  The principal barrier for investors is the absence of
a long term PPA which provides stable cash flow.  With the support of the GCF, including the provision of funds to
participate in PPA tender processes, the Project expects to execute a PPA and move forward with the financing process.
 
The Project has held meetings with numerous international and local banks and multilateral institutions, which have
expressed interest in participating as lenders in a future financing transaction.  The Project has also requested and
received multiple indicative financing proposals from banks on which the financing terms and conditions in the financial
model are based.  The base case funding plan is to source debt from a group of international and local commercial
banks, export credit agencies and multilateral development institutions, particularly those that have a strong track record
with recent participation and/or leadership roles in Chilean power project financings of similar size. Execution of a long
term PPA and incorporation of a strategic equity partner are requisites for successful debt financing of the Project.   
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Regulatory Risk:  Risk of a change in energy sector 
regulations that negatively impacts Project economics 
Financial 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Risk of a change in regulations that would negatively impact the Project is viewed as unlikely.  Chile has one of the 
most stable, transparent and private sector oriented electric sectors in Latin America. The sector benefits from a 
long track record of respecting bilaterally negotiated PPAs and providing stable and transparent regulation of firm 
capacity payments, which are the two core revenue streams for this Project.  Although payments are made in 
Chilean Pesos, the functional currency of Chile’s electric market is the U.S. Dollar. 
 
The importance of energy storage as a facilitator and source of system stability for growth in intermittent renewable 
power associated with strong government support provides the Project with additional protection from regulatory 
risk.  The potential for additional remuneration for energy storage through transmission or ancillary services are 
positive upsides for the Project. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Spot Market Risk:  Financial exposure to volatile electricity 
spot market prices  
 
Financial 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 72 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 88 
 G 
A foundation of the Project’s commercial structure is securing a PPA with an optimal supply volume (approximately 
1,500 GWh).  PPA and firm capacity revenue will account for approximately 80% of annual Project revenues, with 
net spot market sales representing 10% on average. When the Project is dispatched on a relatively continuous basis 
(i.e. solar in the day and hydro at night), there will be some residual exposure to spot pricing driven by the 
seasonality of monthly solar radiation. During the summer, the Project would be expected to sell some excess solar 
production in the spot market and during the winter there may be a need to purchase some additional energy during 
dark hours to completely cover the PPA obligations. However, the Project’s market exposure is minimal as 
compared to certain run-of-river hydro plants and intermittent renewable projects. The actual pumping and dispatch 
profile of the PSH will be dictated by daily market pricing, which provides additional mitigation to spot price 
exposure. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Construction/Completion Risk:  Risk of delay or cost 
overruns related to construction and termination of Project 
 
Technical and 
operational 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Project will contract a large proven solar EPC contractor to construct the PV plant on a lump sum turnkey basis 
with a guaranteed completion date and associated liquidated damages for delays.   
 
The PSH construction contract structure will include fixed pricing, robust schedule guarantees, and associated 
liquidated damages. The Project’s cost estimates and engineering have been validated by third-parties. Leidos 
Engineering, LLC conducted an independent engineer’s limited technical due diligence review to confirm the Project’s 
engineering, construction, and cost estimates, as well as the cost and time contingency levels included in the budget 
and schedule.  World-class, experienced contractors will be employed for all construction components and top-tier 
generation plant and equipment will be utilized. Significant contingency levels between 40%-60% have been included 
in the budget for underground works. The PSH plant construction schedule includes a 6 month delay contingency 
period and overall average cost contingency of 15%.   
 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Permitting Risk:  Risk in delay or increased cost associated 
with difficulties in the permitting process  
 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The permitting process was initiated in early stage development and the Project is currently at an advanced stage.  
The principal permits have been received or are expected in 2019, including the environmental permits, maritime 
concessions and hydraulic works concession. The remaining critical permits are all in advanced stages of the approval 
process. Permit monitoring, execution, and compliance are top priorities for the Project’s management team.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Operating/Technological Risk: Risk of production loss 
resulting from inadequate or failed plant operations or 
technology 
 
Technical and 
operational 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 73 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 88 
 G 
The Project will engage proven EPC contractors and equipment suppliers for all of the key equipment components 
(e.g. panels, inverters, transformers, reversible pump turbines/powerhouse).  PV solar and PSH are both proven 
technologies with each having over 100 GW of installed capacity in the world today along with operational histories of 
over 20 years for PV solar and 75 years for PSH plants using reversible pump technology.  The Project will also hire 
and/or secure experienced and proven O&M operators for the plants and transmission lines. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Corrosion Risk:  Operational risk related to the utilization of 
seawater by the PSH plant 
 
 
 
 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Project’s operations management team has extensively prepared for the operation of the PSH Plant with 
seawater both through the careful selection, together with the EPC contractor, of appropriate anti-corrosive materials 
and the delineation of maintenance and surveillance procedures. Additionally, an independent engineering firm and 
corrosion expert conducted a specialized engineering review confirming the proposed design, protective coatings, 
and maintenance/surveillance procedures.  The Project team visited the Yanbaru seawater PSH plant in Japan in 
July 2015 and obtained first-hand information regarding construction, operation and maintenance of this 
experimental plant which successfully completed 17 years of operation in 2016.  In addition, seawater is used 
abundantly in other industrial processes such as electric generation cooling, LNG regasification and mining 
processes in Chile and other parts of the world. 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Environmental Risk:  Risk of adverse unforeseen 
environmental impacts caused by construction of the Project 
 
 
 
Social and 
environmental 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Since the inception in 2011, a fundamental priority has been to develop and design the Project in a manner that is 
sustainable and environmentally-friendly. For example, the PSH plant will have a limited visual impact as it will be 
located underground.  The Project performed detailed engineering and environmental studies prior to requesting the 
environmental permits in 2014 (for the PSH plant) and in 2015 (for the PV plant), both of which were unanimously 
approved by the regulatory authority.  Additionally, the Project has and will continue to maintain a qualified and 
experienced environmental management team to ensure that environmental impacts are avoided throughout the 
development, construction, and operational phases of the Project.  Specific mitigation measures employed during 
construction to prevent environmental risks will include the following: 
  
• 
Monitoring and supervision to ensure strict compliance with all permit requirements, applicable laws, World 
Bank Guidelines, and Equator Principles by all Project parties 
• 
Continual monitoring of environmental compliance during all construction activities and conducting 
environmental compliance audits and inspections 
• 
Approval of contractor environmental plans and manuals to be included in Project contracts prior to initiation 
of construction activities

=== PAGE 74 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 88 
 G 
The Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been included in Annex 3 to this Funding Proposal.  
Selected Risk Factor 10 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Social Risk:  Risk of adverse unforeseen social impacts 
caused by construction of the Project 
 
 
 
 
 
Social and 
environmental 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Community engagement is an integral and fundamental part of Project development.  The Project has strived to 
implement a precedent-setting community engagement model in Chile which is based on establishing early, 
transparent and empathetic relationships with the local communities close to the Project.  Collaboration agreements 
which govern the Project’s interaction with the local communities during development, construction and operation of 
the PSH plant have been executed with various community organizations and the local communities support 
development of the Project.  No opposition from the communities, or any other stakeholders, was presented during 
the environmental permitting processes.  Both environmental permits were unanimously approved without objection.  
Specific mitigation measures employed to prevent potential issues with the communities will include the following: 
  
• 
Community managers will be designated to lead and maintain relationships with local authorities and 
community representatives 
• 
Local community information offices with dedicated Project representatives will be established to provide 
information during the construction period (offices will be located close to the plant sites) 
• 
Community Managers will be responsible for: (i) identifying, creating, and executing beneficial community 
outreach projects and programs, (ii) ensuring accuracy and availability of project information to the 
communities, (iii) evaluating potential negative impacts, mitigation measures and community concerns, and 
(iv) ensuring that the Project has a positive impact on, and inclusive relationship with, representative groups 
for the community and their constituents. 
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon 
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., 
issues that have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring).  This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors. 
* Please expand this sub-section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.

=== PAGE 75 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 88 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework under 
the Results Management Framework. 
 
The Results Management Framework (RMF) describes the detailed process to measure, report and verify the set 
of indicators proposed in this Section H of the Project’s Funding Proposal. The indicators describe the results 
based on the paradigm-shift objective of the Project, Fund level impacts and Project outcomes related to mitigation 
and adaptation logic models. The RMF framework is complemented with the ESMF and the Gender Action Plan, 
which are included as Annexes 3 and 4 to this Funding Proposal, as these documents also indicate and explain 
the indicators related to social, environmental and gender impact. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level17 
Paradigm Shift Objectives 
Shift to low-emission sustainable 
development pathways 
The Project seeks to achieve multiple objectives in the development of low-
emission pathways by stimulating a paradigm shift in the Chilean electric sector 
and helping it transition from heavy dependence on conventional energy 
generation to renewable energy.  These objectives include: 
1) Reduction of GHG emissions:  It is estimated that the Project will 
avoid on average 1,001,187 tonnes of CO2e every year, with 35 million 
tonnes of CO2e avoided over the Project’s 35-year project lifetime. 
2) Catalysation of Additional Investment in Variable Renewable 
Energy:  Implementation of the 1st renewable bulk energy storage 
project in the Chilean electric grid will enhance grid flexibility and 
improve grid resiliency, thereby catalysing additional investment in 
variable renewable energy projects. 
3) Decarbonisation of the Electric Grid:  Implementation of the 1st 
renewable bulk energy storage project will provide a renewable 
replacement for existing coal facilities which are presently needed to 
maintain system supply reliability when renewable energy is not 
available (when the sun goes down or the wind is not blowing).   
4) Enhancement of Enabling Environment:  Implementation of this 
innovative bulk energy storage Project, which integrates PV solar and 
PSH technology using seawater will provide experience, knowledge 
and learning which can be used to replicate similar innovative projects 
both locally and worldwide.   
5) Strengthening of Regulatory Policies: The principal barrier to entry 
faced by the Project is the lack of stable remuneration for bulk 
renewable energy storage which adequately compensates it for the 
multiple electric system and social benefits that it provides.  
Implementation of the Project will set a precedent and establish a track 
record demonstrating its benefits which will help enable the 
appropriate regulatory incentives for future facilities.   
                                                             
17 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/239759/5.3_-
_Performance_Measurement_Frameworks__PMF_.pdf/60941cef-7c87-475f-809e-4ebf1acbb3f4

=== PAGE 76 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 88 
 
 H 
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development 
The Project will directly contribute to the creation of adaptation actions and 
more resilient communities in three of these sectors that are currently 
experiencing significant effects of climate change in Chile:   
1) Energy Access and Power Generation from Solar and 
Hydroelectric Power: The Project will help Chile build capacity to 
adapt to climate change by improving grid flexibility and catalysing 
additional investments in variable renewable energy and also by 
reducing the national grid’s dependence on fossil fuels and hydrology 
affected by droughts (In 2018, Chile’s power generation was 
comprised of 54% thermoelectric generation and 31% hydroelectric).  
Implementation of the Project will also create an enabling regulatory 
environment for a multi-service asset by setting a precedent for future 
facilities and providing experience, knowledge and learning that can 
be used to replicate similar projects both locally and worldwide.  .   
2) Most Vulnerable People and Community Support: Under the long-
term collaboration agreements executed with the vulnerable fishing 
communities close to the Project, EdT will provide funds and training 
for social and productive investments which will help diversify the local 
economy, which is highly dependent on sea products that have been 
in steady decline in recent years due to over-exploitation and higher 
water temperature due to climate change.  
3) Water Security: EdT will benefit the vulnerable local communities by 
providing stable water supplies from the Project’s desalination plant to 
the communities at cost. Currently, the local communities surrounding 
the Project do not have access to stable drinking water supply, which 
is currently sourced from groundwater and transported bi-weekly to 
the communities by truck from the closest city, Iquique, which is 
located about 100 km north.  
 
Expected 
Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-Term 
Final 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF Core 
Indicators  
M1: Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent 
(tCO2eq) reduced 
or avoided 
Project 
annual 
energy 
generation 
(GWh 
produced) / 
Electricity 
receipts 
0 
17.5MTCO2eq 
35MTCO2eq 
Only considers 
CO2 reductions 
associated with 
the Project; 
additional 
upside from 
catalysation of 
addition VRE 
M2: Cost per 
tonne of CO2-
equivalent 
reduced 
Tonnes of 
CO2eq to be 
determined 
based on 
energy 
generation 
(GWh 
produced); 
cost per 
tonne of 
carbon 
emitted 
0 
$547 million 
(17.5MTCO2eq 
multiplied by 
social cost of 
$31.26 per 
TCO2eq) 
$1.1 billion 
(35MTCO2eq 
multiplied by 
social cost of 
$31.26 per 
TCO2eq) 
Only considers 
CO2 reductions 
associated with 
the Project; 
additional 
upside from 
catalysation of 
addition VRE

=== PAGE 77 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 88 
 
 H 
(estimate 
$31.26 per 
TCO2eq) to be 
based on final 
Project 
investment 
M3: Volume of 
Finance leveraged 
by Fund funding  
Project 
financial 
reports  
0 
$1 billion in 
private sector 
co-financing 
leveraged   
$ 1 billion in 
private sector 
co-financing 
leveraged   
Assumes 
leveraging of 
private sector 
debt and equity 
Total number of 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries 
(disaggregated by 
gender) 
Pre-Project 
and post-
Project 
assessments 
and 
community 
household 
surveys; 
Project 
reports and 
Chilean 
electric 
system 
annual report 
prepared by 
national 
independent 
grid 
coordinator 
(CEN) 
0 
Primary direct 
and indirect 
beneficiaries in 
vulnerable 
local 
communities 
related to 
water security, 
economic 
diversification 
and gender 
empowerment: 
550 people 
(59% male / 
41% female in 
San Marcos 
and Rio Seco). 
Indirect 
beneficiaries of 
increased 
resilience of 
electric sector 
against climate 
variability: 
Chile’s 
population of 
17.6 million 
inhabitants 
(50% male / 
50% female). 
Primary direct 
and indirect 
beneficiaries in 
vulnerable 
local 
communities 
related to 
water security, 
economic 
diversification 
and gender 
empowerment: 
550 people 
(59% male / 
41% female in 
San Marcos 
and Rio Seco). 
Indirect 
beneficiaries of 
increased 
resilience of 
electric sector 
against climate 
variability: 
Chile’s 
population of 
17.6 million 
inhabitants 
(50% male / 
50% female). 
Only considers 
CO2 reductions 
associated with 
the Project; 
additional 
upside from 
catalysation of 
addition VRE 
 
Expected 
Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Mid-term           Final  
Assumptions 
Fund Level Impacts – (Mitigation and Adaptation)

=== PAGE 78 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 88 
 
 H 
1.0-Reduced 
emissions 
from 
improved 
access to 
low 
emission 
energy and 
power 
generation 
Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent 
(tCO2eq) 
reduced or 
avoided as a 
result of Fund-
funded project  
Project 
annual 
energy 
generation 
(GWh 
produced) 
 
17.5MTCO2e
q 
35MTCO2eq 
1.0-Reduced 
emissions 
from 
improved 
access to low 
emission 
energy and 
power 
generation 
A.1 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of 
the most 
vulnerable 
people, 
communities, 
and regions 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
reached 
 
Project 
assessments 
and 
community 
household 
surveys 
Pre-Project 
construction 
baseline 
survey; 
Together with 
community 
household 
survey 
conducted in 
2016 in San 
Marcos 
550 people; 
46% adult 
population 
(members of 
neighbourhood 
association 
and other 
community 
organizations) 
as direct 
beneficiaries 
and remaining 
54% child 
population as 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
 
550 people; 
46% adult 
population 
(members of 
neighbourhood 
association 
and other 
community 
organizations) 
as direct 
beneficiaries 
and remaining 
54% child 
population as 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
 
Implementation 
of Project 
training, funds 
and supply of 
drinking water 
from Project’s 
desalination 
plant 
AE to confirm 
MoV and 
Baseline details 
in Inception 
Report 
 
A1.2 Number of 
males and females 
benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options 
Project 
assessments 
and 
community 
household 
surveys; 
including 
gender 
sensitive 
survey 
Pre-Project 
construction 
baseline 
survey; 
Together with 
community 
household 
survey 
conducted in 
2016 in San 
Marcos 
550 people; 
46% adult 
population 
(members of 
neighbourhood 
association 
and other 
community 
organizations) 
as direct 
beneficiaries 
and remaining 
54% child 
population as 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
 
550 people; 
46% adult 
population 
(members of 
neighbourhood 
association 
and other 
community 
organizations) 
as direct 
beneficiaries 
and remaining 
54% child 
population as 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
 
Implementation 
of educational 
and skill training 
programs to 
promote 
creation of new 
economic 
activities, 
focusing in 
particular on the 
empowerment 
of women 
AE to confirm 
MoV and 
Baseline details 
in Inception 
Report 
A.2. Increased 
resilience of 
health and 
wellbeing, and 
food and 
water security 
A2.3 Number of 
males 
and females with 
year-round access 
to reliable 
Community 
household 
survey; 
including 
gender 
Pre-Project 
construction 
baseline 
survey; 
Together with 
community 
550 direct 
beneficiaries; 
100% of total 
local 
population 
550 direct 
beneficiaries; 
100% of total 
local 
population 
Construction 
and operation of 
Project water 
supply 
infrastructure 
(desalination

=== PAGE 79 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 88 
 
 H 
and safe water 
supply 
despite climate 
shocks 
and stresses 
sensitive 
survey 
household 
survey 
conducted in 
2016 in San 
Marcos 
(59% male / 
41% female in 
San Marcos 
and Rio Seco) 
(59% male / 
41% female in 
San Marcos 
and Rio Seco) 
plant) as part of 
PSH plant 
which will also 
be used to 
supply 
communities 
A.3 Increased 
resilience of 
infrastructure 
and the built 
environment 
to climate 
change 
threats 
A3.1 Number and 
value of physical 
assets made more 
resilient to climate 
variability and 
change, 
considering human 
benefits (reported 
where applicable) 
Project 
reports and 
Chilean 
electric 
system 
annual report 
prepared by 
CEN 
0 
300 MW PSH 
and 561 MW 
PV to provide 
24/7continuous 
energy supply 
 
 
 
 
300 MW PSH 
and 561 MW 
PV to provide 
24/7continuous 
energy supply; 
and additional 
seawater PSH 
capacity in the 
system of 
1,000 MW  
 
Does not 
estimate 
installed 
capacity from 
catalysation of 
additional VRE 
investments 
Project will 
establish 
benchmark and 
track record for 
future energy 
storage projects 
 
 
H.1.2.  Outcomes at Project/Programme Level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-Term (if 
applicable)  
Final 
Project/ 
programme 
Outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
M.5 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
for low-emission 
planning and 
development 
M5.1 
Institutional and 
regulatory 
systems that 
improve 
incentives for 
low emission 
planning and 
development 
and their 
effective 
implementation 
Regulatory 
framework 
assessment 
prepared by 
independent 
market 
consultant 
Pre-Project 
assessment 
Modification 
of regulatory 
framework to 
incorporate 
remuneratio
n of social 
benefits 
provided by 
multi-service 
storage and 
renewable 
generation   
Modification 
of regulatory 
framework to 
incorporate  
remuneratio
n of social 
benefits 
provided by 
multi-service 
storage and 
renewable 
generation   
Energy 
regulator 
implements 
changes to 
recognize 
social benefits 
of multi-service 
storage and 
renewable 
generation / 
Change in 
regulatory 
qualification for 
storage asset 
M.6 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large 
low emission power 
suppliers 
M6.1 
Proportion of 
low-emission 
power supply in 
a jurisdiction or 
market 
Chilean 
electric 
system annual 
report 
prepared by 
CEN 
Pre-Project 
Chilean 
electric 
system 
annual 
report 
Net Project 
generation 
of 1,500 
GWh/year of 
low emission 
power 
supply with 
Net Project 
generation 
of 1,500 
GWh/year of 
low emission 
power 
supply with 
Project’s 
energy storage 
will improve 
grid flexibility 
and resilience, 
thereby 
catalysing

=== PAGE 80 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 88 
 
 H 
prepared by 
CEN 
very low risk 
associated 
to climate 
variability or 
droughts 
 
 
very low risk 
associated 
to climate 
variability or 
droughts 
 
 
additional VRE 
investment  
Catalysation of 
additional  
small, medium 
and large low 
emission 
power 
suppliers  
Project will 
establish 
benchmark 
and track 
record for 
future energy 
storage 
projects 
M6.3 MWs of 
low emission 
energy capacity 
installed, 
generated 
and/or 
rehabilitated as 
a result of GCF 
support 
Chilean 
electric 
system annual 
report 
prepared by 
CEN 
Pre-Project 
Chilean 
electric 
system 
annual 
report 
prepared by 
CEN 
New 
installed 
renewable 
energy and 
storage 
capacity 
from Project 
of 
300 MW 
PSH and 
561 MW PV 
 
 
New 
installed 
renewable 
energy and 
storage 
capacity 
from Project 
of 
300 MW 
PSH and 
561 MW PV 
 
 
Project’s 
energy storage 
will improve 
grid flexibility 
and resilience, 
thereby 
catalysing 
additional VRE 
investment  
Catalysation of 
additional  low 
emission 
installed 
capacity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity 
and reduced 
exposure to climate 
risks  
 
A7.1: Use by 
vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and 
public-sector 
services of 
Fund supported 
tools, 
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to 
respond to 
climate change 
and variability 
 
Number of 
Fund funded 
Community 
household 
survey 
including 
gender 
sensitive 
survey 
Pre-Project 
construction 
baseline 
survey;  
Together 
with 
community 
household 
survey 
conducted in 
2016 in San 
Marcos 
550 people 
(59% male / 
41% female 
in San 
Marcos and 
Rio Seco) 
46% adult 
population 
(members of 
neighbourho
od 
association 
and other 
community 
organization
s) as direct 
beneficiaries 
and 
550 people 
(59% male / 
41% female 
in San 
Marcos and 
Rio Seco) 
46% adult 
population 
(members of 
neighbourho
od 
association 
and other 
community 
organization
s) as direct 
beneficiaries 
and 
Project will 
implement 
educational 
and skill 
training 
programs to 
promote 
creation of new 
economic 
activities, 
focusing 
particularly on 
the 
empowerment 
of women 
Diversification 
of community 
economic

=== PAGE 81 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 88 
 
 H 
 
 
 
projects/progra
mmes 
that support 
effective 
adaptation to 
fish stock 
migration and 
depletion 
due to climate 
change 
remaining 
54% child 
population 
as indirect 
beneficiaries 
 
 
 
remaining 
54% child 
population 
as indirect 
beneficiaries 
 
 
 
 
activities away 
from depleting 
sea resources 
Provision of 
stable drinking 
water supply 
from Project’s 
desalination 
plant 
Grants to 
support 
diversification 
of productive 
activities and 
infrastructure 
for fishing and 
kelp gatherers’ 
unions faced 
with depleting 
sea resources 
 
AE to confirm 
MoV and 
Baseline 
details in 
Inception 
Report

=== PAGE 82 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 88 
 
 H 
 
H.1.3. Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Project/ 
programme 
outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-Term 
(if applicable)  
Final 
COMPONENT 1 – Project Development & Preparatory Work 
Output 1.1  
Commercial viability 
of the Project with 
full funding 
Execution of 
equity and debt 
agreements to 
secure 
complete 
Project funding 
Project 
reporting 
0 
Equity and 
debt 
commitmen
ts for full 
Project 
funding of 
$1,094 
million 
Equity and 
debt 
commitments 
for full Project 
funding of 
$1,094 million 
Incorporation 
of one or more 
strategic or 
financial 
investors in 
Project equity; 
and syndicated  
project finance 
credit 
agreement 
with 
international  
banks and/or 
other financial 
institutions  
COMPONENT 2 – Project Construction 
Output 2.1 
Construction of PV 
plant which will 
deliver clean, 
economic and 
reliable renewable 
energy  
Annual PV 
plant 
generation 
Project 
reports and 
Chilean 
electric 
system 
annual report  
prepared by 
CEN 
0 
 
Average 
annual PV 
plant 
generation 
of 1,600 
GWh/year 
of clean 
energy  
Average 
annual PV 
plant 
generation of 
1,600 
GWh/year of 
clean energy 
Successful 
construction 
and operation 
of PV plant 
Output 2.2   
Construction of PSH 
plant, including 
desalination plant, 
which will deliver 
clean, economic and 
reliable renewable 
energy storage 
Annual PSH 
plant 
generation and 
pumping 
Project 
reports and 
Chilean 
electric 
system 
annual report  
prepared by 
CEN 
0 
Average 
annual 
PSH plant 
generation 
of 800 
GWh/year 
of clean 
energy  
Average 
annual PSH 
plant 
generation of 
800 
GWh/year of 
clean energy 
Successful 
construction 
and operation 
of PSH plant 
COMPONENT 3 – Community Works 
Output 3.1  
Improvement in 
economic, gender 
Number of 
additional non-
climate 
Project and 
community 
Pre-Project 
assessment 
Improvemen
t in  
economic, 
Improvemen
t in  
economic,

=== PAGE 83 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 88 
 
 H 
empowerment and 
climate change 
adaptation capacity 
in vulnerable local 
community 
dependent 
businesses and 
diversification 
of existing 
economic 
activities; 
number of 
women 
incorporated in 
the workforce 
monitoring 
report 
gender 
empowerme
nt and 
climate 
change 
adaptation 
capacity of 
50% with 
respect to 
Pre-Project 
baseline 
assessment  
gender 
empowerme
nt and 
climate 
change 
adaptation 
capacity of 
100% with 
respect to 
Pre-Project 
baseline 
assessment  
Output 3.2 Stable 
and secure water 
supply for vulnerable 
local community 
Volume of 
water supplied 
to local 
community 
from Project’s 
desalination 
plant 
Project and 
community 
monitoring 
report 
0 
Supply of 
desalinated 
water 
supply of 
up to 90/m3 
per day 
from 
Project’s 
water 
desalinatio
n plant 
Supply of 
desalinated 
water supply 
of up to 90/m3 
per day from 
Project’s 
water 
desalination 
plant 
 
Activities – Who, What, Where 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Indicator 
COMPONENT 1 – Project Development & Preparatory Work 
Output 1.1   
Commercial viability 
of the Project with 
full funding 
 
 
 
Activity 1.1.1 
Participation in 
PPA tender 
process (or 
transmission or 
other service 
contract) providing 
for stable long 
term revenue) 
Execution of PPA (or 
transmission or other service 
contract) providing for stable 
long term revenue 
GCF funding of $4.8 million 
in pre-PPA development 
costs and funding of $13 
million guarantee for 
participation in tender 
process and $1.4 million 
guarantee to secure 
permits 
PPA award and contract 
execution 
Activity 1.1.2 
Selection process 
for strategic and/or 
financial equity 
investor(s) to 
participate in the 
Project post-PPA 
 
Invitation and selection process 
for strategic and/or financial 
equity investor(s) to participate 
in the Project post-PPA 
GCF participation as early 
anchor equity investor--
funding $4.8 million in pre-
PPA development costs 
and $4.2 million in post-
PPA development costs 
Execution of shareholders’ 
agreement(s) for $357 million 
with third party investor(s) in 
order to complete full equity 
funding with equity participation 
of 6% Valhalla, 13% GCF, and 
81% new investor(s) 
Activity 1.1.3 Debt 
financing process 
Invitation and selection of group 
of commercial banks and/or 
GCF participation as early 
anchor equity investor--
Execution of syndicated credit 
facility for US$ 647 million with

=== PAGE 84 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 88 
 
 H 
with commercial 
banks and/or other 
potential financial 
institutions 
other financial institutions to 
participate in project financing 
process 
funding $4.8 million in pre-
PPA development costs 
and $4.2 million in post-
PPA development costs 
commercial banks and/or other 
financial institutions 
COMPONENT 2 – Project Construction 
Output 2.1. 
Construction of PV 
plant which will 
deliver clean, 
economic and 
reliable renewable 
energy 
 
 
 
Activity 2.1.1  
Construction of PV 
plant  
Completion of PV plant 
construction period 
2.1.1.1 Construction 
management of contractors  
2.1.1.2 Management of 
permitting and land 
requirements 
2.1.1.3 Timely receipt of 
equity and debt contribution 
disbursements 
2.1.1.4 Community 
engagement and support 
 
Timely completion of  
construction of PV plant 
including associated 
transmission line  
Activity 2.1.2  
Initiation of 
commercial 
operation of PV 
plant 
Start-up of commercial 
operations of the PV plant 
2.1.2.1 Training of 
personnel for operation and 
maintenance of the PV 
plant 
 
Commercial declaration PV 
plant in-service and ready for 
dispatch by independent grid 
operator 
Output 2.2  
Construction of PSH 
plant, including 
desalination plant, 
which will deliver 
clean, economic and 
reliable renewable 
energy storage 
 
 
 
Activity 2.2.1  
Construction of 
PSH plant  
Completion of PSH plant 
(including desalination plant) 
construction period  
2.1.1.1 Construction 
management of contractors  
2.1.1.2 Management of 
permitting and land 
requirements 
2.1.1.3 Timely receipt of 
equity and debt contribution 
disbursements 
Timely completion of  
construction of PSH plant 
including associated 
transmission line

=== PAGE 85 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 88 
 
 H 
2.1.1.4 Community 
engagement and support 
Activity 2.2.2  
Initiation of 
commercial 
operation of PSH 
plant 
Start-up of commercial 
operation of the PSH plant 
2.1.2.1 Training of 
personnel for operation and 
maintenance of the PSH 
plant 
Commercial declaration PSH 
plant in-service and ready for 
dispatch by independent grid 
operator 
COMPONENT 3 – Community Works 
Output 3.1    
Improvement in 
economic, gender 
empowerment and 
climate change 
adaptation capacity 
in vulnerable local 
community 
 
 
 
Activity 3.1.1  
Implementation of 
educational and 
skill training 
programs  
Project will implement activities 
to assist in training and 
employment of San Marcos and 
Rio Seco inhabitants located 
close to the PSH plant.  These 
local economies are dependent 
almost exclusively on sea-
related activities dominated by 
men; the community is 
vulnerable to the economic 
impact of climate change 
3.1.1.1 Implementation of 
Project incentives and work 
opportunities’ coordination 
office for hiring of local 
labour 
3.1.1.2 Implementation of 
training for Project-related 
support activities such as 
provision of related goods 
and services. 
Community and Project reports 
Activity 3.1.2 
Implementation of 
funds for social 
and productive 
investments  
Project will implement funds for 
social and productive 
investments in San Marcos and 
Rio Seco in accordance with the 
executed community 
collaboration agreements.  
These local economies are 
dependent almost exclusively 
on sea-related activities 
dominated by men; the 
community is vulnerable to the 
economic impact of climate 
change 
3.1.2.1 Implementation of 
competitive social grant 
program for development 
projects 
3.1.2.2  Implementation of 
grant program to support 
productive activities for 
fishermen and kelp 
gatherers’ unions 
3.1.2.3 Implementation of 
infrastructure grant to 
support productive and 
recreational activities 
Community and Project reports 
Activity 3.1.3 
Implementation of 
Project Gender 
Action Plan  
Project will implement programs 
to build capacity and awareness 
to facilitate gender equality and 
empowerment 
3.1.3.1 Implementation of 
psychological training 
sessions with local men 
and women to educate and 
sensitize the community 
regarding gender equality 
and empowerment. 
Sessions will include 
sexual harassment 
Community and Project reports

=== PAGE 86 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 88 
 
 H 
 
 
management and 
prevention training. 
3.1.3.2 Implementation of  
counselling/training 
sessions with local women 
to promote economic 
opportunities 
3.1.3.3 Implementation of  
counselling/training 
sessions to promote social 
participation and 
knowledge and utilization of 
networking, including 
establishment of mentoring 
relationships with women in 
business or leadership 
positions 
3.1.3.4  Establishment of 
program for providing 
microcredits to women, 
including training and 
mentoring sessions related 
to business management, 
accounting and credit 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
In order to evaluate and determine progress of the objectives, a Monitoring, Report and Verification (MRV) 
system will be implemented. Figure 15 below describes the flow of information between the stakeholders 
responsible for the RMF, including the relationship between the parties involved in the monitoring of the MoV 
for each indicator as specified above. The information required by the MoV for A.3 is available from 
government sources, such as public reports from the SEN Coordinator and the Ministry of Energy.  However, 
MoV M.1, which requires calculation of GHG reductions by the Project, will be evaluated by external qualified 
consultants using methodology ACM0002 – “Large-scale Consolidated Methodology Grid-Connected 
electricity generation from renewable sources” as explained in the Annex 9 “Methodology Applicability and 
Emission Reductions Calculation Procedure”.  Additionally, the information required the MoV A.1 and A.2 
will be complied based on Project, community and regional information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15: MRV Structure and Flow of Information

=== PAGE 87 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 88 
 
 H 
                                                             
18 http://www.Energía .gob.cl/Energía s-renovables 
 
 
With regard to the reporting process, Energía de Tarapacá (Executing Entity) will consolidate the monitoring 
information, in accordance with the format established by the accredited entity.  The accredited entity will be 
responsible for communication with the third party auditor and the GCF. The bidirectional arrows show the 
process to be followed for review of the observations in preparing the report to be delivered to the GCF with 
final results of the Project. The specific roles and responsibilities of the MRV system are described below. 
 
 
Table 10: MRV Roles and Responsibility 
 
Role 
Institution 
Responsibility 
Monitoring 
Entity 
 Energía  de 
Tarapacá SpA 
Provide MUFG Bank with the information required for evaluation of the 
Project in accordance with GCF standards (see Table 11) Energía de 
Tarapacá SpA is the executing entity of the Project – It will consolidate 
the information from the monitoring phase, and elaborate the interim 
reports in collaboration with MUFG that will act as the final reporting entity 
to the GCF 
Reporting 
Entity 
MUFG Bank 
(Accredited 
Entity) 
Review and validate the evaluation reports from  Energía de Tarapacá 
Verification 
Entity 
External 
Consultant 
Verify the information collecting process and the veracity of the results 
provided in the report from MUFG Bank.  A third party with experience in 
the application of methodology ACM0002 will be responsible for 
calculating the GHG emissions reduction of the Project. 
Monitoring 
Entity 
Ministry of 
Energy 
Highest regulatory authority for the Chilean electric sector – The ministry 
is in charge of approving and promoting laws and norms in the energy 
sector.  Regulatory modifications will be published on the Ministry’s 
website18. 
Third Party 
Auditor
Energía
Tarapacá EE
MUFG AE
GCF
Community & 
Regional 
Authorities
Independent Grid 
Operator (CEN)
Expert Consultant
M.5
M.2
M.6
A.1
A.2
A.7
MOV
Verification
Monitoring
Reporting
A.3
M.1

=== PAGE 88 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 88 
 
 H 
                                                             
19 https://www.coordinador.cl/ 
Monitoring 
Entity 
National 
Electric 
Coordinator 
National independent grid operator for the Chilean electric system – The 
coordinator maintains statistics of the national electric system, the 
information for MoV A.3 and M.6 will be published on the Coordinator’s 
website.19 
 
As detailed in Table 10, Energía de Tarapacá will be responsible for developing and providing the reports 
with the indicators shown in Table 11, requiring coordination with the Ministry of Energy and the National 
Electric Coordinator and/or any other entities necessary in order to appropriately measure the indicators as 
described in the ESMF and Gender Action Plan found in Annexes 3 and 5, respectively.  This information 
will be developed in two reports as detailed below.  The reports will be prepared following a uniform 
evaluation approach in accordance with the terms of the AMA. 
 
• 
Annual Progress Report: The annual progress report will include the indicators described in Table 
11, which will be complemented by field missions from MUFG bank.  The report will be prepared 
every year from the date of reception of the GCF funds. 
 
• 
Final Report:  The final report will systematize the results of the interim report in a final assessment 
of the accomplishment and values of the indicators during the entire process. This report will be 
delivered after completion of construction of the Project, when the plant starts commercial operation. 
 
Table 11: Frequency and Type of Indicators 
 
Type of Indicator 
Indicator 
Type 
Frequency of 
Monitoring 
Outcomes 
Tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) 
reduced as a result of the Project 
Quantitative 
Annual 
Volume of finance leveraged by Fund 
financing 
Quantitative 
Annual 
Number of males and females benefiting from 
the adoption of diversified, climate-resilient 
livelihood 
options 
(including 
fisheries, 
agriculture, tourism, etc.) 
Quantitative 
Annual 
Institutional and regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for low emission planning 
and development and their effective 
implementation 
Qualitative 
Annual 
Database from environmental service area 
Quantitative 
Annual 
Revision of grid emission factors 
Quantitative 
Annual 
External Surveys 
Quantitative 
Annual 
Impact on sites identified with archaeological 
value 
Quantitative 
Annual

=== PAGE 89 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 88 
 
 H 
 
Environmental and 
Social Management 
Framework 
Affectation of deposits or paleontological 
materials 
Quantitative 
Annual 
Risk of affectation of avifauna species in high 
voltage electrical transmission lines 
Quantitative 
Annual 
Air Quality 
Quantitative 
Annual 
Water Quality 
Quantitative 
Annual

=== PAGE 90 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 88 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
List of Annexes: 
1. 
NDA No-Objection Letters from Chilean Ministry of Finance 
2. 
Integrated Financial Model (in Excel) – Contains Confidential Information 
3. 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
4. 
Gender Assessment 
5. 
Gender Action Plan 
6. 
Independent Technical Due Diligence report prepared by Leidos Engineering, LLC – Contains Confidential Information 
7. 
Map indicating the location of the project 
8. 
Timetable of project/programme implementation 
9. 
Methodology Applicability and Emission Reductions Calculation Procedure 
10. Emissions Calculation Spreadsheet 
11. Letter of support to for the Project addressed to the Green Climate Fund from Ricardo Lagos, ex-Chilean President and 
former Special Envoy on Climate Change for the United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon 
12. MUFG Bank Procurement Guidelines draft  
                                                             
20 Confidential not for public disclosure 
21 Confidential not for public disclosure 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal 
☒ 
NDA No-objection Letter 
☐ 
Feasibility Study 
☒ 
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)20  
☐ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment (If applicable) 
☐ 
Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 
etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I 
☒ 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
 
(If applicable) 
☒ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable)21 
☐ 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable) 
☒ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme 
☒ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation 
☒ 
Appendix  – Methodology Applicability and Emission Reductions Calculation Procedure 
☒ 
Emissions Reduction Calculation Spreadsheet

=== PAGE 91 ===
Template no-objection letter 
22 July 2015 
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF") 
Chile, 31 January 2018 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Ministry of Finance regarding "Espejo de Tarapaca" 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the project "Espejo de Tarapaca" in Chile as included in the funding proposal submitted by 
FYNSA- Finanzas y Negocios S.A. to us in January 2018. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Ministry of Finance, the National Designated 
Authority of Chile. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Chile has no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal;
(b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Chile's national priorities,
strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project as included in the
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as included in the 
funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
Undersecretary of Ministry of Finance 
Page 89

=== PAGE 92 ===
E7695/2018 
HGB/TLC 
Mrs. 
Ayaan Z. Adam 
Santiago de Chile, 19th November, 2018. 
Director of the Private Sector Facility 
Ref.: Change of Accredited Entity for the application of the Project "Espejo de Tarapaca". 
With regard to the funding proposal submitted to the 
Green Climate Fund (GCF) by the Espejo de Tarapaca Project (the Project) and the associated No­
Objection Letter presented by the National Designated Authority of Chile on January 31, 2018, we 
would like to confirm our acceptance and approval of the proposed change in Accredited Entity before 
the GCF. 
The Project, submitted a request for GCF funding support 
in the Concept Note presented in the Pitch for the Planet campaign on August 31, 2017. The Concept 
Note was submitted with FYNSA (Finanzas y Negocios S.A) as the proposed Accredited Entity, 
considering that FYNSA had initiated the process of accreditation with the GCF. Subsequently, in July 
2018, the Project submitted a funding proposal with FYNSA (Finanzas y Negocios S.A) and MUFG Bank, 
Ltd. as proposed joint Accredited Entities. 
We understand that FYNSA remains in the process of 
accreditation with the GCF but that the Project will now be presented and move forward exclusively 
with MUFG Bank, Ltd. as the sole Accredited Entity. We confirm our support and approval of this 
change and continuing no-objection to the Project. 
Yours faithfully, 
NATIONAL DESIGNATED AUTHORITY 
Page 90

=== PAGE 93 ===
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information 
Project/programme 
title 
Espejo de Tarapacá 
Accredited entity 
MUFG Bank, Ltd. 
Environmental and 
social safeguards 
(ESS) category 
Category A 
Specific project 
location or target 
country/ies of the 
programme, as the 
case may be 
Chile (Tarapacá region in northern Chile) 
Espejo de Tarapacá (Pumped storage plant): The reversible pumped 
storage hydro power station will be located in the coastal sector of 
Caleta San Marcos, about 100 km south of the city of Iquique, and its 
transmission system will connect to the existing Lagunas substation. 
The power station is located in the district of Iquique and the 
transmission system crosses the districts of Iquique and Pozo 
Almonte, Tarapacá Region. The GPS location coordinates for the 
Espejo de Tarapacá Project are:  Datum WGS84 HUSO 19 (Este 
384.166, Norte 7.665.716). 
Cielos de Tarapacá (PV solar plant): The photovoltaic plant will be 
located 75km southeast of the city of Iquique, Pozo Almonte district, 
Province of El Tamarugal, Tarapacá Region and its transmission 
system will connect to the existing Lagunas Substation.  Both the 
photovoltaic plant and transmission line are located in the district of 
Pozo Almonte, Tarapacá Region. The GPS location coordinates for the 
Cielos de Tarapacá Project are:  Datum WGS 84 - HUSO 19 (Este 
440.496; Norte 7.705.525). 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website 
2019-03-01 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English and Spanish 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/corpandinvest
/gcf/edt/pdf/05.pdf
Spanish: 
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/corpandinvest
/gcf/edt/pdf/10.pdf
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a category A project is 
contained in the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF). 
Other link(s) 
MUFG Bank Ltd. website: 
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/corpandinvest
/gcf/edt/index.html 
Page 91

=== PAGE 94 ===
https://www.bk.mufg.jp/global/productsandservices/corpandinvest
/gcf.html  
 
Gobierno de Chile, Servicio de Evaluación Ambiental (SEA) website, 
Chilean government website on environmental evaluation (Spanish): 
Espejo de Tarapacá (Pumped storage plant):   
http://seia.sea.gob.cl/expediente/expedientesEvaluacion.php?modo
=ficha&id_expediente=2129687968 
 
Cielos de Tarapacá (PV solar plant): 
http://seia.sea.gob.cl/expediente/expedientesEvaluacion.php?modo
=ficha&id_expediente=2130127816 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website 
N/A 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure 
N/A 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website 
N/A 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples 
Date 
2014-08-12 
Place 
San Marcos Connectivity Center, Manzana 2, Casa D, Villa San Marcos, 
Comuna de Iquique, Región de Tarapacá, Chile 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
________

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 92 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP115 
Proposal name: 
Energia de Tarapacá 
Accredited entity: 
MUFG Bank, Ltd. (MUFG Bank) 
Project/programme 
size: 
Large 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
General background 
1. 
The Chilean electricity market was deregulated in 1982, thereby becoming the first such 
market in the region to undergo this type of market segment unbundling. It was achieved by 
segmenting the market into distinct power generation, transmission and distribution markets. 
The deregulation of the electricity market resulted in one driven strictly by prices and 
competitive market characteristics. A key characteristic of this post-regulation market in Chile 
is its so called ‘technological neutrality’. It is argued that since no direct subsidies, tax credits or 
other incentives are provided to any technologies or energy sources in the Chilean electricity 
market, competition is enhanced by lower market-clearing price, thus fostering the competitive 
development of non-renewable and renewable power-generation projects. A key weakness of 
this assertion is that the non-inclusion of social costs and benefits, such as carbon dioxide (CO2) 
emissions,1 in the cost of production, effectively provides indirect subsidies to the development 
of traditional fossil-fuel generation assets, which is inconsistent with the global climate change 
strategy of grid decarbonization to which Chile has subscribed.  
2. 
This indirect support for the development of fossil-fuel plants coupled with inadequate 
electricity storage capacity on the Chilean grid (there is currently only 52 MW of storage 
capacity in a grid with a capacity of approximately 24,000 MW) that is usually needed to 
incorporate variable renewable energy (VRE) power generation assets onto grids, has resulted 
in a Chilean electricity grid that is currently dominated by coal- and natural-gas-fueled systems. 
As of December 2017, the Chilean electricity grid comprised primarily thermal units which 
represented 54 per cent of the total system installed capacity. Hydroelectric power plants, 
consisting of all the dam-based plants and run-of-river plants over 20 MW, represented 30 per 
cent of the system, while the remaining 16 per cent of capacity, consisted principally of 
renewables plants, including solar, wind, biomass, and run-of-river plants of less than 20 MW. 
Among the many goals of the Chilean Government for the development of this grid in the future, 
key ones that are of importance to the goals and objectives of this financial proposal include: the 
aggressive decarbonization of the grid with (a) the replacement of coal facilities; (b) reduced 
reliance on imported fuels (e.g. natural gas imported from Argentina)2; and (c) reduced reliance 
on variable hydropower; etc. Each of these objectives will require an aggressive catalyzation of 
investment in grid-connected renewable power plants. 
3. 
Apart from the barrier mentioned above (i.e. indirect support for fossil-fuel plant 
development due to the current structure of the framework used to decide which alternatives 
                                                                
1 Since 2017, Chile has applied a carbon tax to thermoelectric plants equivalent to USD 5 per ton of carbon emitted. 
2 What has been referred to as “Argentinian Gas Crisis” happened in 2006 when Argentina without any warning 
curtailed its gas export to Chile. Key impacts of this crisis include: high power prices; power shortages, which lasted 
several years ; and the construction of well over 3,000 MW of coal power plants

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 93 
 
 
are adopted for capacity expansion), the inadequacy of the electricity storage capacity needed to 
seamlessly adopt VRE technologies onto the grid has also made it difficult for such technologies 
to be successful in the bidding process to expand Chile’s grid capacity. To participate in the 
bidding process to build power plants for grid connection in Chile requires bidders to acquire 
bid bonds, which for projects usually run into millions of United States dollars. This has also 
served as a disincentive to power-plant investors, both local and international, who are unsure 
as to whether VRE can obtain power purchase agreement given the lack of storage capacity in 
the Chilean grid. The success of grid-connected VRE generation options in recent bids has 
actually slowed down and it is now widely recognized that more electricity storage capacity on 
the Chilean grid will be necessary for the kind of aggressive grid decarbonization expected in 
the future. The need for increased electricity storage capacity of the Chilean grid has been 
recognized by both the Chilean Government as well as relevant international entities. The 
International Energy Agency (IEA) in a recent publication from 2018, “Policy Report for Chile”, 
declared that: “bulk energy storage, will play a key role by providing flexibility and catalyzing 
investment in renewable technologies, thereby transitioning the system from high polluting 
fossil fuel-based to zero emission technologies”.3 Also, in a forward-looking report published in 
January 2019, Chile’s independent grid operator recognized the strategic role that storage can 
play in the process of decarbonization of the energy matrix.4  
4. 
The project business model proposed in this funding proposal submission by MUFG 
Bank, Ltd. (MUFG) serving as the accredited entity (AE), is based on the commercial integration 
of the photovoltaic (PV) and pumped storage hydro (PSH) plants to provide non-stop energy 
supply under a long-term power purchase agreement (PPA) with a creditworthy off-taker. The 
project is able to provide a 24/7 supply solution by utilizing solar generation from the PV plant 
which is available during sun-hours to serve the PPA during the day and utilizing hydroelectric 
generation, which is available during dark-hours to serve the PPA during the night. The solar 
generation that is not utilized to serve the PPA is subsequently available to pump seawater into 
the PSH reservoir, and the water stored in the reservoir can then be released for generation 
during dark-hours of the early morning and evening. 
5. 
This funding proposal aims to invest in a wholistic system, incorporating a bulk storage 
system and a solar PV system, that will: (a) provide round-the-clock supply of electricity to the 
Chilean grid; and (b) supply bulk storage capacity to the Chilean grid, which will catalyse the 
development and deployment of more VRE power plants to the Chilean Grid even after the 
underlying projects of this funding proposal have been commissioned. In this submission, MUFG 
has requested that GCF:  
(a) 
Participate in this project as a 15 per cent equity investor to the tune of USD 60 million; 
and  
(b) 
Prepay a significant proportion of the required equity purposely to:  
(i) 
Finance the bid bond for the PPA to the underlying project; and  
(ii) 
Maintain the 15 per cent equity level with the initial sponsor of the project 
before PPA is granted (the balance of the equity will be delivered after the 
successful acquisition of the PPA); and  
                                                                
3 [Add details of IEA’s Policy Report for Chile.] 
4 See report prepared by Chilean independent grid operator (Coordinador Electric Nacional) in January 2019, “Study 
of Operation and Development Without Coal Plants”. Available at 
<https://www.coordinador.cl/desarrollo/documentos/estudios-de-planificacion/estudio-de-operacion-y-
desarrollo-del-sen-sin-centrales-a-carbon/informes-estudio-operacion-y-desarrollo-sen-sin-centrales-a-carbon/ 
https://www.coordinador.cl/wp-content/old-docs/2019/01/20190102-Estudio_OPyDES-Sin-
carb%C3%B3n_Informe_Principal.pdf>.

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 94 
 
 
(iii) 
Exit the investment at any time it deems necessary, especially once a lead core 
investor and adequate debt funding have been secured for the project.  
6. 
MUFG, in its presentation to GCF, suggested that the core investor will buy out GCF 
equity at its exit.  
7. 
The project has been structured along the lines of the following expected outputs and 
activities: 
(a) 
Output 1 – Commercial viability of the project with completion of financing: 
(i) 
Activity 1.1. Execution of PPA; and 
(ii) 
Activity 1.2. Execution of equity and debt financing with private investors; 
(b) 
Output 2 – Delivery of clean, economic and reliable renewable energy: 
(i) 
Activity 2. Construction and commercial operation of the project for the delivery 
of 24/7 renewable energy; 
(c) 
Output 3 – Mutual cooperation, participation and support by local vulnerable 
communities: 
(i) 
Activity 3. Diversification of the local economy; and 
(d) 
Output 4 – Water security for local communities: 
(i) 
Activity 4. Construction and commercial operation of the project’s desalination 
plant. 
8. 
The total fund required for the project is USD 1,091 million and according to the request 
will be funded as follows:  
(a) 
GCF equity – USD 60 million; 
(b) 
Valhalla equity – USD 30 million; 
(c) 
Strategic private investor equity – USD 301.1 million; and 
(d) 
Senior loans – USD 699.9 million. 
1.2 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
       Scale: High 
9. 
The project, when funded and successfully implemented, will deliver the following 
climate change mitigation and adaptation impacts. 
1.2.1 
Mitigation impacts: 
(a) 
The project is expected to generate approximately 1,500 GWh (net) of clean energy per 
year. This net energy production figure was arrived at by first determining the PSH 
capacity (the “strategic asset”) to be 300 MW, based on the grid's capacity requirements, 
in addition to the site's particular geological conditions. Commercial and economic 
optimization of the combined system was then used to determine the optimal capacity 
of the PV plant as 561 MW; 
(b) 
This system will deliver 24/7 energy supply to the Chilean grid displacing in the merit 
order dispatch, electricity that would have been supplied in the absence of this project, 
by more carbon-intensive power plants, avoiding greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from 
the Chilean grid of 1,001,187 t CO2eq every year on average and 35 million t CO2eq over 
the project’s 35-year evaluation period; and

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 95 
 
 
(c) 
The project’s electricity generation will result in the replacement of 5 per cent of the 
national electric grid from fossil-based sources with renewable energy, and will 
contribute to Chile achieving its mitigation plans as articulated in many of its national 
plans, including its nationally determined contributions submitted to the UNFCCC 
secretariat. 
1.2.2 
Adaptation impacts 
(a) 
The climate change vulnerability of Chile’s energy sector can be summarized as follows:  
(i) 
The past seven years in a row have been catalogued as part of the ten driest 
hydrological years of the past six decades. As such, ports have been closed down 
for significant periods, making it impossible to import coal for electricity 
generation resulting in frequent shortages in electricity supply; 
(ii) 
Natural gas is also imported from Argentina. A concrete example of the 
dependency problem in Chile’s recent history occurred in 2006 when Argentina 
curtailed 100 per cent of its natural gas exports to Chile without warning, 
resulting in a system shock and leading to extremely high power prices and even 
shortages which lasted for years. A key impact of this was the increased 
carbonization of the Chilean grid – approximately 3,000 MW of coal-fired power 
plants were established during this period; and 
(iii) 
The fact that Chile is very vulnerable to hydrology means that 30 per cent of the 
system’s installed grid capacity, corresponding to dam and run-of-river hydro 
power plants, is dependent on hydrology. This has resulted in a decrease of more 
than 20 per cent in available hydroelectric energy, when comparing the last five 
years to the last 56 years. In the last five years, for instance, more than 5,790 
GWh of energy has been unavailable each year; 
(b) 
Chile’s portable water supply is also impacted by climate change, especially for 
communities living in the project area. Currently, the local communities surrounding the 
project do not have access to stable drinking water supply, which is currently sourced 
from groundwater and transported to the communities in trucks. Climate change 
impacts on Chile’s hydrology is making the sourcing of portable water from subsurface 
aquifers more and more difficult to maintain; 
(c) 
Another notable adaptive capacity influence of climate change in Chile is on the local 
economy, which is highly dependent on sea products that have been in steady decline in 
recent years due to overexploitation and higher water temperature due to climate 
change; 
(d) 
Key climate change adaptive capacity improvement in Chile that will be engendered by 
the proposed project can be summarized as follows: 
(i) 
The project will help Chile to build capacity to adapt to climate change by 
improving grid flexibility through renewable energy storage that will enable 
flexible ramping up and down and also catalyse additional investment in more 
variable renewable energy plant options and reduce dependence on the 
fluctuating hydro power resources; 
(ii) 
The project will provide at cost stable water supply from its desalination plant to 
the vulnerable local communities, of approximately 550 inhabitants, who in the 
absence of this project would continue to depend on the climate change 
vulnerable groundwater source; and 
(iii) 
The project will also improve the livelihoods of local communities in the project 
area through the long-term collaboration agreements that will be executed with

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 96 
 
 
the vulnerable fishing communities close to the project. The project investors 
will provide funds and training for social and productive investments to help 
diversify the local economy away from sole dependence on products harvested 
from the sea. 
10. 
The key impact performance indicators of this project can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The GHG that will be reduced or avoided in the project’s lifetime is estimated at 35 
MtCO2eq; 
(b) 
The primary direct beneficiaries of the reduction/avoidance of GHG emissions from the 
project are estimated at 17.6 million people (i.e. the entire Chilean population); 
(c) 
The equivalent per capita annual reduction is estimated at 0.057 tCO2eq; 
(d) 
The number of the primary direct beneficiaries of the Chilean energy system’s increased 
resilience to climate variability is 550 people (50 per cent male and 41 per cent female 
in San Marcos and Rio Seco, respectively); and, 
(e) 
The number of indirect beneficiaries of the increased resilience of the energy system 
against climate variability will be the entirety of Chile’s population of 17.6 million 
inhabitants (50 per cent male/50 per cent female). 
11. 
Given these mitigation and adaptation interventions that have been built into the 
project, and their impacts discussed above, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) 
scored the overall impact potential of this project as “high”.  
1.3 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
       Scale: High 
12. 
The paradigm shift potential measures the degree and the capability of the proposed 
activity to catalyse impact beyond a one-off project. To what extent is the activity proposed in 
the funding proposal likely to catalyse many of such interventions in Chile and other countries 
in the region as well as on a worldwide scale? This extent can be dicussed and elucidated in 
reference to the categories outlined below. 
1.3.3 
Potential for scaling up and replication 
13. 
There are two key areas of focus of the proposed activity: (a) the development of a large 
electricity-storage facility on a grid system; and (b) the development of solar power connected 
to the grid. A study that was conducted by Stanford University’s Global Climate and Energy 
Project utilized geographic information system (GIS)-based topographic analysis5 to study the 
potential of seawater storage in topographically accessible locations in California, Peru and 
Chile. The Chile study identified about 3,500 locations that can be used for PHS, such as the one 
designed to be used in this project. The study also concluded that 52 of the sites in Chile can be 
used to store about 10 million cubic meters of water or several GWh of energy. Therefore, given 
these sites in Chile, a successful completion of this proposed activity will enhance the scaling up 
and replication of such PSH in Chile. The research also reported the existence of similar 
topographic characteristics close to the sea in the other countries and concluded that the same 
type of PHS as was designed for the Chile project could not only be replicated in other sites in 
Chile but also in the other countries included in the study, and globally. The study plans to 
report a global database of candidate PHS locations and to confirm their energy storage 
capability. For global replication however, lessons learned from the project in Chile will need to 
be properly documented and effectively communicated. The sponsors of the project in Chile 
                                                                
5 Charles Barnhart, Reid Parsons and Sally Benson, Energy Storage Potential Estimates Using GIS-Based Topographic 
Analysis, Stanford University’s Global Climate and Energy Project.

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 97 
 
 
have agreed to submit to the Secretariat a well-thought-out plan to communicate the lessons 
learned from the implementation of their project. The AE has agreed to submit to the Secretariat 
a draft communication plan, in a form and content satisfactory to the Secretariat, so as to 
enhance the dissemination of important lessons learned about the project during its 
implementation. This will globally enhance the project’s replicability. 
1.3.4 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
14. 
Another paradigm shift metric is the extent to which the project structure is designed to 
enhance knowledge and learning. The project is innovative in that it will perhaps be one of the 
first, if not the first, of this type of project that will utilize seawater in such a PSH system. The 
design of the project will also allow experience and knowledge to be gained on the integration of 
two proven technologies, PV and PSH, to provide guaranteed 24/7 energy. The project will 
provide information and establish a track record for the design, construction and operation of 
large-scale commercial PSH plants, which use seawater, that can be replicated in other places as 
stated in the discussions in above. Lessons learned on all aspect of the project, which according 
to the AE will be properly documented and communicated to the public will enhance knowledge 
learning and sharing beyond the project area in Chile. This engagement by the AE has been 
included in the term sheet. Potential for knowledge and learning will also be enhanced when 
proper project monitoring covering: technology transfer; GHG emissions reduction monitoring 
and reporting; and the outcome of the adaptive capacity interventions are achieved. A forceful 
letter from the project promoters on this point is included in the submission. It states 
unequivocally that this monitoring will be carried out throughout the project’s lifetime. The 
frequency of monitoring and evaluation results will serve as inputs for the sharing of lessons 
learned so that they can be incorporated into other projects, as well as to improve the project 
itself.  
1.3.5 
Contribution to the enabling environment 
15. 
Private- and public-sector investment in VRE and the needed storage facilities that will 
alleviate all the negative effect of the variability of clean renewable energy on the grid of Chile 
has been hampered over the years due to barriers, including: (a) low electricity storage on the 
grid; (b) competitive advantage of fossil-fuel plant alternatives within the deregulated 
electricity market in Chile; (c) difficulty for VRE plants to attain a PPA within the Chilean bid for 
capacity expansion; and (d) lack of investor trust regarding the profitable delivery of financial 
benefits by new technologies in Chile. The GCF funding intervention that has been requested is 
expected to break all these barriers. Firstly, GCF equity funding will be used as part provision of 
the bid bond, which will be essential in obtaining the PPA needed to proceed with project 
implementation. Secondly, the expected economics of the project in the financial model, 
included in Annex 2, show that the project will achieve a long-term, low-carbon, financially 
sustainable outcome. Thirdly, the project’s key assumption is that participation of GCF as an 
early equity fund will not only help to attain a PPA for this project, but will also catalyse the 
crowding in of private investors who will then have confidence in the project and will bring the 
additional equity and debt required to achieve financial closure.  
1.3.6 
Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
16. 
The Chilean national/local regulatory or legal frameworks as they relate to the country’s 
privatized and unbundled power sector indicate that electric regulations do not provide 
remuneration for the multiple electric systems and social benefits which can be provided by 
bulk renewable energy storage. The relevant electric system and social benefits that 
characterize bulk renewable energy storage, such as the one proposed in this project, and that 
should be taken into consideration during comparative assessment of alternative electricity 
supply systems, in addition to the provision of energy and firm capacity, include: (a) enhanced

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 98 
 
 
system flexibility; (b) increased system resilience; (c) optimization of the transmission grid; (d) 
reduction of CO2 emissions and therefore decarbonizing of the grid with the replacement of coal 
facilities; (e) reduced reliance on variable hydropower; and (f) catalysation of additional 
renewable investments; among others. The regulatory framework and policies existing in Chile 
prior to the introduction of the underlying technology on which this present submission is 
based were usually not considered. Valhalla, as the pioneering investor for this innovative 
technology, has been involved in activities that are changing the regulatory framework and 
policies in a positive direction. Key activities and outcomes of this investor are summarized as 
follows: 
(a) 
Valhalla has been proactive in promoting its vision in discussions on the definition of 
electricity storage within the Chilean legal framework in order to systematically 
promote investment in low-emission development; 
(b) 
In 2015 and 2016, it actively participated in the discussion of new standards on PSH 
technology given the existing regulatory void that exists for this type of technology and 
the need to provide regulatory certainty for investors; 
(c) 
In 2016, a new regulation for “Pumped Storage Plants Without Hydrological Variation” 
was enacted in Chile, in reaction to the positive lobbying of Valhalla and other 
stakeholders, to confirm the dispatch and operation of pumped storage plants; and 
(d) 
The Chilean regulator is currently implementing a participative process to design new 
transmission and ancillary service regulations, which include energy storage as a critical 
technology type. 
17. 
The successful implementation of the project proposed in this submission will provide a 
pedestal from which the actual performance of such a system will foster and strengthen the 
legal framework and regulatory policies that will (a) systematically drive investment in low-
emission technologies and activities; (b) promote the development of additional low-emission 
policies; and/or (c) improve climate-responsive planning and development even beyond that 
built into the present intervention. Also, with a proper communications strategy (such as that 
agreed upon by the AE) in place, one can conclude that not only will technology transfer for such 
PSH hybrids with VRE technologies (and the benefits of its adoption for countries with the right 
topography) be engendered, the regulatory framework and policies in those countries will also 
be impacted.  
18. 
Given the various submetrics of the paradigm shift potential of this present submission, 
the independent TAP scored the overall impact potential of this project as “high”. 
1.4 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
Scale: Medium 
19. 
The potential of the proposed project intervention to contribute to sustainable 
development in Chile has been reviewed by the independent TAP under the following 
submetrics: (a) economic co-benefits; (b) social co-benefits; (c) environmental co-benefits; and 
(d) gender-sensitive development impacts. It utilized information contained in the funding 
proposal and its various annexes submitted to the GCF Secretariat by MUFG. In addition, the 
independent TAP has utilized the period of communications with the AE to properly understand 
and evaluate the information provided. The following is the result of this review.

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 99 
 
 
1.4.7 
Economic co-benefits 
20. 
The construction contracts for the implementation of all aspects of the project includes 
incentives for hiring local unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled labour. Given the skill set needed 
for a first-class implementation of such technologies, major contractors, who are internationally 
known for their track record with these kinds of contracts, will be engaged. Incentives for the 
hiring of local capable workers will definitely enhance the benefits in terms of local income, 
which will in turn benefit the local economy. During the operation of the plants (the PSH, PV 
power plant and the desalination plant), different types of labour will be required. It has been 
estimated that the operation of the PSH will require about 50 employees, while the operation 
and maintenance of the PV plant will be contracted under agreement to an experienced 
supplier, who will directly contract employees. It is conceivable that similar agreements will be 
entered into for the operation and maintenance of the desalination plant. With such plants 
located close to the capital city of Iquique, with population of around 200,000 (the PSH plant is 
located 100 km south the PV plant 80 km south-east of Iquique, respectively), it is very likely 
that such an environment will have a suitable number of skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled 
workers that will be available to be employed when these operating plants are commissioned. 
In addition to the incomes that will be earned by these local workers, Iquique and other 
surrounding population centres, will benefit from the expenditures that will be made by 
contractors and temporary employees (i.e. accommodation, goods and services, etc.) even 
beyond the project’s commissioning. 
1.4.8 
 Social co-benefits 
21. 
According to the funding proposal reviewed, and the various Annexes to the submission, 
made available to the independent TAP, engagement of local communities was made an integral 
part of project development right from the outset. According to the information contained in the 
funding proposal, these engagements were characterized by transparent, meaningfully 
participative and empathetic relationships with the communities, especially those located close 
to the planned sites of the project components. According to the information in the funding 
proposal, such communities included: 
(a) 
Those close to the PSH facilities – the fishing villages of Caletas San Marcos and Rio Seco 
– who were consulted in 2012, approximately two years prior to the submission of the 
environmental permit for the PSH plant. This process enabled the early identification of 
community concerns and provided opportunities to address them in the development of 
the project plans; and 
(b) 
The closest community to the PV power plant site is approximately 8 km from the site. 
Valhalla consulted this community during the environmental assessment of the PV 
power plant. This consultation enabled the identification of community concerns and 
provided opportunities to address them in the development of the project plans. The 
engagement also enabled the identification of potential opportunities that the 
community can take advantage of during the construction of the plant. 
22. 
The gender action plan, which accompanied the funding proposal, included a listing of 
executed agreements that Valhalla has entered into with the communities close to the PSH 
facilities. These include:  
(a) 
The creation of a development fund for the San Marcos Fishermen’s Union to help it to 
implement economic development projects (~USD 100,000 /year) upon start of 
construction; 
(b) 
The creation of a social fund for Caleta San Marcos to support economic development 
projects and student scholarships throughout the operation of the PSH plant (~USD 
95,000/year);

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 100 
 
 
(c) 
The creation of a development fund for kelp harvesters so that they can build a meeting 
space and other economic development projects (~USD 70,000 one-time payment with 
USD 10,000/year for the first five years of operation); 
(d) 
The creation of a development fund for the Rio Seco Fishermen´s Union to help it to 
implement economic development projects (USD 100,000/year for seven years);  
(e) 
The creation of a social fund for Caleta Rio Seco to support economic development 
projects and student scholarships (~USD 45,000/year for four years); 
(f) 
The provision of potable water for Caletas San Marcos and Rio Seco at a fraction of the 
current cost (potable water is currently transported from Iquique), which will help to 
significantly improve the quality of life and health of residents of those areas; and 
(g) 
The creation of an incentive for construction contractors to hire local labour. 
23. 
Some other key activities that Valhalla, as the project proponent, has either 
implemented in the communities or has firmly agreed to implement that have brought or will 
bring strong social co-benefits for those living close to the project sites can be summarized as 
follows: 
(a) 
During the development stage of the project, Valhalla implemented a school-levelling 
programme to help adults to finish primary and secondary education. This prepared 
many of the adults living close to the project sites for training in the semi-skilled and 
skilled tasks that will be required during construction and operation; 
(b) 
The company also implemented training programmes for community members 
(including those who participated in adult education programmes – school-levelling 
programme) interested in taking part in the semi-skilled and skilled tasks that will be 
required during construction and operations; 
(c) 
In May 2015, the project’s office for the school-levelling programme was expanded to 
include a public connectivity centre for use by students and other residents, who 
previously did not have access to the Internet; 
(d) 
The fears of those who principally engage in fishing in the sea area where the reservoir 
of the PSH plant will be taken were allayed through the results of an extensive marine-
related modelling and analysis that was carried out as part of the environmental 
assessment process for the PSH plant. This reduced anxiety about the negative impacts 
on these fishers’ source of livelihood; 
(e) 
It is also expected that the construction of a project reservoir for the PSH in the arid 
desert has the potential to become a tourist attraction in the area, further facilitating 
economic opportunities for the community; and 
(f) 
The project sponsor also indicated in the submission that it recognized the fact that 
fishing is the main occupation of people (especially men) living close to the PSH site and 
prepared for any marginal disruption in this livelihood by providing training in 
alternative livelihoods. Specifically, it is stated in the funding proposal, and other 
relevant Annexes, that families (particularly female-headed households) will be trained 
to sustain a living not solely dependent on the existing fishing activities but potentially 
agriculture and tourism.  
24. 
Clearly, this project when commissioned will deliver substantial social co-benefits for 
the communities around the project sites. The fact that many of these interventions have either 
been carried out or are reinforced by agreements gives comfort that these social co-benefits will 
be delivered.

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 101 
 
 
1.4.9 
Environment co-benefits 
25. 
Key environmental co-benefits of this project that were articulated in the funding 
proposal, and its relevant annexes, can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The key environmental co-benefit of this project is the delivery of a stable large-scale 
zero-GHG-emitting energy system. This will displace the higher carbon fuels (notably 
coal) that before the project were dominant in the supply of electricity to the grid in 
Chile; 
(b) 
The displacement of coal and eventually some of the need for gas-fired generation for 
grid electricity in Chile will not only decarbonize the grid, but will also reduce the 
emissions of noxious gases (SOx, NOx etc.) and particulates that are usually emitted 
when fossil fuel is combusted; 
(c) 
The project will also improve the resilience of the energy system of Chile to climate 
variability, which has been plaguing the reliable generation of power from the hydro 
plants connected to the grid; and 
(d) 
Use of the project electricity for the desalination of seawater will also lead to future 
environmental co-benefits as the impact of climate variability on underground water 
aquifers will be ameliorated. This will contribute in no small measure to the overall 
health and well-being of the communities living close to the project. 
26. 
A review of the environmental and social management framework (ESMF) document of 
the Espejo de Tarapacá Project (annex 3 to the funding proposal) indicated that Chile has a 
comprehensive environmental assessment system, which considers the evaluation of risks and 
impacts, associated with issues addressed by the performance standards of the International 
Finance Corporation (IFC) and in which community engagement is critical. Therefore, we are 
convinced that the fact that the component projects, the PSH and the desalination plant and the 
PV, were unanimously granted the respective environmental permits and because the permit 
endorsed a very strong environmental and social management plan together with a 
comprehensive monitoring plan, may be a good indication that many of the social co-benefits 
discussed above will be achieved. Many of the monitoring procedures built into the ESMF 
should be included in the regular communication protocol that the AE agreed will be developed.  
1.4.10 
Gender-sensitive development impact  
27. 
Relevant documents, submitted as annexes to the funding proposal, that were reviewed 
include: the gender assessment report and the gender action plan. Key conclusions drawn from 
the review of the funding proposal and its relevant annexes can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
A gender gap in terms of workforce participation and income inequality, amongst 
others, exist in Chile, especially in the dominant fishing industry, which is dominated by 
men; 
(b) 
Low levels of education and a lack of economic opportunities beyond those related to 
the fishing and aquaculture sector also contribute to the current realities of women in 
Caleta San Marcos, the main project area; 
(c) 
Realizing this unequal starting gender position, the Espejo de Tarapacá project 
sponsors, from the outset, decided to play a key role in the empowerment of women as 
part of the development of the project; 
(d) 
As a result, as detailed in the gender action plan (annex 5 to the funding proposal), the 
project plans to focus on implementing programmes to help to improve gender equality 
by ensuring that women and men have equal access to the opportunities, benefits and 
decision-making processes associated with the project;

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 102 
 
 
(e) 
The project’s contribution will also be monitored on a regular basis not only in terms of 
progress but also to detect any potential cultural friction related to gender-equality 
issues or tensions within the community as a result of the new economic opportunities; 
(f) 
The gender action plan developed by the project details specific objectives, outcomes 
and activities that will be followed to improve gender equality. It includes the following 
initiatives that are expected to promote gender equality and empower women:  
(i) 
Psychological training of local men and women during the initial construction 
period to educate and sensitize the community regarding gender equality and 
the empowerment of women (~USD 30,000); 
(ii) 
Training of local women during the initial construction period to promote 
economic opportunities (~USD 15,000); 
(iii) 
Counselling/training during the initial construction period to improve 
networking capacity and establish mentoring relationships with women in 
business or leadership positions in other communities (~USF 25,000); 
(iv) 
Counselling/training during the initial construction period to promote social 
participation and networking and knowledge sharing. (~USD 10,000); 
(v) 
A programme during the initial construction period to provide microcredits to 
women (~USD 75,000); and  
(vi) 
Training and mentoring related to business management, accounting and credit 
agreements (~USD 25,000).  
28. 
These gender mainstreaming objectives built into this project plan as described in the 
documents (the funding proposal and relevant annexes) made available to the independent TAP 
are very comprehensive. However, ensuring that these programmes and protocols are adhered 
to will require regular and exact monitoring. The results of the monitoring protocol should be 
reported regularly and should be coupled with the effective communication of the metrics that 
result, as set out, amongst others, in the communication protocol agreed by the AE and which is 
included in the term sheet.  
29. 
The plan of the AE in its submission of this project to the Secretariat has been very 
strongly developed as described in paragraph 7 (a–d) above. However for these elements to 
deliver a strong sustainable development potential for the proposed project, the delivery and 
performance of some of the metrics, discussed above, must be properly monitored and 
communicated during project lifetime. The way in which this will be achieved will need to be set 
out by the AE so that the independent TAP will be able to score the sutainable development 
potential as “high”. Since this information is still pending, the independent TAP has decided to 
scored the project as “medium” for its sutainable development potential.  
1.5 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
       Scale: High 
30. 
In this section, the independent TAP presents a review of how the proposed project 
fulfills the needs of the people of Chile as far as climate change adaptive capacity strengthening 
and mitigation are concerned. In the following subsections, the needs of Chile in this regard are 
described as extracted from the evaluation of policy documents prepared by the Government of 
Chile.

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 103 
 
 
1.5.1 
Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (adaptation only) 
31. 
According to Chile’s third national communications (submitted to the UNFCCC 
secretariat in 2016)6, the key areas where efforts needs to focus on effective climate change 
adaptation strategies include: (a) water resources; (b) biodiversity; (c) forestry and agriculture; 
(d) fishing and aquaculture; (e) energy; (f) infrastructure; (g) cities and coastal areas; (h) health; 
and (i) tourism. The proposed Espejo de Tarapacá project, according to the submission in the 
funding proposal will contribute to climate change adaptation in three vulnerable sectors, 
namely: (a) energy; (b) water resources; and (c) fishing and aquaculture. The way the project 
will contribute to adaptive capacity-building and strengthening in Chile as extracted from 
documents reviewed are described below. 
1.5.2 
Energy sector  
32. 
The Chilean electricity grid is dependent on hydroelectric supply up to the tune of 
approximately 30 per cent (dam and run-of-river hydroelectric power plants). These 
hydropower capacities are dependent on hydrology, which has been negatively affected by 
climate change to the extent that a decrease of more than 20 per cent in available hydroelectric 
energy has been recorded, when the last 5 years is compared to the last 56 years. This translates 
to a reduction of more than 5,726 GWh of energy that has not been available each year during 
the last five years. This is a significant indication of the climate change vulnerability of the of the 
water-dependent Chilean electrical grid. According to information in the funding proposal, the 
past seven years have been catalogued as part of the 10 driest hydrological years of the past six 
decades. In addition to the effect of poorer hydrology on power generation from the 
hydropower system connected to the Chilean grid, it has also caused strong swells in water 
bodies, which has resulted in frequent port closures. Port closures resulted in the inability to 
import coal, which is the leading thermal fuel for electricity generation connected to the grid. 
The proposed project will make available clean electricity 24/7, which will displace this high-
carbon thermal power generation and replace unavailable hydro capacity, thus making the grid 
more resilient to the influence of climate change. The proposed project will thus help Chile to 
build capacity to adapt to climate change by improving grid flexibility and catalysing additional 
investments in variable renewable energy and also by reducing the national grid’s dependence 
on fossil fuels and hydrology affected by droughts. 
1.5.3 
Water resources sector 
33. 
The area where the proposed project, especially the PSH, will be sited is located in the 
arid desert of Northern Chile. The area is very stressed as far as local drinking water supply is 
concerned. In the absence of this project, drinking water will continue to be supplied to 
inhabitants of the area from groundwater from the regional capital (100 km north) and 
transported to the communities by trucks twice a month. This pre-project supply of water to the 
local communities located close to the PSH site, Caletas San Marcos and Rio Seco, translates to 
an average water supply of about 20 liters per day per person; way below the optimum of 100 
liters/per day per person recommended by the World Health Organization. This low availability 
of water to people in the project area is a measure of the extent of their vulnerability to climate 
change. As part of the agreement reached between the proposed project sponsors and San 
Marcos, 50 m3 of drinking water per day will be supplied from the project’s desalination plant to 
the local water council for distribution to consumers in the area. This water will raise the 
specific water supply to about 150 liters per day per person. Also, Rio Seco’s rural water council 
will be provided with portable water at cost with a supply of 25 m3 per day from the project’s 
                                                                
6 Chile’s 3rd National Communications 
<https//unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/NC3%20Chile_19%20December%202016.pdf>

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 104 
 
 
desalination plant. For these areas, the proposed project will contribute indirectly to improve 
the quality of health and well-being at the local level.  
1.5.4 
Fishing and aquaculture sector 
34. 
Fishing and other sea product farming is the main source of income for many males, and 
some females, inhabitants in Caletas San Marcos and Rio Seco, the two communities close to the 
proposed projects. In recent years, overexploitation of these resources coupled with increasing 
water temperatures, which is attributed to climate change, has been blamed for the declining 
productivity of fish catch and the other sea products. The project agreements executed with the 
communities living in the project area includes annual funds to support the development of new 
lines of work that can help the community to adapt to the harvesting of fewer traditional 
resources. In addition, 15 m3 per day of water will be supplied in San Marco for processing to 
facilitate some level of value addition to traditional products. The proposed project will thus 
help these economies to adapt by seeking new opportunities and enhancing the productivity of 
aquaculture projects, thereby improving overall community well-being.  
1.5.5 
Financial, economic, institutional and social needs 
35. 
The proposed project intervention will enhance the financial, economic and social needs 
of Chile as a country. Chile is regarded as one of Latin America’s fastest growing economies. 
However, in recent times, due to declining copper prices, a significant commodity in the 
economy of Chile, gross domestic product growth fell from a high of 6.1 per cent in 2011 to 1.5 
per cent in 2017. This has negatively affected private investment and exports. These economic 
stressors have started to impact the energy sector, especially the power sector, where the 
availability of capital to fund capacity expansion of renewable-energy facilities has started to 
decrease significantly. This is exacerbated by the indirect subsidy given to fossil-fuel power 
plants due to the non-consideration of the external benefits of the adoption of these 
technologies in the comparative assessment given to alternative power capacity expansion bids. 
The proposed project will not only provide a way in which such externalities are brought into 
the bidding process but will also engender and catalyse equity and debt funding for the project 
in an already financially stressed market, thus satisfying the need of the country to have 
variable renewable energy as a strongly considered capacity expansion candidate. The low 
socioeconomic levels of the inhabitants of the areas close to the project sites will be raised 
through the provision of drinking water, sewage service and stable work from the proposed 
project, thus contributing to the social needs in the country.  
36. 
Given the fact that this project will enhance the adaptive capacity of Chile in the key 
sectors discussed above, and actually bring social benefits to the project area’s albeit climate 
stressed inhabitants; and that it will contribute to the financial and economic needs of the 
country, while also delivering key social needs of the people, especially those living in the 
project site areas, the independent TAP decided to score the project as “high” for its potential to 
meet the needs of the recipient 
1.6 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
       Scale: High 
37. 
In this section, the independent TAP provides information on the project documents 
presented to it that demonstrated country ownership. The discussion here is focused along the 
following atrributes. 
1.6.6 
The extent to which the proposed project aligns with a national climate strategy 
(if it exists), and coherence with this strategy and other plans and policies

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 105 
 
 
38. 
A key climate strategy, the intended nationally determined contribution, was submitted 
to the UNFCCC secretariat by Chile in September 2015, as the country’s climate plan, just before 
the twenty-first Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC. Key commitments in this plan, which 
tally with the expected achievement of the proposed project include: 
(a) 
The reduction in CO2 emissions per capita by 30 per cent versus 2007 levels (i.e. down 
from 1.02 t CO2eq/million Chilean pesos (CLP) 2011 to 0.71 t CO2eq/million CLP 2011); 
and 
(b) 
Contingent upon receiving international grants, the reduction in CO2 emissions per 
capita by 35–45 per cent versus 2007 levels (i.e. down from 1.02 t CO2eq/million CLP 
2011 to 0.56–0.66 t CO2eq/million CLP 2011). 
39. 
The proposed project will contribute in no small measure to the achievement of these 
commitments. This statement is especially strong given the fact that the successful project will 
catalyse not only the replication of PSH in the country but it will also enhance the development 
of more renewable power to the grid thus bringing the commitments listed above even closer to 
realization than in the absence of the proposed project. 
(a) 
Another country plan that aligns with the expected outcomes of this project is the 2050 
energy agenda, which was released in 2015. Key goals of this plan that are coherent with 
the objectives of the proposed project include:  
(i) 
At least 70 per cent of total energy generation sourced from renewable energy 
by 2050; and 
(ii) 
Increased reliability of the electricity system, with downtimes that should not 
exceed 1 hour per year on a regional basis. 
40. 
The implementation of the proposed project will help the country on its path to its 
proposed 2050 renewable energy utilization. It will also increase the reliability of the country’s 
electricity system in that downtimes due to problems with the importation of coal, for example, 
resulting from the closure of the ports due to climate change and variability will be reduced as 
the steady renewable power from this project will not only displace the coal and the vulnerable 
hydro-capacity, it will also catalyse the implementation of more variable renewable power for 
the Chilean grid.  
(a) 
In 2018, the Chilean Government released its 2018–2022 Energy Plan. A key goal of this 
plan is the decarbonization of the existing Chilean energy matrix. To achieve this, key 
steps that have been taken or that will be taken as part of the plan include: 
(i) 
The formalization of a working group led by the Ministry of Energy with 
participation from the energy sector, in particular the owners of existing coal-
fired facilities, to analyse the current situation and design a timetable for the 
retirement of coal facilities which do not possess adequate systems for the 
capture of CO2; 
(ii) 
The promotion of distributed renewable generation;  
(iii) 
An increase in the circulation of electric vehicles; and  
(iv) 
The implementation of a regulatory framework for promoting energy efficiency 
and the creation of an “energy culture” in the country. 
41. 
While the first two points above are directly related to the objective of the proposed 
project, the latter two will be indirectly enhanced by the successful implementation of the 
proposed project. 
(a) 
The proposed project will also directly contribute to the two following areas of the other 
top priority areas in the Chilean National Climate Change Adaptation Plan 2017–2022, 
which will help to build communities more resilient to climate change:

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 106 
 
 
(i) 
Water resources; and  
(ii) 
Fishing and aquaculture 
1.6.7 
Capacities of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
42. 
In this section information is discussed that was extracted from the documents made 
available on the capability (experience and track record) of the accredited entity and executing 
entity of the proposed project. The question that an answer is sought to is: do they have the 
capability to carry out the function that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project?  
Energia de Tarapacá 
43. 
The executing entity for the proposed project is Energia de Tarapacá. It is 100 per cent 
owned by Valhalla, the group that developed the project concept and all the activities carried 
out prior to this request for GCF funding. Valhalla assembled a highly qualified multi-
disciplinary team to develop the project, using just its own funds to date. The assembled team 
included local and international expertise in the development, financing, construction and 
operation of electricity-generation plants. it engaged international experts who assisted it in the 
review and verification of key project issues, and qualified contractors to confirm technical 
specifications and capital expenditures before presenting the proposal to GCF for funding 
consideration. In so doing, Valhalla has built a core of local expertise which have worked with 
the impressive list of external consultants and project contractors to ensure a well-thought-out 
and well-planned project. The local groups’ capacity has therefore been strongly built. As 
Valhalla will hold equity in the project even after a core equity investor has been catalyzed to 
invest due to the influence of the GCF equity funding, the independent TAP is convinced that a 
combination of these local and international teams will be available in the long term to carry out 
the functions that will be expected of them in the project cycle successfully. Another advantage 
of Valhalla as an executing entity is the fact that the company has properly engaged relevant 
stakeholders in Chile through proactive communication of its vision amongst authorities, 
academics, communities and other stakeholders, thereby positioning the company for a 
successful project and as a model for the future development of large-scale energy 
infrastructure in Chile. 
Mitsubishi UFG Financial Group (MUFG) Bank 
 
44. 
This is the AE for this proposed project with over 350 years of financial expertise and 
experience. It is currently one of the largest comprehensive financial groups in the world, with a 
global network in 150 countries, employing 150,000 financial professionals in over 
approximately 2,300 offices. MUFG is corporately and financially qualified to perform its role as 
an equity promoter of this project. It will, in this role as a private accredited entity, monitor and 
supervise the project’s compliance with GCF standards (social, environmental, fiduciary and 
gender), based on a periodic review of the project provided by the executing entity. MUFG’s plan 
to off-load its equity share after GCF funding has crowded in a core equity promoter and needed 
debt funding, and then cease its involvement in the investment is however worrisome to the 
independent TAP. At the exit of MUFG, many of the key metrics of project delivery may suffer 
from a lack of monitoring and reporting, especially once GCF have also exited. MUFG has allayed 
this fear by getting the project sponsor (Valhalla) who will be present for the long term to 
commit to carrying out project monitoring functions and reporting, which may be neglected 
when MUFG and GCF exit the investment. In order to ensure that the monitoring and reporting 
function protocols are properly set up after the project is commissioned, the independent TAP 
has insisted that GCF should not unload its equity holding in the company and should serve on 
the board, even after the core equity investor has joined for at least the first five years of the

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 107 
 
 
plant’s operation. This request has been agreed to by the AE and the provision will be included 
in the term sheet.  
1.6.8 
Engagement with the national designated authority, civil society organizations 
and other relevant stakeholders 
45. 
The following are the summary of steps taken by the project proponent to engage the 
NDA, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders in this project in Chile: 
(a) 
In early January 2018, the project proponent made available all the documents prepared 
by its project development teams to the Economic Sustainability and Natural Resource 
Management Department of the Ministry of Finance of Chile – the NDA;  
(b) 
The project proponent held thereafter a series of meetings with the NDA, one of which 
was the presentation of the project to an ‘Expert Panel’, established by the NDA, which 
was comprised of representatives of government and commercial banks, electricity 
industry consultants and academics, among others; 
(c) 
Thereafter, the ‘Expert Panel’ reviewed the project’s proposal and documentation, posed 
questions and provided comments, which were used to update the financial proposal; 
(d) 
On 31 January 2018, the NDA of Chile, the Ministry of Finance, provided a no-objection 
letter to GCF with regard to the Espejo de Tarapacá Project, confirming that Energia de 
Tarapacá conforms to Chile’s national priorities, strategies and plans and all relevant 
laws and regulations; 
(e) 
The process of stakeholder interaction commenced early through a mapping of 
stakeholders and the conduction of preliminary interviews. The coverage of the 
identification and interaction with stakeholders covered national, regional and local 
levels. Stakeholder interaction at each of these levels involve:  
(i) 
Presentation of the projects;  
(ii) 
Listening to stakeholder comments, questions and concerns; and  
(iii) 
Providing them with ways and means to alleviate those concerns; 
(f) 
Other keyways in which the project proponent has communicated the project proposal 
to stakeholders include: 
(i) 
Giving presentations to leading figures in the political, academic, environmental 
and social spectrum; 
(ii) 
Organizing a local energy storage conference, where the impact of storage, and 
the project, were discussed and the impact the project could have on Chile. The 
conference attracted more than 100 participants, among them leading 
authorities and figures from the energy sector; 
(iii) 
Organizing a seminar at a local university, where the project was presented to 
the broader community, especially in the project area; and 
(iv) 
Teaching a course, given by volunteers from top management in Valhalla, on 
sustainable development between 2014–2016, with frequent reference to the 
project as an example, at a local university in northern Chile. 
46. 
The engagements described above are considered by the independent TAP to be good 
measures of the consideration of participation of the country’s decision makers and impacted 
citizens in the development of the proposed project  
47. 
Given the various considerations discussed above, the independent TAP agreed to score 
this project proposal as “high” for country needs potential.

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 108 
 
 
1.7 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
 Scale: Medium 
48. 
Efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project have been assessed along the 
following considerations. 
1.7.1 
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
49. 
The key consideration here is whether the financial structure proposed is adequate and 
reasonable to achieve the proposal’s objective. The following summarizes pertinent issues 
pointing to the adequacy of the structure proposed: 
(a) 
Left unhindered to freely compete with coal-fired plants in the Chilean electricity 
market, which is driven strictly by economic competition without regard for potential 
social benefits, the delivery of renewable electricity 24/7 on the Chilean grid at a price 
below the average variable cost of existing coal units would not be possible; 
(b) 
This is because strategic partners are needed, with the financial capacity, 
creditworthiness, experience and established track record, due to the existence of 
significant financial and market-entry barriers; 
(c) 
Funding, such as that requested from GCF, is needed to facilitate such a strategic 
partnership to make the project financially feasible; 
(d) 
A key barrier, which led similar VRE projects to be unsuccessful in Chile recently, is the 
inability to source the funds needed to provide the bid bond required to achieve a PPA 
with a reliable and stable electricity off-taker. GCF funding will partly be used to secure 
this bid bond that will release a PPA to this project and thus guarantee its feasibility; 
(e) 
By serving as an anchor equity participant, GCF is expected to de-risk the investment 
and thus catalyse further equity participation, with preferred equity returns for the 
private sector moving the flow of financing to climate finance sectors; 
(f) 
With the support of GCF as an anchor investor, the project will raise approximately USD 
1,001 million from private investors (debt and equity). This is does not take into account 
the investment from Valhalla. The funding structure can be summarized as follows: 
(i) 
Total project investment = USD 1,091.0 million 
(ii) 
Made up of: 
1. 
GCF equity = USD 60.0 million (15 per cent); 
2. 
Valhalla equity = USD 30.0 million (8 per cent); 
3. 
Strategic private-investor equity = USD 301.1 million (77 per cent); and 
4. 
Debt from private commercial banks = USD 699.9 million; 
(g) 
GCF funding is expected to catalyse the crowding in of USD 1,001.0 million once the 
project proves it has overcome the identified market risks; and 
(h) 
Considering the total energy that will be generated over the project’s 35-year lifetime, 
the following are the estimated delivery metrics of the intervention from the climate 
change mitigation perspective: 
(i) 
Estimated project avoided GHG emissions = 35 mt CO2eq; 
(ii) 
Cost/t CO2eq avoided (for total investment) = 31.17 USD/t CO2eq; and 
(iii) 
Cost/t CO2eq avoided (for GCF investment) = 1.71 USD/t CO2eq. 
50. 
To ensure that these and other important project metrics are met during the lifetime of 
the project, there will be a need to monitor the following throughout the project’s operation: (a)

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 109 
 
 
GHG emissions; (b) technology transfer successes and failures given the newness and innovative 
nature of the project; and (c) the extent to which all the social intervention promised by the 
project promoters are carried out. For the replicability of the project beyond this intervention 
especially for a global audience, not only will these monitoring protocol need to be in place but 
effective reporting protocol will also need to be in place as well as a clearly defined 
communication plan. Valhalla, the project promoter, has provided a letter of commitment to 
monitor and report the GHG emission reductions of the project in line with the requirement of 
GCF even after GCF has exited this investment. However, there is a need for a comprehensive 
communication plan to be in place to ensure that the project replicability internationally will be 
guaranteed.  
1.7.2 
Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
51. 
The strategy of co-financing or leveraged financing from third parties followed in this 
proposal is consistent with the objectives of the GCF to mobilize funds at scale from private 
investment, especially private financial institutions and institutional investors. Key 
characteristics of this leveraged financing scheme can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
GCF equity financing = 15.0 per cent; 
(b) 
Private-sector investment = 85.0 per cent; 
(c) 
The co-financing ratio of the GCF investment = 5.5 per cent; and 
(d) 
 Debt over total investment = 64.0 per cent. 
1.7.3 
Application of best practices 
52. 
Key considerations here can be summarized follows: 
(a) 
According to the information made available in the funding proposal, the project is 
committed to adopting and applying best international practices in the development, 
construction, operation and maintenance of the project and to managing and monitoring 
safety, environmental, social and financial risks and impacts; 
(b) 
The two generation technologies that will be utilized in this project, solar photovoltaic 
and PSH are both proven technologies with long track records; 
(c) 
Although instances of PSH using sea water are limited in number globally, the ones that 
do exist have been operating successfully without significant problems over the last 50 
years; 
(d) 
In spite of this, the project promoter has taken care to ensure that the necessary 
design/supply adjustments to limit or completely eliminate sea water corrosion have 
been incorporated into the design of the PSH of this project; 
(e) 
Furthermore, the project promoters have committed to utilizing world-class 
Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) contractors for the principal 
construction contracts for the PSH plant; and 
(f) 
For the PV plant, the promoters plan to hold a competitive bid process to select the PV 
plant EPC contractor in order to ensure best terms and conditions in the increasingly 
competitive PV market. 
1.7.4 
Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
53. 
The estimated cost per tCO2eq is defined as the total investment cost divided by the 
expected lifetime emission reductions (mitigation only). The details of these metrics, as 
estimated in the funding proposal, are summarized as follows:

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 110 
 
 
(a) 
Total project financing 
USD 1,091.0 million; 
(b) 
Requested GCF amount  
USD 60.0 million;  
(c) 
Expected lifetime emission reductions over time  
USD 35 million tCO2eq; 
(d) 
Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a/c) 
USD 31.17/tCO2eq; and 
(e) 
Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e=b/c) 
USD 1.71/tCO2eq. 
54. 
Again, it must be stressed that to assure that these metrics are achieved over the lifetime 
of the project, an extensive monitoring and reporting protocol must be put in place and 
implemented in the years of operation of the project. Given that a key contribution of this 
proposed intervention is its replicability globally, a comprehensive project communication plan 
must to be put in place as part of this submission so that GCF can ensure that the project’s 
impact, as mandated, is kept throughout the project’s lifetime. Given the fact that this 
communication plan is not yet in place, the independent TAP finds it difficult to rank the 
efficiency and effectiveness potentials of this request as high as it should be.  
55. 
The independent TAP, therefore, has ranked this request’s efficiency and effectiveness of 
this funding proposal as “medium” in the absence of an articulate communication plan.  
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
56. 
The independent TAP acknowledges the innovative nature of this proposal and attests 
to the fact that it has good paradigm shifting potentials, especially for the deployment of 
variable renewable energy to grids in many countries worldwide. To ensure its replicability in 
countries with suitable topography, it is important that lessons can be learned from the 
successful implementation of this first-of-its-kind project. This will require a very stringent 
monitoring and reporting protocol that will cover many key metrics. Lessons learned will also 
have to be effectively communicated according to a carefully prepared communication plan. The 
fact that this plan was not included in the documents reviewed by the indepenent TAP is the 
reason why the submission did not score high marks on sustainable development potential and 
the efficiency and effectiveness potential of this submission. The scores can be upgraded to high, 
however, when such a plan is in place. 
57. 
The independent TAP therefore recommends that the Board approve this funding 
proposal on the condition that a communication plan be made available to the Secretariat. 
Details of this condition are summarized as follows: 
"Prior to the execution of FAA (or the first disbursement), the AE should submit to the 
Secretariat a draft communication plan, in the form and content satisfactory to the Secretariat, 
to enhance dissemination of the project’s benefits, knowledge and lessons learned in 
development, construction and operation of the project in the context of climate 
change technology transfer among public sector including government agencies and regulator, 
and private sector investors and financiers. The plan should include the AE communication 
strategy indicating the methodology of communication, targeted participants (public and 
private sector) and schedule, and should not be limited to events and seminars that the AE 
participates or engages as its usual marketing and commercial efforts."

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 111 
 
 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel assessment 
findings (FP 115) 
Proposal name: 
Espejo de Tarapacá 
Accredited entity: 
MUFG Bank, Ltd. (“MUFG”) 
 
Impact potential 
Regarding 2(d), MUFG would like to emphasize that current water supply to the local fishing 
village of San Marcos was not sufficiently clean for drinking, which was evidenced during the 
site visit in March 2019. Therefore, the project will not only stabilise the otherwise climate 
change vulnerable water source, but it will also help ameliorate hygienic conditions of the 
villagers through stably supplying clean potable water.  
Paradigm shift potential 
MUFG is in agreement with the iTAP assessment. As pointed out in the assessment, in order to 
globally enhance replicability of the project, outline of the draft communication plan has been 
submitted to GCF PSF team on 31st May 2019 and is currently under review by GCF. MUFG will 
finalise the plan once it receives the comments from GCF. 
Sustainable development potential 
Regarding 7(b) Social Co-Benefits, Valhalla’s occupational training to the villagers of San 
Marcos led to establishment of Neighbourhood Union consisting only of women in San Marcos, 
which started agricultural business with the aid of government’s subsidies. We believe this is 
an exemplary activity that evolved from Valhalla’s vocational training to the community.  
 Valhalla has also converted part of its office in San Marcos into a community center, the first of 
the sort in the village history. The community center offers the villagers access to computers 
and meeting venues, which is very much appreciated by the residents. The relevant ESIA 
documents are also placed in the center for public review.  
MUFG will develop a Stakeholder Engagement Framework shortly.  
Needs of the recipient 
Regarding 9. (b), MUFG would like to emphasise that the Chilean government has the intention 
of promoting competition in the energy market, as the energy market in Chile has long been 
dominated by a few large companies. In that sense, the government would like to support 
Valhalla to spearhead the drive to make the energy market in Chile more competitive.  
Country ownership 
MUFG has been supporting Valhalla to find strategic investors by fully utilising its global 
customer base. Valhalla’s current plan includes hiring a financial advisory (commercial bank) 
to bring strategic investors to the Project.  
Efficiency and effectiveness 
Outline of the draft communication plan has been submitted to GCF PSF team on 31st May 
2019. MUFG will finalise the plan once it receives the comments from GCF.

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.09 
Page 112 
 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
MUFG is prepared to accept the proposed condition in the iTAP assessment. In view of the 
current to do list prior to the execution of FAA, MUFG highly appreciates it if iTAP could allow 
MUFG longer time to prepare the draft communication plan.

=== PAGE 116 ===
Gender Assessment 
Espejo de Tarapacá Project 
1.
Introduction
This gender assessment provides an overview of the gender equality situation in Chile and 
summarizes the principal findings regarding the gender situation in the community located closest 
to the Project, the community of Caleta San Marcos (Tarapacá Region – Chile).    
Espejo de Tarapacá Project (“EdT” or “the Project”) is an innovative and unique large-scale power 
project which combines Chile’s natural resources with proven generation technology in order to 
provide a renewable ‘solar plus storage’ baseload solution for the Chilean market. The objective of 
the Project is to commercially integrate solar generation with pumped storage hydroelectric 
generation in order to provide renewable energy supply 24 hours a day, seven days a week (“24/7”). 
The Project is comprised of two commercially integrated power plants: (i) a 300 MW pumped-
storage hydroelectric (“PSH”) plant using the Pacific Ocean as its lower reservoir and an existing 
natural concavity as its upper reservoir, and (ii) a 561 MW-AC photovoltaic solar (“PV”) plant with 
single axis tracking. 
The Project’s PSH plant is located approximately 100 km south of Iquique, adjacent to the Caleta 
San Marcos fishing village with a population of around 300 inhabitants. San Marcos is a vulnerable 
community with a local economy dependent almost exclusively on sea-related activities, largely 
dominated by men, mostly due to a cultural stigma.  The Project initiated community engagement 
with San Marcos several years before submitting the environmental permit request to authorities, 
in order to in order to address community concerns in early development.  Collaboration 
agreements have been executed with the community which aim to share the benefits of successful 
Project development and completion with these affected groups.  It is important to note the Project 
will not generate physical resettlement of local communities in any of its components or stages. 
2.
Gender Analysis
2.1 
Chilean Background
Chile, particularly within Latin America, has been recognized for its robust environmental and social 
governance, legislative system and institutional capability. The country’s current population is 
approximately 17.6 million people. According to the latest census (2017), annual population growth 
is around 0.93%, as compared to 2.5% in 1960. At present, about 68% of the total population is 
15-64 years old and 11% is over 64 years old. Females account for 51% of the total population and
males for 49%. The majority of the population, 87%, lives in urban areas and nearly 40% of
Chileans live within or around Santiago, the capital city.
In most of the previous century, Chile was strongly influenced by traditional gender roles and norms 
designating women responsible for maintaining the home and childcare.  Males maintained the 
traditional role of economic provider.  According to the National Women’s Agency (Servicio 
Nacional de la Mujer), in 2013, one of every three women in Chile have been affected by some 
type of domestic violence.  In recent decades, coupled with considerable progress in its efforts to 
reduce poverty, sustain growth, and promote democratization, the role of women within the Chilean 
Page 113

=== PAGE 117 ===
culture has changed profoundly. This is particularly true in the last decade, as gender has become 
an important focus of debate and public policy.  
 
At an international level, the state of Chile executed the principal international gender conventions 
such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the 
OCDE protocols on these matters, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). As a result of these agreements and the evolution of local 
society, the Chilean legal framework has been updated to improve equality in the rights of men and 
women, including recent legislative changes in civil unions, divorce, child custody settlements, 
maternal health care, sex crimes, and domestic violence. Women and men have equal rights to 
access to public education; there is no gender gap between attendees at any level; even more, 
women outweigh men by about 7% as university students (2015), but tend to choose careers 
related with health, design, or social sciences.  
 
In the most recent Gender Inequality Index (GII), Chile scored 0.322, ranking it 65th out of 157 
countries, ranking lower than several Latin American countries such as Uruguay, Costa Rica, and 
Cuba. The participation of women in the national Congress remains low, accounting for only 21% 
after the 2017 election. Female participation in the labour market is 48.5% (approximately 7% 
higher than 20 years ago) versus 71.2% of male participation; however, the female unemployment 
rate is higher than the statistic for males. In terms of entrepreneurs, women represent 39.2% of this 
group in Chile. Women perceived average income 31.7% lower than males and, in addition, most 
female income is concentrated in the lower-valued added sectors of the Chilean economy.  With 
regard to income equality, females perceived income 25% lower than males for the same labour 
task.  
 
In 2017, Chile ranked 63rd among 144 countries in the Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI) from the 
World Economic Forum. The GGGI examines the gap between men and women in four categories: 
economic participation and opportunity (#117), educational attainment (#39), health and survival 
(#47); and political empowerment (#36).  
 
Since 2016, gender public policy is led by the Ministry for Women and Gender Equality (Ministerio 
de la Mujer y Equidad de Género) which was created by the government of President Michelle 
Bachelet (2014–2018). The principal macro strategies for Chilean gender policies are aligned with 
the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women; namely, empowerment of 
women and mainstreaming of the gender approach as an integral part of intervention in all areas 
of social development. 
2.2 
Current Gender Policy Goals in Chile 
  
The current government has established three main goals for gender policies to be followed during 
its tenure (2018–2022). 
 
i. 
To consolidate equality before the law for women by putting an end to existing legal 
discrimination; 
ii. 
To create conditions that contribute to increasing women's autonomy;  
iii. 
To contribute to a culture of respect for the dignity of women in all spaces and 
protection of her life and her integrity.  
 
2.3 
San Marcos Background 
 
Caleta San Marcos is a rural coastal community located 108 kilometres south of Iquique, the capital 
city of Tarapacá region. The San Marcos community includes a population of approximately 300 
people and the average resident age is 34 years old. Given the proximity between Caleta San 
Marcos and a portion of the main works for the Espejo de Tarapacá Project, including the entrance 
to the powerhouse cavern, the ocean intake and the reservoir, both parties have worked together

=== PAGE 118 ===
since early stages of Project development1.   Figure 1 below shows the location of the Espejo de 
Tarapacá Project and Caleta San Marcos and Figure 2 shows an aerial view of the community.    
 
Figure 1:  Location Caleta San Marcos 
 
 
 
Figure 2:  Aerial View of Caleta San Marcos 
 
 
 
The community engagement process between the Project and Caleta San Marcos was initiated in 
2012.  Over the next several years, the Project and its external advisors, which included the 
                                                        
1 A summary of the history of the relationship between Espejo de Tarapacá and Caleta San Marcos can be 
found in the video: https://vimeo.com/151937956

=== PAGE 119 ===
Consensus Building Institute and Fundación Casa La Paz, worked to establish an open dialogue 
and involve the community in Project development, by identifying and addressing concerns and 
finding opportunities for mutual collaboration.  In 2015, Espejo de Tarapacá executed individual 
long-term collaboration agreements with Residents’ Council and the Fishermen’s Union of San 
Marcos in which the parties commit to work together during Project development, construction and 
operation. A similar agreement was reached with Kelp Gatherers’ Union in 2016. These 
agreements recognize the Project’s responsibility to respect the lives and values of the 
communities affected by its development, construction, and operations and work together for 
mutual benefit. 
 
Caleta San Marcos was founded as the result of temporary migration of people interested in 
developing local fishing activities. In its beginning, the sector was occupied temporarily by divers 
and shellfish gatherers coming from other regions of the country during resource extraction periods. 
In the 1980s, it was established as a permanent settlement for people involved in artisanal small-
scale fishing.  In recent years, this community, as well as other fishing villages throughout Chile, 
have been severely affected by the impact of climate change on marine resources and their fishing 
livelihood.   
 
In Caleta San Marcos, and throughout fishing villages in Chile, fishing activities are predominantly 
performed by males.  At the national level, 90% of small-scale fishing settlements have low levels 
of development2.  In the case of Caleta San Marcos, it started to receive electricity supply from the 
Chilean interconnected grid in 2014 but does not have fresh water or sewage service.  Water is 
trucked in from Iquique on a monthly basis and residents fill tanks in their homes to store water. 
Interruptions in water supplies are common.  In the desert climate of the Tarapacá Region, water 
is obtained from two main sources: desalination of seawater and underground fresh water from the 
mountains. Underground water has become even scarcer in recent years due to two major effects: 
i) less precipitation in the mountains and ii) increased utilization of water resources by mining 
operations. Given this situation, fresh water in the Tarapacá Region is among the most expensive 
in Chile (about US$ 3.5 per cubic meter compared to US$ 1.25 per cubic meter in Santiago, the 
capital of Chile).   
 
Figures 3 and 4 below show the housing conditions and type of traditional boats used for fishing in 
the community. 
 
 
 
                                                        
2 Subsecretaría de Pesca: Clasificación de caletas pesqueras artesanales, 2002

=== PAGE 120 ===
Figure 3:  Caleta San Marcos Housing 
 
 
 
Figure 4:  Caleta San Marcos Fishing Activity 
 
 
 
2.4. Stakeholder Analysis & Gender Assessment 
 
In 2016, the parties conducted a full baseline study of Caleta San Marcos, in order to better 
understand the community and the expected impact of the agreed upon contributions and support 
by Espejo de Tarapacá.  The baseline study measured variables associated with education, work, 
income, and expectations for the future. The results of the baseline study included the following: 
 
 
The community includes an area with 173 houses, of which only 103 are inhabited.  
 
295 people reside in Caleta San Marcos (41% women). 
 
The average resident’s age is 34 years old (30 for women and 37 for males).  
 
Only 42 females have finished high school (amongst 73 women at least 20 years old).

=== PAGE 121 ===
 
Only 8 have finished technical or undergraduate studies. 
 
70% of the total population of San Marcos declares to work; most of them in activities 
related to local fisheries (most work on a non-contractual basis, which depends on the 
conditions of the ocean). Only 20% of this group are females. 
 
The average monthly income is US$385 (2016). 55% of the employed group receive 
income below the minimum salary (minimum salary is in Chile is currently US$ per month). 
 
The average income of females is US$290 which compares to US$450 for males.  
 
No day care centres exist for children under 4 years old, such that women with children 4 
years old and under must stay at home or take them to work, unless they find another type 
of childcare. 
 
2.5. Gender Narrative 
 
Figure 5 below demonstrates the principal economic activities for the residents of Caleta San 
Marcos.   
 
Figure 5:  Caleta San Marcos Economic Activities 
 
 
 
As in most regions in Chile, fishing is male-dominated in San Marcos. Off-shore, deep-sea and 
diving activities to capture seafood are performed by males. In the case of Caleta San Marcos, 
there are no women in the fisherman’s union. The lack of fresh water also has important economic 
implications because it results in restrictions for obtaining permits to process seafood or provide 
related services. This situation also limits women’s participation in activities associated with fishing, 
considering that seafood extraction is a male-dominated activity. 
 
The effects of climate change over the ocean and fisheries have been investigated in detail3 and 
the local population widely recognizes its detrimental impacts. As shown in Figure 6 below, the 
region has experienced a significant reduction in resources and the natural renewal of seafood in 
recent years. 
 
 
 
                                                        
3 See for example: Climate Change Impacts on Fisheries and Aquaculture Bruce F. Phillips (Editor), 2017 or  
Plan de Acción Nacional de Cambio Climático 2017-2022, Government of Chile. 
0
50
100
150
Education
Construction
Services / Commerce
Fisheries and related
Male
Female
Total

=== PAGE 122 ===
Figure 6:  Extraction of Seafood (tons) in Tarapacá Region 2012 - 2016 
 
 
Source: Servicio Nacional de Pesca de Chile 
 
2.6. Problem Tree:  Gender Inequality & Women’s Expectations for the Future  
 
The problem tree analysis in the Figure 7 below summarizes the principal problem faced by the 
women of San Marcos and its causes and effects. 
 
Figure 7:  Problem Tree Analysis 
 
Roots 
Lack of basic services such 
as water and sewerage 
Lack of female 
representation in labour 
force  
Lack of infrastructure and local 
development actions 
Causes 
Women are responsible for 
domestic work and 
childcare 
Gender pay gap and 
traditional male-dominated 
economic activities 
Lack of alternative 
employment and economic 
activities available to women 
Problem statement 
 
Women are vulnerable to lack of representation and unequal pay related to their social status as women living and 
working in fishing village.  
 
 
Immediate effects 
Women use unpaid time 
and work in domestic 
activities  
Women have lower 
economic and social status 
in relation to men 
Women are relegated to 
household work, traditional 
gender roles are maintained 
Effects 
Women have less 
autonomy and time for 
activities for building climate 
resilience 
Gender inequality and 
inequity. 
Lower productivity and 
incomes 
 
With regard to the future of Caleta San Marcos, women declare that they would like to improve their 
quality of life and are interested in developing the community by improving local infrastructure and 
basic services (such as water and sewage), diversifying economic activities with work not related 
to the fishing industry (such as tourism) and enhancing the availability of recreation activities.  
Women also recognize the difficulties associated with empowerment and enhanced independence 
of women in a traditional “machista” or male-dominated community. They have also requested that 
this community related paradigm shift be accompanied with cultural and psychological intervention 
and training for both males and females. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

=== PAGE 123 ===
3. 
Conclusion 
 
Although Chile has and continues to actively implement public policies aimed at closing the breach 
between males and females, in the community of Caleta San Marcos, a dramatic gender gap 
remains. The historic operation of fishing industries dominated by males is one of the principal 
causes for this inequality. Additionally, low levels of education and the lack of economic 
opportunities beyond those related with the fisheries also contribute to the current realities of 
women in Caleta San Marcos, as well as to their dreams for the future. 
 
In this regard, the Espejo de Tarapacá Project would play a key role not only in the development 
of the community which is vulnerable to climate change, but specifically in the empowerment of 
women by creating new economic activities, training new skills, and developing recreational 
activities. The contribution of the Project in Caleta San Marcos will be monitored on regular basis 
in order to detect early on any potential cultural friction related to gender equality issues or tensions 
within the community as a result of the new economic opportunities.  The Gender Action Plan 
developed by the Project details specific objectives, outcomes and activities that will be followed to 
improve gender equality in Caleta San Marcos.  In implementing successful community 
engagement, an important goal of the Project will be to empower local women to act as agents of 
change in a community that is already experiencing the negative impacts of climate change.

=== PAGE 124 ===
Sources: 
Estadísticas de Género. Introducción Conceptual. Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas de Chile - 2015 
Estadísticas de Género. Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas de Chile – 2017 
Informe Catastro Socio-territorial de Caleta San Marcos. Espejo de Tarapacá – 2016/2017

=== PAGE 125 ===
1 
 
Gender Action Plan 
Espejo de Tarapacá Project 
 
 
Background 
Since early development, the Espejo de Tarapacá Project has focused on developing a 
transparent relationship with local communities, in particular with Caleta San Marcos1, 
given its proximity to the Project.  The results of the Project’s community engagement 
work over the past 5 years have been recognized not only by the local community, but 
also by national authorities2. The Project worked with the Consensus Building Institute 
during the community engagement process3,4.  It should be noted that the engagement 
process was started in early development, prior to submission of the environmental permit 
for the Project, and the permit was granted unanimously several years later without 
objection from the community or any other stakeholders.  
 
To date, the Project has executed four community coordination agreements which were 
developed after extensive meetings and discussions with each community organization, 
in order to understand and address their particular concerns and aspirations.  A summary 
of these agreements is attached in Annex 1.  The community agreements will be managed 
by a non-governmental entity (Fundación Espejo de Tarapacá) formed by the Project, 
which will also include directors from the community.   
. 
 
Gender Action Plan 
In addition to the contributions detailed in the community agreements, the Project will 
focus on implementing additional programs focused on improving gender equality to 
ensure that women and men have equal access to the opportunities, benefits, and 
decision-making processes that the Project will add to the community. These programs 
and activities are described in the following table. In order to clearly measure the impact 
and outcome of the gender action plan, the Project will also conduct a new baseline 
social survey, in order to update the original baseline performed in 2016, prior to 
initiating construction of the Project.  The total cost for the Gender Action Plan is 
$230,000 for the four-year plan, including an updated baseline study ($20,000) and the 
ending baseline study and final report during the third year of construction ($30,000). It is 
important to point out that the Gender Action Plan has been discussed with female 
representatives of Caleta San Marcos’ Neighbourhood Council and their suggestions 
have been incorporated.  A letter from these representatives is included in Annex 2. 
                                                        
1 Caleta San Marcos is a fishing village located close to the Project’s pumped storage hydroelectric plant.   
2 See video presentation by the Minister of Energy, Máximo Pacheco at the launch of Impacta Energía 
(Energy Innovation Program) at: https://vimeo.com/280537547 
3 Annex 3 contains a summary of the community engagement process prepared by the Consensus Building 
Institute entitled, “The San Marcos Community and the Espejo de Tarapacá Project, a History of the 
Community Engagement Process” prepared by the Consensus Building Institute.  
4 See video documental of the community engagement process prepared by Consensus Building Institute at: 
https://vimeo.com/176207738

=== PAGE 126 ===
2 
 
 
 
 
Performance Measurement Framework 
 
(1) Impact Statement: Improve sociocultural knowledge, awareness and sensitivity of men and women related to gender equality and the 
empowerment of women 
Outcome I: Build capacity and awareness of men and women in order facilitate gender equality and empowerment of women 
Outcome Indicator:                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Indicator: Improved knowledge and awareness of the need for gender equality within the community 
Target I: Increase in knowledge and improved acceptance of gender equality and empowerment of women 
Target II: Reduction in violence against women 
Activities 
Targets 
Timeline 
Organization
Responsible 
Cost 
(US$) 
Organized psychological training 
sessions with local men and women to 
educate and sensitize the community 
regarding gender equality and the 
empowerment of women.  
 
Sessions will include sexual 
harassment management and 
prevention with establishment of 
channels of communication and alert. 
4 meetings per year for the 
community 
Meetings will be held quarterly, with 
the first meeting starting after the 
notice to proceed for the Project’s 
civil works construction contract has 
been issued, Meetings will be held 
during the 1st, 2nd and 3rd years of 
construction.  
Espejo de Tarapacá 
NGO 
30,000

=== PAGE 127 ===
3 
 
 
(2) Impact Statement: Increase in female participation and reduction of income gender gap in local labour market 
Outcome I: Increase participation of women in the local labour market 
Outcome Indicator:                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Indicator: Increase in female participation based on 2016 baseline study                                                                                                                                  
Target: 30% of the total work force to be composed of women by Year 3 in the Project construction period 
Outcome II: Diminish the gap in average income between males and females, while improving both 
Outcome Indicator:   
Indicator I: Increase in average female income based on 2016 baseline study                                                                                                                          
Target I: Increase of 15%  in female income based on 2016 baseline by Year 3 in the Project construction period 
Indicator II: Reduction in gender income gap based on 2016 baseline study 
Target II: Reduction of 15% in the income gender gap based on 2016 baseline by Year 3 in the Project construction period 
Activities 
Targets 
Timeline 
Organization
Responsible 
Cost
(US$) 
Organized counselling/training 
sessions with local women to promote 
economic opportunities 
4 meetings per year exclusively 
for women in the community 
Meetings will be held quarterly, with 
the first meeting starting after the 
notice to proceed for the Project’s 
civil works construction contract has 
been issued Meetings will be held 
during the 1st and 2nd years of 
construction. 
Espejo de Tarapacá 
NGO 
15,000

=== PAGE 128 ===
4 
 
 
(3) Impact Statement: Empowerment of women to increase social participation and improve future outlook and opportunities 
Outcome I: Empowerment of women to improve future outlook  
Outcome Indicator:                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Indicator I: Improve perceived capacity to build a better future                                                                                                                                                    
Target: Improve future outlook expectations by 15% over Project pre-construction baseline by the Year 3 of the construction period 
Outcome II: Increase female participation in social programs and initiatives  
Outcome Indicator:                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Indicator: Monitoring of applications and participation in community programs and initiatives  
Target: Improve participation in programs by 15% over Project pre-construction baseline by the Year 3 of the construction period 
Outcome III: Improve networking capability 
Outcome Indicator:                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Indicator: Knowledge and utilization of public networking opportunities 
Target:  Improve knowledge and utilization of networking opportunities by 15% over Project pre-construction baseline by the Year 3 of the construction 
period 
  
  
Activities 
Targets 
Timeline 
Organization   
Responsible          
Cost 
Organized counselling/training 
sessions to promote social 
participation and knowledge and 
utilization of networking  
4 meetings per year exclusively 
for women in the community 
Meetings will be held 4 times per 
year, with the first meeting starting 
after the notice to proceed for the 
Project’s civil works construction 
contract has been issued.  Meetings 
will be held during the 1st and 2nd 
years of construction.  
Espejo de Tarapacá 
NGO 
10,000 
Organized counselling/training 
sessions to improve networking 
capacity and establish mentoring 
relationships with women in business 
or leadership positions in other 
communities. 
4 meetings per year exclusively 
for women in the community  
Meetings will be held 4 times per 
year, with the first meeting starting 
after the notice to proceed for the 
Project’s civil works construction 
contract has been issued.  Meetings 
will be held during the 1st and 2nd 
years of construction. 
Espejo de Tarapacá 
NGO 
25,000

=== PAGE 129 ===
5 
 
(4) Impact Statement:  Provide microcredit access to women in order to increase economic entrepreneurship and activity 
Outcome: Provide microcredit access to women for pursuing economic activities 
Outcome Indicator:                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Indicator: Increase female participation in financial market via granting of loans 
Target: Improve female participation in formal financial markets by 15% over Project pre-construction baseline by the Year 3 of the construction period 
  
  
Activities 
Targets 
Timeline 
Organization           
Responsible 
Cost 
Establish program for providing 
microcredits to women 
3-year program with a rate of 
return above 75% 
Meetings will be held 4 times per 
year, with the first meeting starting 
after the notice to proceed for the 
Project’s civil works construction 
contract has been issued.  Program 
will be maintained during the 1st and 
2nd years of construction. 
Espejo de Tarapacá 
NGO 
75,000 
Organized training and mentoring 
sessions related to business 
management, accounting and credit 
agreements  
4 meetings per year exclusively 
for women in the community 
Meetings will be held 4 times per 
year, with the first meeting starting 
after the notice to proceed for the 
Project’s civil works construction 
contract has been issued.  Meetings 
will be held during the 1st and 2nd 
years of construction. 
Espejo de Tarapacá 
NGO 
25,000

=== PAGE 130 ===
6 
 
ANNEX 1 
 
Project Agreements with Caleta San Marcos Community Organizations 
 
Summary of Project Agreement with Neighbourhood Council
Project Stage
Project Contribution
Amount 
CLP 
Years
Total CLP
Total USD
Status
Pre-Construction 
Improvement of San Marcos park (plaza) infrastructure 
 $30,000,000 
1 
 $30,000,000 
 $46,154 
Executed 
Educational and training program for helping adults 
complete high school 
Creation of a connectivity centre, equipped with computers, 
printers and internet connection 
 $10,000,000 
1 
 $10,000,000 
 $15,385 
Executed 
Construction 
Investment in community infrastructure 
 $80,000,000 
1 
 $80,000,000 
 $123,077 
Pending 
Competitive social grant for development projects 
conducted by San Marcos residents (1st year of 
construction)  
 $55,000,000 
1 
 $55,000,000 
 $84,615 
Pending 
Competitive social grant for development projects 
conducted by San Marcos residents (2nd, 3rd and 4th years 
of construction) 
 $35,000,000 
3 
 $105,000,000 
 $161,538 
Pending 
Sale of desalinated water supply of up to 50/m3 per day 
from Project’s water desalination plant 
 $- 
4 
 $- 
  
Pending 
Installation of work opportunities’ coordination office 
 $- 
1 
 $- 
  
Pending 
Provision of incentives to contractors for hiring local labour 
 $- 
4 
 $- 
  
Partially 
Executed 
Operation 
Social fund for projects that generate social beneﬁts and 
support collective interests 
 $50,000,000 
25 
 $1,250,000,000 
 $1,923,077 
Pending 
Educational fund to support students  
 $20,000,000 
25 
 $500,000,000 
 $769,231 
Pending 
Sale of desalinated water supply of up to 50/m3 per day 
from Project’s water desalination plant 
 $- 
25 
 $- 
  
Pending 
Total Amount
$2,030,000,000 
$3,123,077

=== PAGE 131 ===
7 
 
 
Summary of Project Agreement with Fishermen’s Union
Project Stage
Project Contribution
Amount CLP
Years
Total CLP
Total USD
Status
Pre-Construction 
Grant to support productive activities 
 $50,000,000 
1 
 $50,000,000 
 $76,923 
Executed 
Construction 
Grant to support productive activities 
 $50,000,000 
4 
 $200,000,000 
 $307,692 
Pending 
Grant to fund pre-construction study of marine intake 
 $30,000,000 
1 
 $30,000,000 
 $46,154 
Pending 
Supply of desalinated water supply od up to 15/m3 per day 
from Project’s water desalination plant 
 $-  
4 
 $- 
  
Pending 
Operation 
Investment in union infrastructure 
 100,000,000 
1 
 $100,000,000 
 $153,846 
Pending 
Supply of desalinated water supply of up to 15/m3 per day 
from Project’s water desalination plant 
 $-  
25 
 $- 
  
Pending 
Grant to support productive activities with option to utilize 
as income stabilization fund 
 $80,000,000 
25 
 
$2,000,000,000 
 $3,076,923 
Pending 
Total Amount
$2,380,000,000 
$3,661,538 
  
Summary of Project Agreement with Kelp Gatherers’ Union
Project Stage
Project Contribution
Amount 
CLP 
Years
Total CLP
Total USD
Status
Pre-Construction 
Grant for local office 
 $3,000,000 
1 
 $3,000,000 
 $4.615 
Executed 
Construction 
Grant to support productive investment (1st year of 
construction) 
 $50,000,000 
1 
 $50,000,000 
 $76.923 
Pending 
Operation 
Grant to support productive activities 
 $10,000,000 
5 
 $50,000,000 
 $76.923 
Pending 
Total Amount
$100,000,000 
$153,846

=== PAGE 132 ===
8 
 
Project Agreements with Caleta Río Seco Organizations 
 
Summary of Project Agreement with Neighbourhood Council
Project Stage
Project Contribution
Amount 
CLP 
Years
Total CLP
Total USD
Status
Pre-Construction 
Employability training programs for adults  
 
$10,000,000 
1 
10,000,000 
 $15,385 
Pending 
Construction 
Grant for community infrastructure 
 
$20,000,000 
1 
20,000,000 
 $30,769 
Pending 
Provision of incentives to contractors for hiring local labour 
 $- 
4 
 $- 
  
Partially 
Executed 
Total Amount
$30,000,000 
$46,154 
  
Summary of Project Agreement with Fishermen’s Union
Project Stage
Project Contribution
Amount 
CLP 
Years
Total CLP
Total USD
Status
Construction/Operation 
Grant to support productive activities 
 
$10,000,000 
7 
70,000,000 
 $107.692 
Pending 
Total Amount
$70,000,000 
$107,692 
  
Summary of Project Agreement with Rural Water Council 
Project Stage
Project Contribution
Amount 
CLP 
Years
Total CLP
Total USD
Status
Construction 
Grant to co-finance solution for water transportation 
between Project desalination plant and community 
 
$70,000,000 
1 
70,000,000 
 $107.692 
Pending 
Construction/Operation 
Sale of desalinated water supply of up to 25/m3 per day 
from Project’s water desalination plant 
 $- 
25 
 $- 
  
Pending 
Total Amount
$70,000,000 
$107,692

=== PAGE 133 ===
9 
 
Annex 2 
 
Letter from Caleta San Marcos’ Female Neighbourhood Council Representatives

=== PAGE 134 ===
10 
 
English Translation 
Letter from Caleta San Marcos’ Female Neighbourhood Council Representatives 
 
 
 
July 13, 2018 
 
 
 
Sir/Madame 
The Green Climate Fund 
 
Dear Green Climate Fund: 
 
In name of the Caleta San Marcos Neighbourhood Council and in particular in 
representation of the women in this community, we would like to confirm that the Gender 
Action Plan presented by Espejo de Tarapacá was discussed with and supplemented by 
our organization and we believe that it will make a valuable contribution to the 
development of our community and its women. 
 
Since 2012, the organizations from the community of San Marcos have been in 
conversation with the Espejo de Tarapacá Project, first to understand and evaluate the 
environmental impact of the Project on our community, and later to dream about the future 
of our village.  The innovative form of interaction between the project and the community 
was based on permanent dialogue, very different from our previous experience with other 
companies and industrial projects.  Based on this, we were able to develop a trusting and 
transparent relationship which resulted in the execution of long term coordination 
agreements which establish the scope of the contributions, programs and investments 
that Espejo de Tarapacá will provide to Caleta San Marcos in order to contribute to its 
development during the phases of development, construction and operation of the Project. 
 
We are convinced that the Project is good for Chile and for our community; and we are 
pleased that Espejo de Tarapacá has been selected by the Pitch for the Planet initiative 
of the Green Climate Fund.  From our community, we live day to day with the effects of 
climate change on our ocean resources and see with impotence how, year after year, on 
one hand our economic sustenance is undermined, and on the other, how no 
transformations are implemented to face the biggest problem in the history of humanity.  
For the future of our planet and our children, projects like Espejo de Tarapacá cannot 
continue to wait.   
 
Hoping for your good reception, 
 
 
 
Yenny Hernandez 
 
 
 
 
 
Genesis Avalos

=== PAGE 135 ===
11 
 
ANNEX 3 
 
 
The San Marcos Community and the Espejo de Tarapacá Project, 
A History of the Community Engagement Process

=== PAGE 136 ===
THE SAN MARCOS
C O M M U N I T Y
E S P E J O  D E  
T A R A P A C Á
A N D  T H E
H I S T O R Y  O F  C O M M U N I T Y
E N G A G E M E N T  P R O C E S S

=== PAGE 137 ===
Document drafted by 
Consensus Building Institute (CBI)
English Translation Draft
November 2016

=== PAGE 138 ===
INDEX
pag.
pag.
pag.
pag.
7
5
9
15
pag.
pag.
26
27
INTRODUCTION
CONTEXT
THE BEGINNING
CONVERSATIONS AND 
INITIAL REACTIONS
LAYING THE FOUNDATION
FOR A RELATIONSHIP 
AND JOINT WORK
REACHING AGREEMENTS
IMPLEMENTING 
AGREEMENTS
LESSONS LEARNED

=== PAGE 139 ===
GENERATING AN
EQUITABLE DIALOGUE 
pag.
pag.
pag.
13
18
20
pag.
pag.
pag.
24
23
25
WORK PLANS WITH 
EACH ORGANIZATION
DIFFICULTIES AND 
OPPOSITION
ASSOCIATION AGREEMENT 
WITH THE NEIGHBOURHOOD
COUNCIL
ASSOCIATION AGREEMENT 
WITH FISHERMEN´S UNION
RESPONSE MECHANISM IN
CASE DAMAGE TO THE SEA 
IS DETECTED
EXPLANATORY
TABLES

=== PAGE 140 ===
5
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
S
 
 
 
 
 
C O N T E X T
I N T R O D U C T I O N
This document describes the interaction 
between the community of San Marcos, 
a fishing village in northern Chile, 
and Valhalla, a new Chilean energy 
company.
 
San Marcos is located in 
the Atacama Desert, 110 
kilometres south of the city of 
Iquique. Artisanal fishermen, 
originally from other regions 
of the country, founded San 
Marcos in the early 1980s. 
Approximately 300 people live 
there, and they rely mainly on the sea for their li-
velihoods. 
 
In 2012, Valhalla arrived in San Marcos 
with the idea of developing a project that could 
offer renewable energy at a large scale for the 
country. The project, called Espejo de Tarapacá, 
would involve installing a Pumped Storage Plant 
that would use solar energy available in the daytime 
to lift seawater to the upper part of the coastal cliff. 
This water would be stored in natural concavities 
located 630 m above sea level. At night, when no 
solar energy is available, the water would fall from 
the same tunnels and return to the sea, generating 
hydroelectricity in the process.
 
Valhalla chose to develop Espejo de 
Tarapacá in San Marcos because it has an ideal 
geography: a high coastal cliff close the sea, with 
natural concavities at the top that permit the 
storage of sea water without the need to build a 
dam.
 
The development of this Project has oc-
curred within a pre-existing context of tension and 
mistrust between Chilean coastal communities and 
industrial operations. Historically, the relationships 
between these actors have been transactional 
in nature, based on the use of monetary compensa-
tions to avoid conflicts during the environmental 
permitting and construction processes.
 
This paradigm of engagement has not 
permitted a comprehensive understanding of the 
environmental and social impacts of this type 
of initiative, and it has hindered the construction 
of relationships based on trust and the goal of 
long-term development. When Valhalla arrived in 
San Marcos, this dynamic had already played out 
in other fishing villages nearby, and local residents 
had detailed knowledge of these experiences.

=== PAGE 141 ===
6
To tell the story, this document uses as inputs the documents generated 
during the engagement process, as well as the views expressed in 
interviews, conducted in July and August 2015, with community leaders 
and representatives of the company. These same interviews are the 
basis for the documentary “Voices of San Marcos”, which narrates the 
experience and complements this narrative.
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
Valhalla and the community representatives of San 
Marcos sought to establish an interaction that was 
different from this traditional paradigm. For its part, 
Valhalla decided to contact the community at a 
very early stage, before initiating the preliminary 
engineering and environmental studies. Once 
concerns about the project started to arise, the 
community and the company decided to separate 
issues related to environmental impacts from any 
future social investments, focusing the first stage 
of conversations on possible impacts and how 
these could affect San Marcos and marine resourc-
es. In a second stage once the potential impacts 
had been reviewed, the community and the compa-
ny began to talk in detail about the project’s poten-
tial contribution to the village’s long-term develop-
ment.
 
This document tries to reflect how the 
company and the community of San Marcos 
worked with each other during the project’s devel-
opment, describing how they found ways to 
dialogue and tackle key issues in a context of 
nationwide mistrust.

=== PAGE 142 ===
7
C O N V E R S A T I O N S  
A N D  I N I T I A L  
R E A C T I O N S  
T H E  B E G I N N I N G E
T
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
feasibility of the project: they visited the coastal 
cliff where the water could be stored and rented a 
boat to study the depth of the bay.
 
During the next nine months, they began 
conversations with representatives of existing 
community organizations, particularly the Fisher-
men’s Union and the Neighbourhood Council. 
Amidst a generalized context of mistrust, the 
community leaders showed openness to talking 
with the company and interest in the idea of 
generating renewable energy.
 
During this period, the community’s 
initial questions about the project began to 
emerge: Are you going to bring energy to the 
village? Who are you? What company do you 
represent? These questions reflected in part the 
community’s isolation in those days. San Marcos 
still wasn’t connected to the electricity grid; its 
inhabitants didn’t have local internet access and 
depended on trucks, coming from Iquique, for 
their water supply.
he founders of Valhalla, two 
young Chileans motivated to 
contribute renewable energy 
to the country, arrived in San 
Marcos for the first time in 
June 2012. During this visit, 
they conducted some initial 
activities 
to 
analyse 
the
 
Some inhabitants of San Marcos also 
said they doubted that the project would actually 
happen, mentioning that other people had 
already come with the idea of building wind energy 
projects that never came to fruition.
 
In addition to these doubts, several 
community representatives feared the harm that 
the project could cause to their main source of 
livelihood: marine resources. This fear was 
influenced by the experience of nearby communi-
ties with coal-fired power 
plants 
and 
mining 
ports, which had created tension and led to 
accusations 
of environmental damage to the 
marine ecosystem.

=== PAGE 143 ===
8
RAÚL MADRID
FORMER PRESIDENT, 
SAN MARCOS FISHERMEN´S UNION
YENNY HERNÁNDEZ
SECRETARY, NEIGHBOURHOOD 
COUNSIL OF SAN MARCOS
 
“
“
”
”
 “I was the president of the Union and 
didn’t shut the doors, first [I wanted] 
to listen to them and give them the 
chance to present the proposal they 
brought to community.”
 “It was like fear, like a giant coming 
towards us and…you were fighting 
against that” 
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T

=== PAGE 144 ===
9
F O R  A  R E L A T I O N S H I P  
A N D  J O I N T  W O R K    
L A Y I N G  T H E  F O U N D A T I O N
A
1) 
  
 
 
 
2) 
Principles
The company committed to developing a project that is
compatible with the San Marcos village and the marine 
resources on which it depends.
r
r
01
03
02
04
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
After several months of 
sporadic engagement, in 
April 
2013 
a 
more 
structured 
dialogue 
process 
between 
the 
company and the commu-
nity began. A milestone of 
this process was the first 
formal meeting with the company convened by the 
neighbourhood council .
 
In this meeting, some of the fundamental 
questions started to appear – these were the 
questions that would guide and accompany the 
company-community interaction for the next two 
years: Will the project impact the sea? What do we 
gain?
 
Two months later, the first meeting with 
the Fishermen’s Union’s general  assembly 
occurred. The fishermen expressed mistrust, 
stating that Valhalla’s discourse was the same as 
that of every other company and that it was impos-
sible to imagine that the project would not affect 
the sea and their shellfish management area. 
They added that the project was probably “already 
ready and approved, so there was probably not 
much to discuss”.  These first meetings under-
scored the importance of developing an engage-
ment process that was guided by principles and a 
clear commitment from the company.
 
Accordingly, the company began to make 
explicit the following:
Commitment
Recognize the community’s concerns and work 
to address them: The interaction between the 
community and the company must transparently 
address concerns about possible impacts, and it 
must not fall into the trap of mixing that 
conversation with possible contributions towards 
local development.
Involve the community in the studies: The 
ﬁshermen must know, participate and safeguard 
the credibility of the samples and other aspects of 
the project’s baseline studies.
Transparency: The community must have access 
to the results of the studies and know the main 
characteristics of the project.
Be present and accessible: Generating trust 
requires time. The company must be present in the 
village and have a day-to-day interaction that 
permits mutual trust.
In Chilean legislation, neighbourhood 
councils are the territorial community 
organizations of people living in same 
neighbourhood. Their objective is to 
promote the development of the 
community, defend the interests and 
safeguard the rights of the neighbours, 
and 
collaborate 
with 
state 
and 
municipal authorities.
In this document, Fishermen’s Union 
refers to the “Sindicato de Trabajadores 
Independientes, Pescadores Artesana-
les, Buzos Mariscadores y Ayudantes de 
Caleta San Marcos” constituted in 
1991.

=== PAGE 145 ===
10
JACINTA ACUÑA 
PRESIDENT, NEIGHBOURHOOD
COUNCIL, SAN MARCOS
They started getting involved with us 
little by little, communicating door to 
door. Talking to [the community], 
explaining the situation, what is 
happening and would happen… in other 
words, they took the time, and then 
people started to get involved and also 
started talkings empeza
“
”
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
Based on these principles, the company and 
community began a dialogue process, using work-
shops and community meetings. Meetings were 
convened and facilitated by Casa de la Paz 
Foundation, an organization hired by the company 
to generate the conditions for a fluid and transpar-
ent dialogue. The Foundation’s mandate was to 
play an impartial role, and also to support the 
community representatives in their leadership 
roles, when they asked for this assistance.
During the first meetings, held in the final months 
of 2013, the company presented its plans to 
conduct baseline environmental studies. Partici-
pants agreed that the fishermen would accompa-
ny Valhalla’s consultants in the data-collection 
process. The Fishermen’s Union also suggested 
some additional studies, which the company 
agreed to conduct. These studies were designed in 
a collaborative way and included an Intensive 
Plankton Study and a Biodiversity Study in the 
shellfish management area.

=== PAGE 146 ===
11
GENARO COLLAO
PRESIDENT, FISHERMEN´S UNION,
CALETA SAN MARCOS
If you want to achieve a change 
in the relationship, early 
engagement is key
“
”
 
During the first months of 2014, the conversations 
were focused on the studies and the project design. 
During this time, the community realized they 
needed technical consultants that could help them 
better interpret the results of the studies. The 
company accepted this request and two marine 
consultants were hired: one that was trusted by the 
Neighbourhood Council and another that was 
trusted by the Fishermen’s Union. 
 
All meetings were public and different 
approaches were used to invite and notify partici-
pants. Before each meeting, posters were hung in 
the village shops and other gathering places; neigh-
bours were personally invited through home visits; 
and people were reminded with phone calls.
 
Other initiatives sought to establish 
additional lines of communication: newsletters and 
informative walls; suggestion boxes for comments, 
questions, complaints and suggestions; and during 
the most intense months of environmental studies, 
the company handed out monthly schedules of the 
activities that would take place in the village. Also, 
the company conducted three door-to-door visits 
of every house in the village to ensure that every 
inhabitant knew the process was happening.
 
Aside from this formal process of interac-
tion and participation, the community team, led by 
Valhalla’s founders, started to spend more and 
more time in the village and the area, with the 
intention of always being present and available to 
talk and tackle the concerns that the community 
might have. The company rented a house to have a 
place to spend nights, and in March 2014 one of the 
team members went to live in the village for 6 
months.
 
This daily interaction allowed for deeper 
conversations, which helped build a better under-
standing of the different perspectives, visions and 
aspirations, and laid the groundwork for more trust.
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T

=== PAGE 147 ===
12
JUAN ANDRÉS CAMUS
CO-FOUNDER, VALHALLA
Meetings in the Community  |  2013-2015
3
22
2
meetings with the
Union´s General 
Assembly
“
”
3
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
open meetings with 
the Neighborhood 
Council
workshops
open meetings with 
the Algae Union
What we encountered, right at the 
beginning, was a high level of frus-
tration, insecurity, and it’s also 
worth saying, sadness, related to 
the political system, institutions and 
big industrialists. The result of this 
was that all of those fears and frus-
trations were awakened and direct-
ed at us when we arrived.

=== PAGE 148 ===
G E N E R A T I N G  A N  
E Q U I T A B L E  D I A L O G U E
 
 
Impartial entity to facilitate meetings 
and support community representatives:
Legal Advisor: 
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
Neither the community leaders of San Marcos nor the company had been part of a dialogue process 
of this magnitude. Along the road, they found opportunities to strengthen the dialogue and, in 
particular, to empower the community to be a strong and informed counterpart. In that regard, three 
initiatives are important to highlight, two of which were requests from the community.
 Marine Consultants:
Casa de la Paz foundation was hired in October 2013. The 
foundation helped design the participatory process, facili-
tate the meetings and support community representatives 
in their leadership role. 
As the studies were being concluded, the community 
requested a marine consultant in order to have technical 
expert help in reviewing the studies and making comments. 
The community and company jointly drafted terms of refer-
ence to select a professional, and then requested proposals. 
The neighbourhood council and the Fishermen’s Union 
didn’t agree on a consultant, so ﬁnally the priority shifted to 
ﬁnd a consultant that would generate conﬁdence in both 
organizations and a consultant was hired for each of them. 
The consultants started their work reviewing the Environ-
mental Impact Study (EIS), focusing their advisory work in 
formulating comments. They continue to advise the 
community until one month after the approval of the EIS.
Once the company and the community started a conversa-
tion about a formal long-term agreement, the Neighbour-
hood Council requested a legal advisor to ensure that the 
agreed-upon terms would be properly reflected in a formal 
and binding agreement. The Neighbourhood Council and 
the company established terms of reference together to 
select this advisor. They agreed to pay the lawyer by the 
hour, rather than a percentage of the funds provided in a 
potential agreement between the community and the 
company. The legal advisor also supported the community 
in drafting a supplementary document that included bylaws 
for implementing the terms of the agreement. The Fisher-
men’s Union also asked for the support of this lawyer 
during the elaboration of its agreement.

=== PAGE 149 ===
14
YENNY HERNÁNDEZ
SECRETARY, NEIGHBORHOOD
COUNCIL OF SAN MARCOS
The lawyer came about the same way, 
because we needed to negotiate with the 
company, but it needed to be clear (…) 
that it was a collaborative process. (…) 
The company paid him, but he worked 
for us
There was a lot of 
technical language that 
we didn’t understand, 
so we started to explain 
that we needed someone
to advise us, to explain 
things to us, someone to 
help us, to review the 
study to see how it was...
“
”
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T

=== PAGE 150 ===
15
R E A C H I N G  
A G R E E M E N T S
A
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
As the dialogue process 
moved forward, in March 
2014 the company and the 
community began consid-
ering the possibility of a 
framework agreement that 
would establish Espejo de 
Tarapacá’s potential con-   
tributions to San Marco´s local development. 
 
Even though the community representa-
tives did not oppose the idea of an agreement, 
they emphasized that it was necessary to know 
the final results of the environmental studies 
before starting conversations about subjects 
such as social investments in the village. For the 
community, an agreement didn’t make sense if 
the project wasn’t compatible with their 
marine-related economic activity.
ANALYSING POSSIBLE
IMPACTS AND ELEMENTS OF DESIGN
During the following months, the community and 
the company reviewed the results of the different 
studies that would form part of the Environmental 
Impact Study. They also held conversations that 
influenced important aspects of the project’s 
design. For example, the company decided to 
install a membrane in the reservoir in order to 
address community concerns about the possible 
absorption of metals and salt into the reservoir 
water, which they feared would generate impacts 
when this water was returned to the sea. 
The company also decided to include a desalina-
tion plant in the project instead of bringing water 
in on trucks, thereby opening the possibility of 
generating a source of continuous fresh water for 
the community.
 
One issue that was intensely discussed 
was where the water intake and outlet would be 
located. The community asked that the tunnel 
opening be located deeper than initially planned, 
which the company indicated was not feasible for 
technical and financial reasons. Although they did 
not reach agreement on this point, the company 
did incorporate the community’s underlying 
concerns into new designs of the intake / outlet, 
including screens to minimize potential impacts. 
The discussion also led to a commitment to limit 
the plant’s operation in the case of significant 
alterations in water temperature.
 
A similar conversation occurred around 
the location of the new access road to the coastal 
cliff and reservoir. The community wanted the 
road to start near San Marcos, thinking this would 
generate a flow of tourists. The company, howev-
er, considered the options near San Marcos to be 
unsafe or infeasible, and opted for a road that 
followed a natural ravine near the Río Seco 
community, 14 kilometres to the north of San 
Marcos. This discussion triggered a conversation 
about how the community could benefit from 
tourism related to the project.

=== PAGE 151 ===
16
AGREEING TO WORK PLANS
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
While these conversations moved forward, at 
workshop held in June 2014 the company 
presented a first Association Proposal to the 
Neighbourhood Council and the Fishermen’s 
Union. This proposal included, among other 
things, the idea that Espejo de Tarapacá would 
contribute to the community’s development 
during the project’s lifecycle based on a percent-
age of the company’s annual revenues.
 
The proposal was not well received by 
the community. The representatives considered 
the proposed social investment amounts to be 
insufficient. Moreover, they did not agree with the 
company’s proposal to set each year’s investment  
according to the project’s revenues, as they felt 
this mechanism did not provide enough certainty. 
Rather, the community wanted fixed contribu-
tions. 
 
At the same time, an important number 
of people wanted an agreement that would 
provide economic contributions to individual 
community members, rather than a social and 
productive investment fund. This type of agree-
ment was not aligned with the company’s princi-
ples, or those of some community representa-
tives. In addition, the environmental impact study 
was not yet completely reviewed, and accordingly 
the community was not ready to engage in a 
second stage of conversations focused on 
benefits.

=== PAGE 152 ===
17
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
Given this context, the company and the commu-
nity identified the need to develop Work Plans with 
the Fishermen’s Union and the Neighbourhood 
Council to explore and establish the conditions of 
a future agreement. In July, the company signed a 
work plan with the Fishermen’s Union, and in 
August it signed one with the Neighbourhood 
Council. Both plans were submitted as an annex 
to the Environmental Impact Study at the end of 
August 2014.
 
The conversations with Neighbourhood 
Council and the Fishermen’s Union occurred in 
parallel. One reason for separating these conver-
sations was that the two organizations take 
decisions in different ways: the Neighbourhood 
Council takes decisions in an assembly that is 
open to the entire community, while the Fisher-
men’s Union takes decisions in an assembly that 
open to its members. An additional reason was 
that the Fishermen’s Union is a productive entity, 
and owns  exclusive management areas for the 
extraction of shellfish as well as an aquaculture 
concession.
 
The work plans included a commitment 
to dialogue in good faith about a possible Associa-
tion Agreement. 
 
Given the importance of this commit-
ment, both the Neighbourhood Council and the 
Fishermen’s Union worked to ensure that their 
constituencies approved the plans. Representa-
tives of the Neighbourhood Council distributed a 
draft of the work plan to each neighbour, along 
with a form for signalling their approval or 
rejection of the document and their intent to sign 
onto it. The neighbours were given a timeframe of 
five days to return the form to the Neighbourhood 
Council representatives. Failure to return the form 
within this timeframe was interpreted as implicit 
approval of the agreement. In this way, the 
document was approved.
 
For its part, the Fishermen’s Union’s 
assembly voted to approve the work plan, and also 
to form a commission to negotiate with the 
company.

=== PAGE 153 ===
W O R K  P L A N S  W I T H  
E A C H  O R G A N I Z A T I O N
 
 
Permanent and effective 
dialogue:
Knowledge of similar 
experiences: 
01
05
02
06
04
03
The work plans included a declaration of willingness to work toward an Association Agreement, without a 
commitment to support the project. For the community, it was essential to maintain their freedom to 
approve or reject the project.
The plans also included the following commitments:
 
All of the actors committed to working 
in good faith to review studies, address 
concerns and explore a possible 
long-term agreement.
Technical and legal 
support:
The company committed to ﬁnancing 
marine consultants and a lawyer to 
support the community as it reviewed 
the Environmental Impact Study and 
discussed a possible agreement with 
the company.
The company committed to organizing 
a visit to a hydroelectric project in the 
central region of the country, so that 
community members could learn 
about the project’s relationship with 
the local community and better 
understand how hydroelectric projects 
work. During this visit, participants 
met 
with authorities, community 
actors, opposition groups, and the 
company’s 
community 
relations 
managers, among others. In addition, a 
representative of another Fishermen’s 
Union was invited to speak with the 
San Marcos ﬁshermen about his 
experience.
Labour Opportunities:
The community asked for the compa-
ny’s support in accessing work 
opportunities during the project’s 
construction phase. Accordingly, the 
company committed to including a 
clause in its contracts with contractors 
that established an incentive for each 
local worker hired. In addition, the 
company ﬁnanced a program to help 
adults complete their primary and 
secondary studies, and it conducted a 
survey to understand community 
members’ degree of interest in work 
opportunities.
The company committed to ensuring 
access to project-related information, 
and to the possibility of participatory 
monitoring initiatives.
Participatory Monitoring:
Anticipating and monitoring 
social impacts: 
Given that the majority of the conver-
sations had focused on the project’s 
possible impacts on the sea, the 
Neighbourhood 
Council 
and 
the 
company looked for a way to better 
identify the project’s potential social 
impacts, as well as mechanisms to 
address them. As a result, the social 
dialogues were created. This was an 
initiative to talk with the community 
about the village, and how the 
construction of Espejo de Tarapacá 
could affect it. The concerns that arose 
during 
these 
dialogues 
included: 
contractor behaviour, road safety, air 
quality, light pollution, work opportuni-
ties, local business opportunities and 
marine impacts.
H i s t o r y  o f  t h e  c o m m u n i t y
e n g a g e m e n t  p r o c e s s

=== PAGE 154 ===
19
3) The formal public consultation process 
that is required as part of Chile’s 
Environmental Impact Assessment Process.
 
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
Three months after signing the Work Plan with the 
Neighbourhood 
Council, 
the 
Environmental 
Assessment Service (Servicio de Evaluación de 
Impacto Ambiental) organized a Public Participa-
tion Process . The public meeting held in San 
Marcos focused on the technical aspects of the 
project, with active participation of the communi-
ty’s marine consultants. During the meeting, some 
community members verbally expressed their 
rejection of the project.
 
The Environmental Assessment Service 
also held public meetings in Iquique, Pozo Almonte 
and Río Seco. This last locality is a fishing village 
14 kilometres north of San Marcos. It has approxi-
mately 200 inhabitants and is relevant for the 
project due to its proximity to the new road that will 
be built up the coastal cliff. In addition, the camp 
that will house workers during the project’s 
construction phase is located halfway between Río 
Seco and San Marcos.
 
Meetings between Valhalla and Río Seco 
started in 2013. During the initial meetings, the 
company provided an explanation of the main 
project components, and concerns about possible 
impacts were addressed. Once these issues had 
been resolved, the conversation centred on the 
labour opportunities that the project might provide, 
as well as ways to support local development. 
 
In October 2014, the company held a 
workshop with Río Seco, during which the commu-
nity did not express major concerns about the 
project’s environmental impacts. It did show great 
interest in the work and service provision opportu-
nities that could arise due to the project’s construc-
tion. 
 
Currently, the company and Río Seco are 
considering options for providing support to this 
community. The options under consideration 
include the provision of desalinated water to Río 
Seco, trainings in activities related to the construc-
tion phase, and incentives for contractors to hire 
local workers.

=== PAGE 155 ===
D I F F I C U L T I E S  
A N D  O P P O S I T I O N  
 
4) The “Kelp Gatherers Union” refers to 
the “Sindicato de Pescadores 
Independientes de Recolectores de Orilla, 
Alguero, Buzo Apnea y Buzo Mariscador 
de Caleta San Marcos,” founded in 
March 2014.
H i s t o r y  o f  t h e  c o m m u n i t y
e n g a g e m e n t  p r o c e s s
Some community members expressed oppo-
sition to the project throughout the engage-
ment process. This opposition was most 
evident in May 2014, when some villagers 
painted grafﬁti in different areas that read: 
Out Yankees! The village is not for sale! They 
also posted black flags around the communi-
ty, and organized protests in Iquique with 
people from other ﬁshing villages and local 
university students.
 
During this same period, a new 
organization was formed: the Kelp Gatherers 
Union . This organization brought together 
people from San Marcos, including project 
opponents, who work in the sea but are not 
part of the Fishermen’s Union. This new union 
stated that they did not want to be part of the 
workshop process that was underway 
because they represented a productive 
organization that deserved a separate conver-
sation. While they formalized their legal 
constitution, they asked the company to 
negotiate a similar agreement with them as 
the one that had been negotiated with the 
Fishermen’s Union. 
 
This new organization posed a dilem-
ma for the company, since it had insisted in 
dialoguing through the workshop process, 
and it invited the Kelp Gatherers to participate 
 in that way. Tensions grew, and in November 
2014 some people, including members of this 
new union and people from outside of San 
Marcos, barricaded the village road and 
burned a resident’s old car.
 
This level of conflict surprised many 
villagers and generated two reactions. First, 
important voices from San Marcos, including 
representatives of the new Union, rejected 
this form of protest. Second, the company 
and the Kelp Gatherers Union ﬁnally found a 
mechanism for sitting down and discussing 
the productive future that the organization 
wanted, and how the company could contrib-
ute to that vision.
  
In June 2015, with the new union fully 
institutionalized, Espejo de Tarapacá present-
ed a formal proposal for a work plan that 
would support improvements in the produc-
tivity and sustainability of the union’s activi-
ties. It would also provide technical support 
for the union’s applications for public funding, 
among other provisions.
 
The project and the Kelp Gatherers 
Union signed a Collaboration Agreement in 
April 2016 that expressed both parties’ 
willingness to work collaboratively in the long 
term.

=== PAGE 156 ===
21
Learn to dialogue, to find each other. 
Fighting, throwing rocks, burning the 
highway, hitting, NO.
PEDRO BRIONES
SECRETARY, KELP GATHERERS UNION,
SAN MARCOS
JUAN CASTILLO, 
“
”
“
”
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
As we were a new organization, we 
weren’t taken into account very much. 
So we had to force them to consider us.
PRESIDENT, KELP GATHERERS UNION,
SAN MARCOS

=== PAGE 157 ===
22
REACHING AGREEMENTS
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
After the milestone of signing work plans with the 
community, and once the community had submit-
ted its comments about the project as part of the 
formal environmental assessment process, a 
second phase of the relationship began. This 
phase focused on the details of a long-term agree-
ment. 
 
The conversations were intense, but they 
occurred in a context in which the parties trusted 
each other more than they had two years before, 
given the history of open discussions about the 
project and its potential impacts. The Neighbour-
hood Council and the project signed an Associa-
tion Agreement in February 2015. A few weeks 
later, the Fishermen’s Union and the project also 
signed an agreement. Both agreements were 
submitted as part of the first addendum to the 
project’s Environmental Impact Study, thereby 
forming part of the environmental assessment file.
The agreements were approved by the respective 
organizations. The Fishermen’s Union approved its 
agreement in the members’ assembly. For its part, 
once the terms of the agreement were set the 
Neighbourhood Council convened an assembly 
meeting in which the proposed agreement was 
presented. Participants agreed to hold a second 
assembly meeting during which the proposal 
would be subject to a secret ballot vote. During this 
second assembly meeting, the majority voted to 
accept the proposal. 
ASSOCIATION AGREEMENTS
The Association Agreements sought to establish 
the mechanisms that will govern the execution, 
development and control of the contributions, 
programs and investments that Espejo de 
Tarapacá will provide in San Marcos to contribute 
to its development.

=== PAGE 158 ===
A S S O C I A T I O N  A G R E E M E N T  
W I T H  T H E  N E I G H B O U R H O O D  
C O U N C I L  
 
Contributions
Pre - Construction
Construction
Operation
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
 
5) The San Marcos Social Council 
takes decisions by simple majority of 
its members. The president’s vote 
(president of the Neighbourhood 
Council) is the last one to be emitted, 
to decide in case of a draw. However, 
some decisions must be taken with 
the support of at least 5 of the 7 
council members. These decisions 
are: (1) approval of the fund’s annual 
bidding 
documents 
when 
they 
consider dedicating 50% or more of 
the funds to a particular document; 
(2) acceptance of social fund bids 
that contemplate the assignation of 
more than 25% of the total funds to 
any 
particular 
project; 
and 
(3) 
definition and modifications to the 
investment strategy of the education 
fund.
The agreement with the Neighbourhood Council included basic criteria and mechanisms for the 
agreement’s implementation. In particular, it created a Social Council that will deﬁne investment 
areas and amounts. This council includes four representatives of the Neighbourhood Council and 
three repre-sentatives of Espejo de Tarapacá. The agreement also established investment amounts 
for each of the project’s phases and lines of work:
Implementation of infrastructure in 
the San Marcos school or public 
spaces, 
subject 
to 
municipal 
approval.
Execution of a program for helping 
adults to complete high school
Creation of a connectivity centre, 
equipped with computers, printers 
and internet connection.  
Investment 
in 
community 
infrastructure.
Fund for development projects 
conducted by San Marcos residents.
Supply of desalinated water to the 
Rural Potable Water Community, at 
a price that is equivalent to 75% of 
the price of water in Iquique. This 
supply is maintained during the 
project’s operation phase.
Coordinate work opportunities.
Incentives for contractors to 
promote for local hiring.
Social fund for projects that gener-
ate social beneﬁts and support 
collec-tive interests.
Fund to support students of San 
Marcos.

=== PAGE 159 ===
A S S O C I A T I O N  A G R E E M E N T  
W I T H  T H E  F I S H E R M E N ’ S  
U N I O N
We have been able to 
build a dialogue and 
get on board with this 
bet. We proposed things 
that were accepted and, 
well, without that condition 
we wouldn’t have an 
agreement.
GENARO COLLAO
PRESIDENT, FISHERMEN´S UNION, 
SAN MARCOS
Construcción
Operation
Before and During Construction 
During Construction
“
”
H i s t o r y  o f  t h e  c o m m u n i t y
e n g a g e m e n t  p r o c e s s
The Association Agreement with the Fishermen’s Union dedicated resources to support its 
productive activities and infrastructure. Decisions about these resources are taken according to 
the Union As-sembly’s bylaws.
Support the productive 
activities of the Fishermen’s 
Union.
Support the productive 
activities of the Fishermen’s 
Union.
Investment in union 
infrastructure.
Support the productive 
activites of the Union. 
Income stabilization fund

=== PAGE 160 ===
R E S P O N S E  M E C H A N I S M  
I N  C A S E  D A M A G E  T O  
T H E  S E A  I S  D E T E C T E D
When does this mechanism apply?
How does the mechanism work?
Who can be a party?
Who executes the study?
 
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
If the Environmental Superintendence penalizes the project for 
having generated environmental damage in the marine ecosys
-
tem.
A study is commissioned that will determine:
• 
The existence of direct economic harm caused by  
 
environmental damage resulting from the project.
• 
Which people or organizations suffered this economic  
 
harm.
• 
How much compensation will be provided to each  
 
affected party.
The study will be executed by a team of at least two profession
-
als, one linked to marine sciences and the other to economic 
sciences. These professionals must be selected jointly by all 
parties.
Residents of San Marcos that work in the sea and are duly 
registered before the ﬁshing authorities, and that have resided in 
the village for at least ﬁve years, as certiﬁed by the Neighbour
-
hood Council.
 
This mechanism provides that the community can opt 
for “arbitration,” paid for by the company, to determine impartial
-
ly the economic damage suffered. For the community, this 
mechanism may be swifter and more efﬁcient. Use of arbitration 
does not exclude the option of going to court.
 
For Espejo de Tarapacá, it was important to agree on 
this mechanism because it is coherent with the commitment 
that the contributions under the Association Agreements are not 
“environmental compensations”, but rather the manifestation of 
a commitment to local development.
One of the most innovative aspects of both agreements is that they contemplate a response mecha-
nism in case damage to the sea is detected. This mechanism responds to the fact that the community 
expressed, throughout the entire process, that the company must establish some sort of “insurance” 
in the case the project contaminates the ocean. Community members insisted on this point because 
they didn’t entirely trust the studies. The underlying question was, what happens to us if the studies 
are wrong?

=== PAGE 161 ===
26
I M P L E M E N T I N G  
A G R E E M E N T S  
Neighbourhood Council: 
Connectivity Centre: 
01
03
02
04
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
As of March 2016, the following initiatives contemplated in the Association Agreements 
for the Pre-Construction Phase have been implemented
The Connectivity Centre is open to the community 
of San Marcos. It is equipped with four computers 
that are connected to satellite internet, as well as a 
printer and ofﬁce materials. In addition, a commu-
nity member was hired to help manage the centre 
and keep it open every day.
Education completion:
12 members of the San Marcos community 
prepared for and took exams to advance in their 
primary and secondary education. Everyone who 
took these exams passed.
San Marcos Park: 
Neighbours of San Marcos, along with Espejo de 
Tarapacá and Mi Parque Foundation, worked to 
improve of one of the village’s parks. Improve-
ments included the creation of shaded areas and 
upgrades to the children’s playground.
Work training programs: 
Using a survey, the company and the community 
worked together to select two priority training 
programs for the village: gastronomy and heavy 
machinery. Part of these training programs started 
in July 2016, and others will take place in 2017.
In the case of the Fishermen’s Union, the funds 
contemplated for the pre-construction phase 
were provided. These contributions seek to 
support the productive activities of the union’s 
members. They have been invested in equip-
ment, improved productivity in the exclusive 
management areas, and connecting the Union’s 
offices to the electrical grid.
With regard to future productivity, the Fisher-
man’s Union has been awarded public funds for 
the installation of a freezing machine, an ice 
chamber, and resources to finance a seaweed 
cultivation project. In addition, the Union recent-
ly won public funds to install solar panels on the 
roof of its offices. They foresee selling surplus 
energy to the electrical grid.

=== PAGE 162 ===
27
¶
¶
¶
I think it has been beneficial and I hope that other communities can have 
access to this situation and decide for themselves, but [I believe that] 
with information, with equal opportunities, communities can be informed 
in their decisions, defend their rights, so that ignorance doesn’t become an 
obstacle to development.
GENARO COLLADO
PRESIDENT, FISHERMEN´S UNION, 
SAN MARCOS
“
”
L E S S O N S  L E A R N E D  
In interviews, representatives of both the community and the company expressed a series of 
lessons learned from the experience of engaging around the Espejo de Tarapacá project.
Community representatives highlighted the following lessons:
 
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
 Openness to dialogue: 
The experience of engagement showed the commu-
nity, especially its representatives, that it was 
necessary to be open to listening and communicat-
ing, and to seeing dialogue as a way to express their 
concerns and interests and defend their rights. This 
openness also contributed to overcoming existing 
prejudices on both sides.
  Empowered and informed community: 
For the community, it was essential that the 
dialogue occurred in an environment in which 
transparency 
and 
symmetry 
of 
information 
prevailed. In order to create this environment, it was 
essential that the community, especially its 
representatives, had access to information and 
technical and legal support. Only in this way, by 
addressing community representatives’ sense of 
vulnerability, could the parties develop relation-
ships built on trust.   
Long-term vision: 
When it came time to establish agreements with the 
company, it was key for the community representa-
tives to focus these agreements on the long term 
and on how they could contribute to local develop-
ment, despite the pressure that existed to generate 
agreements that would provide monetary resources 
to individuals.

=== PAGE 163 ===
28
 Adequate time: 
Early engagement process:
¶
¶
¶
¶
¶
¶
¶
¶
Company representatives highlighted the following lessons:
 
T H E  S A N  M A R C O S  C O M M U N I T Y
A N D  T H E  E S P E J O  D E  T A R A P A C Á  P R O J E C T  
Community engagement processes are human processes 
that require a long period of work in order to generate 
enough trust to address difﬁcult conversations. Having 
adequate time allowed the company representatives to 
understand the history and origins of the community, as 
well as the social context in which the project would be 
inserted.
 
It was essential to conduct an early engagement process, one 
that began prior to starting the environmental impact study and 
making decisions about all aspects of project design. Doing so 
meant that the community’s concerns influenced the project 
design.
Presence in the territory:
The understanding that developed between the company and 
the community was based on the generation of relationships at 
a human scale that were nurtured daily. In order to build these 
relationships, it was essential that the company be present in 
the territory permanently. The founders of Valhalla and the 
community team spent more than 11,000 hours in San Marcos 
and its surroundings between 2012 and 2015. This presence 
helped to generate trust between community members and 
the company at a human level. 
 First understand possible impacts, then talk about beneﬁts:
It was important for this process to separate the conversations 
about possible environmental impacts and project design from 
the conversations about a long-term agreement on social 
investment. The community and the company concentrated on 
understanding how the project could be compatible with the sea 
and the ﬁshing vocation of the village, and then later shifted to 
thinking about beneﬁts for the community.
Collective beneﬁts, not individual ones:
During the conversations about a possible social investment 
agreement, it was essential for the company representatives to 
focus on contributions to local development in the long term, 
rather than beneﬁts for individuals, despite initial pressures from 
some community members. 
Invest in empowering the community: 
It was key to respond to the community’s request to empower 
itself, and thereby help it be a solid counterpart during the 
process. This also helped decrease asymmetries of informa-
tion and strengthen trust in the process
Be aware of people/groups that do not feel represented: 
It was a challenge to respond to the new Kelp Gatherers Union’s 
request for a direct relationship, while also respecting and 
maintaining the relationship with the originally established 
groups. Company representatives point out that to address this 
challenge, it was necessary to understand that the communities 
are dynamic, and that new organizations and interests groups 
can appear that lack clear representation. It is important not to 
wait for tensions to explode before seeking a way to deal with 
potential representation challenges.
Keep working methods flexible
It was essential for the process that the company had a flexible 
work methodology that adapted to changes and the cultural 
dynamics of the community
