=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20034
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20034
creationDate: D:20190613133528+09'00'
modDate: D:20190613140003+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
6 – 8 July 2019 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 20 
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
14 June 2019 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package for FP113 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled “TWENDE: Towards Ending Drought Emergencies:
Ecosystem Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid Rangelands”;
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
81 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
83 
Secretariat’s assessment 
86 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
99 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
109 
Gender documentation 
110

=== PAGE 3 ===
1 Twende is Swahili for “let’s go”. Ending Drought Emergencies is Kenya’s flagship policy for the arid 
and semi-arid lands 
Project/Programme Title:  
TWENDE1 Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem 
Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid Rangelands  
 
Country/Region: 
Kenya 
Accredited Entity: 
IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature) 
Date of Submission:  
 1st June 2018

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME 
SUMMARY 
 
 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
 
• 
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
FP-IUCN-01062018-001 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 76 
 
 A 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
TWENDE Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem Based 
Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid Rangelands 
  
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region  
Kenya 
A.1.4. National designated 
authority (ies) 
The National Treasury 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature) 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☐ Direct 
☒ International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / 
beneficiary 
Executing Entity: The Government of Kenya (GoK), through the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI), National Drought Management Authority 
(NDMA), and Conservation International (CI)  
Beneficiary: The Republic of Kenya: The project will focus on eleven of Kenya’s 
Arid and Semi-Arid (ASAL) counties: Garissa, Tana River, Isiolo, Marsabit, 
Samburu, Kajiado, Kitui, Makueni, Tharaka-Nithi, Meru and Taita Taveta 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total 
investment, million USD) 
☐ Micro (≤10) 
☐ Medium (50<x≤250)  
X Small (10<x≤50)  
☐ Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐ Mitigation 
☒ Adaptation 
☐ Cross-cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission 
1st June 2018 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, 
position 
 Luther Anukur, Regional Director, IUCN Eastern & Southern Africa Regional 
Office  
Organization 
IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature) 
Email address 
IUCNGCF@iucn.org 
Telephone number 
+41 (0)22 999 0256 
Mailing address 
Rue Mauverney 28, 1196 Gland, Switzerland 
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
☐ 
Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)  
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
☐ 
Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
☒

=== PAGE 6 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 76 
 
 A 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
The objective of this project is to reduce the cost of climate change induced drought on Kenya’s national 
economy by increasing resilience of the livestock and other land use sectors in restored and effectively 
governed rangeland ecosystems. The project will contribute to improved adaptation to climate change of Kenya’s 
national policy of “Ending Drought Emergencies”, as outlined in “Kenya Vision 2030”.  
The project will strengthen climate change adaptation in Kenya’s arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs). ASALs 
occupy 89% of the country and are home to about 36% of the population and 70% of the national livestock herd. 
Livestock contributions account for 80% of household incomes in arid lands and 65% in semi-arid lands. Drought has 
been shown to reduce economic growth in Kenya by 2.8 percentage points per year for three years (from 5.2% to 
2.4%), with 72% of the losses concentrated in the livestock sector. Frequency and intensity of drought is increasing as 
a result of climate change. 
The project will be implemented in 2 landscapes encompassing 11 counties, which have devolved powers under Kenya’s 
new constitution. The project will benefit 620,000 people in 104,000 households and will protect or restore 500,000 
hectares of rangelands in a landscape of 2.5 million hectares. 
The target landscapes are dry season grazing areas: critical resource zones that provide refuge during periods of drought. 
Their existence depends on availability of permanent water, which makes them hotspots for resource competition and 
land use change. They are used seasonally by large numbers of livestock keepers, often from multiple ethnic groups, 
following customary governance practices. Customary institutions have become weakened, leading to break down in 
natural resource governance, degradation of resources, and escalating conflict. 
The target landscapes face challenges of weak capacities for landscape planning, poor access to climate data and 
analysis, and low access to markets and financial services. The project addresses this through three components: 
• 
Component 1: Climate change adapted planning for drought resilience 
• 
Component 2: Restoration of rangeland landscapes for ecosystem based adaptation 
• 
Component 3: Climate change resilient ecosystem management for investments  
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
Approved 25/05/2018 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
N/A 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 1/11/2019 
End:  31/10/2024 
 
Project/programme lifespan 
Five years, 0 months

=== PAGE 7 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 76 
 
 A 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme  
Table on Financial elements per project outputs  
Output 
Activity 
GCF funding 
(USD) 
Total co-financing 
(USD) 
Amount (for 
entire project) 
(USD) 
Output 1: 
Coordinated 
transboundary 
rangeland 
management 
decisions are 
strengthened by 
enhanced climate 
change analysis 
and  participatory 
community and 
county planning 
Activity 1.1 
Enhance 
information 
systems to inform 
climate change 
sensitive 
landscape 
planning and 
vulnerability/ risk 
management 
1,441,268 
932,000 
2,373,268 
Activity 1.2 
Strengthen 
community 
institutions to 
coordinate 
community 
planning and to 
inform and 
represent 
stakeholders in 
landscape 
planning 
1,637,772 
389,250 
2,027,022 
Activity 1.3 
Develop county 
rangeland 
restoration plans 
that build on local 
community plans 
combined with 
enhanced climate 
change data 
1,204,379 
233,750 
1,438,129 
Activity 1.4 
Establish 
functioning 
landscape 
management 
mechanisms in 
participating 
counties for 
climate change 
sensitive and 
accountable 
decision-making 
610,544 
600,000 
1,210,544 
Activity 1.5 
Establish 
participatory 
monitoring, 
evaluation and 
learning systems 
to support 
adaptive 
management 
620,350 
245,000 
865,350 
  
 TOTAL  
5,514,313 
2,400,000 
7,914,313 
Output 2: 
Prioritized 
rangeland 
resources 
including water 
resources, are 
Activity 2.1 
Implement priority 
community-based 
rangeland 
restoration 
activities 
  
3,617,914  
  
2,300,000  
5,917,914

=== PAGE 8 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 76 
 
 A 
brought under 
restoration, 
safeguarded and 
sustainably 
managed for 
improved climate 
change resilience 
Activity 2.2 
Implement priority 
actions for 
integrated 
land/water 
management in 
catchments 
  
3,197,647  
  
3,000,000  
6,197,647 
Activity 2.3 Install 
community-
validated strategic 
water sources for 
sustainable 
rangeland 
utilization 
  
500,000  
  
-  
500,000 
Activity 2.4 Assist 
communities to 
formulate bylaws 
and incorporate 
into county laws 
  
627,250  
  
-  
627,250 
Activity 2.5 Build 
capacity of local 
institutions to 
implement 
climate-sensitive 
landscape 
management 
  
1,539,285  
  
100,000  
1,639,285 
 TOTAL  
9,482,096 
5,400,000 
14,882,096 
Output 3: Public, 
private and 
community 
investments in 
natural resources  
Activity 3.1 
Climate resilient 
Investment in 
priority value 
chains that have 
been validated by 
local communities  
1,325,925 
1,200,000 
2,525,925 
Activity 3.2 
Provide grants to 
establish 
restoration 
enterprises 
created/led 
primarily by 
women’s groups 
2,695,628 
900,000 
3,595,628 
Activity 3.3 
Establish financial 
incentive 
mechanisms for 
sustainable land 
management 
1,600,541 
0 
1,600,541 
Activity 3.4  
Provide grants to 
community-based 
enterprises for 
ecosystem based 
adaptation that 
could create 
opportunities for 
investments in the 
value chains 
1,431,099 
800,000 
2,231,098 
 TOTAL  
7,053,193 
2,900,000 
9,953,192 
  
  
22,049,602 
10,700,000 
32,749,602 
 PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT 
COSTS  
5.00% 
  
1,102,480  
  
690,900  
1,793,380 
  
 GRAND TOTAL  
23,152,082 
11,390,900 
34,542,982

=== PAGE 9 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 76 
 
 A 
 
 
 
 
Output  
Activities 
Amount 
(for entire 
project) 
Currency 
Amount 
(for 
entire 
project) 
Local 
currency 
GCF 
funding 
amount 
Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient 
Output 1 
1.1 - 1.5 
7,914,313 
million 
USD ($) 
N/A 
N/A 
5,514,313 
USD 
Output 2 
2.1 - 2.5 
14,882,096 
million 
USD ($) 
N/A 
N/A 
9,482,096 
USD 
Output 3 
3.1 - 3.4 
9,953,192 
million 
USD ($) 
N/A 
N/A 
7,053,193 
USD 
PMU 
  
1,793,380 
million 
USD ($) 
N/A 
  
1,102,480 
USD 
Total project financing 
34,542,982 
  
  
  
23,152,082 
  
 
 
* Please expand the table if needed. 
• 
A breakdown of cost/budget by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, travel, goods, 
works, services, etc.) and disbursement schedule in project/programme confirmation (term 
sheet) as included in section I, Annexes. 
  
Total Cost 
Category 
Summary 
(Excluding 
Co-finance)   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 PMU 
Costs  
  C1   
  C2   
  C3   
  Total GCF   
  Co-
financing   
  Grand 
Total   
 Staff 
costs - 
hiring of 
staff and 
their 
remunerati
ons  
             
858,605  
             
1,797,290  
             
1,689,002  
                      
988,991  
                      
5,333,888  
                      
503,363  
             
5,837,251  
 
Profession
al 
services - 
legal and 
consultanc
y services  
             
100,000  
             
683,525  
             
186,890  
                      
621,333  
                      
1,591,748  
                      
60,000  
             
1,651,748  
 Travel and 
per-diem  - 
covering 
local and 
foreign 
travels   
             
60,250  
             
420,020  
             
415,808  
                      
381,503  
                      
1,277,581  
                      
294,110  
             
1,571,691  
 
Conference
s, 
workshops 
and 
training   
             
-    
             
749,447  
             
1,195,629  
                      
34,467  
                      
1,979,543  
                      
1,336,935  
             
3,316,478  
 Building 
and 
infrastruct
ure - 
covering 
water pans 
etc  
             
-    
             
-    
             
643,333  
                      
50,000  
                      
693,333  
                      
555,000  
             
1,248,333

=== PAGE 10 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 76 
 
 A 
 Field 
activities - 
covering 
rehabilitati
on 
activities 
etc  
             
-    
             
769,410  
             
3,639,885  
                      
20,300  
                      
4,429,595  
                      
6,004,065  
             
10,433,660  
 Outreach - 
covering 
publication
s etc  
             
-    
             
700,180  
             
12,750  
                      
11,000  
                      
723,930  
                      
391,500  
             
1,115,430  
 Vehicles 
and related 
costs   
             
71,125  
             
180,223  
             
7,668  
                      
17,800  
                      
276,816  
                      
180,000  
             
456,816  
 IT 
Equipment 
& Software  
             
4,000  
             
118,000  
             
42,100  
                      
34,730  
                      
198,830  
                      
10,211  
             
209,041  
 
Office/gene
ral 
equipment/
admin 
costs/EE 
costs 
excluding 
AE fee  
             
8,500  
             
96,218  
             
59,200  
                      
113,371  
                      
277,289  
                      
55,715  
             
333,004  
 Grants  
             
-    
             
-    
             
1,589,831  
                      
4,779,698  
                      
6,369,529  
                      
2,000,000  
             
8,369,529  
 Others - to 
cover any 
other costs  
             
-    
             
-    
             
-    
                      
-    
                      
-    
                      
-    
             
-    
 GRAND 
TOTAL   
                      
1,102,480  
                      
5,514,313  
                      
9,482,096  
                      
7,053,193  
                      
23,152,083  
                      
11,390,900  
                      
34,542,982

=== PAGE 11 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 76 
 
 B 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
   
34,542,982  
 
Options 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
 
………………… 
23,152,082 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
( ) years 
( ) years 
 
 
 
 
( ) %  
( ) %  
( ) % IRR 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
…23,152,082… 
Options 
 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniorit
y 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
Subordinat
ed Loans 
3,600,000 
2,400,000 
2,400,000 
1,500,000 
690,900 
800,000 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
Conservation Int. 
GoK/MoAI 
NDMA 
WRA 
IUCN  
Conservation 
Int. 
( ) years 
( ) years 
( ) years 
( ) years 
( ) years 
 
3-5 years 
( ) %  
( ) %  
( ) % IRR 
 
 
 
interest 
rates 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Lead financing institution: Government of Kenya………………………  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing passes 
directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed financial instrument and 
terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped. 
 Not Applicable (NA) 
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE.  
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Choose an item. 
…………………. 
Options 
( ) years 
( ) %  
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by the AE to the 
recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE. 
 NA 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non-concessional) determined?

=== PAGE 12 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 76 
 
 B 
Please provide an overview of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets which could be tapped to finance the 
proposed project/programme. 
Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1-year T-Bill, 5-year government bond, 5-year corporate bond (specify credit rating) and 5-year 
syndicate loan. 
Provide examples or information on comparable transactions.  
 NA

=== PAGE 13 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 76 
 
C 
2 Kenya National Adaptation Plan: 2015-2030, Government of Kenya, July 2016 
3 The 2011 Post Disaster Needs Assessment is the most recent thorough assessment of the impact of drought 
on Kenya’s economic growth 
C.1. Strategic Context 
Kenya’s Vision 2030 provides a road map for becoming an upper-middle income economy by the year 2030. One 
of the biggest threats to the achievement of this vision is the increasing recurrence of drought, causing substantial 
losses and suffering and undermining economic growth, particularly in the country’s arid and semi-arid lands 
(ASALs). Prolonged droughts have occurred in 1983/84, 1991/92, 1995/96, 2004/2005, 2008/09, 2011/12 and 
2016/17. 
Drought is a major contributor to chronic food insecurity and poor nutrition in Kenya, which affect about 10 million 
people. Nearly 30 per cent of Kenya’s children are classified as undernourished, and micro-nutrients deficiencies 
are widespread (NFNSP, 2011). This situation is exacerbated by increasing frequency and intensity of drought. 
Better management of drought is therefore critical to national development and the attainment of the Vision 20302.  
Kenya’ ASALs are characterized by extremely high inter-annual variability of rainfall, with the majority of years 
varying by more than 30% of the mean, and this variability is projected to be increased by climate change. 
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC 2012), there is likely to be a marked increase 
in drought risk over much of Eastern Africa by the 2050s, which ultimately will threaten climate sensitive economic 
sectors. Kenya is highly influenced by the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon, which seasonally 
and annually contributes to Kenya’s variable rainfall (see graphs in C.2). Temperature projections for East Africa 
indicate that the median and average surface temperature will increase by 3°C to 4°C in the 2080 to 2099 period 
compared to the 1980 to 1999 period. Changes in temperature and precipitation variability due to climate change 
will increase the frequency and severity of drought and extreme weather events, undermining livelihoods, eroding 
assets, reducing recovery periods, and contributing to changing pressures and increasing impacts on key 
environmental resources. Drought and floods are expected to be one of the major drivers of change in terrestrial 
ecosystems, with knock-on effects on water availability, livestock and crop productivity and hence food security.  
Changing patterns of drought are already being observed in Kenya and impact on the national economy. The 
Government of Kenya’s Post Disaster Needs Assessment for the 2008-20113 drought estimated total damage and 
losses to Kenya at Ksh 968.6 billion (USD 12.1 billion) across all sectors. Drought slowed GDP growth by an 
average of 2.8 percentage points per year – roughly 50% of annual growth – during the same 3 year period. 
Recovery needs were estimated at USD 990 million, reconstruction needs at USD 788 million, and disaster risk 
reduction needs at USD 2.1 billion. The livestock sector suffered the most when compared to other sectors, 
incurring 72% of all losses and damages followed by agriculture sector 13%, water and sanitation 9%, etc. In 
response, the Kenyan government put in place a national climate change action plan to take bold steps to secure 
the country against risks and impacts of climate change.  
Kenya developed the National Adaptation Plan (Government of Kenya, 2016) as a robust framework to support 
adaptation at national, county and local community level. The NAP defined adaptation and resilience building as 
the priority responses to climate change, and suggested that adaptation and development goals need to 
complement each other. Vision 2030 was conceived as an overarching strategic document. Its second Medium 
Term Investment Plan (MTP II) prioritizes investments in climate change adaptation, drought risk management 
and ending drought emergencies, and the water, livestock, crop agriculture and energy sectors.  
The ASALs are dominated by rangelands, the dominant population practice pastoralism, or extensive livestock 
production, managing herd mobility to manage climate risks and uncertainties. Kenya’s pastoralists are highly 
impacted by climate change. Climate change is eroding key natural resources and placing ever-greater demands 
on risk management strategies and resources, including herd mobility and drought reserves. Climate change 
modifies the availability of natural resources, forcing pastoralist to change their migration routes and the timing of 
herd movements, which has precipitated resource conflicts and has weakened traditional mechanisms for 
resource governance. This is exacerbated by growing competition for high value seasonal resources located in 
the dry season grazing reserves (Government of Kenya, 2016). 
Dry season grazing areas are critical resource zones within the ASALs that provide refuge during periods of 
drought. Their existence depends on availability of permanent water, which makes them hotspots for resource 
competition and land use change. They are used seasonally by large numbers of livestock keepers, often from 
multiple ethnic groups, following customary governance practices. At the same time, population pressure in Kenya 
combined with drop outs from the pastoral system is driving an expansion of crop cultivation in dry season

=== PAGE 14 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 76 
 
C 
reserves. Over time, customary institutions have become weakened, leading to break down in natural resource 
governance, degradation of these critical resources, and escalating natural resource conflict. 
Healthy and productive landscapes are central to rangeland productivity and water security and for building 
resilience and creating livelihood options for communities in the face of climate change. Resilience in pastoral 
landscapes is determined by seasonal access to productive resources, including water, pasture and sources of 
secondary (non-livestock) income. Options to generate income from rangeland resources is determined by access 
to markets, which is generally weak throughout the ASALs. The resilience of pastoral livelihoods is underpinned 
by the resilience of rangeland ecosystems, which is influenced by how herd movements are managed and how 
resource use is governed (and seasonally restricted). Changing patterns of livestock movement, combined with 
land use change and uncontrolled expansion of water infrastructure, is contributing to land degradation in the 
rangelands. 
Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA) approaches offer a way to integrate climate change resilience into large-
scale and long-term planning of rangeland landscapes. EbA is the use of biodiversity and ecosystem services as 
part of an overall strategy to help people to adapt to the adverse effects of climate change (Convention on 
Biological Diversity, 2009). EbA supports the integrated management of land, water and living resources, including 
humans, which promotes conservation and sustainable use in an equitable way. In the Kenyan ASAL context EbA 
will primarily focus on restoring and sustainably managing rangeland resources, including pastures and water 
sources, to underpin adaptive capacities and community resilience. EbA is well recognized as a critical element 
of adaptation by the UNFCCC, and constitutes a fundamental pillar in Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA), Disaster 
Risk Reduction (DRR) and the Kenya National Adaptation Plan. Despite this attention, EbA is not well integrated 
into most of Kenya’s programs, including its flagship Ending Drought Emergencies (EDE) plan. For instance, at 
the time when the EDE plan was launched in 2013, EbA was a fairly emergent concept and was not popularized 
in Kenya at that time. In addition, EDE was strongly driven from a humanitarian angle with disaster risk reduction 
dominating the conceptual thinking. 
Opportunities to embed EbA approaches and rangeland landscape management are increasing due to the 
growing autonomy of county governments. Kenya’s 2010 Constitution mandates a shift towards decentralized and 
devolved policy and legislative environment, which is opening up opportunities for multi-sector, multi-stakeholder, 
integrated planning with the participation of land users at the county level. Local governance systems are being 
realigned, empowering county-level elected government to define and implement local development priorities. 
Devolution is also contributing to increased investment in the ASALs and offers new opportunities for upholding 
the rights of marginalized communities in the ASALs. 
In 2010 Kenya established the ASAL Secretariat as a permanent and specialized institution to champion and 
coordinate development in the ASALs. In 2012 Kenya adopted a strategy for Ending Drought Emergencies by the 
year 2022. EDE currently focuses on short-term implications of drought (response) combined with improved early 
warning. Rangeland management and climate change adaptation are not yet integrated into the medium term 
strategy for ending drought emergencies. The National Drought Management Authority, a project partner, is the 
Secretariat of the Common Program Framework for Ending Drought Emergencies. 
The EDE program consists of six pillars cutting across Kenya’s National Vision 2030 Medium Term Plan: peace 
and security; climate-proofed infrastructure; disaster risk management; sustainable livelihoods; human capital; 
and institutional development and knowledge management. By contributing to EDE this project is firmly anchored 
in national, sub-national and sectoral plans and policies that have been evolving for three decades. In addition, 
the Climate-Smart Agriculture Programme (CSAP, 2015–2030) is jointly implemented by Ministry of Agriculture 
and Irrigation (MoAI), Ministry of Environment and Forestry, and Ministry of Water and Sanitation--the key 
ministries in this project. 
This project responds to significant opportunities that have been created by the Kenyan government through 
adoption of key, favorable policies for sustainable rangelands management. The project will demonstrate 
implementation of these policies in ways that are adapted to climate change projections and threats. The project 
recognizes that pre-existing development failures in Kenya’s ASALs leave populations more exposed to the risks 
of climate change, but also recognizes that pastoral livelihoods are traditionally well-adapted to conditions of 
climate variability. The project therefore strengthens climate change adaptation by reinforcing and enabling local 
institutions and practices and up-grading them to manage the scale and rate of changes that are implied by climate 
change. 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
C.2.1. Baseline scenario  
C.2.1.1. The Baseline Context in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (ASALs):  
ASALs occupy 89% of Kenya and are home to about 36% of the population and 70% of the national livestock 
herd. The livestock sector contributes 5.6% to 12.5% of GDP and 30% to 47% of agricultural GDP: estimates

=== PAGE 15 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 76 
 
C 
4 Mwangi K,K. and Mutua F. 2015. Mapping Kenya’s Vulnerability to Climate Change- A multifactor Approach. 
International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR).ISSN (Online) 2319-7064; Volume 4 Issue 6: 12-20 
are constrained by weak market penetration in the ASALs and poor data collection, but applying 70% to the 
livestock sector contribution indicates that pastoralism contributes between 3.9 and 8.8% of GDP. Up to 90% of 
the red meat consumed in Kenya comes from livestock raised in the ASALs. In pastoralist production systems 
livestock accounts for 90% of employment and 95% of family incomes (Elisabeth & Mbwika, 2012). Additionally 
the ASALs is home to 90% of the wildlife that supports the country’s thriving tourism sector (contributing more 
than 15% of GDP).  
Of the 23 counties in the ASALs in Kenya, 9 counties are classified as Arid, and 14 as Semi-Arid. The ASAL 
ecosystems are characterized by low, erratic annual precipitation between 150mm to 550mm per year in arid 
areas and 550mm to 850mm year in semi-arid areas. The ASALS are the most affected by climate change in 
Kenya. They include most of the lands forecast to be at very high risk (36.1%), and at high risk (47.4%) of 
climate change impacts, as shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1: Map of Kenya’s ASAL Counties (left: source http://www.asalforum.or.ke) and Climate change sensitivity 
map of Kenya (right: source: Mwangi & Mutua 2015)4. The landscapes selected for the project are all in High Risk or Very 
High Risk areas 
Precipitation projections and evidence are inconsistent, with models projecting increases in some ASAL areas 
while data show declining trends. Projections and recorded data in Kenya’s drylands (ASALs) show rising 
temperatures. Changes in precipitation and temperature from historical trends have been used in Kenya to 
determine a climate change influence on land degradation and drought. Evapotranspiration data would make an 
even stronger link between climate change and the observed increases in land degradation and drought events. 
Such evapotranspiration data is available for a few counties although not all, but does indeed show increases in 
evapotranspiration rates. Annex 2b provides a further compilation of data and analysis concluding that climate 
variability is increasing alongside the number of extreme weather events and resulting in an increase in drought 
and flood. The frequency of drought has probably increased beyond the recovery period (5 years) for pastoralist 
systems in some parts of Kenya. The project will develop further the data and analysis between climate and 
other data, such as evapotranspiration and also land degradation to further strengthen Kenya’s capacity to 
analyse the data and reinforce response measures. 
Kenya’s population of about 40 million grows at the high rate of 2.9% per year. About 10 million people suffer 
from food insecurity and poor nutrition with 2-4 million requiring emergency food assistance at any given time,

=== PAGE 16 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 76 
 
C 
with proportionally more people affected in ASALs. Kenya’s Food Security Steering Group estimated in 2017 
that 2.6 million people in 23 ASAL counties are affected by drought and in need of food aid. Among the most 
affected counties are Isiolo, with more than 55% of the population at risk, followed by Marsabit, Tana River and 
Samburu where 44% of the population are affected. Other counties affected are Wajir (32%), Garissa (29%), 
Mandera (28%), and Turkana and Kwale (25%) (FEWS NET, 2017). The project counties are both pastoralists 
and agropastoralists. The Sabarwawa landscape comprises largely pastoralists while the Mid Tana river and 
Chyulu landscapes comprise a mixed population of both pastoralists and agropastoralists. 
Drought emergencies have an impact on economic growth in Kenya. The 2011 drought, for example, reduced 
GDP by 2.8 per year for 3 years, with 72% of the economic losses from drought concentrated in the livestock 
sector. As mentioned in C1, climate change is increasing the frequency of drought in Kenya, which reduces the 
amount of time for recovery from one drought episode to the next. Three droughts have occurred in Kenya since 
2008 and this frequency presents a serious risk to the resilience of the pastoral sector. 
 
 
Figure 2: Fifty years of rainfall in northern Laikipia, Kenya (Source: Hauck and Rubenstein 2016). In the figure, the 
BLACK BOXES (annual mean rainfall) indicate years where rainfall was above 300 mm/year whereas the ORANGE BOXES 
(again, mean annual rainfall) indicate years where rainfall was below 300 mm/year. The graph illustrates the decrease in 
years of above average rainfall and the increasing frequency of years with sub-average rainfall. 
Economic development throughout Kenya is impacting on the ASALs, but in the absence of a clear understanding 
of how climate change will impact on existing livelihoods and natural resources, there are serious risks of 
maladaptation. Current development paradigms are poorly informed by the current knowledge on risk 
management in rangeland economies. Herding strategies are designed to respond to a highly uncertain climate, 
and climate change will probably aggravate that uncertainty. Without understanding this critical aspect of how 
climate change affects drylands, development actions could undermine risk management by undermining the 
herding strategies that are designed to manage risk. 
Major concerns have been raised over Kenya’s ambitious LAPSSET corridor, which will involve the construction 
of roads, railway, air, fiber optics transport and communication systems, electricity, oil pipelines and resort cities 
across parts of the ASALs. While these developments will offer many opportunities for economic growth in the 
ASALs, they also present numerous risks to the sustainable management of rangeland landscapes and to 
climate change adaptation strategies of resident populations.  
The Kenyan government has major concerns over the state of degradation in the countries rangelands. 
Degradation of rangeland resources undermines the capacity of rangeland users to adapt to climate change and 
reduces the rate of recovery post-drought, contributing to a downward spiral of resilience. Kenya’s National

=== PAGE 17 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 76 
 
C 
5 Republic of Kenya, 2002. National Action Programme to Combat Desertification: 
http://www4.unfccc.int/Nap/Documents%20nap/Kenya_Nap_Final.Pdf  
6.Kariuki, R., Willcock, S., and Marchant, R., 2018. Rangeland Livelihood Strategies under Varying Climate 
Regimes: Model Insights from Southern Kenya. Land, 7, 47; doi:10.3390/land7020047 
 
7 Nassef, M., Anderson, S. and Hesse, C., 2009. Pastoralism and climate change: Enabling adaptive capacity. 
Humanitarian Policy Group. April 2009 http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/G02497.pdf 
 
Action Program to Combat Desertification5 estimates land degradation at an average of 62% in pure ASAL 
counties and 25% in counties that are at least 85% ASAL. Consecutive droughts combined with disruption of 
herding patterns have compromised regeneration of rangelands, leaving large expanses of natural pastureland 
degraded and under-productive.  
Kenya does not systematically collect data on land degradation in the ASALs and the above figures are quite 
crude estimates, which places a major constraint on planning and investment. However, the National Drought 
Management Authority estimates that the 2016 drought led to: i) severe vegetation deficit in Isiolo county with 
persistently poor and deteriorating vegetation condition across all livelihood zones; ii) increased grazing 
distances for herds, linked to continued depletion of pasture/browse resources and poor pasture regeneration 
due to successive failed rains; iii) low yields of shallow wells attributed to reduced recharge potential and; iv) 
poor livestock body condition, particularly for cattle and sheep,- linked to limited pasture and browse and 
extended distances to water sources (NDMA, 2017). 
Rates of erosion have increased in recent decades and soil carbon stocks, a key indicator of soil health and 
regeneration potential, are critically low (below 3.5 kg/m3) in some northern rangelands. Given the scale of the 
ASALs, and the importance of restoring soil organic carbon through restoration and sustainable management, 
rangeland restoration actions not only contribute to climate change adaptation, but have the potential to make a 
significant contribution to climate change mitigation. 
The impacts of climate change have led to more people depending on survival strategies to reinforce their 
livelihoods. This includes unsustainable practices, such as overharvesting trees for charcoal. Casualties of 
climate change include a growing number of former livestock keepers who require alternative livelihoods. In the 
absence of adequate land use planning, these people frequently adopt land use practices that compete against 
pastoralism, for example converting key dry season pastures or over-exploiting scarce water resources for crop 
farming. Such examples are on-going responses to a range of social and economic pressures that could 
compromise the capacity of rangeland users to adapt to climate change, because they encroach on established 
adaptation strategies. Climate change impacts are forecast to further compound the already-fragile situation in 
these areas without major changes in the way rangeland landscapes are managed and governed (Kariuki et al., 
2018)6 (Nassef et al., 2009)7.

=== PAGE 18 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 76 
 
C 
 
 
Figure 3: Kenya Humanitarian Overview in 2017: the stressed and in-crisis regions almost perfectly mirror the map 
of ASALs (UN-OCHA). 
Current responses to drought respond poorly to climate change projections. Responses are constrained by the 
lack of adequate information systems to inform rangeland management and adaptation planning and to prioritize 
investments. Responses are also constrained by overall low capacity to support sustainable pastoralism in the 
rangelands. 
At the same time, local governance systems, which hold the key to climate change adaptation, are being 
weakened due to loss of authority over resource and low recognition from outside actors. A significant 
consequence of weakened governance is breakdown in planning of communally-managed rangeland 
landscapes. As a result, interventions responding to drought have frequently undermined drought management. 
The most obvious example is the installation of water infrastructure in drought or dry season grazing reserves, 
which have led to unplanned settlement and high, sustained pressure on pasture resources, leading to their 
degradation, which in many cases was done without detailed analysis of the hydrological systems and grazing 
patterns which have sometimes resulted in land degradation. Experiences with water infrastructure potential in 
drylands of the Horn of Africa show that its potential is limited by the scarcity and quality of its water. Detailed 
hydro-meteorological data is often inadequate or inaccessible for proper planning, making over-estimates likely. 
Around 60% of land in the ASALs is regarded as community land. Devolution is relatively new and it offers an 
opportunity to strengthen local governance, but this will not happen on its own. Past laws, over many decades, 
have eroded customary authority while the new Land Act has not been implemented and capacities are weak to 
secure natural resources. As a result, critical communal resources that underpin adaptation will continue to be 
eroded.

=== PAGE 19 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 76 
 
C 
Land use planning in these areas can be complex as land tends to be used communally and seasonally by the 
multiple actors for multiple uses. County spatial plans were expected to commence by July 2015 but very few 
county-wide planning processes have yet to take place, due to cost and capacity, and very little land use 
planning guidance has been provided to counties so far; with that which has been developed lacking a 
participatory focus.  
Through devolution in Kenya there are opportunities for more locally appropriate and integrated planning, but 
this has yet to fully be realised at county level. Once communities have articulated their visions and plans for 
land use—having been impartially informed of the potential and alternative uses—other levels of governments 
can then present their land use preferences in order that negotiations and agreements can ensue.  Local 
participatory developed plans will need to be integrated with and support government planning processes, rather 
than running in parallel or conflicting with them. The devolution process in Kenya not only provides an 
opportunity for nested planning processes at different levels but also makes it a necessity. This would 
strengthen the opportunity for communities to have better land management and authority over resources in the 
devolution scenario. 
A further consequence of drought, which is exacerbated by climate change, is that actors have become locked 
into humanitarian response, at the expense of overall economic development. As a result, penetration of 
markets and associated infrastructure into ASAL areas is low. Most people in the ASALs struggle to access 
finance and investment and as a result value chains are poorly developed. There has been some progress in 
recent years in marketing of livestock, but investment in other commodities - both livestock and non-livestock 
goods and services - remains very low. 
 
C.2.1.2. Climate impacts problem statement: 
Climate change is increasing the frequency and severity of drought events in Kenya’s ASALs while 
contributing, directly and indirectly, to degrading the natural resources on which ASAL communities 
depend for adaptation. 
Pastoralism is an adaptation to the natural conditions of ASALs, including high climate variability and aridity. 
Climate change affects pastoralism by exacerbating these natural conditions beyond the capacity of traditional 
mechanisms to manage them. Traditional patterns of mobility are proving inadequate as key resource areas are 
degraded through over-use (usually through prolonged grazing), or lost to other uses, and pastoralists are forced 
to migrate to new areas. Changing climate patterns are also modifying the rangeland landscape, contributing to 
localized land degradation and affecting the balance between pasture resources and water sources, particularly 
in the key drought reserve areas. 
Land degradation is driven by climate change as well as a host of other factors (e.g. economic and demographic 
drivers). Land degradation reduces capacity for climate change adaptation by undermining established strategies, 
reducing overall rangeland productivity, and disrupting hydrology and water availability. A common symptom of 
land degradation in the rangelands is reduction in vegetation, and particularly grasses. This reduces the available 
livestock fodder, increases the rate of surface run-off, and increases soil crusts, which leads to lower infiltration of 
water during the rains. A further consequences of land degradation is reduction in soil organic carbon, which not 
only reduces this contributes of rangelands to climate change mitigation, but also further reduces the capacity of 
the soil to store moisture. Climate change therefore not only contributes to meteorological drought (through 
periodically low rainfall) but also hydrological drought (as a result of degrading water cycles). 
In the absence of land use planning in rangeland landscapes, land use change is uncontrolled and pastoralist 
drop-outs (those who lose their livestock herds during drought for example) as well as people relocating from other 
areas pursue alternative land uses that directly compete against pastoralism. This undermines pastoral coping 
strategies and increases the risk of resource-based conflict. At the same time, the traditional institutions that 
mediate in natural resource conflicts are coming under strain as a result of many social and economic factors, 
including changing competition for land and water and the emergence of new state institutions with parallel or 
overlapping mandates. Climate change influences these factors by changing the patterns of resource use and 
access and affecting the seasonality of resource use. Competition and conflict over resources among pastoralists 
and farmers in traditional dry-season grazing areas further reduce the adaptive capacity of vulnerable pastoral 
communities, especially women and youth. 
Pastoralists manage lands according to locally devised rules designed to manage and conserve key resources 
such as pastures and water sources. Dry season grazing areas are a critical element of traditional land 
management systems in many pastoralist communities, providing a ‘grass reservoir’ for livestock to consume 
during the long dry season when forage and water for livestock invariably become scarce. Wet season pastures 
usually lack permanent water, while dry season pastures tend to have permanent water nearby or retain vegetation 
that livestock can access even during severe droughts. Pastures designated for use by ‘home herds’ (i.e. milking 
animals, young, weak or infirm livestock) are close to permanent settlements and sources of water, and are

=== PAGE 20 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 76 
 
C 
8 See Feasibility Study Section 4 for details 
sometimes allocated to individual households rather than being managed at the community level. In the dry season 
livestock from the surrounding areas converge to survive during the dry months. 
However, these traditional pastoral production systems are under threat from increasingly erratic rainfall, drying 
grasslands, rapid population growth, restrictions on household and herd mobility, pastoralists becoming more 
sedentary, and privatization of land. Traditional pastoral economics are shifting to more commercial approaches 
that incorporate newer links among globalization, local markets, migration and economic opportunities--creating 
new dynamics in livestock value chains. Market relationships are an integral part of today’s pastoral livelihoods, 
and are reshaping the practices of pastoralism in Kenya today. 
Kenya’s ASALs have historically received below average public investment and as a result they suffer from many 
basic development challenges. This has resulted in wide spread investment, capacity and institutional gaps that 
undermine climate change adaptation. Climate change adaptation and resilience projects8 include StARCK+, 
Building Drought Resilience, Regional pastoral Livelihoods Resilience Project, Accelerated Value Chain 
Development Program, which are supported by a number of development partners (Austrian Development 
Agency, DFID, World Bank, IUCN, ILRI, IIED). These projects are implemented in partnership with Government 
and local NGOs/CBOs in Garissa, Wajir, Isiolo, Kitui, Makueni, Mandera, Marsabit, Samburu, Tana River and 
Kajiado Counties. None of these projects addresses rangeland landscape restoration and management as the 
basis for climate change adaptation. However, the projects have piloted a number of good practices that will be 
scaled up through the GCF investment, including participatory planning and climate change adaptation planning 
at the community level. These projects provide a platform on which to build, but by failing to address rangeland 
landscape management they fail to address the underlying natural resource constraint that affects resilient 
rangeland livelihoods. 
Projects on water resource development and catchment management, and sanitation are being supported by 
multiple donors (Governments of Sweden and Finland, EU, GIZ, Bill and Malinda Gates Foundation, DANIDA, 
IFAD, CARE) in collaboration with Ministry of Water and Sanitation, Water Sector Trust Fund, Water Resources 
Authority, and communities in the counties of Tharaka Nithi, Meru, Mandera, Wajir, Tana River and Isiolo. These 
projects present a major risk due to the lack of coordination with rangeland management and restoration. While 
water resources are urgently needed in many locations, they are also a leading driver of rangeland degradation. 
Counties currently lack the information and the processes through which water resources can be safely developed 
in order to enhance, rather than erode, rangeland productivity. 
The Government also supports capacity building for counties on agricultural sector coordination, resilience and 
value chain development through Agricultural Sector Development Programme (ASDSP) in collaboration with the 
bilateral donor SIDA. While this program offers opportunities for investment in more resilient rangeland 
management, the absence of adequate planning in agriculture sector development, particularly in relation to 
rangelands, creates the opportunity for maladaptation. A clear example is the disproportionate investment in crop 
production on localized high-value drought reserve pastures, which takes critical drought resources away from 
pastoralists. 
Another baseline initiative is Conservation International’s (CI) Accelerator Fund, which provides targeted capital 
and other resources needed to enhance the ‘investment readiness’ of conservation enterprises. The roadmap 
for this component features:  
1) Access by ASAL pastoralist entrepreneurs to CI’s established Kenya-wide USD 13 million Conservation 
Accelerator Fund. This pre-investment facility plans to support between 50 and 70 investments of roughly 
USD 50k - 500k throughout Kenya, work to unlock larger investor potential by creating bankable small 
businesses in Kenya, and restore or avoid emissions on hundreds to thousands of hectares per 
investment via landscape conservation or restoration.  
2) In addition, CI manages an Incubation Fund Facility of USD 5 million that serves as a business 
incubation or microfinance mechanism, to provide about 200-450 grants to community-based small 
businesses, like a women-managed seedbank project in Chyulu Hills. Lastly,  
3) CI will provide strategic advice, capacity building, value-chain investment plan and climate-related market 
support to influence the livestock and other relevant sectors. 
Despite the existing initiatives, the principle barriers that constrain the transition to greater climate change 
resilience in the ASALs, and thereby ending drought emergencies, are as follows:

=== PAGE 21 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 76 
 
C 
1. Information and capacity gaps limit the options of critical stakeholders for climate change adaptation (i.e. 
lack of access to, and availability of, data on climate change impacts and its implications; weak capacity to 
act on the information that is available; weak capacity to influence rangeland planning across different 
sectors).  
2. Land users have for many years lacked security of governance to implement sustainable rangeland 
management (i.e. low and ineffective participation of land users in decision-making; low capacity of local 
institutions to coordinate communal rangeland management; absence of mechanisms for coordinated 
planning and management of actions within rangeland landscapes).  With the 2010 Kenya Constitution the 
2012 Land Act and the 2016 Communities Land Act, the situation is improving and providing opportunities to 
improve land tenure. 
3. Rangeland management planning is not cognizant of future climate change scenarios (i.e. low access to, 
and capacity to use, up to date information; absence of mechanisms and protocols for systematically 
integrating climate change data in planning). 
4. Critical resources in rangeland landscapes are degraded and no longer support risk management (e.g. 
seasonal pastures converted to other lands uses, pastures degraded through permanent/extended 
occupation and fencing, bush encroachment due to grazing mismanagement).   In some cases the loss of 
rangeland resources is permanent but in other cases such as land degradation it is reversible.  In the case 
of protected areas it is possible to negotiate access to pasture resources during drought events. 
5. Investments in rangelands are insufficient and inappropriate to support adaptation (i.e. large-scale measures 
for large scale regeneration; technical options to assist natural regeneration; suitable alternative land use 
practices; effective management of land and water to mitigate drought). 
6. Poor access to markets and financial services (i.e. low access to markets for livestock products and non-
livestock products; low availability of finance for local enterprises; low awareness of positive externalities 
and ecosystem services form rangelands).  While these barriers can be challenging especially communities 
that are remote from consumers of livestock products there are actions that can be taken to help access 
markets and to support access of finance.  
Existing projects in the counterfactual scenario (i.e. no GCF project) focus on agricultural development without 
considering the consequences of climate change, or the impact of crop sector development on pastoralist 
adaptation to climate change. However, climate change, with increased frequency of drought, strongly threatens 
the potential for sustainable development outcomes. GCF support is therefore needed to make investments in 
socio-economic development more resilient to climate change. 
 
C.2.2. Alternative Scenario Proposed by this Project  
The theory of change (see Figure 6) is designed to address the barriers listed in the preceding sub-section, in line 
with Kenya’s institutional arrangements at national and county levels. The project will contribute to ensuring 
adaptation and resilience of socio-economic development in the ASALs of Kenya to current and future climate 
change. Sustainable development will be centered on landscape-scale management of rangelands that is 
informed by improved climate change impact analysis. Landscape management will be consistent with the vast 
area these lands occupy and the high numbers of pastoralists who manage them communally, and who may have 
periodic (seasonal or occasional) resource rights. Institutions will be strengthened to govern rangeland resources 
at the community and inter-community level and at the level of county governments. Counties will develop the 
mechanisms to coordinate management of transboundary rangelands, which often include critical grazing 
reserves. 
In the alternative scenario delivered through the project, improved information and capacities combined with 
stronger institutions will enable rangeland users to adapt more effectively to climate change. They will allow both 
better decision-making and better implementation of decisions as a result of stronger participation and 
accountability. Increased access to markets, through stronger value chains and improved access to finance, will 
increase the opportunities for livelihood adaptation, will raise incomes and asset ownership amongst pastoralist 
communities, and will enable restoration activities. Restoration of rangeland landscapes will increase overall 
productivity and reduce climate risks by improving the overall supply of fodder, water and other critical productive 
inputs. The outcomes will include increased food and water security and greater income security. These outcomes 
contribute together to overall drought resilience. 
Improved monitoring of rangeland health combined with improved analysis of climate change will enable 
communities and county governments to prioritize and implement appropriate restoration measures. This will 
include low-cost measures that are viable for vegetation recovery on a large scale, such as improved planning of 
herd movements for natural regeneration. 
Improved planning will also guide interventions in the water sector, including siting of strategic and low-yield water 
resources that are commensurate with the associated pasture availability. Restoration of rangeland vegetation will

=== PAGE 22 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 76 
 
C 
increase infiltration rates and will contribute to reducing hydrological drought, and will lessen the impacts of 
climate-change-induced drought events. 
Restored rangelands will improve overall livestock productivity (e.g. meat and milk yield) and reduce losses during 
drought. They will additionally provide alternative income sources through harvesting of natural products, such as 
gums, fruits and medicinal plants. Management of rangelands will be oriented towards protecting the multiple 
ecosystem services that benefit society, including both livestock and non-livestock commodities. Ecosystem 
service externalities that are enjoyed outside the rangelands, such as downstream water supply or protection of 
wildlife, will be evaluated for further compensation, for example in the form of payments for ecosystem services. 
Rangeland users will enjoy better access to markets and market information, increasing revenues from production 
and stability of incomes, and improving terms of trade. Value chains will be developed for a wider range of 
products, supporting diversification of livelihoods in-line with sustainable rangelands management. Planning for 
non-livestock value chains will be better informed of, and responsive to, the potential trade-offs between 
pastoralism and other land uses, such as crop production. The project does not prioritize investment in tourism-
related activities, but activities under income generation could be used to respond to emerging opportunities, 
recognizing the importance of this sector to the Kenyan economy, and the pivotal role played by ASAL 
communities in conserving the country’s wildlife. 
The alternative scenario envisages transformative, sustainable and inclusive investment in value chains to meet 
local and global market demands. This can contribute to optimizing major infrastructure development opportunities 
such as the economic growth corridors planned in Kenya, to help open up currently remote area to other 
commercial enterprises. Social, inclusion, protection and empowerment are strengthened to enable pastoralists 
and farmers, and especially the more vulnerable, to invest and modify their practices to improve their adaptive 
capacity. 
 
 Figure 4: Restoration (right) proximate to priority landscape, Chyulu Hills

=== PAGE 23 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 76 
 
C 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
Target landscapes 
In rangeland management, the term “landscape” describes vast areas of nature that are managed by people, 
and therefore shaped by human activities. A landscape approach is adapted to the scale of human 
management, which in the case of Kenya’s ASALs may be areas of tens of thousands of square kilometers, in 
which tens of thousands of individuals may have different resource rights and responsibilities. The complexity of 
these systems defies simplistic management solutions or the imposition of easily measurable boundaries, and 
the landscape approach is a way of managing that complexity. 
Within Kenya’s ASALs, dry season grazing zones create islands of resources that are seasonally indispensable. 
These zones determine land management throughout the whole landscape and they play a particularly 
important role during drought, as discussed above [check].  The primary criteria for the selection of priority 
landscapes was, therefore, that they include an important dry season grazing areas. 
 
Figure 5a Concept for the selection of priority landscapes focused on a dry season grazing area. 
Extensive consultation was required to determine the landscapes for intervention in this project.  Originally 
seven such landscapes were identified, and finally two were selected with one being a cluster of two interlinked 
landscapes a primary site and a satellite site. The two target landscapes are major dry season grazing zones, 
one in semi-arid southern Kenya and the second in the Northern arid lands. 
The landscapes selected met the following criteria: 
• 
Are centred on large-scale drought reserves and dry season grazing areas cutting across county 
boundaries,  
o 
Rationale: Concept as per Figure 5a. These areas host seasonal influxes of livestock that 
are widely disbursed during the wet season converge on the dry season grazing area and 
numbers can build during droughts to reach emergency proportions.  In the last 50 years the 
dry season reserves have also been expansion areas for subsistence crop agriculture and 
portions of them have been incorporated into protected areas, both phenomenon creating 
conflict with pastoralists.  The effective management of dry season gazing areas (including 
those that act as drought reserves) will provide a substantial input into reducing the level of 
emergency around drought. 
 
• 
Retain traditional land management systems that are still functioning, at least partially, 
o 
Rationale: Traditional land management systems and institutions had mechanisms to 
address drought, manage pasture and resolve conflicts around inter community competition 
for pasture resources.  The residual existence of these systems in communities has been 
demonstrated to be a foundation and baseline building block for improved governance in 
situations of new county governance structures.  For example the Dedha (Elders) Council,

=== PAGE 24 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 76 
 
C 
and Abagarega (Water Point Control Elders) of the Borana communities in Isiolo have been 
shown to improve drought outcomes in the Waso Rangelands. 
• 
Are experiencing conflict levels (as identified by the key informants in stakeholder consultations) 
which are manageable and represent interactions with agro-pastoralists or crop farmers,  
o 
Rationale: Increasing frequency and severity of drought as a result of climate change 
coupled with increasing, human and livestock populations, and reduction of livestock 
rangelands due to competing land-use (crop agriculture and protected areas), has led to 
conflict between communities and other land users.  The sites have been selected so the 
level of conflict is considered manageable and conflict resolution mechanisms promoted by 
the project will be practiced. 
• 
Represent cross-county interactions,  
o 
Rationale: The current devolution in Kenya has reached a point where the counties are 
increasingly improving management within county boundaries.  Inter-county coordination is 
less well developed but is emerging.  The dry season grazing areas largely because they 
represented historically barriers to community settlement and so partially implicated in the 
original setting of county boundaries (then called districts) 
• 
Have associated satellite wet season grazing areas, so that the integrated governance and 
restoration of wet season grazing can also be incorporated,  
o 
Rationale: The priority landscapes are primarily dry season grazing areas but the project 
theory of change implies the parallel restoration activities in wet season grazing areas.  The 
better managed the wet season grazing areas the less pressure there will be on the dry 
season grazing areas and drought reserves.  These areas have a mosaic of land uses 
including some wet-season grazing areas so the restoration of wet season rangelands can 
be demonstrated in the same landscape. 
• 
Have potential livestock value chains linked to external domestic and export markets 
o 
Rationale: Improved range management will improve livestock productivity and the 
presence of livestock markets will help to demonstrate the benefits through livestock 
revenues.  
In addition to the criteria listed, the two target landscapes are selected to represent the two major climate 
zones of the ASALs: semi-arid (Chyulus) and arid (Sabarwawa/ Mid Tana). The Arid landscape also includes 
patches of semi-arid land, reflecting its location on the climate gradient between the drylands and the higher 
altitude humid lands of central Kenya.  
Both landscapes also present opportunities for mitigating long-standing land-use conflicts.  As mentioned a 
proportion of the dry season grazing areas have been changed into different land uses – subsistence agriculture 
and protected areas.  Traditionally there was a level of reciprocity between pastoralist and crop farmers.  The crop 
farmers bought livestock from the pastoralists and allowed grazing on stovers (crop residues), while the livestock 
manured the crop fields.  Systems to rebuild reciprocity will be examined.  Wildlife has co-existed with livestock 
within in ecosystems, but the creation of protected areas has excluded livestock from traditional grazing areas, 
yet wildlife range beyond the park causing resentment.   The presence of protected areas in the dry season grazing 
areas presents an opportunity to work with park authorities and communities to find mechanisms to reduce the 
land use conflicts. 
A description of each site is presented in the table below. 
Table 1: Description of the selected landscapes (IUCN 2017) 
Priority 
landscapes 
Counties 
Land-use dynamics 
Rationale for selection 
Sabarwawa/ 
Mid Tana River 
(dry season 
reserve for arid 
lands of 
northern 
Kenya)  
Samburu, 
Marsabit, 
Isiolo, Wajir, 
Garissa, Tana 
River, Meru, 
Tharaka Nithi 
and Kitui 
Used for production of all species: 
camel, cattle and small stock of 
which the latter is particualrly 
important 
Connects pastoralists and agro-
pastoralists along the major 
watershed of River Tana. Houses 
Meru and Kora parks, Rahole 
Game Reserve and Bisan Adhi 
Conservancy 
Mid Tana River is a transition between the 
arid lowlands and the humid highlands of 
Mount Kenya,  It is predomintly arid but has 
a semi-arid transition.  
The linked satelite landscape to the north; 
Sabawarwa has no crop interface is and the 
landscape is managed under community 
conservancy management model. Connects 
4 counties as dry-season grazing area. 
Convergence zone; one of best -managed 
grazing reserves. Opportunity for joint 
county planning and investment. 
Livelihood systems include crop production, 
irrigated agriculture, livestock production

=== PAGE 25 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 76 
 
C 
(camels, small stock and beef cattle) and 
wildlife conservation. Promotion of mutual 
partnership among diverse communities. 
Chyulu 
Hills (dry 
season reserve 
for semi-arid 
southern 
Kenya) 
Taita Taveta, 
Makueni, 
Kajiado 
Houses Chyulu National Park and 
Chyulu Forest Reserve. Part of 
the wider Amboseli ecosystem. 
Acts as dry-season grazing 
reserve for pastoralists & agro-
pastoralists from the 3 counties. 
Wildlife / livestock disease 
interface. A water catchment.  
Water tower for the 3 counties and beyond. 
Surrounded by ranches, mixed farming, and 
pastoralist communities who keep cattle and 
Dorper Sheep for export and meat. 
Important source of beef for Nairobi and 
Mobassa. 
Home to diverse wildlife. 
 
The target landscapes are at the junction of multiple counties and the dry season grazing areas are managed 
communally by herders from multiple ethnic groups and locations. The landscape in the arid zone includes 
both Sabarwawa and / Mid Tana River. Although these two zones are non-contiguous, they both provide 
seasonal grazing resources for the neighboring counties and for counties further to the north, as well as 
regions in southern Ethiopia. The Chyulu Hills landscape in the semi-arid zone provides a dry season reserve 
for livestock keepers from 3 adjacent counties. 
The two locations selected offer a cross-section of pastoral ASALs with populations vulnerable to climate 
change potential impacts. Approximately 62% of the population of the two landscapes live in what is termed 
“absolute poverty” (Feasibility Study, from County Integrated Development Plans 2013-2017). Details of the 
landscapes are tabulated below: 
Table 2: Details of target landscapes (IUCN 2017) 
Dry season 
landscape 
Population  
Absolute poverty 
Area the target 
landscape (ha) 
Estimated area 
of degraded land 
in target 
landscape (ha) 
Sabarwawa/ 
Mid Tana River 
400,048 
55% 
 1,935,782  
888,200 
Chyulu Hills  
220,627 
57% 
 515,737  
128,900 
Total  
620,675 
56% 
2,451,519 
1,017,100 
 
For each target landscape a mapping exercise was used to identify the landscape boundaries, although this is 
an imprecise exercise due to the nature of the terrain. Based on this exercise, counties and wards that fell into 
the each landscape were identified. This provided the basis for estimating the landscape population. Population 
data is taken from the County Integrated Development Plans (2013-2017), as reported in the feasibility study. 
Poverty estimates, from the same source, are based on 2012 data. 
Data on land degradation in each county or ward was unavailable, so national estimates were used. 
Government of Kenya data estimates an average land degradation of 25% in semi-arid areas and 62% in arid 
areas. Using these estimates, the land degradation in each landscape was estimated (note that the Mid 
Tana/Sabarwawa landscape includes both arid and semi-arid counties).

=== PAGE 26 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 76 
 
C 
 
Figure 5: Location of the project landscapes and coordination hubs

=== PAGE 27 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 76 
 
C 
 
 
Figure 6: Maps of target landscapes and counties/wards 
 
Objective and components in response to identified barriers 
The GCF Fund-level impact objectives for this project are improved resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem 
services (A4.0) and increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities 
and regions (A1.0). The expected outcomes are strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate 
risks (A7.0); strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate responsive planning and development 
(A5.0) and strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes (A8.0). 
The overall objective of the project is to reduce the cost of climate change induced drought on Kenya’s 
national economy by increasing resilience of the livestock and other land use sectors in restored and 
effectively governed rangeland ecosystems. 
The objective will be delivered through three components, as outlined in Section H:  
• 
Climate change adapted planning for drought resilience; 
• 
Restoration of rangeland landscapes for ecosystem based adaptation; 
• 
Climate change resilient ecosystem management for investments. 
These 3 components respond to the priorities raised during consultation with partners and key stakeholders. The 
components will support sustainable progress in the main domains of interest: sustainable pastoralism, 
improved water management in anticipation of droughts, and enhanced value-chain production and markets for 
livestock and other products.  The components will be implemented in parallel to each other.

=== PAGE 28 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 76 
 
C 
The key to ecosystem based adaptation in Kenya’s ASALs is to adapt restoration and sustainable management 
approaches to the scale of rangeland management, which is largely carried out communally over thousands of 
square kilometers and may involve tens of thousands of people. EbA approaches also have to be developed to 
deal with the naturally high levels of climate uncertainty, and their amplification as a result of climate change. 
EbA provides a unique opportunity to ensure that Kenya’s national commitment to “Ending Drought 
Emergencies” responds to anticipated climate change as well as other ongoing changes that affect the ASALs.  
The project builds on approaches that have been piloted in Kenya but which have not yet gone to scale. It takes 
a landscape approach to restoration, recognising that mismanagement of zones within a rangeland landscape 
can have far-reaching impacts due to the high degree of interconnectedness. It plays a vital role in addressing 
the two-way relationship between climate change and land degradation, which together contribute to increased 
drought risk. In doing so the project will contribute to reducing the cost of climate change on Kenya’s national 
economy and will generate lessons that will inform the development of similar initiatives in many countries in 
Sub Saharan Africa. 
Component 1: Climate change adapted planning for drought resilience  
Component 1 will deliver Output 1: “Coordinated transboundary rangeland management decisions are 
strengthened by enhanced climate change analysis and participatory community and county planning”. The 
component contributes to addressing the barriers of weak capabilities and inadequate governance institutions. 
Component 1 consists of 5 activities: 
o 
Enhance information systems to inform climate change sensitive landscape planning and 
vulnerability/ risk management 
o 
Strengthen community institutions to coordinate community planning and to inform and 
represent stakeholders in landscape planning 
o 
Develop county rangeland restoration plans that build on local community plans combined 
with enhanced climate change data 
o 
Establish functioning landscape management mechanisms in participating counties for 
climate change sensitive and accountable decision-making 
o 
Establish participatory monitoring, evaluation and learning systems to support adaptive 
management 
Component 1 will be led by the National Drought Management Authority to strengthen climate change analysis 
and vulnerability analysis (vulnerability assessment approaches) and to integrate this with improved assessment 
of rangeland landscape health status (participatory rangeland assessments). Component 1 will build on 
established information systems to incorporate improved analysis of climate change scenarios, projections and 
impacts (including early warning systems, down-scaled climate data, biophysical (e.g. degradation) and social 
data). This improved analysis will feed into mechanisms for cross-county landscape planning (landscape forums 
and county plans). Component 1 also strengthens community institutions for participatory planning and improved 
representation in decision making processes, which will also feed into these mechanisms for landscape 
coordination (inter-sectoral community level land-use plans based on sub-catchment management). Component 
1 provides capacity building for local institutions to implement climate-sensitive landscape management 
Component 1 will also establish monitoring, evaluation and learning systems to support adaptive management 
(using a range of tools and approaches). 
Component 2: Restoration of rangeland landscapes for ecosystem based adaptation 
Component 2 will be led by the Government of Kenya, through the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation – State 
Department of Livestock and will deliver Output 2: “Prioritized rangeland resources including water resources, 
are brought under restoration, safeguarded and sustainably managed for improved climate change resilience”. 
This primarily address the barriers of rangeland resource degradation and low investment in rangeland 
restoration, and to a lesser extent barrier around inadequate governance institutions.  Component 2 focuses on 
implementing restoration and sustainable management actions that are (i) prioritized by communities and (ii) 
informed by improved analysis, as delivered under Component 1. Component 2 consists of 5 activities: 
o 
Implement priority community-based rangeland restoration activities 
o 
Implement priority actions for integrated land/water management in catchments 
o 
Install community-validated strategic water sources for sustainable rangeland utilization 
o 
Assist communities to formulate bylaws and incorporate into county laws 
o 
Build capacity of local institutions to implement climate-sensitive landscape management 
Community-based rangeland restoration prioritizes natural regeneration of degraded rangelands through 
improved coordination and timing of herd movements (community grazing plans), as well as assisted natural 
regeneration, for example through reseeding (grass seed banks) and control of bush encroachment of invasive 
alien species (mechanical removal). Component 2 also supports integrated land/water management in

=== PAGE 29 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 76 
 
C 
catchments, recognizing that a critical element in drought management is to protect scarce water resources by 
improving infiltration, soil moisture retention, and recharge of aquifers (re-establishment of vegetation cover, soil 
conservation practices such as stone lines and earth bunds). Rangeland restoration will be supported by 
installation and rehabilitation of small-scale strategic water resources (sub-surface, sand-dams, water pans, 
limited duration bore holes e.g. closed during critical periods) adjusted to the seasonal availability of adjacent 
pastures as well as the complexities of use and management rights. 
A crucial element of Component 2 is to develop bylaws (through facilitated community planning) or other local 
resource management agreements that legitimize customary practices of resource sharing and regulation. 
Customary institutions have proven to be an effective way of ensuring sustainable management of communal 
resources, but they have come under strain due to a multitude of changes, including changing resource patterns 
as a result of climate change. Component 2 will develop bylaws and incorporate them into county laws in order 
to strengthen accountability and compliance over resource management as well as strengthening local 
institutions that will be supported to be compliant with current gender and youth representation norms. 
An important aspect of Component 2 is to strengthen the capacity of local institutions to implement climate-
sensitive landscape management. This includes improved access to, and capacity to use, information on climate 
change scenarios in relation to rangeland landscape resource use. It also includes developing skills to negotiate 
for appropriate use of natural resources within the wider rangeland landscape and as a viable component of the 
Kenyan economy at large. 
It is important to note here that components 1 and 2 are to be implemented in parallel and not consecutively.  
Nonetheless there are certain elements at the community level that may benefit, although not necessarily have 
to be, carried out in sequence, although this could have limitations.  For example the establishment of a 
women’s grass seed bank does require a communal decision on location.  That could be, but does not have to 
be decided as part of a community land-use plan.  Tying the women’s groups to the completion of the land-use 
plans may be counterproductive. Component 1 also contains the monitoring and evaluation.  It is likely to be an 
impediment to the project to require progress on one element before proceeding to another. 
Component 3: Climate change resilient ecosystem management for investments. 
Component 3 will deliver Output 3: “Public, private and community investments in natural resources”, addressing 
barriers related to insufficient investment in rangelands and poor access to markets and financial services.  
Component 3 will be led by Conservation International. Component 3 provides investment in priority value 
chains that have been validated by local communities through Component 1. The value chains will be supported 
by the restoration efforts. Restored and healthy landscapes will greatly improve rangeland health, and in turn the 
value chains that are dependent on them.   
o 
Provide climate resilient investment in priority value chains that have been validated by local 
communities 
o 
Provide grants to establish restoration enterprises created/led primarily by women’s groups  
o 
Establish financial incentive mechanisms for sustainable land management 
o 
Provide grants to community-based enterprises for ecosystem based adaptation that could 
create opportunities for investments in the value chains    
 
Priority value chains in the target landscapes include livestock value chains—for example meat and milk—as 
well as value chains for the secondary products of healthy rangeland ecosystems, such as gums and medicinal 
plants. These activities will increase incomes from natural resource management while also diversifying the 
sources of income, which contributes to mitigating risks associated with climate change. Workshops on value 
chains analysis will be used to validate the analysis and to engage value chain actors in the analytical process. 
These actors will be assisted to evaluate and the value chain analysis, assess the potential further development 
of the value chains, and identify investment opportunities that can catalyze their development. 
Component 3 will establish restoration enterprises, such as community grass seed multiplication units or fodder 
reserves. 
It will additionally develop the community-level autonomous Community Resilience Facilities, which operate per 
village and are a governance and financial mechanism to incentivize sustainable land management through 
community land use/restoration plans and by laws. Each community–owned and run facility is a revolving fund 
founded on a well-known village savings groups and is coupled with the participatory rangeland/catchment plans 
(Component 1) and bylaw development (Component 2).  The funds (typically $10-30) are community managed 
and given to community members according to their endorsement and household level compliance with the 
community-owned plan. The use of the fund is self-determined but can support the enterprises.  The grant to 
communities, from GCF funds, is used to establish and capitalize the solidarity revolving fund, and becomes a 
long-term and growing asset at village level, with the revolving funds delivery mechanism the most equitable and

=== PAGE 30 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 76 
 
C 
efficient mechanism to ensure all households benefit.  It is adaptation of a 25 year well-established and near 
universal system well-known at community level and the adapted model has been tried and tested and 
operational for over 5 years and now being used in 4 countries. 
Building on the participatory planning at community and landscape level (Output 1) and the value chain 
assessments (Activity 3.1) a larger scale grant mechanism will provide grants to community-based enterprises 
in, and associated with, the priority landscapes for supporting activities on sustainable land management and 
ecosystem restoration. These will include grants to community-based and climate change adaptation and 
restoration enterprises that could create opportunities for investments in grass, gums, resins, livestock and other 
value chains. Indicative grants might include: physical market infrastructure; equipment; cooling, processing, 
packaging; quality control equipment/ laboratory.  Constraints include: identifying ‘investment ready’ deals, 
raising risk-tolerant capital and securing technical and other resources needed to demonstrate performance and 
meet investor expectations. 
The model used will be additional to that developed under CI’s new kind of responsible investment vehicle to 
deploy climate funds to assist restoration and land management businesses to upgrade their infrastructure, 
improve operational capacity, obtain certification to increase business value and unlock further capital. The GCF 
investment will be complementary and additional to CI loans, as it will focus on the supporting and enabling 
environment for investments and increasing the investment’s resilience to climate change.  
More specifically, the arrangement between GCF funded grants and CI loans are as follows: 
• 
It will most commonly be the case that GCF funded grants alone are provided to early stage 
initiatives that require seed funding to develop the investment opportunity. These initiatives could be 
followed by a CI loan, should the business develop and become investable (from a CI perspective). 
• 
It is more likely that a CI investment follows a grant; rather than simultaneous investment.  
• 
The reporting function will provide information on the outcomes of each initiative leveraged through 
CI financing that has been leveraged through this project. 
The grant will benefit communities by creating economic stability and incentivizing restoration and sustainable 
management of natural resources. The grants criteria will include: 
• 
A viable business model 
• 
Potential for significant, measurable environmental and social impacts 
• 
Potential to unlock future follow-on investment at scale 
• 
Strong management capacity  
Grants will be in the size $10-250k depending on competitiveness, value added and capacity of the company. 
These will be used as climate-smart mechanisms to catalyze growth of community-based enterprises as well as 
the development of the value chain the landscape. 
The relationship between the activities linked to the objectives, outputs and outcomes are presented in the 
Feasibility Study in the Annexes. The linkages are summarized in Figure 7 below. 
Examples of grantees projects to be supported by this component are provided in Annex 12.

=== PAGE 31 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 76 
 
C 
 
Figure 7: A Summary of the Intervention Logic - Linkages among project components, outputs, outcomes, and Fund 
objectives

=== PAGE 32 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 76 
 
C 
C.4. Background Information on Project/Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
(a) The Government of Kenya, through the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation- State Department for 
Livestock (Component 2) 
The Government of Kenya (GoK), through the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI) has responsibility over 
the agricultural components, and thus ensuring sustainable land management in cultivated areas, grazing lands 
and through all aspects of the agricultural value chains. The MoAI also has direct links with the main land users, 
farmers who are decision makers affecting land use and its management. As such it offers an entry point for most 
of the interventions that promote SLM especially in the rural areas. 
The State Department for Livestock in the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation promotes, regulates and facilitates 
livestock production for socioeconomic development and industrialization. The State Department for Livestock is 
organized into three directorates, namely Veterinary Services; Livestock Policy, Research and Regulations; and 
Livestock Resources and Market Development. 
In Kenya, the Livestock Sub-Sector is informed by the Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS) and the 
National Livestock Policy (Republic of Kenya, 2012). The strategic objectives of the livestock sub-sector as 
encapsulated in the Agricultural Sector Development Strategy include increasing livestock productivity, increasing 
market access of livestock and the integration of development and management of rangeland. The State 
Department of Livestock implements this strategy through functions such as animal production, range 
management, livestock marketing, strengthening livestock extension services, apiculture and emerging livestock 
production, value addition and agribusiness. 
(b) National Drought Management Authority (Component 1) 
The National Drought Management Authority (NDMA) is a statutory body established under the NDMA Act 2016. 
The Act gives the NDMA the mandate to establish mechanisms which ensure drought does not result in 
emergencies, and that the impacts of climate change are sufficiently mitigated. NDMA is currently working in 23 
drought-prone ASAL counties using local offices for long-term planning and action, as well as coordination across 
Government and other stakeholders. The Adaptation (ADA) Consortium secretariat piloting the devolved climate 
finance mechanism is housed at the NDMA. 
(c) Conservation International (Component 3) 
Conservation International, one of the world’s largest conservation organizations, has been working in Kenya for 
20 years, and works with local partners in several of the project priority landscapes. CI aims to leverage the power 
of public, private and local stakeholder cooperation to achieve impact at a landscape scale. Its approach focuses 
on natural capital conservation, sustainable production, and improving governance and local buy-in in specific 
subnational jurisdiction recognition of the dual need to protect forests and catalyze a shift towards more 
sustainable agricultural production. CI is working in Chyulu Hills supporting a successful REDD+ project. CI also 
works with private companies to transform production and sourcing practices to be sustainable, and to achieve 
impact at scale. 
  
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
 
Not applicable: refer to feasibility study for details of markets for rangeland products and ecosystem services.

=== PAGE 33 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 76 
 
C 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
Besides the EIA required for activities: i) Community-based rangeland restoration activities; ii) Integrated 
land/water management in catchments; iii) Installation of community-validated strategic water sources for 
sustainable rangeland utilization and, iv) Development of sustainable value chains, no further licenses or permits 
are required for the implementation of the Project.   
As part of the country due diligence requirements in Kenya, CI engaged legal counsel on a number of item, 
including CI’s registration/licensing requirements. It was confirmed that no regulatory requirements will be 
needed by CI for the advancing of loans and grants under Component 3.  
C.7. Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
Governance structure of the project  
 
IUCN is the Accredited Entity for this project. IUCN will therefore be accountable to the GCF on the use of funds, 
the overall implementation on the ground and achievement of the project’s outcomes. Consequently, IUCN is 
responsible for providing strong technical oversight to this project and ensuring that all fiduciary rules, including 
procurement, to this project are compliant with IUCN and GCF standards. Similarly, the project is fully compliant 
with the IUCN environmental and social management system, which will be applied and monitored during the 
entire project lifetime. 
 
Principles:  
- 
Accredited Entity Fees related to the implementing function are dedicated to provide oversight to the 
project during implementation.  
 
The Accredited Entity function for this project will be undertaken by IUCN building on the expertise of its regional 
office for Eastern and Southern Africa based in Nairobi Kenya, thematic expertise on drylands management and 
general oversight from the global finance unit and the IUCN GEF & GCF Coordination Unit. 
 
As an Accredited Entity, IUCN’s responsibilities are the following:  
 
- 
Receiving, managing and disbursing GCF funds to the Project Management Unit (PMU) and project Executing 
Entities, ensuring that these disbursements are made as the project reaches successive milestones, showing 
steady progress in its execution. Any funds allocated to PMC will be retained and used by IUCN in its role for 
project management. The PMU will be housed by the MoAI; 
- 
Overseeing project implementation in accordance with the Project document and Annual Work Plans and 
Budgets, procurement plans, disbursement plans and agreements with co-financiers and each executing 
agency rules and procedures, which will involve regular review of the project’s progress that is delivered by 
the Project Management Unit; 
- 
Submitting financial and technical progress reports to the GCF for all Project funds received from the GCF 
based on the project progress reports that it clears from the submissions of the Project Management Unit, 
who in turn have carried out this monitoring and reporting exercise done annually in consultation with the 
executing entities of the project; 
- 
Carrying out annual supervision visits and a mid-term project review; 
- 
Entering into Subsidiary Agreements between IUCN and NDMA, MoAI-SDL and Conservation International 
who will be executing the different components of the project; 
- 
Managing the Landscape Coordination Hubs in each of the Landscapes; 
- 
Making direct disbursement of activity finances into the project landscapes, financial reporting; and  
- 
Providing technical guidance to ensure that the appropriate technical quality is applied to all Project 
activities.  
 
Funds flow mechanisms 
 
IUCN, as the project Accredited Entity, will request funds to be transferred from the GCF based on the Project 
Management Unit disbursement plan. All Executing Entities will prepare project disbursement requests to the 
Project Management Unit housed by MoAI and coordinated and managed by IUCN.  Each of these Executing 
Entities (MoAI, NDMA, and CI) will have a Subsidiary Agreement with IUCN as the AE.  
 
Executing Entity will enter into service agreements with service providers. 
 
Project funds flow will be as per the below diagram.  There will be three models of funds flow.  These will be 
channeled through a) Direct Disbursement at the landscape level by IUCN in its role as an Accredited Entity

=== PAGE 34 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 76 
 
C 
undertaking project management through the PMU.  IUCN will operate, from within offices hosted by relevant 
county governments’, three landscape coordination hubs.  The second channeling mechanism will be by b) 
Subsidiary Agreements to Executing Entities, (MoAI, NDMA, CI) responsible for delivering each of the three 
components, which will work with service providers at the activity level.  All these institutions have already 
been assessed and screened for financial and technical capacity.  Once the project is approved, contractual 
arrangements with these institutions will be developed, and tailored to the level of risk (e.g. size and duration 
of advance).  The third channel for funds will be c) service agreements to service providers, which will be 
selected on competitive basis based on EE procurement policy and under the supervision of Executing 
Entities.  Some service providers have already been identified throughout the project preparation process, 
and these service providers will be hired through an exception for competition. These service providers 
include the following: i) Justdiggit will provide technical support to local-level restoration of degraded spots in 
the selected landscapes, ii) Northern Rangelands Trust (NRT) will technically support local communities in 
piloting rangeland management techniques and in developing priority value chains, iii) Masaai Wilderness 
Conservation Trust (MWCT) will technically support development of restoration enterprises including 
establishment of grass seed banks and support to participatory rangeland planning in southern rangelands, 
iv) Kenya Forestry Research Institute (KEFRI) will offer technical knowledge and requisite expertise to 
establish gums and resins enterprises in different areas, v) Water Resources Authority (WRA) will facilitate 
actions on watershed management and restoration, while vi) Kenya Water Towers Agency (KWTA) will bring 
expertise and approaches to restoration of key water towers in selected landscapes, and vii) The World 
Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF) will deliver technical tools, approaches and processes essential to community 
and county-level planning for land restoration.  
 
Twende – Funds flow diagram 
 
Project Steering Committee 
 
A project steering committee (PSC) will be established to provide strategic-level project guidance, technical 
and policy advice to the Project Management Unit.  The PSC will meet twice per year and ad-hoc when 
needed. Meetings of the PSC will be convened by the Chief of Party who heads the Project Management 
Unit.  
 
The Project Steering Committee will review and advise on annual work plans and budgets submitted by the 
Project Management Unit. The Project Steering Committee is responsible for making recommendations to 
strengthen project execution and the achievement of results targeted. Project Steering Committee 
recommendations will be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure management for development 
results, best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective competition. 
 
The Project Steering Committee   will also monitor progress at the end of each agreed period based on 
annual project reports that the Project Management Unit submits to the PSC. The Steering Committee is

=== PAGE 35 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 76 
 
C 
consulted on the planning of evaluations, and will receive the outputs from, periodic evaluations. It will also 
be informed of the outcomes of annual supervision visits and mid-term reviews. 
 
The PSC will be composed as follows: 
- 
Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (Chair) 
- 
Regional Director IUCN 
- 
Nationally Designated Authority of Kenya 
- 
Directors from relevant State Department for Livestock and CEO NDMA. 
- 
CEO Council of Governors 
- 
Representatives from participating counties and the ASAL NGO Consortium. 
 
The duties of the PSC will include (but are not limited to): 
1. Provide oversight of the Project Management Unit (PMU); 
2. Consider and recommend approval of annual and semi-annual work plans and budgets.  
3. Monitor progress through the review of progress reports by PMU at the end of each agreed project period 
(semester).  
4. Consulted on Terms of Reference [for senior staff and major subcontracts]. 
5. Receive the outputs from, periodic evaluations and outcomes of annual supervisory and midterm reviews.  
6. Approve annual reports by Project Management Unit.  
 
The PSC is responsible to i) make strategic orientation decisions ii) support resource mobilization iii) facilitate 
integration of the results of Programme into policy processes and iv) consolidate the annual work plans, 
budgets and reports. 
 
Project Management Unit 
The project will establish a Project Management Unit (PMU), coordinated and managed by IUCN in partnership 
with and housed by the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI). 
The PMU will be responsible for the coordination of all project activities funded by the project and undertaken by 
the executing entities on the ground. The PMU comprised of technical experts will be constituted and specifically 
perform the following functions: 
 
1. Consolidate the annual work plans submitted by the executing entities. 
2. Responsible for all fiduciary matters, including financial management, procurement and project 
disbursements.  
3. Ensure coordinated delivery of the agreed projects outputs and activities through the coordination of all 
partners, stakeholders and suppliers involved in project delivery.  
4. Overall monitoring, evaluation, learning and application of knowledge products with the support of relevant 
experts involved in the project delivery.  
5. Ensure that the safeguards framework is used throughout the project and raise any potential safeguards 
violations. 
6. Ensure operational staff and supervise their work programs. 
 
Given the geographic distribution of the project, the PMU will work with beneficiaries through three landscapes 
coordination hubs in Isiolo, Garissa and Kibwezi Towns.  
The PMU will be composed as follows:  
- 
1 Chief of Party, responsible for overall coordination and management 
- 
2 Landscape Coordinators 
- 
3 Programme Officers

=== PAGE 36 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 76 
 
C 
- 
1 Senior Finance Officer 
- 
1 Programme Administrator 
- 
1 Driver 
All Members of the PMU will be recruited under IUCN terms and conditions. They will report the Chief of Party, 
who will report to the IUCN Regional Director.   
 
The project activities will be coordinated through three landscape coordination hubs.  The landscape 
coordinators will ensure the smooth running of the project across the different institutions including the EEs, 
county governments, consultants, service providers and other partners, as well a coordinated planning and 
action across landscape stakeholders.  As much of the activities is expected to be financed directly by the 
Landscape Coordination Hubs, the Landscape Coordinators will play a crucial role.  They will be one of the 
signatories on the landscape hub bank accounts and be responsible for financial probity of activities.  They will 
monitor and maintain technical competency and quality and play an important role in the monitoring, evaluation 
and reporting activities at the landscape level. 
 
IUCN will have overall responsibility for ensuring that the ESMF is implemented.  Each EE will need to ensure 
that the work that it does follows the ESMF guidelines and any work is factored in. One of the critical areas for 
ESMF compliance will be the participatory process and FPIC work. 
 
NEMA will review and inspect ESIA reports for those activities that fall within the full environmental assessment 
threshold. 
 
Executing Entities 
Executing Entities are selected for the execution of the three project components and are therefore accountable 
for the delivery of the associated outputs. The project executing entities are:  
- 
The Government of Kenya, through the State Department for Livestock, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Irrigation (Directorate of Rangelands)  
- 
the National Drought Management Agency (NDMA)  
- 
Conservation International 
 
Chart showing which activities that service providers will support through invited sub-contracts under the 
procurement and supervision of relevant EEs.  All other activities will be delivered by EEs. 
Output 
Activity 
Service 
providers   
support 
Output 1: Coordinated 
transboundary rangeland 
management decisions are 
strengthened by enhanced climate 
change analysis and  participatory 
community and county planning:  
Executing Entity: NDMA 
 
Activity 1.1 Enhance information systems to 
inform climate change sensitive landscape 
planning and vulnerability/ risk management 
ICRAF 
Output 2: Prioritized rangeland 
resources including water 
resources, are brought under 
restoration, safeguarded and 
sustainably managed for improved 
climate change resilience 
Executing Entity: MoAI 
Activity 2.1 Implement priority community-based 
rangeland restoration activities 
ICRAF, KWTA 
Activity 2.2 Implement priority actions for 
integrated land/water management in 
catchments 
Justdiggit, NRT. 
MWCT, WRA 
Output 3: Public, private and 
community investments in natural 
resources   
Activity 3.1 Climate resilient Investment in 
priority value chains that have been validated by 
local communities  
Justdiggit, NRT, 
MWCT, KEFRI

=== PAGE 37 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 76 
 
C 
Executing Entity: CI  
Activity 3.2 Provide grants to establish 
restoration enterprises created/led primarily by 
women’s groups 
Justdiggit 
Activity 3.4 Provide grants to community-based 
enterprises  for ecosystem based adaptation 
that could create opportunities for investments 
in the value chains  
Justdiggit, 
KEFRI,  
 
Financial and fiduciary management 
 
An implementing agreement will be signed between IUCN and the Chair of the Project Steering Committee 
representing the Government of Kenya through the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (Executing Entity of the 
project) to regulate relationships between IUCN and the PMU for the implementation of this project.  
 
Funds will be transferred to IUCN according to the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) related to this project. 
IUCN will retain any of the funds allocated to PMC to directly undertake project management. IUCN 
Headquarters Global Finance Unit will manage funds disbursements to the Project Management Unit based on 
semi-annual work plans agreed by IUCN ESARO supervision team. Funds will be hosted in a bank account 
dedicated to the project.  
 
Funds flow models 
• 
Subsidiary Agreement with specific executing entities that have passed due diligence for robust finance 
and administration systems (named above) 
• 
To contractors following a competitive process 
• 
Direct funds disbursement via a bank account established at each Landscape Coordination Hub locality 
 
PMU is also responsible for the accounting and fiduciary management of all funds disbursed. The PMU will 
adopt IUCN’s accounting systems and will be audited independently (auditors selected through a competitive 
bidding process where TORs are approved by IUCN Global Finance Unit) on a yearly basis.  
 
Project locations 
 
Landscape Coordination Hubs 
The coordination and delivery of activities in each of the landscapes and the counties included within these 
counties will be actively facilitated by a ‘Landscape Coordination Hub’.  The hubs will be hosted by one of the 
county governments and housed in government offices.   
Location 
Landscape served 
Covering counties 
A. Garissa Town 
1a   Mid Tana River 
Garissa, Tana River, Kitui, Tharka Nithi, 
Meru, Isiolo 
B. Isiolo Town  
1b  Sabarwawa 
Isiolo, Samburu, Marsabit 
C. Kibwezi Town 
2. Chyulu 
Makueni, Kajiado, Taita-Taveta

=== PAGE 38 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 76 
 
C 
 
 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable in section I (Annexes). The table below is for 
illustrative purposes. If the table format below is used, please refer to the activities as numbered in Section H. In 
the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be completed. 
 
A project timetable is included in Annex 8.

=== PAGE 39 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 76 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
Grant support from the GCF is justified for this project due to the limited purposeful investment to address ecosystem-
based climate resilience in relation to drought in the ASALs. The project can build on existing investments in related 
works, as outlined under Section C, but initiatives are fragmented and often lack institutional support. There is a gap 
between the current approach to drought which focuses on humanitarian response and the long-term management of 
agro-ecological systems. Devolution creates powerful opportunities for change, but the ASAL counties suffer from a 
legacy of neglect and underinvestment, which has left them with low capacities to develop beyond the baseline scenario. 
ASALs face constraints of poverty and relatively low access to capital and financial services which the project is designed 
to overcome. 
In a scenario without GCF funding, historical weather patterns will likely affect the vulnerability of communities and the 
ecosystems services that are generated from the surrounding landscape and the gap will grow between deteriorating 
land conditions and the emergency response to drought.  In the counterfactual, a project would generate improvements 
in livelihoods with interventions that address the impact of weather patterns, namely drought, and the subsequent soil 
and land degradation, but without considering future changes due to climate change.  
GCF grant support will be used to strengthen resilience in the target landscapes and for ASAL populations and will help 
sustain economic development in the ASALs and nationally. GCF funds will help to create an enabling environment that 
promotes investment in climate resilient livestock production, where livestock are managed in ways that reduce their 
impact on the landscape and in turn, face less risk of land degradation as a result of a vicious cycle of historical weather 
patterns, exacerbated by climate change. In the baseline scenario, communities would face a shrinking income and 
challenges to their livelihoods, whereas in the GCF scenario, linkages with markets to increase investment opportunities 
for climate resilient production are foreseen. 
 
In the GCF funded scenario, climate risk and resilience are brought into this complex situation. With GCF financing, 
climate risk and resilience will be integrated into national planning focused at the county level.  Climate information 
and early warning are key for planning in a way that factors in climate risk and opportunities for resilience at 
community and ecosystem level.  Climate resilient land use planning and management means that the counties need 
to identify ways of using the landscape in ways that will not bring further risks to communities’ vulnerability.  Based on 
climate resilient planning, areas that would be at further risk from climate change such as water sources and livestock 
are able to withstand the impact of climate change. GCF funds thus help improve the resilience of water sources and 
the ecosystems that generate them 
 
The project will thus make targeted interventions to capitalize on opportunities that enhance climate resilience whether 
in terms of stability in water supply, land that is not further degraded from climate change but in-fact restored, and a 
resilient value chain, particularly among pastoralists. Food security and income generation are among the benefits of a 
GCF scenario.  
 
The project will develop enabling conditions for scaling up of investment and policy for resilience. The grant will contribute 
to reducing risks from climate change in order to enable long term investment. Pastoralism provides an important 
contribution to the national economy—estimated at between 3.9 and 8.8% of GDP—and is the dominant economic 
activity in the target counties. The rewards from creating an enabling environment for resilient pastoralism will be long 
lasting in the ASALs. 
Kenya’s Vision 2030 and the national policy of “Ending Drought Emergencies” provide a clear demonstration of the 
commitment to address recurrent droughts in the ASALs. However, climate change is increasing the frequency and 
severity of drought, presenting a challenge to existing strategies for drought management. The added value of GCF 
involvement is in adapting drought management to climate change from the level of individual land users up to county 
and national governments. 
Despite a huge amount of effort and financial commitment by the government and development partners over many 
years to deal with climate risks and disasters (through relief and humanitarian interventions) in the ASALs, the trend 
remains an increasing number of relief-dependent people, increased poverty levels and vulnerability to climate shocks 
and stresses. This trend is influenced by climate change, which increases the frequency and severity of drought and

=== PAGE 40 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 76 
 
 D 
reduces the period of recovery between droughts. However, a confluence of other factors also aggravates this trend, 
including population growth, land degradation, and erosion of traditional drought management mechanisms. Climate 
change amplifies the impact of these negative trends in the ASALs and the GCF support is needed for Kenya to adapt 
its responses in order to make the shift from humanitarian dependency to sustainable development. 
Drought responses in Kenya’s ASALs focus on short term aid and frequently neglect the core issues of sustainable 
natural resource management, and how this is impacted by climate change. Ecosystems in the ASALs are central to 
building resilience and creating livelihood options for communities in the face of climate change. Ecosystem approaches 
are well recognized as a critical element of adaptation by the UNFCCC and constitute a fundamental pillar in Climate-
Smart Agriculture (CSA), Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) and the Kenya National Adaptation Plan. Yet ecosystems and 
ecosystem services will become more vulnerable and fragile as drought frequency and intensity increase in the ASALs.  
The GCF involvement will be used to build the knowledge, capacities and systems required to make ecosystem 
management central to climate change adaptation by rangeland managers in the ASALs. 
The rationale of this GCF intervention is to unlock the full potential of holistic sustainable pastoral and agro-pastoral 
systems as optimal and resilient livelihood strategies and pathways for adaptation to climate change in the ASALs. 
Pastoral strategies of herd diversity, flexibility and mobility are rational and crucial for survival in risk-prone environments 
and they are based on the need to respond rapidly to changing climatic and vegetative conditions. GCF support provides 
an opportunity to overcome existing barriers to an alternative scenario that invests in restoring rangelands, improving 
livestock productivity and hence product market development in the dry rangelands. The benefits will be enhanced 
adaptive capacity, food security and economic growth. The GCF support will provide models for upscaling or replicating 
in the other 23 ASAL counties. GCF involvement will therefore further catalyze public private partnerships and increase 
the uptake of government policies to areas affected by drought forming about 80% of Kenya’s land area. 
Through this project, the Government of Kenya will learn valuable lessons that will be used in developing climate change 
adaptation investments in other drought-affected ASALs of Sub Saharan Africa. Pastoralism is practiced in various forms 
throughout the world and has frequently been shown be the optimal, profitable and sustainable land use option in the 
rangelands offering adaptation benefits, contributing to climate change mitigation, and protecting biodiversity. 
Experiences in this project will be shared with 20 other Sub-Saharan African countries with pastoralist populations 
through IUCN’s global drylands initiative. 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
 
The primary aim of the project is to establish a more enabling environment, through reducing climate related risks, for 
investments in the counties concerned by the project and resilient pastoralism in particular. Enhancing these enabling 
conditions in a sustainable manner in front of climate risks will justify the non-continuation of the project. This will have 
set the basis for climate resilient and adaptive economic development in the counties, which will enhance revenue 
generation and attract investments. Investments in pastoralism combined with restoration of rangeland ecosystems 
will enable faster recovery in the aftermath of droughts, reduced loss of GDP during, and sustained growth. By 
monitoring these impacts, the project will make the case to the national government for continued investment to build 
on the project outcomes. 
The project contributes to strengthening the following dimension of sustainability: 
1. Biophysical sustainability through restoration of rangelands, establishment of functioning landscape 
management mechanisms, and building capacity for sustainable rangeland management 
2. Legal/institutional sustainability by strengthening institutional arrangements and capacities for rangeland 
landscape decision making and policy design 
3. Economic sustainability by reducing the impact of drought on GDP and strengthening recovery rates and by 
strengthening value chains for the products of sustainably managed rangeland landscapes 
4. New data and analysis on climate change predictions and responses for inclusive decision making 
5. Adaptation and coping responses will be better planned for resilient and more diversified livelihoods  
The primary aims of this project are to enable pastoralists to restore natural resources, to establish complementary 
infrastructure, and to develop stronger economies in order to support long term, climate-change adapted, sustainable 
management of rangelands. The success of the project should be evaluated against the effective continuation of 
information systems, local capacities, governance institutions and financial mechanisms. 
Ecosystem based Adaptation in the rangelands support a shift towards protecting ecosystems as the basis for 
adaptation – both reducing the severity of climate-change induced natural hazards like drought (e.g. improved

=== PAGE 41 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 76 
 
 D 
 
hydrological cycles) and reinforcing the natural capital on which communities rely to manage the effects of those 
hazards. This requires, above all, a fundamental change in how county governments and national ministries adapt 
their approaches to managing land and water resources. The central role of government partners in this project is 
therefore of paramount importance. 
The project will work through the devolved county structures to build their capacity and strengthen their asset base 
(including capacities). County governments have significant convening power and will be supported to provide policy 
and strategic support for rangeland landscape restoration and investments in resilience. Project outputs will be shared 
through inter county platforms, including the landscape fora established through the project. At the community and 
county level, the project will strengthen capabilities for climate change adaptation, including the capacity for using 
available information to inform rangeland management planning, and the capacity to implement those plans. 
Supporting this at the county level will be an enhanced county planning and decision-making system supported by 
improved climate information and an information dashboard. County officials will be enabled to use this information in 
making improved climate change adaption decisions and to allocate resources more effectively. An Early Warning 
System that will take account of land health status will be particularly important as a long-term asset for improved 
coordination of livestock management and other aspects of local livelihoods during drought.  
The project will strengthen governance institutions at the local level and will support development of bylaws to increase 
the legitimacy of customary rules and regulations over rangeland management. The project will also strengthen local 
community organizations that play a role in implementing and compliance with these bylaws. Those community 
institutions are one of the most vital elements of sustainable rangelands management and the effectiveness of the 
project will be evaluated against their strength and autonomy.   
Lastly, the project will strengthen investment in value chains and in restoration enterprises that will function beyond the 
life of the project and will be critical to maintaining ecosystem management. The engagement of private investors is 
crucial to ensure the long term viability of actions under this project. CI’s Accelerator Fund has a particularly central role 
to play in overcoming the investment barriers and enhancing the investment readiness of conservation enterprises. 
In the long term the project will leave a legacy of climate resilient and adaptive economic development in the target 
landscapes, with scale up to other ASAL landscapes in Kenya. A stronger enabling environment will lead to higher levels 
of appropriate investment which, combined with restoration of rangeland ecosystems, will underpin drought resilience 
and climate change resilience in pastoral livelihoods and will contribute to more stable and sustained growth nationally.

=== PAGE 42 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 76 
 
 E 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
This section outlines the project impacts and their alignment with the GCF’s Adaptation Logic model and performance 
indicators. Impacts are listed in order of relevance to the project.  
Fund level impact A4.0: Improved resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services. 
GCF Indicator 4.1: Coverage/scale of ecosystems protected/rehabilitated in response to climate variability and change.  
Target 500,000 hectares of degraded land under a restoration trajectory9. This represents 50% of the degraded land 
(1million ha), which in turn represents 40% of the total landscape (2.5 million ha). Restoration trajectory will be achieved 
through rehabilitation (e.g. reduced pressures such as overgrazing and land degradation through resource over-
harvesting), restoration (e.g. through natural regeneration and where required replanting) and protection (e.g. through 
improved grazing, fire and water management). The project will target the equivalent of the Land Degradation Neutrality 
concept in target counties, by ensuring that degradation processes are balanced by an equivalent area of land under 
improved management leading to restoration.  
Fund Level Impact A1.0: Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities 
and regions  
GCF Indicator 1.2: Number of males and females benefiting from the adoption of diversified, climate resilient livelihood 
options (including fisheries, agriculture, tourism, etc.) 
Target 25% of men and women in the target landscapes (155,000 people) reporting enhanced, more resilient livelihoods 
(e.g. more resilient livestock production, diversification of income, increased access to markets etc.) as a result of 
rangeland restoration (e.g. diverse livestock products, harvesting and processing natural products). 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
 
Lifetime 
 
• 
Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 
(reduced vulnerability or increased resilience);  
• 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender (adaptation 
only) 
Total 
155,000 direct beneficiaries (74,400 of 
whom are women) 
620,000 indirect beneficiaries (297,600 
of whom are women) 
Percentage 
(%) 
Direct beneficiaries are 25% of the total 
population of the two landscapes 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
Reduced loss of income and assets (US$) due to the impact of extreme climate-related events (baseline to 
be established. 
The project will examine household perceptions of loss and damage during both normal and drought event 
years; and to attempt to identify proxies for socioeconomic resilience, including seasonal patterns of school 
attendance, and human and livestock health indicators. 
Livestock productivity metrics are an unreliable indicator of change in rangeland condition due to the range 
of different factors that have an impact on livestock performance in communal rangelands. However, since 
9 The end goal of restoration can take decades to achieve, so the only measurable outcome through the project is 
that restoration is underway.

=== PAGE 43 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 76 
 
 E 
livestock are the mainstay of the local economy, the project will identify suitable indicators of livestock 
economic performance in the medium to long-term at a macro-level. This includes both the number of head 
of livestock marketed and the individual live-weight. This data will be combined with other indicators, such 
as change in seasonal milk yield (including the duration of lactation) and calf mortality rates. In combination 
these indicators will better reflect the management objectives of pastoral herders. 
Number of public and nongovernmental institutions with increased capacity for landscape restoration and 
climate resilience-building. 
The project will strengthen the capacity of 11 county governments to implement restoration and SLM actions 
at scale, by: 1) Strengthening local decision-making processes (governance, participation, stronger capacity 
to promote adaptive management); 2) Implementing restoration actions through financial incentives for 
community-led solutions; and 3) Monitoring the impact on resilience. The project will strengthen the 
capacities of at least 11 county institutions and at least 39 community institutions. 
Number of local bylaws and other resource management agreements established or adjusted to address 
climate change risks. 
The project will contribute to development of local resource agreements, bylaws and policies, including ones 
to address climate change risks, in all 2target landscapes. 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
 
In the current paradigm, climate change information is centralized but is not widely available at local level. 
Capacities at the local level are comparatively weak, both institutionally and in terms of human resources, and 
the ASAL regions have experienced a long history of neglect and marginalization. The paradigm shift offered by 
this project takes advantage of the devolution process in Kenya to strengthen capacities and institutions at the 
county level, where greater accountability can be achieved towards rangeland populations. The project will build 
cost effectiveness by engaging community institutions in resilience building, strengthening community-based 
approaches (for example to restoration) and connecting them with private investors. The project will scale up 
scattered experiences and good practices in a more systematic way, enabling government to play a stronger 
role in coordinating climate change adaptation actions and in establishing favorable conditions for investments 
in resilience. The project will build cross-institutional collaboration in the long term, including through input to 
policy formulation. 
Kenya lies 80% in the ASALs—the regions that are most affected by climate change—and these regions are the most 
underdeveloped in the country, which compromises adaptive capacity. To secure a future in which resilient rangeland 
ecosystems support adaptive pastoral livelihoods requires a comprehensive transformation of natural resource 
management in the ASALs. This transformation requires a paradigm shift, away from treating rangelands as low value 
areas where existing economic practices are a problem, towards recognizing the high value of rangeland ecosystem 
services and the inherent adaptability and economic rationality of pastoralism as a system for managing extreme climate 
risks and uncertainty. 
The project will demonstrate how to scale up good practices that have been proven on a small scale but which need 
greater institutional support to be more widely adopted. In doing so the project will pave the way for comprehensive 
adoption of EbA in the target counties and scale up to all 23 ASAL counties in Kenya. Ultimately the aim is to use these 
experiences to inspire similar approaches in other rangeland countries of Sub Saharan Africa and even in other regions 
where IUCN is already actively working in ASALs. 
The project will develop innovative financial instruments that specifically target restoration actions and which have a 
strong focus on social inclusion. Access to finance is generally weak in the ASALs, particularly for natural resource 
management, and women face particular challenges of access. The Community Resilience Facility ensures that women 
have access to resources and is tailored towards ensuring investment in natural resource management and conservation 
actions. CIs Accelerator Fund is designed to incentivize climate-smart private sector enterprises in the conservation and 
natural resources sector, where entry barriers act as a constraint to scaling up.  
The alternate model of Ecosystem based Adaptation in rangeland ecosystems emphasizes improved access and use of 
information, stronger systems of governance for natural resource planning, stronger community organizations to 
coordinate sustainable use of communal resources, and strengthened value chains and investments to support livelihood

=== PAGE 44 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 76 
 
 E 
diversification and to incentivize restoration actions. Among the strengths of this approach are more secure land tenure, 
more secure access to seasonal grazing areas, protection of drought reserves, restored pastures in key landscapes, 
secured grazing corridors, and improved access to water infrastructure that is compatible with rangeland management.  
This project offers potential for replicating and scaling up by: 
Leveraging counties: The project will build capacities, incentives, institutions and knowledge management at the county 
level and nationally to enable counties to adopt climate-smart landscape planning for restoration and protection. The 
knowledge management component will explicitly focus on institutionalization at county and national levels, and will 
support outreach to other stakeholders to build momentum for scale up and replication. The project is designed to build 
the capacities of the recently devolved county governments, where there is clear demand, opportunity and potential for 
embedding climate resilience in sustainable development. 
Platforms for take-off: A major boost to take-off in other locations is the proposed reliance on models and approaches 
tested in similar context but that need fine-tuning for this application. The project will scale up the following experiences 
of key partners and stakeholders: 
• 
NDMA has developed drought resilience practices in all the ASAL counties that will be scaled up; 
• 
The SHARED methodology focuses on changing behavior and building long-term capacity in evidence-based 
and cross-sectoral negotiation, planning and decision making; 
• 
KEFRI has extensive experience in gums and resins enterprise development in the ASALs; 
• 
IUCN has experiences in improved planning, bylaw and county law development; 
• 
Conservation International has worked with private sector and civil society to develop various interventions in 
financing conservation actions, including climate resilience funds, green venture financing, seed bank 
enterprises, and fodder production. 
• 
The project will generate long-term changes in planning and decision-making around annual budgeting and 
planning, incorporating climate and land health data and community priorities to accelerate resilience returns on 
investment. 
Leveraging other initiatives: Existing experiences in landscape-scale Ecosystem-based Adaptation in ASALs in Kenya 
confer a foundation on which to build the project and to expand out from to other jurisdictions. Climate-Smart Agriculture 
initiatives in East Africa like those of ICRAF and the World Bank also offer important collaborative opportunities; as do 
several existing policy initiatives like the high-profile Bonn Challenge for restoration, in which each country sets a target 
for number of hectares planted by 2030 or another date. 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
The project is fundamentally based on collective learning, knowledge generation and dissemination at 
community, landscape county and national levels (Fig 15). Participatory approaches, action learning and most 
significant change monitoring tools will underpin the project information.  
Stakeholder input and access to visual dashboards for enhanced decision making: Decision making will be 
supported by a visualized database in the form of a Climate Resilience Dashboard (Component 1). This is based on a 
Resilience Diagnostic and Decision Support Tool (RDDST) focusing on climate and land health that will be generated for 
each of the four landscapes. It is underpinned by the Land Degradation Surveillance Framework (LDSF), which has a 
strong analytical framework built into it for modelling and mapping of a range of indicators of ecosystem health (e.g. soil 
erosion, soil carbon, infiltration capacity, vegetative cover). The project will analyse data (livestock, water, conflict, sentinel 
sites, markets and productivity) for inclusion in the dashboard to support integrated landscape planning. Participatory co-
design of visually accessible information will enhance uptake and action. 
Stakeholder forums, extension and outreach. Stakeholder forums will be established in each landscape to provide 
multi-way communication and feedback on landscape issues, droughts and restoration action. This landscape level 
approach will be augmented with broader outreach based on large-reach radio programmes. Specifically, prepared 
programmes will allow caller and text-message participation beyond the landscapes themselves. Community extension 
services, primarily via pastoralist field schools and water resource users associations, will provide information, 
communication and feedback at the grassroots level.  
Drought early warning and action information: Under Component 1, real-time information will be shared through a 
mobile phone messaging network to community leaders, CBOs, NGO’s and out-posted government staff. Messages will 
include restoration, land management and extension material. The system will be operated from the information centres.

=== PAGE 45 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 76 
 
 E 
Information, training and capacity-building centres: Information centres will act as nodes for resources, information 
and communications. They will coordinate an active training programme for landscape-level actors in all aspects of the 
project focusing on drought early warning and ecosystem restoration. There will be one in centre in each landscape 
hosted by the county governments and housed within the Landscape Coordination Hubs.  
Monitoring, evaluation and learning: The approach to MEL will include collecting information for immediate feedback 
use in the project as well a tracking project progress and longer term outcomes, impacts and paradigm shift and overall 
lessons. The project will use a range of tools outlined in section H2, including tracking changes in knowledge, attitude 
and skills; policy influence ranking scale; and tools such as PRAGA10, SHARED11, Saiku and InVEST. Progress 
reporting and periodic evaluations will be carried out, to capture both expected and unexpected results. At project end, 
the combined resilience dividend will be estimated, and a value-for-money evaluation will be undertaken. 
 
Figure 9: Communications, information, knowledge and learning elements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Support monitoring and assessment tools and centres: The project will scale up and institutionalize rangeland 
landscape planning, and will document and validate the approaches used to support further replication and scale-up. This 
will be supported through data collection, monitoring and assessment tools and knowledge management activities. Data 
will be collated in climate change technical support centres in each landscape hosted by the county governments and 
housed within the Landscape Coordination Hubs.  
Dashboards to support integrated landscape planning: Under Component 1, a visualized data base called the 
Climate Resilience Dashboard will be developed at landscape level to support decision making and the use of the data 
collected. The project will collect and analyse data sets (land health, vegetation, livestock, water, conflict, NDMA sentinel 
site data, markets, productivity, resource mapping, etc.) for inclusion in the dashboard to support integrated landscape 
10 https://www.iucn.org/theme/ecosystem-management/our-work/global-drylands-initiative/gdis-
projects/participatory-assessment-land-degradation-and-sustainable-land-management-grassland-and-pastoral-
systems-praga  
11 http://www.worldagroforestry.org/shared   
Data Collection and 
analysis land health, 
vegetation, livestock, 
water, conflict, sentinel 
site data, markets, 
productivity, resource 
mapping 
Climate Resilience 
Dashboard  
A Visualized Data 
Base at Landscape 
and County Levels 
Integrate land 
degradation 
surveillance into 
early warning 
assessments
 
 
Enhanced action 
for climate 
resilience based on 
‘Dashboard’ 
information 
Establish land 
degradation monitoring 
sentinel sites, and 
augmented weather 
data collection
 
 
Establish Drought 
Early Warning and 
Landscape 
Restoration 
Centres supporting 
each landscape 
Community 
Drought Warning 
and Degradation 
Knowledge 
network Mobile text 
message based 
Community 
Outreach through 
Landscape Forums 
Resilience Radio 
and Pastoralist Field 
Schools 
Monitoring, Evaluation& Leaning using multiple tools and approaches for robust data collection and sharing and live information and mid to long-term distillation and 
dissemination of learning

=== PAGE 46 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 76 
 
 E 
planning. Participatory approaches will be followed for co-designing visually accessible and simplified information to 
enhance uptake and action. 
Training in integrated systems management for climate resilience: Under Component 1 the project will train county, 
ward and landscape-level actors in integrated systems management for climate resilience. Training will include interactive 
use of information in the Landscape Dashboard and capacity development for embedding landscape resilience 
dashboards into planning processes and data management. A Resilience Diagnostic and Decision Support Tool (RDDST) 
focusing on climate and land health will be generated for each of the four landscapes. The RDDST makes visually 
accessible any additional data from government (The Government of Kenya through the MoAI-SDL, NDMA, KEFRI, 
NEMA, DRSRS, County Government, etc.) and other organizations (e.g. IUCN, ICRAF, KWTA) and bilateral agencies 
(e.g. GIZ, USAID) (with full attribution) to enhance resources for climate resilience decision making.  
Land Degradation Surveillance Framework: The land health component of the RDDST is underpinned by the Land 
Degradation Surveillance Framework (LDSF), which has a strong analytical framework built into it for modelling and 
mapping of a range of indicators of ecosystem health (e.g. soil erosion, soil carbon, infiltration capacity, vegetative cover). 
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
The project will contribute to strengthening the enabling environment for implementing the national devolution 
process in order to strengthen ecosystem based adaptation and drought resilience in the ASALs. The project 
focuses on a key part of Kenya’s economy that is highly exposed to the risks of climate change. Climate 
change resilience in the rangelands is important nationally, but it is particularly indispensable for sustainable 
development in the ASAL counties, where development is frequently set back by increasingly frequent drought 
events. By restoring rangeland ecosystems as the foundation of pastoral livelihoods the project will contribute 
simultaneously to mitigating drought emergencies (for example by diversifying the pastoral economy) and 
mitigating drought itself (reducing the frequency and severity of drought by restoring hydrological cycles and 
soil moisture retention). 
The project will strengthen local institutions that can act as intermediaries between private investors and markets and 
local land managers, and reduce transaction costs for investors. Stronger resource rights are vital for sustainable 
economic growth. Clearer rights can mitigate conflicts that arise over land transfers and land use change, and ensure 
more equitable distribution of the benefits of economic development. Improved coordination and governance 
mechanisms developed by this project will support initiatives that address elements of climate change, resilience 
building, risk reduction, and sectoral planning to support agricultural growth. 
Landscape planning strengthens the enabling environment by giving confidence to investors (including communities 
themselves) about the long-term vision for land use and investments in restoration and sustainable land management. 
Landscape planning helps mitigate the externalities of investment that can undermine investments elsewhere in the 
landscape.  
Enhanced information systems will provide potential stakeholders with greater clarity over the opportunities and 
potential rewards of engagement and investment. They allow the public sector to track the impacts of investment on 
social and environmental indicators, facilitating evaluation of the suitability of different investments.  
Climate Information and resource centers will integrate local and scientific sources of information on the state of land, 
soil, water and biological resource, and drivers of change. These will be hosted at the landscape level, with web 
information shared with other towns and management centres. A text messaging service to support dispersed 
communities will also be established. It will provide information on early warning, market access, grazing pressures and 
security alerts. 
Strengthening local capacities is a vital measure to enable the participation of different actors in climate- resilient 
development. Communities are frequently disadvantaged in development programs and investment projects, due to the 
low level of formal education and the lack of exposure to new ways of doing business. Stronger communal resource 
management capacity will enable more equitable and more stable investments in restoration and sustainable land 
management initiatives and complementary investments. 
The project scales up innovative community mechanisms to provide capital for local restoration and sustainable natural 
resource management. Value chains need marketing expertise and business-savvy plans to boost production and 
quality of natural products from restored landscapes. The Community Resilience Facility is one financial mechanism to 
build on that matches a community-owned land use plan with a community-owned solidarity fund to incentivize 
sustainable land management. Small grants will also be considered for other community-based enterprise value chain 
actions.

=== PAGE 47 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 76 
 
 E 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
The project contributes to implementing Kenya’s National Adaptation Plan (NAP, 2016), which prioritizes promoting 
access to climate finance by county governments and vulnerable communities to implement priority climate change 
actions. The goal of Kenya’s National Adaptation Program (NAP) is enhanced climate resilience towards the attainment 
of Vision 2030, encompassing strong economic growth, resilient ecosystems, and sustainable livelihoods for Kenyans. 
These were defined and costed for short term (1-2 yrs), medium term (3-5 yrs) and long term (>6 yrs). The Priority actions 
for the Disaster Risk Reduction under NDMA, Livestock and Ecosystems are presented in the following table, clearly 
demonstrating how the project is aligned with the national priorities.  
Table 3: Table Priority adaptation actions for the key subsectors 
National Drought Management Authority – Disaster risk reduction 
Action  
• Fast Track the Implementation of the Ending Drought Emergencies Framework 
Short Term Sub-actions 
• Address the conditions that Perpetuate vulnerability 
Medium Term Sub-actions 
• Enhance Productive Potential 
Long Term Sub-actions 
• Strengthen Institutional Capacity for Effective Risk Management 
Livestock sector  
General Action  
• Enhance the resilience of the livestock value chain 
Short Term Sub-actions 
• Increase awareness on climate change impacts on the livestock sector  
• Strengthen  land use  management systems  including rangeland management, fodder 
banks and strategic reserves  
• Conduct capacity building in indigenous knowledge, livestock insurance schemes, early 
warning systems, early action, livestock management and breeding 
Medium Term Sub-actions 
• Develop new feed formulation 
• Promote livelihood diversification and market access  
• Establish price stabilization schemes and strategic livestock based food reserves  
• Restore degraded grazing lands 
Long Term Sub-actions 
• Enhance selection, breeding  and management  of animals to adapt to climate change  
• Promote climate smart agriculture 
Environment  
Action  
• Mainstreaming of climate change adaptation in the Environment sector 
Short Term Sub-actions 
• Strengthen early warning and climate information services through improving the Climate 
Information Service Providers network and enhancing integration of local/indigenous 
knowledge into early warning systems. 
• Enhance participatory scenario planning with communities. 
• Undertake climate vulnerability and risk assessments on ecosystems and provide guidance 
on relevant adaptation actions. 
• Strengthen tree-planting and conservation initiatives 
Medium Term Sub-actions 
• Strengthen the capacity of national and country institutions responsible for coordinating 
climate change adaptation, 
• Improve and expand the existing climate change modelling work of KMD. 
Long Term Sub-actions 
• Provide guidance on and improve access to climate resilient trees and cultivars,  
• Integrate ecosystem and community based approaches in sector strategies,  
• Rehabilitate water catchment areas to provide sustainable ecosystem services. 
  
The National Adaptation Plan (NAP) builds on the National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS) National 
Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP) and is the basis for Kenya’s INDC response to the Paris Agreement. The NAP 
builds on the Adaptation Technical Analysis Report (ATAR) developed under the NCCAP, which provided a detailed 
analysis of the sectors and vulnerabilities in the various counties, sectors and economic processes. The NAP is also 
aligned with the Climate Change Act enacted into law in May 2016. In the MTP II sectors, climate change adaptation is 
represented in the drought risk management and ending drought emergencies, environment, water, energy, agriculture, 
livestock, and fisheries sectors. 
Kenya’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) prioritized mainstreaming climate change adaptation into 
County Integrated Development Pans (CIDPs). The principle contribution of this project is to “Climate smart agriculture 
(CSA) in line with the National CSA Framework”, although considering the tree cover in rangeland landscapes the project 
will also contribute towards “achieving a tree cover of at least 10% of the land area of Kenya.

=== PAGE 48 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 76 
 
 E 
The project contributes to implementation of Kenya Vision 2030” and the national policy of “Ending Drought 
Emergencies”, which is included in the NAP. This will be accomplished by capitalizing on the national process of 
devolution, which is advancing but many counties still requires assistance to establish new ways of working that take 
advantage of increased local autonomy, accountability, legal frameworks, larger budget allocations and enhanced 
coordination. The explicit focus of the project is to build the capacities and institutions required for improved 
implementation of devolution to achieve greater climate change resilience in the ASALs. Kenya has a large body of 
relevant policies and legislation but these are not well reflected at the county level. The project will support establishing 
or strengthening the climate adaptation and rangeland management laws at the county level.  
The county legal framework will be supported to specifically empower community land management rights. By linking 
these rights with national water management at the catchment level, this allows the development of legally mandated 
sub-catchment management plans (SCMPs). It is a priority of the project to support communities to formulate participatory 
land use and resilience plans to establish local bylaws, and to develop compliance with the bylaws for improved 
governance. 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
Environmental co-benefits 
• 
Improved governance of rangelands will reduce soil erosion and enable more sustainable management of 
rangeland resources, allowing natural and assisted regeneration 
• 
Restoration of degraded rangelands will lead to an increase in biodiversity and rehabilitation of ecosystem services  
• 
Restored rangelands will sequester and store higher levels of carbon in soil and in vegetation 
• 
Restored rangelands will infiltrate and store more moisture, contributing to recharge of aquifers and boosting range 
productivity, biodiversity, and sequestration of atmospheric carbon 
 
Economic co-benefits 
• 
Ecosystem restoration will mitigate both drought and the effects of drought 
o 
Restored rangeland landscapes will conserve more water, reducing the severity of drought and reducing 
moisture deficits in normal dry seasons 
o 
Restored rangeland landscapes will provide a range of resources that are used to reinforce rangeland 
livelihoods, including drought coping strategies 
• 
Increased infiltration in restored landscapes will recharge aquifers, contributing to livestock productivity and health  
• 
Restored landscapes foster adaptation options: 
o 
Increased adaptive capacity at county, landscape and community level through climate-proofing value 
chains 
o 
Resilient production systems through adoption of climate-adaptive practices and technologies for 
production, processing and marketing of livestock and agricultural goods, improving producers’ access to 
markets, and revenues generated. 
o 
Transformative and inclusive investments will be made at critical points in product value chains that allow 
pastoralists to trade surplus goods on local and regional markets at fair prices. Activities will be targeted to 
address barriers to adoption such as upfront costs, income foregone during the transition period, and the 
risks of introducing new inputs or products to the market. 
• 
Smallholder capacities will be built to adopt more sustainable production practices, address environmental 
sustainability, increase access to livestock markets, and increase their competitiveness and ability to adapt to 
drought-induced changes in land productivity and markets.  
• 
Improved grazing management in the selected landscapes will contribute to increased livestock health, productivity, 
survival rates and post-drought recovery. 
• 
Sustainable pastoralism combined new climate smart agricultural techniques, featuring water management and 
reduced tillage, will reduce water demand for irrigation and crop intensification. 
 
Social co-benefits  
• 
Gender benefits include partnerships with the private sector and stimulus programs targeting women, youth and 
marginalized groups, which will help build resilience along value chains. Two key barriers that suppress livelihood 
participation by these groups will be addressed, including insufficient access to product markets, due to high 
transport costs from remote pastoralist communities; and lack of market information.

=== PAGE 49 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 76 
 
 E 
• 
Access to finance strengthens the adaptive capacity of households and communities, by providing start-up capital 
for small businesses that provide alternative income during drought livestock sell-offs and losses.  
• 
Rehabilitation of water cycles is expected to impact positively on water availability (e.g. increased infiltration) and 
quality (e.g. reduced sedimentation). This will improve access to water and the cost of water supply in dry seasons. 
• 
Local governance, participation and accountability will be strengthened, contributing to wider processes of citizen 
engagement and accountability. Revival of communal herding arrangements will reinforce the social fabric central 
to pastoral livelihoods and to pastoralist risk management strategies. This includes collective action for herd 
mobility and resource management as well as traditional systems of social capital that underpin drought 
management, such as herd splitting and resource sharing 
• 
The project will contribute to more integrated social protection systems becoming more accessible to the 
vulnerable. 
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
The recipient of the project is the government of Kenya. Kenya has recently become a lower middle income country 
and it is highly exposed to the risks of climate change. The ASALs, which dominate the country, are projected to be 
particularly affected by climate change, and will be greatly affected due to a legacy of under-investment. Kenya has 
established policies that can remedy this situation, but the country requires a boost to establish an enabling environment 
so that ASAL counties can take advantage of the opportunities offered by devolution and the countries commitment to 
“ending drought emergencies”. 
At the local level, beneficiaries of this project are rangeland communities, with a primary focus on pastoralists, 
and specific attention to the roles, responsibilities, and needs of pastoralist women. Pastoralists are among the 
most disadvantaged populations in Kenya, performing poorly on basic human development indicators like mortality rates 
and literacy levels.  Kenya’s ASALs have fewer social services per capita and less infrastructure. Livestock production 
in the ASALs accounts for over 70% of the country’s livestock, but livestock products, including milk, meat and hides, 
are under-valued and under-marketed in the ASALs due to challenges of market access.  
Severe droughts have been recorded in Kenya for 23 of the 51 years from 1960 to 2011. Recurring and persistent 
drought in these regions has been attributed to climate change. The greatest challenge to pastoral livelihoods in the 
ASALs is coping with unpredictable rainfall, climate variability and change. These climate-related challenges contribute 
to high levels of vulnerability, when combined with weakening of natural resource governance, low investment in basic 
services, and resource conflicts.  
Food security and nutrition crises resulting from protracted drought undermine pastoralist coping capacities and 
exacerbate their vulnerabilities. Kenya faced a food crisis for most of 2017 due to recurrence of drought in shorter cycles, 
negating efforts to reduce vulnerabilities. The areas affected also face entrenched poverty, limited investment and 
intermittent conflict. Humanitarian partners in Kenya in September 2017, appealed for USD106 million to scale up their 
response to the most urgent and lifesaving needs resulting from the egregious effects of the drought in northern Kenya.  
Impacts of climate change on water and production systems: The effects of the drought are always most severe in the 
ASAL areas, often characterized by complete depletion of pastures, lack of water for livestock, massive movement of 
animals in search of water and pastures and heightened incidences of livestock diseases. Drought contributes to 
deterioration of animal body condition, low birth rates and high mortality rates. Water pans store water but dry up with 
increased return distances for water trucking, sometimes more than double; increasing waiting time at water sources for 
women; and exceptionally high costs of water in many areas. In Marsabit in the far north, the cost of a 20-litre jerry can 
has reached Ksh 50 ($0.50)—10 times the normal cost of Ksh 5 ($0.05). Traditional mechanisms for managing climate 
variability are being closed off, such as livestock mobility and careful rotation among drought reserve areas. 
Intensive land uses are expanding and ASALs are being converted to arable land at an increasing rate. Soil carbon 
stocks in semi-arid environments can decrease by 30 percent in less than five years when native vegetation or pastures

=== PAGE 50 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 76 
 
 E 
are converted to cropland. 12 However, sustainable pastoralism will continue to be the optimal, most profitable and 
sustainable land use option in dry rangelands. If investment and incentives like those proposed in the project are 
implemented in the ASALs, an adaptive model of resilient pastoralism is feasible. This alternate model needs to feature 
more secure land tenure, access to dry season grazing areas, rehabilitated and restored pastures in the landscapes, 
secured grazing corridors, improved access to climate resilient water infrastructure, and improved market access. It 
would offer significant adaptation benefits, reducing land conversion and promoting the adoption of sustainable land 
management practices. Strengthened pastoral production systems through ecosystem based adaptation would prevent 
higher emissions, reduce water demand through irrigation and intensification, reduce alienation of local communities and 
instead enhance their adaptive capacity to the changing climate. 
The project will reduce vulnerability to drought and will contribute to food and water security by restoring and safeguarding 
rangeland ecosystem services, by reinforcing local governance and decision making, and by strengthening markets for 
rangeland ecosystem services. 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Kenya’ economic growth has been robust in recently years, but climate change is contributing to an increasing 
frequency of drought, which has been shown to retard economic growth by as much as half (i.e. down from 
5.5% per annum to around 2.8% per annum in 2011). ASAL regions have been left behind in Kenya’s rapid 
progress and, in the context of climate change, they now represent a constraint to national progress. Counties 
now have greater access to resources, but institutions and capabilities are weak. An absence of other sources 
of suitable funding prevents the ASAL counties form addressing urgent needs related to climate change and 
ecosystem based adaptation. 
Major contributors to GDP in 2016 were agriculture, forestry and fishing (15.2%), manufacturing (6.3%), real estate 
(12.3%) information and communication (6.1%), construction (8.2%), transport and storage (9.7%) and financial services 
(7.3%). Annual total trade is about 40% of Kenya’s GDP, but the global share is very small. The bulk of exports are raw 
materials and primary products, while imports are high-value capital and finished products, sustaining persistent trade 
deficits. Kenya’s food security is dependent on imports. While self-sufficiency has improved, post-harvest losses, low 
agricultural productivity and frequent weather shocks remain constraints.  
Expansion of crop farming is taking place at the expense of pastoralism and is mostly unplanned and quite opportunistic. 
Drought has particularly damaging impacts on rain-fed farming, but irrigation farming can have even more harmful 
impacts on the pastoral economy by using scarce water resources and by rendering key tracts of land unavailable for 
grazing. Unplanned encroachment of rangeland resources has both economic and social costs that are poorly 
understood.  
Kenya’s population of 40 million grows at an estimated 2.9 % per year. The population is projected to reach 51 million 
by 2025, 96.9 million by 2050 and 160 million by 2100. 10 million people currently suffer from chronic food insecurity and 
poor nutrition of which 2 to 4 million require emergency food assistance at any time and nearly 30 per cent of Kenya’s 
children are classified as undernourished, while micro-nutrients deficiencies are widespread. 
The affected population is the poorest in Kenya and experiences extreme frequent drought events that negatively impact 
on their livelihoods. Drought occurrence has become increasingly severe during the last decade with rainfall totals of 50–
75 % below normal encountered in most areas, amounts that are not sufficient to support crop and pasture growth for 
livelihood security. The pastoral economy in the ASALs’ of Kenya accounts for 90 % of all employment opportunities and 
95 % of family income and livelihood security (Kenya ASAL Policy, 2012). The most widespread non-pastoral livelihood 
option is charcoal production, with some engagement in micro businesses. The livelihood diversification activities are 
dominated by women.  
Effective management of rangeland landscapes is constrained by the lack of a supporting institutional environment, 
including policies for better integrated planning. However, devolution and the establishment of county authorities provides 
an important opportunity for strengthening inter-sectoral planning. Effective implementation of programs is constrained 
12 Noellemeyer, E., Frank, F., Alvarez, C., Morazzo, G. & Quiroga, A. 2008. Carbon contents and aggregation 
related to soil physical and biological properties under a land-use sequence in the semiarid region of Central 
Argentina. Soil & Tillage Research, 99: 179–190.

=== PAGE 51 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 76 
 
 E 
by poor links among central government agencies, and between national, county and community levels. Even with the 
devolved governance structure there is need for more inclusive approaches in policy development and strengthen vertical 
and horizontal flows of communication. 
There is need therefore to strengthen institutional capacity in line with the various ambitions and policies including the 
National Adaptation Plan (NAP), the Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Strategy, the Kenya Strategic Investment 
Framework for Sustainable Land Management, the ASAL Policy and Livestock Policy among others. The NAP pioneers 
landscape level Ecosystem-Based Adaptation in ASALs in Kenya and builds on the rationale for Climate-Smart 
Agriculture (CSA) in ASALs with the aim to sustainably increase productivity, enhance resilience (adaptation), reduce 
GHGs (mitigation) where possible, and enhance achievement of national food security and sustainable development 
goals13.  
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
Kenya offers a rich climate and drought policy environment upon which to build this new project. The Climate Change 
Act (2016)14 was stimulated by the impacts of climate change being observed, and establishes structures to coordinate 
climate change activities from national to county levels. Kenya has been in the forefront of advocating for policy 
responses to climate change, and launched a National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS) in 201015, and 
National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP) in 2013. The NCCAP16 performed an adaptation technical analysis of 
economic sectors and prioritized adaptation actions, including integrating climate resilience into planning, budgeting and 
implementation of activities at national and county levels. Some counties are developing or now implementing climate 
change policies and legislation, e.g. Makueni County Climate Change Fund Regulations and Wajir County Climate Fund 
Act (2016)17. This work was spearheaded by the Department for International Development’s Strengthening Adaptation 
and Resilience to Climate Change in Kenya Programme of the Adaptation Consortium (Ada) in the National Drought 
Management Authority (NDMA). 
Kenya’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC18) prioritized mainstreaming climate change adaptation into 
County Integrated Development Pans (CIDPs). The INDC bolsters the National Adaptation Plan (NAP, 2016), which 
prioritized promoting access to climate finance by county governments and vulnerable communities to implement priority 
climate change actions, based on four criteria: urgency and ease of implementation in the short term, compatibility with 
the NCCAP Adaptation actions, compatibility with the Vision 2030 Medium Term Plan actions and low regret options if 
implemented. These were defined and costed out for short term (1-2 years), medium term (3-5 years) and long term (>6 
years).  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
 
About IUCN (AE): This project takes advantage of IUCN’s unique status as a union of both state and non-state members. 
Kenya is a state member of the union and IUCN is a trusted partner of government with experience in working on policy 
formulation and implementation. IUCN combines this profile with a long history of working with nongovernment members 
in strengthening rights and building capacities. IUCN also has a strong reputation as a science/knowledge based 
organization, with strong institutional capacity in the fields of Land Degradation Neutrality, ecological restoration, and 
Ecosystem Based Adaptation. IUCN is at the forefront globally in setting policy and practice in dryland management. 
13 Climate-smart agriculture contributes to the goals of making sustainable development concrete and integrates the three 
dimensions of sustainable development in addressing food security and climate concerns in a forward-looking perspective.  
14 http://www.kenyalaw.org/lex//actview.xql?actid=No.%2011%20of%202016 
15 Government of Kenya/Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources. 2010. National Climate Change 
Response Strategy. Nairobi. 
16 www.kccap.info 
17 http://www.adaconsortium.org/index.php/309-wajir-county-set-to-access-kes143m-for-climate-change-
adaptation-and-resilience-building.html 
18 www.environment.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/Kenya_INDC_20150723.pdf

=== PAGE 52 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 76 
 
 E 
This project builds on IUCN extensive experience in implementing transboundary projects and in supporting the 
processes of decentralization, in Kenya and in other countries in the region. IUCN has implemented ASAL 
management and forest landscape restoration in Kenya since 2008, in close partnership with government and NGOs 
program there. IUCN has developed approaches to strengthening ASAL governance, restoring and sustainably 
managing rangelands and forest landscapes, strengthening value chains at the local level, promoting incomes from 
biodiversity, economically valuing ASAL ecosystem services, and promoting measures to enable local benefits.  
IUCN’s experiences in climate change adaptation in Kenya include: support to the Ministry of Water to adapt sub-
catchment management planning to the arid and semi-arid lands; cross-border adaptation dialogue between pastoralist 
communities in Kenya, Ethiopia and Tanzania; adapting built and natural water infrastructure for livestock in Isiolo and 
Garissa Counties; developing a resilience framework to support climate change adaptation in Mt. Elgon region in western 
Kenya; demonstrating natural infrastructure as a nature-based solution to climate change; and promoting transboundary 
river governance in the IGAD region.  
In January 2016, IUCN established a Hub for Forest Landscape Restoration directed by its Nairobi office, to support 
Kenya and other nearby countries, organizations, communities and enterprises in experimenting with and adopting 
landscape and forest restoration approaches. 
The Government of Kenya (GoK), through the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI):  
The State Department for Livestock (SDL), under the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, a line ministry of the 
Government of Kenya, will execute the project on behalf of the ministry. SDL has experience in strengthening 
management of rangeland resources through the Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience Project (RPLRP). RPLRP is 
a regional project financed by the World Bank between 2015 and 2019 and concurrently implemented by three IGAD 
member states: Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda. The objectives of the RPLRP are improved livelihoods for pastoral and 
agro-pastoral communities’ in cross-border drought prone areas and capacity building of the government to respond 
crisis or emergency. The project’s coordination unit is housed in the MoAI and the project is implemented in 14 counties 
including Baringo, Garissa, Isiolo, Kajiado, Laikipia, Lamu Mandera, Marsabit, Narok, Samburu, Turkana, Wajir, Tana 
River and West Pokot.  
National Drought Management Authority (NDMA):  
NDMA implements project-based interventions directly affecting household food security and livelihoods of more than 
ten million people. It provides a platform for long-term planning and action, as well as a mechanism for solid 
coordination across Government and with all other stakeholderall in matters relating to drought management in Kenya 
together with adaptation and resilience building in the Arid and Semi -Arid Lands (ASALs). 
NDMA administers the National Drought Contingency Fund in Kenya and disbursed Ksh 53 million to seven ASAL 
counties in 2016.  
Conservation International (CI):  
CI, through its Conservation Finance Division (CFD), has invested more than US$450 million in over 80 countries and 
territories, through various mechanisms and instruments, helping secure the protection of more than 90 million 
hectares of high-value habitat. CFD has supported over 2,000 partner organizations globally through direct grants and 
loan financing, and through its investments has leveraged over US$520 million to directly benefit communities and 
ecosystem services, including more than US$50 million of private-sector investments.  
CI has created more than 20 Trust Funds in various jurisdictions and leveraged more than US$200 million in public and 
private sector funding through these innovative mechanisms to ensure long-term financial sustainability of the 
interventions.  Since 2009, CI has also been one of the world’s most active investors in land-based mitigation and 
adaptation projects, developing a core portfolio of projects that have attracted over US$30 million in carbon finance 
and helped protect or restore over a million hectares of critically important land in Latin America, Africa, and Southeast 
Asia.  
For this project, CI will be building on CI’s responsible investment mechanism that deploys philanthropic capital to 
start-up and growth-stage enterprises that operate in key conservation areas.  Focused on impact first, CI works up 
front with a network of investment partners to secure follow-on financing and define paths to financial sustainability for 
its portfolio of projects.  
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
Intensive stakeholder consultative processes at community/county and national levels have driven the formulation and 
development of the project. The project design team was drawn from the relevant line ministries, state agencies, county 
government representatives, international and national NGOs, and local communities under the oversight of NDA.

=== PAGE 53 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 76 
 
 E 
Multi-stakeholder meetings with the NDA began when the project was first conceived in late 2016, and have continued 
frequently during 2016 - 2018(2-3 times/month). 
This widespread engagement in developing the project builds on past consultations on the foundation of experience, 
networks, and intellectual capital accumulated from previous projects to address drought, pastoralism models, and 
supply-chain market models in drylands. By employing lessons demonstrated by other projects, the project can 
replicate and upscale the most effective and transformative interventions to build resilience to drought and other climate 
impacts in the targeted landscapes.  
A total of over 250 stakeholders have been participated in various consultation and multi-stakeholder workshops 
including: 1) government agencies, Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation – State Department of Livestock, National 
Drought Management Authority, the Council of Governors, Kenya Water Towers Agency, Kenya Forestry Research 
Institute, Kenya Water Resources Authority, Kenya Forest Service, Kenya Wildlife Service, Department of Resource 
Surveys and Remote Sensing and Kenya Agriculture and Livestock Research Organization; 2) county technical and 
executive officers for Environment, Water, Agriculture, and Livestock; 3) local community representatives including 
agro-pastoralists, pastoralists, and women’s leaders as well as community institutions such as Water Resource Users 
Associations, Community Forest Associations, and Rangeland Users Associations; and 4) other project beneficiaries 
and partners from civil society and private sector firms working in the counties, e.g. Northern Rangelands Trust, Efforts 
of the Poor in Development, Kenya,, Waso Gums and Resins Farmer's Society Ltd, and ICRAF. The list of participants 
of the various stakeholder consultative workshops is presented the Stakeholder Consultation Report (Annex 9). 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
Private investment is highly constrained in the ASALs of Kenya and the project will establish enabling conditions to 
attract growing levels of private investment. ASALs are a neglected area nationally and this has led to limitations to the 
potential for returns on commercial investments. Yet vulnerability in the ASALs is exceptionally high and communities 
will be particularly impacted by climate change. 
The share of GDP from the ASALs could be high and investment in resilience in these area has the potential to give 
good returns to Kenya’s economy. The alternative scenario will be continued, and growing, costs to Kenya economy as 
a result of climate change-induced drought. Drought events cost Kenya through reduction in growth and through the 
cost of reconstruction, with most of the losses related to dips in the ASAL livestock sector. This sector contributes up to 
13% of GDP, but in the ASAL counties it is the dominant sector and the mainstay of the majority of livelihoods.  
The potential for upscaling this project is high and the target landscapes were identified based on the potential for 
upscaling to other areas. The project will strengthen information on climate change nationally, which will benefit all 
ASAL counties and provide a platform upon which similar investments can further advance ecosystem based 
adaptation in other ASAL regions. The work is easily scalable because the project will work within established national 
structures, following priority national policies. Furthermore, the project will come at a time when ASAL counties are 
looking for ways to capitalize on devolution, and it will provide critically needed resources at a highly strategic period in 
history. 
The proposed grant from the GCF will help promote transformative change while enhancing private and public 
investment. As structured, the grant will target activities that tend to have pay-offs that fully accrue only in the long-run 
or which are of a ‘public good’ nature, and which therefore cannot be addressed by the private sector. The combination 
of GCF grant financing and stakeholder involvement has been designed to stimulate systemic change that can be 
rapidly scaled-up. 
The costs of the activities identified are determined in a way to cover the minimum cost possible to achieve project 
objectives. Activities are related to cover the additional cost of responding to climate change threats in these counties. 
Thus, the project is intrinsically efficient and cost-effective. Activities to be undertaken by the project specifically 
address the climate change adaptation needs of stakeholders, who are mainly agro-pastoralists. The Outputs involve 
creating awareness and capacity building as well as actual implementation of activities on the ground. Thus, they are 
expected to have positive effects on long-term investments to be made by the stakeholders. 
A critical aspect of cost effectiveness is the emphasis on community-based rangelands management, which is a low 
cost approach with minimal material intervention, and a strong focus on creating a legacy of capacity for communal 
resource management and collective action. The key to success in Kenya’s ASALs is to unlock the adaptation potential 
of local communities by establishing conditions that enable them to deploy their knowledge and skills more effectively.

=== PAGE 54 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 76 
 
 E 
More costly measures, such as mechanized approaches to land restoration, are impractical on the scale required in 
these areas. 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability 
Without this grant from GCF, it is unlikely that the ASALs of Kenya will become resilient to climate change in the 
foreseeable future. The current development pathway, based on weak governance of rangeland landscapes, is likely to 
see further conversion of land for other uses, leaving pastoral populations increasingly vulnerable to the effects of climate 
change. This will jeopardize future sustainable development in the ASALs and will reduce economic growth in Kenya. 
Calculating economic rates of return is challenging due to the economic uncertainty and increasing regularity of drought 
events and the fund will be crucial for creating greater economic certainty in future. 
The main emphasis of this project is to contribute to Kenya’s national goal of ending drought emergencies. The project 
will contribute to (i) reducing the cost of drought on Kenya’s national economy and (ii) increasing incomes through value 
chain investments in the agricultural and natural resources sectors. 
Economic losses due to climate change in Kenya are currently estimated at 1% - 3% of GDP (Watkiss, Downing, & 
Dyszynski, 2010) (SEI, 2009). The PDNA report 2012 estimated the economic growth gap as a result of the 2008 – 2011 
drought at 2.8% per annum with the agricultural sector being among the most affected (Government of Kenya, 2012). 
Based on these estimates, the economic and financial analysis in the feasibility study estimates that, in the business as 
usual scenario (i.e. absence of GCF) the expected economic losses due to droughts over the next 14 years in the target 
landscapes will be US$ 578 million. 
To assess the future scenarios resulting from the project implementation the analysis relied on the documented evidence 
of similar interventions. Venton (2018) is assessing the economics of resilience building in Kenya, found out when the 
costs of investing in early response and resilience are offset against the benefits (avoided humanitarian aid and avoided 
income and livestock losses), the benefits exceed the costs by $2.8 for every $1 spent. 
The study also estimated the total costs of droughts experienced in Turkana and Northeast Livelihood zones in the ‘late 
humanitarian response’ scenario at US$ 71 million per year (i.e. US$1,068 million over 15 years). A resilience building 
scenario that results in an increase in income of US$450 per household could help save of  US$1.3 billion, or an average 
of US$84 million per year  in terms of avoided ‘drought related losses’ and ‘costs of humanitarian response’. An increase 
of income of USD$450 per household would thus help eliminate all the losses and even generate surplus benefits. 
The study thus concluded that interventions that build people’s resilience through an increase in household income of 
US$450 per household per year is more cost effective than meeting household needs in a crisis. Investing in drought 
resilience saves money and should be the priority in the ASALs of Kenya. Venton’s (2018) findings can be relied upon 
to model the expected impacts with regards to avoided drought related losses. However the analysis adopts a very 
conservative position and assesses three scenarios to ensure robustness i.e. realistic, pessimistic and optimistic 
scenarios. A 10% reduction of the economic losses is adopted as the realistic position of the impact expected from the 
project – representing a conservative estimate. 
Table 5: Economic analysis results – realistic scenario 
  
14 years, 12% discount rate 
5 years 12% discount rate 
NPV (USD) 
11,809,623  
3,255,214  
IRR 
31.15% 
20.98% 
Discounted payback period 
4.59  
4.59  
AEV (USD) 
1,781,732  
903,028  
Benefits/Costs Ratio 
1.38  
1.12

=== PAGE 55 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 76 
 
 E 
 
An analysis of the project shows that it will deliver a high net present value (NPV) of USD$ 0.83 million (12% discount 
rate; 5 years), demonstrating the project is economically viable and will lead to large economic, social and environmental 
benefits in Kenya. Sensitivity analysis using a 10% and 14.5% discount rates also shows an overall positive net present 
value for the project. The analysis did not undertake Financial Analysis of individual interventions neither did it assess 
mitigation benefits. 
Additional benefits are expected from the project that have not yet been evaluated, but which will be evaluated under the 
vulnerability analysis and monitoring activities (Component 1). These include social benefits associated with improved 
governance and peace, and environmental benefits including climate change mitigation benefits that could not be 
realistically estimated at this stage. 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
The project will include best practices across several domains and includes the following: 
• 
Sub-Catchment Management Plans (SCMP): SCMP are the community-level land use planning process legally 
mandated by the Water Resources Authority. SCMP for ASALS is the versions developed jointly by WRA and IUCN 
for drylands that specific integrates different sectors including water, rangelands, forests and agriculture. Outputs 
include community bylaws for landscape management. Through the project these SCMP will be developed with clear 
understanding of climate change impacts. 
• 
Community based rangeland management: IUCN has pioneered community-based approaches to securing and 
restoring rangelands in Kenya’s ASALs, including in Garissa and Isiolo counties. This approach will be incorporated 
in the sub-catchment management planning approach above. Community management plans for the rangelands will 
be informed by analysis of climate change impacts.  
• 
Drought sensitive water resource management: IUCN has developed approaches for community-validation of 
water infrastructure development, ensuring that yields are commensurate with available pasture resources in order 
to minimize the risk of over grazing, and to minimize conflict over natural resources. This includes small scale 
infrastructure, such as sub surface dams, as well as improved institutional arrangements to control the seasonal use 
and closure of critical water infrastructure. As with the previous tools, this approach will build on climate change 
impact information generated through the project. 
• 
Drought Early Warning: The Arid Lands Resource Management Project, implemented by the International 
Development Association (IDA) and the Government of Kenya. It successfully operationalizing drought early warning 
information and defined drought management structures that led to the institutionalization of the National Drought 
Management Authority. 
• 
SHARED (Stakeholder Approach to Evidence-based and Risk-informed Decision-making): decision support tool to 
facilitate decision making in complex systems. 
• 
Resilience Radio. Using interactive rural radio programs Farm Radio International has reached large audiences 
and in partnership with IUCN increased uptake of restoration activities in Uganda and Malawi. An evaluation found 
that 98% of people who listened to most or all of the broadcasts carried out one of the practices. 
• 
Value chains. Scaling up work undertaken by the ILRI Feed the Future program. These models include the Kenya 
Value Chain Finance Centre on strengthening and climate-proofing livestock value chains; and the MAMASE project, 
Mara Beef and NRT experiences on livestock husbandry, value addition, branding and marketing. 
• 
Community Resilience Facility (CRF): The CRF that builds on the successful VSLA model matches a community-
owned land use plan with community-owned solidarity funds. This is based on 5 years’ experience in Uganda and in 
Kenya a Sharia compliant version has been developed. 
• 
County Climate Change Funds: The counties are increasingly developing climate changes laws, institutions and 
funding mechanisms. Makueni allocates 1% of its revenue and Wajir County 2%; other counties are following suit. 
This is based on work under the Adaptation Consortium including NDMA, IIED, and others. 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)

=== PAGE 56 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 76 
 
 E 
 
(a) Total project financing 
 
(b) Requested GCF amount  
 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c) 
 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators (d) and (e) above. 
 TBD 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a comparable context.  
 TBD 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
 NA 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. NA 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a comparable context. NA 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit generated as a 
result of the project/programme) 
 
 
 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.

=== PAGE 57 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 76 
 
 F 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
The detailed economic analysis and assumptions are presented in Annex 3.  
As noted in section E.6.3 an economic analysis was conducted for the proposed project. Best practices in appraisal 
for public sector projects have been followed. The Economic Analysis - Annex 3 shows the conclusions of the 
economic analysis, together with related assumptions and information.  
Economic net present value (ENPV) is calculated using a 12% discount rate. The ENPV at a 12% discount rate at 14 
years for the project is USD 11,809,623 and the corresponding economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 31.15%. At 
12% discount rate for 5 years, the project ENPV is USD 3,255,214 and the EIRR is 20.98%. In both project lives, the 
project is economically viable. However the project’s viability is even higher under the 14 years project life as is 
expected with climate change adaptation projects whose impacts are more medium to long-term in nature. Tests of 
sensitivity of the ENPV and EIRR show the following: 
Table 6: Summary of economic net present value (ENPV) and economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project, at 
12% discount rate and two sensitivity cases 
(in USD. Figures are rounded) 
 
Discount rate 
ENPV 
(14 years) 
EIRR 
(14 years) 
ENPV 
(5 years) 
EIRR 
(5 years) 
Discount rate – 12% (base case) 
11,809,623 
 
31.15% 
3,255,214 
 
20.98% 
Discount rate – 10% 
14,350,595 
4,237,843 
Discount rate – 14.5% 
9,165,194 
2,176,283 
 
The sensitivity analysis shows that the economic viability is less sensitive to the discount rates generally accepted for 
appraising public projects as all the ENPVs remain positive. 
The net benefits of the project are considered underestimates, however, for the reasons explained in Annex 3. These 
include:  
1. The period considered for the economic analysis is 14 years. Several of the projects interventions are 
expected to bring benefits beyond the 14 years of the analysis implying that the net benefits are not fully 
considered. These include some water harvesting infrastructure, community incentive mechanisms etc. 
2. There are some benefits not captured in the economic analysis, including the economic value of different 
ecosystem services provided by the restored ecosystems. Examples of such services include increased 
groundwater recharge, reduced soil degradation and mitigation of floods on lower catchments. GHG 
emissions reduction from restoration of pasture or Climate-Smart Agriculture practices also are not included 
as benefits. 
 
The project cannot be accomplished without the Fund’s support. Project partners are contributing co-finance for the 
implementation of the proposed project, it represents a fraction of the resources required for implementation.  
The proposed project is expected to have a high impact when the all activities are implemented together in the project 
areas. Taking these points into account, and noting that Kenya is a low middle income country with limited resources 
to devote to climate change adaptation, the concessionality that the GCF provides is justified.

=== PAGE 58 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 76 
 
 F 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
The approaches outlined in this proposal are recognized by IUCN as “Nature Based Solutions” (NBS): actions to 
protect, sustainably manage, and restore natural or modified ecosystems that address societal challenges effectively 
and adaptively, simultaneously providing human well-being and biodiversity benefits. 
NBS approaches are the most appropriate for ASAL counties for four reasons: 
1. Reach: the project can include and empower a large number of stakeholders to directly engage with adaptive 
decisions and interventions as it works with the land and natural resource base; 
2. Scalability: these are the types of interventions that have the best chance of going to scale quickly given the 
local context, and particularly Kenya’s stage in the devolution process; 
3. Cost effectiveness and time responsiveness: the actions can be deployed immediately and at reasonable 
cost; 
4. Complementarity: they are no-regret options and can provide a solid foundation for other types of 
interventions (not provisioned for in the project) such as livestock insurance, as they become viable options. 
Rangeland restoration, particularly based on improved rangeland management practices to allow natural 
regeneration, are low cost approaches that are suited to having an impact on a large scale, as demanded in the 
ASALs. Natural and assisted natural regeneration approaches are well understood at the community level and can be 
directly delivered through strengthening of local governance. By empowering local level governance (through by-laws, 
laws, recognition of local institutions) and financially incentivizing governance through community solidarity 
mechanisms and increased functionality of restoration-based value chains a virtuous feed-back is established. 
Stronger local governance in turn provides multiple benefits beyond restoration, including improvements in security 
and conflict management and improved decision making for collective action. 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
This project has completed the screening procedures of IUCN Environmental and Social Management System 
(ESMS). The ESMS and its procedures, Standards and tools have been reviewed by GCF accreditation panel and 
validated as being compliant with GCF requirements for analyzing low and medium risk projects.  
The project aims to improve resilience of communities and ecosystems in Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (ASALs) in 
Kenya to future climate shocks and stresses and is expected to have environmental and social impacts that are 
overall highly positive. It is considered as highly unlikely that the activities carried out under this project will have any 
significant adverse environmental and/or social risks and/or impacts that are divers, irreversible, or unprecedented 
(hence no high risk). However, physical interventions, planned under component 2 and 3, must be carefully planned 
and monitored to mitigate potential social or environmental impacts. 
The project emphasizes low-risk interventions and favors community approaches in order to mitigate the risks 
associated with natural resource management and governance. While most of the activities are not expected to 
involve any social or environmental risks, some might imply mild adverse environmental and/or social risks and/or 
impacts, though they would be expected few in number, generally be site-specific, largely reversible, and readily 
addressed through mitigation measures. Hence the ESMS Screening report classified the project as moderate risk 
project (category B, see attached ESMS Screening Report).  
Component 1 is not expected to cause negative impacts that are more than minimal as it aims at improving decision 
making by strengthening diagnosis and integrated landscape planning at the county level, providing climate data, 
strengthening drought early warning systems, and enhancing landscape governance and participatory monitoring. 
The main focus of risk management is in strengthening community institutions and enabling them to participate 
effectively in landscape planning, which includes negotiation between different rights holders in the same landscape. 
The project includes resources for training in conflict management and facilitation of conflict resolution in landscape 
dialogues.  
Component 2 aims to promote ecosystem-based adaptation and includes concrete measure for rehabilitation and 
restoration of degraded river banks, wetlands, forests, degraded rangelands and agro pastoral systems and provides 
water management structure such as sand dams, shallow wells rock catchments and spring protection. Potential risks 
to the extent known at this stage, are listed in Section G below. Because these interventions and infrastructures are 
small in scale and implemented using good management practices and effective participation in planning these

=== PAGE 59 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 76 
 
 F 
actions in order to mitigate localized disputes, risks are overall not expected to be significant. In line with the 
participatory character of the project the specific on-the ground interventions and sites for the individual interventions 
will be defined only during project implementation. Accordingly, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) has been prepared and will be publicly disclosed (in country at publicly accessible locations and 
on IUCN website) prior to project approval. 
Component 3 involves the development of sustainable value chains (e.g. livestock-based, gums, resins and other 
products), the promotion of conservation enterprises specialized on grass seeds and fodder reserves and community-
based conservation initiatives to improve livelihoods. As part of the latter, the project will support the establishment of 
two distinct mechanisms; 1) autonomous and community-owned and run ‘Community Resilience Facilities (CRF’s)’ in 
communities in the 2 landscapes, and 2) grants to cooperatives and community-based enterprises actors to unlock 
barriers in specific value chains based on CI’s model.  1. The CRF’s will enable each community to establish an 
autonomously managed revolving fund that provides an incentive to implement the restoration land-use plans that 
each community develops and owns.  A grant from GCF to village communities in the landscapes will be used for 
each community to establish this revolving fund. That includes the training and set-up of the fund and the small-scale 
capitalization. The condition of the community internal lending is that households support, and where appropriate 
invest in, activities that support restoration.  The loan sizes are small (typically $10-30) and households can use them 
in a self-determined way, including but not necessarily in support of, the restoration value chain activities they are 
engaged in.  Being a revolving fund, all members of the community will benefit and this community owned asset will 
grow and mature as a resilience-building mechanism.  It is the most equitable and efficient use of limited grant funds.  
2. The grants to value chain actors based on the CI model will be much larger grants in the range of $10,000 -
250,000 into specific value chains with a view to overcoming barriers that are currently impeding the operation of the 
value chain and larger and more consistent  investment. 
Environmental and/or social risks of supporting these two mechanisms are considered minor given the small scale of 
the activities. However, because the individual investments and the concrete value chain activities to be supported by 
the project are not known at this stage, the ESMF includes operational procedures for assessing environmental and 
social risks of these small investments and the value chain activities. These procedures will ensure compliance with 
IUCN’s ESMS safeguard provisions.  
ESMS Grievance Mechanism  
The implementation of the provisions of IUCN’s ESMS Grievance Mechanism will provide an additional safety net for 
ensuring that people will not suffer from any unforeseen negative social or environmental impacts. 
Gender considerations 
The Gender Analysis undertaken for this proposal noted existing gender gaps, inequalities and challenges, and 
proposed corresponding gender-responsive actions to enhance project outcomes with a gender perspective. With an 
understanding that women, men and youth are affected by climate change and development activities differently, the 
gender analysis was carried out using the Harvard Gender Analysis Framework and Rani Parker’s Gender Analysis 
Matrix. Through these two tools, the typical daily activities of women, men, girls and boys were investigated, as well 
as the gender-based power relations and interests, based on access and control to resources. The gender analysis 
will be further complemented through the vulnerability assessments carried out at community level.  
Herd management comprises up to 70% of men’s work time, while women have simultaneous and competing 
demands for productive (market) and reproductive (household) labor time. Men typically control access to most 
productive assets in the project area, while women use or maintain the same assets, hence the need to include both 
men and women in decision making on dryland restoration and management. When developing land-use plans and 
designing the actual ecosystem restoration measures together with the communities, the project will ensure 
appropriate participation of women in the meetings. Where needed, women will be empowered to ensure that 
decision-making is not dominated by specific gender groups. In designing the restoration measures the project will be 
sensitive to the traditional divisions of labor to ensure that plans and measures are socially acceptable but will also 
not unwittingly or increase the time burden of women, men and youth, or unintentionally exacerbate other inequalities. 
Given increased vulnerability and lack of access to key resources female-headed households will be specifically 
targeted by project benefits (e.g. through training, in decisions about water infrastructure, through incentives related 
to livelihood alternatives). 
Access to technical assistance, to markets and to finance is also a key constraint in improving women’s economic 
productivity, which will be addressed when designing the Community Resilience Facilities and value chain activities 
under Component 3.

=== PAGE 60 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 76 
 
 F 
The project ensured that there was representation of women and youth organizations in the county consultations. The 
project has indicators that disaggregate the benefits that women are expected to receive e.g. in terms of participation 
in decision making access to resources and other elements. 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
1. The financial management of this project will be guided by IUCN’s internal financial rules and regulations which 
are part of the IUCN Finance Manual. In situations where the government rules give clear cost advantages, they 
will take precedence over the IUCN rules. To ensure that project funds are used effectively and efficiently in 
accordance with the approved budget, monthly review of project expenditures will be conducted. The project will 
apply IUCN financial reporting template that caters to provide information of “actual versus budget” data for 
desired period of reporting. The report can also group and present expenses/transactions pertaining to the 
activities described in project budget.  
2. 
The procurement aspects of this project will be guided by IUCN’s, ‘Policy and Procedure on Procurement of 
Goods and Services’ (https://www.iucn.org/procurement), that is a standard professional procurement policy and 
elaborate standard procedures which ensure that IUCN obtains value for money in all its procurement activities 
and that procurement is conducted in an efficient and cost effective manner that respects sustainability, the 
environment and ethical principles. For the grant recipients, the specific sub-policy titled, ‘Procurement Policy 
and Procedure for Grant Recipients’ will be applied, which is a specific set of procedures for grant recipients.  
3. 
There will be comprehensive due diligence assessment undertaken of every short-listed grant recipient using the 
relevant guidelines. This will ensure that the grantees have the required organizational and administrative 
capacity to implement grant projects, and at the same time will act as a capacity-building measure for the 
grantees.  
4. 
The project will be audited in accordance with the International Standards on Auditing (ISA). This project will 
form part of the annual statutory audit undertaken by IUCN’s corporate auditor, Price Waterhouse Coopers. In 
terms of the project specific audit, IUCN will appoint the auditors and the audit will be scheduled around end of 
the project and conducted in line with ISA. To supplement these audits, periodic financial reviews will be 
conducted as part of regular monitoring.

=== PAGE 61 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 76 
 
 G 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
 
The project was designed considering the potential social and environmental risks as well as financial and operational 
risks.  
The results of the ESMS screening on social and environmental risks and the rationale for classifying the project as a 
moderate risk project concerning environmental and social issues (Category B) have been described under section F 
3. Risks related to component 2 and 3 are expected to be controlled and managed through the implementation of the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). As described in F3, activities and sites under 
components 2 and 3 are not known in detail yet as they will be designed together with the respective communities 
and stakeholders during project implementation. Considering the proposed generic types of restoration and 
rehabilitation measures, activities related to water infrastructure and value chain and enterprise development 
measures, the following types of risks might be expected:  
Social Risks: 
• 
Lack of access to alternative grazing resources for communities may arise. This might be a result of the 
implementation of community restoration plans, land-use plans and grazing management guidelines that may 
involve seasonal restriction of access to range and pastureland. 
• 
Increased competition over natural resource use, especially water and pasture. Resource competition is an 
existing risk in the target landscapes and could be exacerbated as economic opportunities increase (e.g. through 
the promotion of value chains) or as communities take steps to strengthen their rights and claims over specific 
resources. Improvements in water infrastructure (water harvesting structures, boreholes and wells) may also act 
as starting points for resource-related conflicts as it might trigger disputes over their location or might lead to the 
perception of unfair treatment.  
• 
Incompatibility with cultural practices of the local communities in the project sites when implementing restoration 
activities. There is therefore a need to work closely with the communities in designing and setting up the 
ecosystem restoration measures and water management infrastructure to ensure compatibility with cultural 
practices of indigenous peoples and marginalized groups, including pastoralists and hunter-gatherer groups.  
• 
Potential for operational health and safety considerations due to the location of the project.  
• 
Domination by older men in community dialogue and decision making. Decision-making in cultural institutions is 
traditionally dominated by older males, with women and youth partially excluded from the process. These 
institutions are now adapting to the new constitutional mandate of gender equity. The project will adopt a 
participatory approach and promote inclusive mechanisms to hear the voices of women and youth.  
Environmental Risks: 
• 
Developing or rehabilitating water points or harvesting structures in drylands, if not well planned and 
implemented, can lead to localized impacts on biodiversity during construction phase or to disturbances caused 
by an influx of communities and livestock to newly established water points. There is also a risk of lowering the 
water table due to over-abstraction of water resources from constructed boreholes and wells. 
• 
Accidental spread of invasive species when implementing ecosystem restoration measures.   
• 
Measures for controlling invasive species as part of ecosystem restoration may require the targeted application of 
herbicide or other pest management techniques – hence the need to develop an herbicide management plan 
should stakeholders decide to control the spread of invasive alien plants.  
• 
Providing value chain support and developing markets for products harvested from natural habitats could lead to 
over-harvesting. This is particular relevant for the harvest of gums and resins which frequently causes over-
harvesting and drying up of trees in Kenya. The risk might be significant in particular for communities where the 
project does not influence harvest rates but who still benefit from enhanced market access.  
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Lack of alternative grazing resources for communities 
may arise as a result of the implementation of 
community restoration plans, land-use plans and 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low

=== PAGE 62 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 76 
 
 G 
grazing management guidelines that may lead to 
seasonal restricted access to range and pastureland. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project’s approach to ensure active participation of the communities in the development of the land-use plans 
and grazing guidelines will be vital to prevent social impacts. The vulnerability assessments undertaken in each 
village/community will provide appropriate social baseline and understanding of vulnerabilities. The ESMF includes 
provisions for ensuring that any land-use decisions and in particular decisions about potential use restrictions of 
certain areas, are completely voluntary and with an appropriate degree of participation of potentially affected 
stakeholders. The participatory approach to be used in community planning brings together all the relevant 
stakeholders from the local communities, including women and the youth in the planning and decision making 
process.  
However, residual risks relate to the uncertainty whether rehabilitation or restoration of ecosystems will provide 
sufficient and timely benefits to mitigate use restrictions. The rehabilitation/ restoration measures will be prioritized 
and strategically chosen (e.g. the most degraded and least productive areas) to ensure maximum benefits within the 
project time cycle (restoration of grasses brings very quick benefits). Second, there is a low risk that there might be 
vulnerable and disadvantaged groups in the communities who may not be able to cope with seasonal restrictions. If 
this risk is verified in a certain community, measures will be identified together with the affected groups to mitigate 
social impacts from restrictions such as providing subsistence allowance to support them through a period of access 
restriction or by prioritizing them in the project’s to livelihood support activities. The measures will be funded through 
reserves set aside in the Community Resilience Facility.  
The above mitigation measures are expected to further lower the probability of the risk. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Increased competition over resource use especially 
water and pasture. Resource competition is an existing 
risk in the target landscapes and could be exacerbated 
as economic opportunities increase (e.g. through the 
promotion of value chains). Improvements in water 
infrastructure and the provision of other project 
benefits may also act as starting points for conflicts. 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project has been and will continue to be designed via participatory community consultations, and implemented 
largely by community organizations and pastoralist user groups. These groups will identify which water retention or 
management structures to improve or build, and their locations – not outside partners. Activities for value chain 
development and other benefits provided by the project will be defined with involvement of relevant groups applying 
transparent processes and fair criteria. The ESMF provides further guidance. IUCN’s experience in managing 
negotiated and mutually acceptable outcomes is vital to mitigate this risk. These mitigation measures are expected 
to reduce the probability of the risk occurring to ‘low’.  
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Conflict with cultural practices of the local communities 
in the project sites when implementing restoration 
activities. 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low

=== PAGE 63 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 76 
 
 G 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
This risk will be mitigated through the use of participatory approaches in planning and implementing activities at the 
local level. This approach incorporates extensive and inclusive consultation of different stakeholders including 
indigenous peoples and marginalized groups and their participation in the designing of interventions and plans 
relevant to their livelihoods as well as through actions that strengthen their participation and rights in natural 
resources management. The ESMF entails elements of an Indigenous Peoples Process Framework and specifies 
how provisions from the Indigenous Peoples Standard are addressed. As such it provides a detailed account of the 
participatory process related to the various components and activities of the project including the specification of the 
types of analysis on potential social, cultural or economic impacts required (incorporated in the vulnerability 
assessments) and when FPIC from respective groups will need to be obtained.  These measures are expected to 
further reduce the low probability of the risk. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Potential for operational health and safety risks due to 
the location of the project.  
Social and 
environmental 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The risk is managed by IUCN security protocols and monitoring of government and NGO intelligence. An operational 
health and safety handbook will provide preventive and protective measures and emergency prevention and 
preparedness and response arrangements to address risks to community workers, contracted workers and project 
staff. These measures are expected to further reduce the low probability of the risk. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Domination by older men in community dialogue and 
decision making. Decision-making in cultural 
institutions is traditionally dominated by older males, 
with women and youth partially excluded from the 
process.  
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Kenyan institutions are now adapting to the new constitutional mandate of gender equity. The project will include 
intensive sensitization towards the need to include women in decision making in land-use planning and practice 
gender equity in decisions making processes influenced by the project. These measures are expected to lower the 
probability of the risk occurring to ‘low’.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Increased degradation as a result of developing and 
rehabilitating water harvesting structures and water 
points. This could be caused by inappropriate location 
of water infrastructure and influx of communities and 
livestock to newly established water points. The 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low

=== PAGE 64 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 76 
 
 G 
installation of boreholes and wells could lead to over-
abstraction and to a lowering of the water table. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The risk during construction phase will be addressed through careful planning of infrastructure works, incorporating 
strong technical guidance, appropriate planning of infrastructure within wider landscape management plans, and 
ensuring extensive community consultation. Further mitigation measures include ensuring regular maintenance and 
monitoring of water abstraction. Detailed guidance is provided in the ESMF. These measures are expected to further 
reduce the low probability of the risk. 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Increase in the spread of invasive species when 
implementing ecosystem restoration measures.  
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
This risk is managed by the use of a protocol with clear guidelines regarding the selection of tree species included in 
the ESMF. For the grass establishment the project will conduct a risk assessment following IUCN guidelines for 
reintroduction and translocation of species. These mitigation measures are expected to further reduce the low 
probability of the risk. 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Providing value chain support and developing markets 
for products harvested from natural habitats could lead 
to over-harvesting. This is particular relevant for the 
harvest of gums and resins which frequently causes 
over-harvesting and drying up of tree in Kenya. The 
risk might be significant in particular for communities 
where the project does not influence harvest rates but 
who still benefit from enhanced market access.  
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will support communities in determining thresholds for harvest rates for natural resources extracted from 
natural habitats – specified in the community land use plans. These plans will also include requirements for 
monitoring actual extractions. The project will further work with authorities and relevant stakeholders outside the 
project sites and raise awareness about the need to establish and monitor harvesting rates. These measures are 
expected to lower the probability of the risk occurring to ‘low’.  
Selected Risk Factor 9 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Natural disaster events such as prolonged droughts or 
higher frequency of drought as well as torrential rainfalls 
destroy or delay project interventions.  
 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
High

=== PAGE 65 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 76 
 
 G 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project is designed to operate within the context of recurrent drought and it is likely that drought will occur during 
the project period. The occurrence of drought will inevitably have consequences for project delivery, but will also 
strengthen support for the role of the project in mitigating such risks in the long term. Enhanced information and 
early warning systems will strengthen drought management while restoration of natural resources in drought reserve 
will reinforce adaptive capacity and demonstrate the value of the project. Additional livelihood activities will also 
reinforce adaptive capacities and resilience. 
The main risk that has to be managed is of relief agencies implementing actions that undermine adaptive capacity 
and degrade resources, for example through inappropriate siting of water points. The project will develop planning 
tools that are explicitly designed to mitigate this recurrent risk. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 10  
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Government/ donors/ private sector invest in irrigation 
schemes which are technically not appropriate for 
dryland system and affect sustainability and 
effectiveness of project interventions  
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
There is a medium probability that some investments in irrigation will be made in the target landscapes, although the 
overall scale of such investments is likely to be low. The project does not stand in complete opposition to irrigation, 
but will provide technical guidance to ensure that, if irrigation is developed, it is guided to reduce the wider 
consequences within the landscape in a context of increasing drought and scarcity of water resources. The project 
supports policy dialogue with relevant authorities at national and county level about managing the negative 
externalities changing land use and water management practices, and will establish mechanisms for improved 
planning of natural resources to offset the risk of negative externalities. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 11  
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Infrastructure development or economic activities such 
as mining activities, concessions, and claims might 
affect the effectiveness of the restoration measures 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Although no major mining or infrastructure investments are foreseen in the target landscapes, they cannot be ruled 
out in the long term. The project will establish landscape management mechanisms which are designed to manage 
competing land uses and claims. These mechanisms provide the means through which future land use changes can 
be coordinated and managed, particularly with regard to seasonal grazing access. Those mechanisms deliberately 
operate at the County level, since the Counties are the main decision maker over land reallocations. These measures 
are expected to lower the probability of the risk occurring to ‘low’. 
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon 
TBD during project inception phase

=== PAGE 66 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 76 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement 
Framework under the Results Management Framework. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level19 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased 
climate-resilient 
sustainable 
development 
Reduce the cost of climate change induced drought on Kenya’s national economy by increasing 
resilience of the livestock and other land use sectors in restored and effectively governed rangeland 
ecosystems 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if 
applicable) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
A4.0 Improved 
resilience of 
ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
4.1: Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems 
protected/rehabilitated in 
response to climate 
variability and change 
Landscape 
‘dashboard’ 
 
Participatory 
rangeland 
assessment 
combined with 
remote sensing 
 
0 
200,000 
ha 
500,000 
ha 
Rangelands are 
facing degradation 
processes but 
restoration processes 
can be activated 
during the program 
cycle  
Socially and 
ecologically 
acceptable 
approaches to 
rangelands 
management and 
restoration can be 
identified and 
approved for scale up 
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of the 
most vulnerable 
people, 
communities and 
regions 
1.2 Number of males and 
females benefiting from the 
adoption of diversified, 
climate resilient livelihood 
options (including fisheries, 
agriculture, tourism, etc.) 
KAP survey 
Participatory 
narrative inquiry 
survey results 
0% 
50,000 
people of 
which 
40% are 
female  
and youth 
 
 
 
155,000 
people  of 
which 
50% are 
female 
and youth 
(Total 
number 
of males 
and 
Government 
maintains a strong 
commitment to 
devolution, security 
and drought 
management in the 
ASALs 
19 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement 
Frameworks available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf

=== PAGE 67 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 76 
 
 H 
females is 
approxim
ately 25% 
of the 
total 
landscape 
populatio
n) 
 
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Program level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term (if 
applicable)  
Final 
Project/ 
program 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
for climate-
responsive 
planning and 
development 
5.1 Degree (%) of 
integration/ 
mainstreaming of 
climate change in 
national, sub national 
and sector planning 
and coordination in 
information sharing 
and project 
implementation. 
Landscape 
dashboard 
Climate 
change data 
engagement, 
uptake and 
use 
scorecard 
Evaluation of 
county 
policies and 
plans and 
their 
implementati
on  
County development 
and investment 
plans for rangeland 
and natural resource 
management do not 
integrate climate 
change projections. 
Provisions for 
necessary cross-
sectoral and cross-
county coordination 
of landscape 
management are 
insufficient. 
Landscape 
manageme
nt included 
in  50% of 
land use 
related 
county 
developme
nt, 
investment 
plans and 
bylaws 
100% 
target 
counties 
integrate 
climate 
change 
projections 
in 
landscape 
manageme
nt plans. 
National and 
devolved policy 
remains favorable 
to stronger 
institutional 
systems for 
climate 
responsive 
planning and 
development. 
7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity 
and reduced 
exposure to 
climate risks  
7.2 Percent population 
using  fund supported 
tools, instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to respond to 
climate change and 
variability 
  
 
Vulnerability 
assessments 
carried out at 
inception and 
end of 
project 
 
Climate 
change data 
engagement, 
uptake and 
use 
scorecard 
 
Adoption of 
climate 
adaptation 
planning in 
Zero: (climate 
adaptation tools 
have been piloted 
through NGO 
projects in an ad hoc 
way – no 
standardized 
approaches have 
been scaled up in 
partnership with 
government) 
Standardiz
ed 
approaches 
agreed and 
implement
ed in all 
target 
landscapes 
Standardiz
ed 
approaches 
used 
systematica
lly for 
rangeland 
planning in 
all target 
county 
governmen
ts 
Counties 
champion the 
standardized 
approaches and 
ensure that future 
actors are willing 
and able to 
support the 
established 
institutionalized 
approaches

=== PAGE 68 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 76 
 
 H 
participatory 
exercises and 
County 
budgets 
8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of 
climate threats 
and risk-reduction 
processes 
8.1 Percent of target 
population aware of 
the potential impacts 
of climate change and 
range of possible 
responses  
Reach of 
radio 
broadcasts 
and other 
media 
 
Household 
assessment 
 
Information on  
climate change and 
its implications for 
rangeland 
management has not 
been systematically 
validated or 
communicated 
20% of 
population  
reports 
increased 
awareness 
of climate 
threats  and 
risk-
reduction 
processes 
50% of 
population 
reports 
increased 
awareness 
of climate 
threats  
and risk-
reduction 
processes 
Network 
providers 
continue to 
strengthen the 
reach of radio 
broadcasts and 
mobile telephony 
through the 
project area 
Project/ 
program 
outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
Output 1: 
Coordinated 
transboundary 
rangeland 
management 
decisions are 
strengthened by 
enhanced climate 
change analysis 
and  participatory 
community and 
county planning 
.1.1 Number of ASAL 
counties that receive 
early warning 
information that is 
informed by enhanced  
projections of climate 
change and its impacts 
on land and livestock 
.1.2  Number of 
community plans 
developed using 
gender differentiated 
and participatory 
approach for climate-
change sensitive 
landscape planning 
.1.3 Number of  
evidence-based 
climate resilience 
plans at county level 
informed by 
community plans 
.1.4 Quality and 
quantity of inter-
county decisions 
aimed at coordination 
of climate change-
adaptive natural 
resource management 
and drought 
preparedness 
Early 
warning 
system 
functionality 
report 
Landscape 
plan 
availability 
Landscape 
dashboard 
Climate 
change data 
engagement, 
uptake and 
use 
scorecard 
Participatory 
narrative 
inquiry 
survey 
results 
County 
budgets 
Published 
participatory 
landscape 
management 
plans  
Reports of 
participatory 
processes 
1.1.  0 
1.2.  3 
1.3.  3 
1.4.  0  
1.1.  23 
1.2. 29 
(75% of 
wards)  
1.3.  8 
1.4.   2 (1 
per 
landscape) 
1.1.  23 
1.2.  39 
(100% or 
wards) 
1.3.  11 
1.4.   11 (1 
per county) 
Landscape level 
planning and 
climate action is 
adopted  as a 
high-level agenda 
by the county 
governments and 
this is reflected in 
county budgets 
Multiple inter-
county decisions 
will be required 
over shared 
natural resources. 
However, it is 
conceivable that 
multiple 
arrangements 
could be captured 
in a smaller 
number of 
agreements (e.g. 
one or two per 
landscape, agreed 
between all 
relevant counties)

=== PAGE 69 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 76 
 
 H 
Output 2: 
Prioritized 
rangeland 
resources 
including water 
resources, are 
brought under 
restoration, 
safeguarded and 
sustainably 
managed for 
improved climate 
change resilience 
 
2.1 Area (ha) of 
rangeland ecosystems 
under   improved 
communal governance 
for restoration and 
protection 
2.2 # communities 
implementing 
“planned grazing” for 
climate smart 
pastoralism 
2.3 # of grass seed 
banks 
2.4 # of soil and water 
conservation works 
2.5 # rangeland users 
trained in climate 
change resilient 
natural resource 
management and 
governance 
2.6 # county laws 
enabling community 
action (bylaws) for 
climate change 
resilient natural 
resource management  
Landscape 
‘dashboard’ 
data 
land use and 
grazing plan 
availability  
DRSRS 
survey 
frames 
County SLM 
and CSA 
reports 
Project 
Monitoring 
Reports 
Departmenta
l Reports 
Training 
Reports 
Consultancy 
reports 
2.1.  0 
2.2.  0 
2.3.  0 
2.4.  0 
2.5.  0 
2.6.  0 
 
2.1. 
250,000 
2.2.  20 
(50% of 
wards) 
2.3.  0 
2.4.  20 
2.5.  780 
(20 pax 
times 39 
wards) 
2.6.  0 
 
2.1. 
500,000 
2.2.  29 
(75% of 
wards) 
2.3.  16 
2.4.  39 
2.5.  780 
2.6 9 
 
 
The pursuit of 
climate adaptation 
benefits and the 
need to reduce 
risks of land 
degradation will 
strengthen  and 
influence 
investment 
choices by 
government, 
communities and 
private sector 
Output 3: Public, 
private and 
community 
investments in 
natural resources  
 
 
3.1 # counties with at 
least one value chain 
developed for the 
benefit of rangeland 
users 
 
3.2 # of restoration 
enterprises created by 
women’s groups 
3.3 # investment-
ready  business plans 
for climate change 
resilience in the 
natural resources 
sector 
-HH survey  
- Project 
Reports 
-County 
Reports 
-GARA 
reports 
-KEFRI 
reports 
-Kenya 
Export 
Promotion 
Council 
-MTP reports 
-Ministry of 
Trade 
Reports 
-Training 
Reports 
3.1.  0 
3.2.  0 
3.3.  0 
 
3.1.  0 
3.2.  0 
3.3.  0 
 
3.1.  11 
3.2.  16  
restoration 
enterprises
3.3  16 (40 
business 
plans 
Sufficient 
restoration 
related value 
chain companies 
exist to take up 
value chain grants 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Description 
1.1 Enhance 
information 
systems to inform 
climate change 
sensitive 
Enhance county data for early warning 
information and Action 
• Updated climate change analysis 
• Gathering and consolidation of key 
data 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Travel and meetings 
Equipment  
Other Direct Costs 
Consultants to design reporting 
& communication formats for 
climate change data for 
communities and counties

=== PAGE 70 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 76 
 
 H 
landscape 
planning and 
vulnerability/ risk 
management 
• Increased dissemination of drought 
early warning information 
Conduct participatory rangeland 
assessments (implement PRAGA 
methodology) 
• Consolidate baseline information 
• Develop spatial analysis using 
baseline remote sensing data 
• Participatory landscape 
classification and indicator 
development 
• Field assessment 
• Data analysis  
Vulnerability assessments and 
evaluation of coping strategies 
• Application of established NDMA 
methodology 
Establish county dashboards using 
SHARED 
• Integration of existing data 
• Collection of data to address key 
gaps Development of data platform 
Outreach and communications  
• Website development and 
maintenance 
• Radio broadcasts 
• Other communications, including 
print media 
External Grants 
Indirect Costs 
 
Training and capacity building 
for drought monitoring and 
analysis 
Stakeholder training on Eco-DRR 
e.g. 
• Technical expertise 
• Funding for consultations 
• Awareness campaigns 
• Publication material (print, 
poster, social media, video, etc.) 
1.2 Strengthen 
community 
institutions to 
coordinate 
community 
planning and to 
inform and 
represent 
stakeholders in 
landscape 
planning 
Implement stakeholder engagement 
and communication 
• Organize community consultations 
to validate stakeholder analyses 
• Develop and disseminate 
communication materials 
• Public outreach and awareness 
events 
Training of trainers in participatory 
rangeland/catchment planning 
(develop  sub-catchment management 
plans and rangeland management 
plans) 
• Publication of training materials 
• Implementation of training for 
target stakeholders 
• Implementation of “training by 
doing” through implementation of 
participatory rangeland/catchment 
plans in all target communities  
Development community plans in all 
target wards 
• Prepare maps of target areas 
• Facilitate community meetings 
• Validate plans with the whole 
community (linked with the 
development of community level by 
laws) 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Travel and meetings 
Equipment  
Other Direct Costs 
Grants 
Indirect Costs 
 
Mobilizing community members 
for a thorough and open 
consultative/participatory 
process 
Training of a cadre of County and 
NGO staff to implement climate 
smart participatory planning  
Roll out of participatory planning 
in 39 target wards 
1.3 Develop county 
rangeland 
restoration plans 
that build on local 
community plans 
combined with 
Training of county staff in use of 
climate change and other early 
warning data for rangeland landscape 
management 
• Development of training materials 
• Implementation of training 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Travel and meetings 
Equipment  
Other Direct Costs 
Grants 
Training programs will be 
developed and implemented and 
County fora will be convened and 
a periodic basis to integrated 
climate change data and

=== PAGE 71 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 76 
 
 H 
enhanced climate 
change data 
County plans developed for the priority 
landscapes 
• Convening of County planning fora 
to consolidate/reconcile data 
analysis and participatory land 
use/catchment planning  
• Landscape level planning at county 
level using SHARED and early 
warning data to integrate into 
County Planning 
 
Indirect Costs 
 
 
participatory plans into County 
planning  
1.4 Establish 
functioning 
landscape 
management 
mechanisms in 
participating 
counties for 
climate change 
sensitive and 
accountable 
decision-making 
Establish and support inter-county 
forums for landscape planning 
• Mobilization of key stakeholders 
• Inception process 
• Consensus building meetings 
between Counties for 
transboundary landscapes 
• Facilitation of conflict management 
dialogue 
Training of county government staff 
and community representatives in 
landscape planning and rangeland 
ecosystem management  
• Interpretation of climate resilience 
diagnosis and climate change data – 
use of the SHARED tool 
• Management of rangeland 
ecosystems and restoring 
ecosystem functionality  
• Training in coordination and 
evidence based decision making for 
climate resilience 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Travel and meetings 
Equipment  
Other Direct Costs 
Grants 
Indirect Costs 
 
 
Training and facilitation for 
enhanced leadership and 
coordination  
Training and application of 
SHARED methodology 
Integrated landscape resource 
mapping and planning for 
climate resilience 
Training and advisory services to 
integrate evidence based 
decision making with landscape 
level planning and to link with 
county development and land 
use plans 
 
1.5 Establish 
participatory 
monitoring, 
evaluation and 
learning systems 
to support 
adaptive 
management 
 
Validate project results framework and 
indicators 
• Inception meeting 
• Validate the agreed project 
oversight mechanisms at all levels 
Establish monitoring unit 
• Develop and agree on monitoring 
plan 
• Provide training for identified M&E 
leads in project team, including 
training participatory monitoring  
Implement monitoring, evaluation and 
learning plan for the project 
• Annual monitoring of outputs, 
outcomes and impacts in the 
Theory of Change 
• Annual participatory review of 
participatory rangeland 
management plans 
• Mid-term project review 
• Final project evaluation  
• Disseminate project outputs and 
share experiences and enhance 
learning 
 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Travel and meetings 
Equipment, including monitoring  
Other Direct Costs 
Grants 
Indirect Costs 
 
Knowledge, attitude and skills 
will be tracked through 
participatory narrative inquiry  
Collect Earth and InVEST tools 
for biophysical impact. 
Performance Story Reporting 
(PSR) will be used for reporting 
on contribution to higher level 
outcomes using mixed methods 
and participatory process.  
Annual, Mid Term review and 
End term Evaluations will be 
carried out 
The project will use appropriate 
tools and methods for regular 
data collection. 
The project apply the Bonn 
Challenge Barometer to assess 
progress towards Kenya’s 
restoration targets.   
2.1 Implement 
priority 
community-based 
rangeland 
Support community-based actions for  
natural regeneration of pastures 
(based on participatory rangeland 
/catchment plans  developed in 1.2) 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Contract for construction activities 
Travel and meetings 
Community mobilization and 
training to establish pasture 
management plans

=== PAGE 72 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 76 
 
 H 
restoration 
activities 
• Training and assistance for pasture 
and water management and natural 
regeneration 
• Establishment of rangeland and 
land-use plans defining managed 
grazing regimes and seasonally 
protected pasture zones  
• Implementation of fire management 
protocols 
• Protection of riparian zones and 
wetlands 
Implement actions for assisted natural 
regeneration based on  participatory 
rangeland/catchment plans  
• Evaluation of regeneration needs 
based on Activity 1.1 
• Provision of specific technical 
assistance for implementation 
• Provision of materials  
• Introduction/protection of locally-
adapted high-value pasture and tree 
species 
• Bush clearance 
• Control of Bush encroacher and/or 
Invasive Alien Species 
Equipment, including monitoring  
Other Direct Costs 
External Grants 
Indirect Costs 
 
Field visits and exchange visits 
based on thematic focus within 
the landscapes 
Development of community 
management agreements and 
monitoring plans  
Contracts for physical actions 
and supply of inputs 
Control of bush encroacher 
species and invasive alien 
species will primarily be 
mechanical but some alien 
species may require the targeted 
use of herbicides (e.g. Prosopis 
jubiflora) and an herbicide plan 
will be developed if this is the 
case. 
 
2.2 Implement 
priority actions for 
integrated 
land/water 
management in 
catchments 
Implementation of soil and water 
conservation actions 
• Scientific and participatory 
validation of Sustainable Land 
Management options in relation to 
improved diagnosis of the drivers of 
degradation (Output 1) 
• Construction of appropriate SLM 
options: e.g. half-moons, check 
dams, stone bunds, rock 
catchments, sand dams, spring 
protection & cattle troughs 
• Measurement of infiltration/run off, 
soil moisture 
• Monitoring ground water to track 
land-water management dynamics 
and water availability 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Contract for construction activities 
Travel and meetings 
Equipment, including monitoring  
Other Direct Costs 
External Grants 
Indirect Costs 
 
Selected and low-impact soil 
conservation measures and 
water harvesting infrastructure 
will be undertaken to support 
rangeland restoration efforts.   
All interventions will be guided 
by the inclusive, participatory 
planning processes outlined 
under Component 1 in order to 
avoid disputes related to land 
ownership and over selection of 
sites and respective benefits 
received from the infrastructure.  
Physical works will be out-
sourced to contractors, or to 
community groups where they 
have the capacity (dependent on 
the nature of the action) 
 
2.3 Install 
community-
validated strategic 
water sources for 
sustainable 
rangeland 
utilization 
Restoration and construction of critical 
water infrastructure 
• Strengthening of existing 
monitoring networks and 
monitoring of water resources 
• De-silting of dams to increase 
storage 
• Training on gender-sensitive water 
harvesting  
• Construction of small scale water 
infrastructure including pans and 
shallow wells 
• Installation of boreholes with 
seasonal management plans 
• Decommissioning/modification of 
harmful water infrastructure 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Contract for construction activities 
Travel and meetings 
Equipment, including monitoring 
and communications  
Other Direct Costs 
External Grants 
Indirect Costs 
 
 
Water sources will be carefully 
validated through the 
participatory planning processes 
outlined under Component 1 in 
order to avoid disputes over 
access to water sources. 
Training will be provided to 
resource managers/users and 
service providers to avoid 
environmental and health risks 
as a result of developing water 
sources (e.g. disease vectors 
from stagnant water). Water 
extraction will be monitored to 
avoid depletion of groundwater 
resources (e.g. in case of 
boreholes).

=== PAGE 73 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 76 
 
 H 
Physical works will be out-
sourced to contractors, or to 
community groups where they 
have the capacity (dependent on 
the nature of the construction) 
2.4 Assist 
communities to 
formulate bylaws 
and incorporate 
into county laws 
Develop bylaws/communal 
management agreements to secure 
land and resource rights (communal 
management agreements) 
• Conduct a review of lessons from 
past experiences (Garba Tula, 
Garissa) 
• Document traditional resource 
management arrangements  in local 
languages 
• Organize workshops for validation  
• Publish resource management 
arrangements 
• Develop legal options to strengthen 
customary arrangements, including 
bylaws, other community level 
natural resource management 
agreements, conservancies, and 
recognition of local institutions 
Strengthen domestication and 
implementation of national level 
policies 
• Conduct review of policies in 
support of community based 
rangeland landscape management, 
including relevant land tenure laws 
and the Forest Conservation and 
Management Act.  
• Organize multistakeholder dialogue 
to establish county implementation 
plans for key policies, with focus on 
enforcement and compliance  
• Develop/review county laws to 
support rangeland restoration 
• Strengthen climate sensitive 
legislation that support community 
bylaws and structures at cross 
county landscapes/county level 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Travel and meetings 
Equipment 
Other Direct Costs 
External Grants 
Indirect Costs 
Consultancies to document 
traditional regulations and 
develop management laws for 
each county; review of policies 
Training to support communities 
to enforce county laws and 
bylaws, especially linked to 
Community Resilience Facility 
Workshops for monitoring and 
follow up of implementation of 
community land-use plans and 
by-laws; capacity building on by-
law formulation; 
multistakeholder dialogues on 
policy implementation  
Facilitation of by-law 
development with County 
Government  
Communication and awareness 
raising on community by-laws  
Participatory monitoring and 
evaluation in implementation 
progress of legislation and 
policies related to climate change 
Support communities to enforce 
county laws and bylaws 
Strengthen county and ward 
level committees on climate 
change at the priority 
landscapes. 
 
2.5 Build capacity 
of local institutions 
to implement 
climate-sensitive 
landscape 
management 
Training of local and customary 
institutions, including those 
representing women and youth: 
• Organizational management 
• Accountability and representation  
• Influencing public decision-making 
Participatory mapping and spatial 
planning 
• Community based vulnerability 
assessment and option analysis 
• Landscape restoration and 
sustainable rangeland management 
• Legal options for communal land 
tenure 
Development of long term rangeland 
extension strategy 
• Consultancy study 
• Public dialogue 
Personnel 
professional services 
Travel and meetings 
Equipment 
Other Direct Costs 
External Grants 
Indirect Costs 
 
 
Capacity building will be 
conducted both by executing 
partners and by external experts. 
Training will primarily be 
carried out in the target counties 
although the option of organizing 
specific training in other more 
suitable locations will be 
retained 
Training will contribute towards 
long term institutionalization of 
capacity building

=== PAGE 74 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 76 
 
 H 
3.1 Provide 
climate resilient 
investment in 
priority value 
chains that have 
been validated by 
local communities 
Strengthen beef, sheep and goat meat 
and camel milk value chains 
• Update value chain analysis in 
response to participatory 
prioritization (Output 1) in each 
landscape 
• Workshops on value chains analysis 
to validate analysis and to engage 
value chain actors  to distill the 
value chain analysis output and 
assess both the potential further 
development of the value chains; as 
well as identify investment 
opportunities that can catalyse their 
development 
• Assess capacities of existing 
cooperatives and other value chain 
business actors in the landscapes 
and provide targeted support and 
training (e.g. on business planning, 
quality control, value addition, 
marketing/branding)  
• Strengthen market information 
systems through cooperatives and 
other business actors. 
• Trader/producer forums to address 
challenges within the value chain 
(such as market access and prices)  
Support gums and resins value chains 
• As above, with additional specific 
support for processing and 
transportation 
• Linking to producers and buyers 
through trade shows and internet 
presentations 
• Training in quality management 
and sustainable harvesting of 
natural products  
Support for development of equitable 
value chains and market development  
• Focus on the training and 
development of women and youth 
is a priority in all of the above 
action items. This is particularly 
relevant in the primary value chains 
of livestock in ASAL counties  
• Assess and implement actions to 
improve women’s engagement with 
the above value chains.  
• Provision of extension services and 
marketing material 
 
Advancement of grants and loans by CI 
to the beneficiaries  
• 
CI making investments through 
provision of grants and loans for 
eligible activities 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Travel and meetings 
 
 
 
An analysis of current livestock 
value chains based on 
consultations, actor & market 
analysis will identify an action 
plan for public and private sector 
investments to increase livestock 
values. 
Key aspects will be addressed 
including markets, gender roles 
and capacity.   
The value chain work will be 
underpinned by pasture 
restoration which will secure 
access to pastures and feed.   
Support women and youth 
groups to form cooperatives and 
access skills and finance to 
participate in the livestock value 
chains 
Gums and resin production 
provides supplementary income 
especially for pastoralist women 
& youth. Value chain actor 
consultation and assessment will 
support private sector actors and 
link producers to international 
markets. 
Capacity for collectors to meet 
market demand and standards. 
Grants to financially support 
these value chains overcome 
specific barriers will be made 
under Activity 3.4. 
3.2 Provide grants 
to establish 
restoration 
enterprises 
created/led 
Promote the establishment of  grass 
seed production and fodder bank 
enterprises with a particular focus on  
women groups 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Travel and meetings 
Equipment 
Grants 
By establishing community-run 
grass seed and fodder reserve 
areas or’ ‘banks’ in degraded 
rangelands, pastoralist’s 
resources are increased and

=== PAGE 75 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 76 
 
 H 
primarily by 
women groups  
• Training women & men in grass 
seed production 
• Entrepreneurship training for 
women and youth 
• Development of business plan 
• Allocation of resources (seeds) for 
start up 
• Implementation of fodder, pasture 
and seed lots and stores and 
marketing activities 
 
Workshops for participatory 
identification and selection of 
appropriate sites and species for grass 
seed banks. 
entrepreneurs (typically women) 
are empowered and developed.    
The project will establish seed 
and fodder banks that will 
reduce risk for home herds, as 
well as for the women 
entrepreneurs. They will be run 
by women, who, via training to 
market their products, will 
become entrepreneurs.   
In combination with proper land 
use/ grazing management, this 
leads to increased vegetation 
cover, a positive impact on 
regional climate:  
https://www.youtube.com/watc
h?v=F4Dj630AX3k) and a more 
climate resilient ecosystem. 
Grazing lands sequester 200-
500kg of carbon/ha/yr, hence 
mitigating climate change. 
3.3 Establish 
financial incentive 
mechanisms for 
sustainable land 
management 
Establish the Community Resilience 
Facility (CRF) and explore other 
mechanisms (e.g. Climate Smart 
Lending Platform) 
Implementation of the CRF in 
communities will involve: 
• Dialogue with community members 
to secure commitment over linking 
the fund to the community land use 
plans 
• Training of community members to 
understand CRF purpose and 
operation 
• Training of CRF fund managers 
• Establishment of CRFs 
• Allocation of  fund  
• Monitoring of the fund management 
and the compliance with the plan 
Provide technical support for other 
community level incentive for eco-
credit approaches e.g. Climate Smart 
Lending Platform 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Travel and meetings 
Equipment 
Grants 
 
Establishment of the Community 
Resilience Facility (CRF) in 2 
landscapes.  The facility 
incentivizes community 
restoration land-use plans by 
supporting communities to 
establish their own solidarity 
revolving fund, based on wide-
spread and well known 
principles.  Community members 
can access the funds contingent 
on their compliance with the 
community land-use and 
restoration plan. The facility 
becomes a long-term community 
owned asset for supporting their 
restoration plans. The 
disbursement of CRF support 
household resilience especially 
for diversified livelihoods for 
agro-pastoralist communities.  
Monitoring, evaluation and 
graduation CRF will be a basis 
for scaling up.  The scaling up 
will be help households access 
commercial eco-credit such as is 
provided by the Climate Smart 
Lending Platform. 
3.4 Provide grants 
to community-
based enterprises  
for ecosystem 
based adaptation 
that could create 
opportunities for 
investments in the 
value chains  
Establish mechanism for investments 
in climate-smart enterprises. Eligible 
investments  might include 
• Physical market infrastructure  
• Equipment: cooling, processing, 
packaging 
• Quality control equipment/ 
laboratory 
The grants criteria will include 
• 
A viable business model 
• 
Potential for significant, 
measurable positive  
environmental (e.g. river bank 
Personnel 
Professional services 
Travel and meetings 
Grant making mechanism 
Training, advice, materials and 
advice to be provided by 
executing partners with a grants 
team following the progress and 
land management impacts of 
grant recipients.

=== PAGE 76 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 76 
 
 H 
 
protection, rangeland restoration, 
adhering to grazing plans, climate 
smart agriculture ) and social 
impacts (e.g. income generation, 
health and education) 
• 
Potential to unlock future follow-
on investment at scale 
• 
Strong management capacity  
Grants will be in the size $10-250k 
depending on the competiveness, value 
add and capacity of the company 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
The activities on monitoring, action learning, evaluation and reporting are part of Component 1 (Activity 1.4). IUCN will 
lead this activity through the development and implementation of a monitoring, evaluation, reporting and learning (MERL) 
system. The key elements of the system are outlined here and a full version will be developed in the inception phase. 
 (a) Project Intervention  Logic:  
The project intervention logic shows the main project activities and the expected outputs, outcomes and impacts. 
Activities will contribute to three outputs: (i) communities and county governments develop rangeland landscape 
management plans using appropriate climate change and landscape analysis and participatory processes; (ii) prioritized 
rangeland resources, including water resources, are restored, safeguarded and sustainably managed; and (iii) public, 
private and community investments equitably support restoration activities and strengthen value chains for restored 
ecosystem services. The outputs lead to three intermediate outcomes namely strengthened institutional and regulatory 
systems for climate-responsive planning and development; strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to 
climate risks; and strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes. The outcomes are expected 
to lead to two main impacts, improved resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services and increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions. Ultimately, the project will contribute to 
reducing the cost of climate change on Kenya’s national economy by enabling pastoralists in arid and semi-arid counties 
to restore rangeland ecosystems and increase water security and land productivity, in order to adapt better to climate-
change induced drought. 
The project logical framework outlines the expected results, indicators, means of verification, baseline values and target 
values at mid-term and end-term. Critical assumptions underpinning the logical framework include:            
• 
There is high level of receptiveness of the men, women and vulnerable populations to the content and timeliness 
of Early Warning Systems.  
• 
Landscape level planning and climate action is adopted as a high-level agenda by the county governments and 
this is reflected in county budgets. 
• 
The pursuit of climate adaptation benefits and the need to reduce risks of land degradation will strengthen and 
influence investment choices by government, communities and private sector.  
• 
Critical mass of restoration related value chain companies take up value chain grants and kick start the crowding 
in process necessary for ongoing implementation. 
(b) Baseline:  
Baseline information for the indicators was identified during project preparation and provided in the logical framework. 
Baseline data gaps will be addressed through a comprehensive programmatic baseline during the inception phase. The 
baseline will inform specific programmatic targets. 
(c) Outputs: A simple progress ranking tool will be used to assess the delivery of project outputs.  This ranking tool will 
be part of the project results dashboard. A description of the progress ranking tool is provided below: 
Ranking 
Description 
Criteria 
1 
Above expectations 
• 
Activities and results exceed workplan targets 
• 
There have been significant time and/or resource efficiencies 
• 
Results are being achieved significantly faster than expected  
• 
Project activities have contributed to unexpected positive results 
(e.g. among non-target beneficiaries, or outside target areas)

=== PAGE 77 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 76 
 
 H 
20 https://www.veco-ngo.org/en/project/inclusive-business-scan  
21 Annexed 
22 https://www.iucn.org/theme/ecosystem-management/our-work/global-drylands-initiative/gdi-projects/participatory-
assessment-land-degradation-and-sustainable-land-management-grassland-and-pastoral-systems-praga 
23 http://www.worldagroforestry.org/shared 
24 Saiku Server is a web-based open source software that facilitates data visualization and data querying. 
www.openforis.org/tools/collect-earth/tutorials/saiku.html  
25 Clear Horizon Consulting https://www.clearhorizon.com.au/  
2 
On target 
• 
Activities and results align with workplan 
3 
Below expectations 
• 
Activities and results fall below workplan targets 
• 
There are significant delays in delivery 
• 
There are significant delays in achieving results 
• 
Results are significantly lower than expected  
4 
Completed 
• 
Activities and results have been completed 
• 
(No further reporting is required) 
5 
Cancelled 
• 
Activities have been cancelled (a justification should be provided) 
(d) Behavioural Outcomes: It is anticipated that target beneficiaries’ knowledge, skills, attitudes, and ultimately 
behaviour will be influenced by the project activities, and will result in enhanced landscape management and 
watershed protection practices being adopted and shared. Change in knowledge, attitude and skills will be tracked 
using an appropriate methodology that facilitates:  
• 
understanding change as it emerges and in making real-time adjustments (quick feedback loop) 
• 
rapid analysis of qualitative material and distributed (fragmented) information from multiple sources 
• 
insights into different perspectives, attitudes and values associated with a set of pre-identified domains of interest 
• 
weak signal detection in revealing hidden or emergent opportunities and threats 
• 
generating evidence-based ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ data”20. 
 
(e) Policy Influence: The project will contribute to the development or review of County-level policies and laws that will 
support integration of drought risk, natural resource management and climate adaptation.  A Planning and Policy 
influence scorecard21 will be used to track the project’s influence on target policy processes. 
(f) Impact: The project will quantify the realization of projected benefits of sustainable forest management and watershed 
protection per GCF Criteria. The benefits are expected to include long-term resilience of rangeland communities and 
ecosystems improved livelihoods and contributions to climate change mitigation.  
Tools to be used include Participatory Assessment of Land Degradation and Sustainable Land management in 
Grassland and Pastoral Systems -PRAGA22, Stakeholder Approach to Risk Informed and Evidence Based Decision 
Making (SHARED)23, Saiku24 and InVEST. These tools are user friendly and customizable for specific data collection 
and analysis. 
InVEST is an ecosystem services analysis and mapping tool that is effective for balancing competing environmental and 
economic goals.  
(g) Learning: This will be guided by a learning strategy which will include learning thematic modules and questions.  We 
will monitor two aspects: a) capturing unexpected results as they arise, and b) making use of evidence from the MERL 
system to inform key learning questions, inform adaptive management, and inform future project design and 
implementation. Learning will be integrated into project implementation by using learning questions to frame annual 
project management meetings, case studies and mid-term or other evaluations.25 
 
Case studies will be developed to package evidence of change resulting from the project’s interventions. They will present 
a sample of success and failure-cases.

=== PAGE 78 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 76 
 
 H 
(h)  Data collection, management and reporting system: A fit-for-purpose data collection, management and reporting 
system will be deployed. Mobile data collection apps will be integrated in due course based on needs. Progress reporting 
will be on annual and semi-annual basis throughout the life of the programme. The annual/semi-annual reports will 
provide information on the performance of the project against planned activities and set targets. They will also provide 
details on the project achievements, evidence of success during the reporting period, constraints during implementation 
and how they were addressed. They will also include a compilation of lessons learned and financial expenditure 
statements.  
(i) Methodology for monitoring and reporting of key outcomes 
In addition to the above mentioned data collection and management tools, various approaches will be used to monitor 
the three key outcomes of the programme. The main approaches will include : 
• 
Participatory rangeland assessments, combined with remote sensing to specifically monitor area covered by 
rehabilitated/protected ecosystems; 
• 
Regular field/site monitoring visits to document and validate the number and coverage of ecosystem-based 
adaptation systems that have been established/enhanced through programme activities; 
• 
Knowledge, Attitude and Practice (KAP) survey to monitor programme beneficiaries; 
• 
Scorecards to assess degree of awareness and integration of climate change to national and sector plans; and  
• 
Vulnerability assessments to monitor adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. 
(j) Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 
IUCN is overall responsible for the monitoring and evaluation of the project and these responsibilities will be detailed in 
the M&E Plan.  IUCN will report to the GCF as follows: 
(a) Annual performance reports (APRs), including financial management reports, which will include dates and amounts 
disbursed for each funded activity and compliance with financial covenants; and 
(b) An interim evaluation report and a final evaluation report for the project. The evaluations will assess the performance 
of the project against its project results which include the relevant GCF investment framework criteria, including 
financial/economic performance as part of the project efficiency and effectiveness criterion. 
The APR will include a narrative report (with supporting data) on implementation progress based on the logical framework 
in the project, including a report on ESMS as well as gender. The report will be aligned with the modalities set out in the 
GCF results management framework and its performance measurement frameworks. 
The M&E plan will detail the tools mentioned above  including the progress ranking tool, the KAP survey, the policy 
influence scorecard, , PRAGA, SHARED, Saiku, InVest, DevResults and will have set targets for specific deliverables 
and benchmarks.  The M&E plan will be the basic M&E tool for monitoring progress in project implementation. The plan 
will be developed during the inception period of the project and will be reviewed and updated periodically. The plan will 
be the responsibility of the PMU with a dedicated M&E officer supported by regional and global expertise in M&E and 
integrated with the M&E capabilities of the executing entities and other partners.  The M&E data collection function will 
be supported at the field level by the Landscape Coordination Hubs and will be one responsibility of the Landscape 
Coordinators. Programme monitoring and evaluation activities include periodic site monitoring visits, indicator tracking 
through data collection, progress reporting, baseline surveys and reports and evaluation (mid-term review and end-term 
evaluation).  The MERL system will support and feed into the Performance Reports submitted to the Fund on an annual 
basis. 
The M&E plan will detail the tools mentioned above  including the progress ranking tool, the KAP survey, the policy 
influence scorecard, the use of PRAGA, SHARED, Saiku, InVest, and will have set targets for specific deliverables and 
benchmarks.  The M&E plan will be the basic M&E tool for monitoring progress in project implementation. The plan will 
be developed during the inception period of the project and will be reviewed and updated periodically. The plan will be 
the responsibility of the PMU with a dedicated M&E officer supported by regional and global expertise in M&E and 
integrated with the M&E capabilities of the executing entities and other partners.  The M&E data collection function will 
be supported at the field level by the Landscape Coordination Hubs and will be one responsibility of the Landscape 
Coordinators. Programme monitoring and evaluation activities include periodic site monitoring visits, indicator tracking 
through data collection, progress reporting, baseline surveys and reports and evaluation (mid-term review and end-term

=== PAGE 79 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 76 
 
 H 
26 DAC - Development Assistance Committee 
27 OECD – Economic Cooperation and Development 
evaluation).  The MERL system will support and feed into the Performance Reports submitted to the Fund on an annual 
basis. 
(k) Interim Evaluation and Final  Evaluation:  
Interim Evaluation (IE): An independent Interim Evaluation will be carried out no later than Year-3 of programme 
implementation. The interim evaluation will be an important milestone of the project and will be guided by the 
DAC26/OECD27 evaluation criteria on relevance, validity of design, performance (effectiveness, efficiency and timeliness), 
efficiency, sustainability and impact orientation. The evaluationwill also pin-point issues requiring decisions and actions, 
restructuring needs and lessons learned on the project design, implementation and management. The IE findings and 
recommendation will be disseminated to stakeholders. Furthermore, a management response to the interim evaluation 
review recommendations together with a plan for implementing the required changes will be developed and its 
implementation status tracked. The Terms of Reference for the IE will be prepared by IUCN in consultation with the 
executing agencies and the funding agency (GCF). Recruitment of the consultant to carry out the IE will be in accordance 
with IUCN procurement policies/regulations.  
Final Evaluation: An independent end of project evaluation will take place three (3) months prior to the project closing 
date in Year-5. This evaluation will focus on the same issues as the Mid Term Review. However, it will also examine 
indications of impact and sustainability of results, including the contribution to achievement of the overall project objective. 
In addition to lessons learnt, the final evaluation will also provide recommendations for follow-up activities and other 
relevant management, strategic and/or policy actions. Management response to issues raised in the end of project 
evaluation will be prepared by the Project Manager. Review of the quality of the evaluation report will be done by Project 
Management Unit (PMU) in consultation with implementing and executing agencies, after which the report will be 
submitted to the Steering Committee for further review and comments.  The final report will eventually be submitted to 
GCF.

=== PAGE 80 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 76 
 
 
 
 
I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable 
supporting documents. 
 
  
I. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS FOR FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
☒ 
Annex 1. NDA No-objection Letter 
☒ 
Annex 2. Feasibility Study 
☒ 
Annex 3. Economic and Finance Analysis including Sensitivity Analysis 
☒         Annex 4. Letters of commitment for co-financing  
☒ 
Annex 5. Environmental and Social Management System - Questionnaire and Screening Report and ESM 
F 
☒ 
Annex 6. Gender Analysis Report  
☒ 
Annex 7. Map indicating the location of the project 
☒ 
Annex 8. Timetable of project implementation 
☒           Annex 9. Stakeholder Consultation Report 
☒         Annex 10. Budget & Budget Notes  
☒         Annex 11. Procurement Plan   
☒         Annex 12. Samples of grantees projects  
☒         Annex 13.  Monitoring & Evaluation Plan  
☒         Annex 14.  IUCN Letter of confirmation for EEs’ capacities and Capacity Assessments Forms

=== PAGE 81 ===
Annex 1: NDA No-objection Letter 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 83 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
TWENDE - Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: 
Ecosystem Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid 
Rangelands 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Kenya, two priority landscapes: 
1) Mid Tana River (including Sabarwawa) consisting of 8
Counties – Samburu, Marsabit, Isiolo, Garissa, Tana River, 
Meru, Tharaka Nithi and Kitui; and  
2) Chyulu Hills landscape which consists of 3 counties i.e.
Taita Taveta, Makueni, Kajiado.
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, June 5, 2019 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
The ESMF has been disclosed in English as the NGOs 
working with the local communities on the ground are 
proficient in English, an official language. A summary of the 
ESMF is being translated into Swahili and will be uploaded 
on the IUCN website and shared locally with the 
communities shortly.  
Link to disclosure 
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/fp-iucn-kenya-
twende-annex_5_b_esmf_kenya_31052019_final.pdf 
Other link(s) 
IUCN website: https://www.iucn.org/gcf-iucn-
partnership/projects  
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Irrigation 
(MoAI) website: http://www.kilimo.go.ke/?page_id=623 
National Drought Management Authority (NDMA) website: 
https://www.ndma.go.ke/index.php/resource-
center/category/42-special-reports 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, June 5, 2019 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
The ESMF has been disclosed in English as the NGOs 
working with the local communities on the ground are 
proficient in English, an official language. A summary of the 
ESMF is being translated into Swahili and will be uploaded

=== PAGE 84 ===
on the IUCN website and shared locally with the 
communities shortly. 
Link to disclosure 
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/fp-iucn-kenya-
twende-annex_5_b_esmf_kenya_31052019_final.pdf 
Other link(s) 
IUCN website: https://www.iucn.org/gcf-iucn-
partnership/projects 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Irrigation 
(MoAI) website: http://www.kilimo.go.ke/?page_id=623 
National Drought Management Authority (NDMA) website: 
https://www.ndma.go.ke/index.php/resource-
center/category/42-special-reports 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B 
project is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, June 5, 2019 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
 The ESMF has been disclosed in English as the NGOs 
working with the local communities on the ground are 
proficient in English, an official language. A summary of the 
ESMF is being translated into Swahili and will be uploaded 
on the IUCN website and shared locally with the 
communities shortly.  
Link to disclosure 
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/fp-iucn-kenya-
twende-annex_5_b_esmf_kenya_31052019_final.pdf
Other link(s) 
IUCN website: https://www.iucn.org/gcf-iucn-
partnership/projects 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Irrigation 
(MoAI) website: http://www.kilimo.go.ke/?page_id=623 
National Drought Management Authority (NDMA) website: 
https://www.ndma.go.ke/index.php/resource-
center/category/42-special-reports 
Remarks 
Elements of an IPP Framework consistent with the 
requirements for a category B project are contained in the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Wednesday, June 5, 2019

=== PAGE 85 ===
Place 
National Drought Management Authority (NDMA) website: 
https://www.ndma.go.ke/index.php/resource-
center/category/42-special-reports 
The ESMF has been disclosed on the website in English as 
the NGOs working with the local communities on the ground 
are proficient in English. A summary of the ESMF is being 
translated into Swahili and will be uploaded on the website 
and shared locally with the communities shortly. 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Saturday, July 6, 2019 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 86 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP113 
Proposal name: 
TWENDE – Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem 
Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid Rangelands  
Accredited entity: 
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) 
Country/(ies): 
Kenya 
Project/programme size:  
Small 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The project strengthens the capacity of 
county governments, established in 2010, to 
address the threats of climate change 
The project operates in 11 counties over two 
“landscapes”, which may lead to complicated 
arrangements for implementation, 
communication and delivery of results 
The project operates at a low level, working 
directly with the communities, which is 
considered beneficial for long-term 
sustainability 
The administrative and financial structure of 
the on-granting and loan award will need to 
be well coordinated 
The project aims to increase the value to the 
local communities extracted from the 
environment through the development of 
value chains, cottage industries and support 
to micro enterprises 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XIII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background  
3. 
The “TWENDE – Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem Based Adaptation in 
Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid Rangelands” project aims to increase the resilience of the livestock 
sector and other land-use sectors in restored and effectively governed rangeland ecosystems in 
Kenya’s arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs). The project targets eleven counties in the ASALs. The 
interventions are focused on increasing the adaptive capacities of communities and local 
institutions to develop evidence-based landscape planning by increasing accessibility to climate 
data and information; and enhancing the ability of community-based small businesses to access 
markets and financial services by developing value chains.

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 87 
 
 
4. 
Climate change is projected to increase high inter-annual variability of rainfall and 
temperature, underlining the significant risk of increase in the frequency and severity of 
droughts and extreme events in ASALs in Kenya. ASALs in Kenya are dominated by rangelands 
with the predominant population practising pastoralism or extensive livestock production. In 
the absence of capacity to develop appropriate rangeland and landscape planning in these 
regions, the reduced recovery period between droughts presents serious risk to the resilience of 
the pastoral sector, reinforcing the heavy dependence on survival strategies that lead to 
unsustainable practices.  
5. 
The total project finance is USD 34.54 million, with a request to GCF for grant finance of 
USD 23.15 million (67.0 per cent). The Government of Kenya, through the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI), the National Drought Management Authority (NDMA), and 
the Water Resources Authority, is contributing USD 2.4 million, USD 2.4 million and USD 1.5 
million, respectively. Conservation International (CI) is contributing USD 3.6 million in the form 
of grants and USD 0.8 million in the form of loans, the latter being sourced from CI Ventures, an 
investment fund operated by CI. Finally, IUCN is providing USD 0.69 million in the form of 
grants. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Component 1: Climate change adapted planning for drought resilience (total cost: USD 7.91 
million; GCF cost: USD 5.51 million) 
6. 
Under this component, the project will strengthen the management capacity of 
governance and local institutions to make evidence-based decisions when developing climate 
change sensitive landscape and management plans. Interventions will build on established 
information systems to incorporate improved climate change sensitivity and vulnerability 
analysis and downscale climate data, thereby increasing coordination of cross-county landscape 
planning. 
7. 
The proposed interventions strengthen the local county administrations, which were 
established after the adoption of the new constitution in 2010 and which tend to lack adequate 
knowledge of climate change issues. This component is considered critical for the sustainability 
of the project and the long-term resilience of the target areas. 
Component 2: Restoration of rangeland landscapes for ecosystem-based adaptation (total cost: 
USD 14.88 million; GCF cost: USD 9.48 million) 
8. 
This component focuses on strengthening the implementation of climate change 
sensitive landscape management based on improved evidence-based planning. Interventions 
under this component include supporting communities to implement drought management 
activities, supporting communities to develop bylaws and incorporate county laws, and 
increasing the implementation capacity of local institutions. 
9. 
The proposed interventions build on proven approaches and technologies for 
ecosystem-based adaptation in dry areas, and the interventions are very likely to be effective in 
reducing the impacts that are due to reduced reliability of rainfall. The focus on community 
engagement strengthens the sustainability of the interventions as well as the cost-effectiveness. 
Component 3: Investments and incentives for climate change resilient ecosystem management 
(total cost: USD 9.95 million; GCF cost: USD 7.05 million)

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 88 
 
 
10. 
This component aims to address the existing barriers of insufficient investment in 
rangelands and poor access to markets and financial services. Interventions will provide 
climate-resilient investment in priority value chains in livestock as well as secondary products 
to diversity sources of income. Additionally, it will develop community owned and managed 
revolving funds, which will be complementary and additional to a grant scheme to private 
sector enterprises. 
11. 
The development of economically viable value chains is highly rated because it breaks 
the dependency of the local communities on accumulating wealth and reduces the risks of 
having large herds of cattle and other ruminants, which in itself is leading to increased land 
degradation due to overgrazing. Extracting more value out of the use of natural resources (e.g. 
through cottage industries at the community level) may be expected to reduce the intensity of 
natural resources use while reducing the exposure to droughts and other environmental 
calamities. 
12. 
Micro and small enterprise development is supported through a dedicated funding 
window, using financial resources from CI in the form of micro loans. This funding window is 
considered to be complementary to the value chain support at the community level. 
2.2.1. 
Project management (total cost: USD 1.79 million; GCF cost: USD 1.10 million) 
13. 
All explicitly indicated project management costs are to be covered through the grant 
requested from GCF. Project management costs amount to 5 per cent of the total grant request 
to GCF. 
14. 
It is expected that project management costs for the co-financing are to be borne by the 
co-financers. 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential                                                                               Scale: High 
15. 
The proposed project has adaptation benefits for local communities and institutions 
through improved capacity in landscape planning and implementation, enabling evidence-based 
decision-making and creating incentives for community-led solutions. 
16. 
The grants scheme provides incentives to create sustainable value chains by improving 
the entrepreneurship of local private sector enterprises. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
                                                    Scale: High 
17. 
The project demonstrates opportunities for scaling up and knowledge-sharing beyond 
the project timeline and area, to cover a larger extent of landscape through activities aiming to 
enhance coordination among counties and local communities. 
18. 
The emphasis on creating more value in the local communities through the development 
of cottage industries and support to micro and small enterprises is considered highly effective in 
breaking the dependency on natural resources and thus for hedging risks against crop failures. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential                                          Scale: High

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 89 
 
 
19. 
The project will increase environmental resilience through restoration activities and 
long-term adaptive capacity-building at county and community level, from planning through to 
implementation of sustainable rangeland management and practices.  
20. 
The development of cottage industries and support to micro enterprises delivers a long-
term benefit that will persist beyond the lifetime of the project. 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient                                                                Scale: High 
21. 
Reduced recovery periods between droughts owing to an increase in their frequency 
and severity exacerbates the deterioration of vegetation conditions, leading to further 
environmental degradation. The direct beneficiaries of the project are among the poorest 
households in Kenya. 
22. 
The administrative restructuring of governance after the adoption of the constitution in 
2010 means that the new county governments have little knowledge and operational skills in 
dealing with climate change issues. This project addresses that gap through institutional 
capacity-building. 
3.5 
Country ownership 
                                                                Scale: High 
23. 
The proposal aligns well with national policies and strategies on climate change, such as 
the National Climate Change Response Strategy, National Climate Change Response Strategy, 
Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Strategy, Kenya Strategic Investment Framework for 
Sustainable Land Management, the ASAL policy, the livestock policy and others. It also shows 
strong alignment with the country’s nationally determined contribution and national adaptation 
plan.  
24. 
The project takes a participatory approach and suggests a community-based approach, 
enabling autonomous community-led solutions. A high level of stakeholder engagement and 
consultation during the identification of priorities and target areas are well referenced. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
                                    Scale: Medium–High 
25. 
The project demonstrates financial adequacy and minimum concessionality. The project 
seeks to address a market failure of collective action related to the management of communal 
rangelands in ASAL affected by climate change. GCF grant financing will be used for non-
commercial activities that generate public benefits but cannot generate sufficient revenues to 
service a loan. Revenue-generating components, such as financial support to private 
enterprises, will be financed by loans through co-financing. 
26. 
An economic analysis of the proposal shows high cost-effectiveness through a base case 
economic internal rate of return of 31 per cent over 14 years. The key economic benefits are 
reduced economic losses from droughts and increased income resulting from increased land 
productivity and community incomes through up-scaling nature-based enterprises. However, a 
sensitivity analysis shows the economic internal rate of return is low in a pessimistic scenario 
where the effect on incomes is 40 per cent lower than expected and reductions in losses from 
drought are 50 per cent less than expected.

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 90 
 
 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
27. 
The project aims to reduce the cost of climate change drought on Kenya’s national 
economy by increasing the resilience of the livestock and other land-use sectors in restored and 
effectively governed rangeland ecosystems. The project will cover 11 counties in two priority 
ASAL of the country, Mid Tana River and Chyulu Hills. The project has three components: (1) 
climate change adapted planning for drought resilience; (2) restoration of rangeland 
landscapes; and (3) investments and incentives for ecosystem management.  
28. 
The accredited entity (AE) has classified the project as likely to generate moderate 
environmental and social risks, equivalent to category B, following its environmental and social 
management system (ESMS). Based on its environmental and social screening, the AE 
anticipates that there will be no significant adverse risks and impacts. Instead, the risks and 
impacts are expected to be mild, few in number, generally site-specific, largely reversible and 
readily addressed through generally accepted mitigation measures.  
29. 
While the landscapes and counties have been selected, the specific interventions and the 
exact locations have yet to be determined. To address this, the AE developed an environmental 
and social management framework (ESMF). The ESMF described the overall environmental and 
social context of the project, the likely environmental and social risks and impacts, measures 
considered to manage the risks and mitigate impacts, the policy landscape, the due diligence 
process and the implementation arrangements. The AE identified seven activities that are 
expected to generate risks and impacts and where the ESMF will be applied. The project applies 
the Standard on Indigenous Peoples of the AE as well as the GCF interim environmental and 
social safeguards (ESS) standards and Indigenous Peoples Policy; therefore, the ESMF 
incorporates the requirements and processes for further assessments and management of risks 
and impacts to indigenous peoples, and for meaningful consultations leading to free, prior and 
informed consent (FPIC). The ESMF also incorporates the processes for stakeholder 
engagement, information disclosure and the project-level grievance redress mechanism.  
30. 
The ESMF describes the environmental and social due diligence process that will be 
undertaken for the activities to be supported under the project. The due diligence will integrate 
the national requirements under the Environment Management and Coordination Act 1999 and 
associated amendments, and the ESMS of the AE, aligned with the requirements of the GCF 
interim ESS standards. The process for screening, including screening criteria, is included in the 
ESMF. The ESMF also provides the list of excluded activities, including high environmental and 
social risk activities, and other activities that may have significant risk related to physical and 
economic displacement, restrictions on water use, degradation of critical natural habitats, 
activities affecting indigenous peoples without having obtained FPIC, and infrastructure with 
potential impacts on natural resources, among others. The eligibility criteria are also included 
as part of the screening and selection of locations.  
31. 
For moderate risk activities, the due diligence process will involve the conduct of an 
impact assessment and risk management, based on the identified risks and impacts. In instances 
where there are significant likely social impacts, as in cases where there are indigenous peoples 
in the project or that may involve land or livelihood disturbances, a social impact assessment 
(SIA) will be undertaken. The environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) and/or an SIA 
will form the basis of the various management plans that may include the environment and 
social management plan or other specific plans, such as inclusion plans for marginalized 
communities. The impact assessment process will be concluded with the issuance of ESMS

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 91 
 
 
clearance following a review of the adequacy of the ESIA and the ESIA process by the Project 
Management Unit (PMU).  
32. 
Salient environmental and social impacts. The project is expected to generate 
moderate environmental and social impacts taking into account the small-scale nature of the 
activities, the sensitivity of the dryland ecosystem and the complexity of the social organization 
and institutional arrangements. The project is also expected to deliver positive impacts from the 
restoration activities, land and water conservation and management, and investments in 
priority value chains as well as to provide incentives for sustainable land management and 
grants for private sector enterprises. As the design and locations of the interventions will be 
determined during implementation with the participation of the communities, the specific risks 
and impacts will be detailed through ESIAs. 
33. 
The expected environmental impacts include the introduction of invasive species, 
potential land-use changes, sediment movement, disturbance of natural habitats, biodiversity 
and soil, and localized impacts from value chain activities. These, however, are readily mitigated 
through the application of best practices in rangeland management and natural regeneration 
processes. On the other hand, the social impacts may include temporary losses of livelihood, 
resource competition, impacts on marginalized and vulnerable communities, and impacts on 
cultural heritage.  
34. 
An important impact of the project is the impact on the indigenous peoples. The ESMF 
provides a framework for consultations, further assessments and planning for mitigation. 
Further site-specific social assessments and/or vulnerability assessments including stakeholder 
identification and analysis will provide an adequate basis for the application of the AE ESS and 
GCF interim ESS standards, including a specific inclusion plan, or indigenous peoples plan, as 
may be necessary. FPIC will be obtained at various levels and will apply to indigenous peoples 
as well as to a wider group of marginalized peoples. The process for obtaining FPIC in the 
context of the project is described in the ESMF.  
35. 
Conflicts around resource use are also anticipated in the project. The measures 
identified in the screening process provide an approach to conflict sensitivity (including 
participatory management and planning, consultations and incorporation of measures for 
conflict resolution) in the project-level grievance redress.  
36. 
While some of the activities may involve potential temporary restriction of access to 
resources, which could lead to livelihood loss, the restrictions will be voluntary and will not 
change the land uses or rights to the resources, and such restrictions will be collectively decided 
by the communities as part of their community land-use plans. Where land may be required for 
small-scale water or restoration infrastructure, the use of such lands will be provided on a 
voluntary basis following the provision of documented consent from the landowner.  
37. 
Stakeholder engagement, information disclosure and grievance redress. The ESMF 
describes the process for continuing stakeholder engagement, which follow the principle of the 
AE on stakeholder engagement. A participatory engagement approach is central to the design of 
the project and is incorporated into the project’s three components. The levels of engagement 
follow the level of expected risks and are indicated in the ESMF, with the process for FPIC being 
the highest level of engagement. The ESMF also includes a report on the stakeholder 
consultations that have been undertaken to date. 
38. 
The ESMF also describes the information disclosure requirements, which follow the 
principle of the AE on accountability. The disclosure of information on activities, including the 
likely environmental and social risks and impacts, will involve local disclosure at locations

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 92 
 
 
accessible to the communities (including indigenous groups) and will be provided in English 
and appropriate local languages.  
39. 
A project-level grievance redress mechanism has been developed, consistent with the 
grievance mechanism guidance note of the AE. The three-stage process involves the resolution 
of grievance at the executing entity (EE) and affected party level, at the project management 
unit level, and at the institutional level of the AE. The principles of the grievance redress 
mechanism of the AE will be applied in the project level mechanism. The ESMF provides a 
process for handling non-eligible complaints. The entire process, from receiving complaints to 
the implementation of corrective actions, is outlined and includes a description of responsible 
persons or entities as well as the time frames.  
40. 
Institutional arrangements and capacity-building. The AE will maintain oversight for 
the project’s compliance with the ESMS. The ESMF summarizes the key responsible persons 
from the NDMA, one of the EEs, and the PMU, and there are ESMS officers for each of the ESMS 
processes described in the ESMF. The indicative budget for implementing the ESMF is provided 
in the ESMF. The budget includes staff training, screening and scoping activities, the conduct of 
assessments and management plans, implementing environmental and social management 
plans, clearance and supervision, and evaluation. In order to build the capacity of the EEs to 
implement the tasks assigned to them in the ESMF, safeguards training will be conducted and 
delivered by ESMS officers from the AE, the International Union for Conservation of Nature 
(IUCN). 
4.2 
Gender policy  
41. 
The proposal contains an extensive and well-structured gender analysis and therefore 
complies with the operational guidelines of the GCF Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan. 
42. 
Kenya presents a favourable enabling environment, giving recognition to women’s 
rights and human rights. The principle of equality and non-discrimination is established as a 
core value. 
43. 
Detailed gender-related information is given for the two landscapes where the project 
will be operating, and the information clearly illustrates the challenges and opportunities for 
the project to address and invest on. The gender analysis, which was done using gender analysis 
tools, has enabled an extensive assessment to be undertaken of the two landscapes in terms of 
the level of access and control issues in what are regarded as critical resources such as land 
(ownership, access, decision-making), natural resources, livestock and the services that are 
associated with it (e.g. animal health, agricultural extension services, markets, market 
information, credit). The assessment presents the differences in the position, roles (time use or 
time poverty) and decision-making levels of women compared with those of men in the two 
landscapes. The assessment highlights that women lack capital and assets that can be put up as 
collateral to engage in diversified income and livelihood-generating activities and therefore 
there is a need for the project to address this. The assessment also stated that women and youth 
face many more challenges in accessing services and technologies despite their significant 
contributions to the local economies and to maintaining the well-being of the community. It 
emphasizes the “time poverty” faced by women, which will be one of the issues to be considered 
by each project at the activity implementation level. The assessment demonstrates the 
structural and traditional perceptions and belief systems that relegate women to their current 
positions, which needs to be improved by strongly recognizing that these changes will have to 
come with the involvement of men. The analysis indicates that illiteracy levels among women 
and girls are high and therefore recommends appropriate communication modalities to ensure

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 93 
 
 
knowledge and information are equally shared and understood by women and men. It further 
highlights the added disadvantage of female-headed households and makes specific 
recommendations to remedy the challenges faced by these households. The assessment has 
provided several recommendations which, if applied, can improve the role, contribution and 
benefits for women in the improvement of natural resource management, in negotiating peace 
talks, in improving the sustainable and equitable use of natural resources and community-based 
management of rangeland and rehabilitation works. At the same time the assessment identified 
specific interventions that need to take place to improve women’s benefits. The project is 
expected to benefit women in terms of: increased access to technologies to increase agricultural 
and animal production; enhanced capacity to implement sustainable disease control; support 
for income-generating activities to diversify income sources from on- and off-farm activities and 
services; access to financial support services; and improved natural resource management and 
equitable access to resources, rangeland rehabilitation and management interventions. The 
project expects to be progressively gender responsive by building on gender-sensitive activities, 
by continuously identifying and overcoming gender gaps, and by ensuring women’s 
empowerment and that more effective and equitable outcomes are achieved. 
44. 
The assessment also identified youth as a target, so it is planning to address this in detail 
during the inception phase of the project. 
45. 
The recommendation of the gender analysis has been translated into an extensive and 
detailed gender action plan, clearly outlining objectives, specific activities, indicators and 
responsibilities that are aligned to the project outputs and further defined into specific 
activities. It is also going to be refined in the inception phase of the project to incorporate youth 
programming whereby the gender action plan will become a gender and youth action plan. 
46. 
A gender task group will be established early in the project, drawn from the different 
institutions of the project. IUCN will lead the gender task group that will be responsible for 
implementing the gender and youth action plan. Training and capacity-building on gender and 
youth programming will be held for all the institutions working on the project. Specific support 
will be provided to the gender task group by the IUCN Global Gender Office. 
47. 
During the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) plan preparations stage, baseline data and 
targets will be set against which progress and achievements on gender issues can be measured.  
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium risk):  
48. 
The funding proposal requests a GCF grant of USD 23.15 million, accounting for 67 per 
cent of the total financing. The total project cost is USD 34.54 million, with co-financing by way 
of grants from the EEs/Government of Kenya, grant from the AE and subordinated loans from 
CI; and 
49. 
There are three EEs for the three outputs; namely, MoAI for component 1, NDMA for 
component 2, and CI for component 3. Given the large project areas (11 counties; 500,000 
hectares) and the engagement with three EEs, the success of the project depends on the efficient 
coordination among the AE, the EEs and other relevant stakeholders. A coordination mechanism 
will be provided through “landscape coordination hubs” operated by the AE. In addition, the AE 
states that NDMA has a coordination mandate and has staff in all counties in project target 
areas. As a lead EE, NDMA will also provide a coordination function supported by the 
coordination hubs that divides the counties into manageable units.

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 94 
 
 
4.3.2. 
AE/EE capability to execute the current programme (medium risk):  
50. 
IUCN has an extensive track record in implementing climate change adaptation in the 
region. The AE has also been partnering with government agencies and non-governmental 
organizations on ASAL management and forest landscape restoration in Kenya since 2008. The 
IUCN Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Office based in Kenya and IUCN Headquarters, 
through its Global Nature-based Solutions Group, will be responsible for technical quality and 
ensuring progress. It is noted that while the experience of the AE working with the Government 
of Kenya since 2008 and its track record of implementing adaptation activities are expected to 
support the project implementation, the three readiness grants under implementation by IUCN 
experienced delays in implementation. However, subsequently IUCN has shown improvement in 
implementation of these readiness projects; and 
51. 
The three EEs have track records in project implementation. MoAI has experience in 
managing projects (average size: USD 37 million) and executing a regional project financed by 
external donor funding for 2015-2019. The annual budget in 2017/2018 of NDMA was USD 59 
million. It has experience in implementing projects (average size: USD 15 million) and 
administering the National Drought Contingency Fund in Kenya. Finally, CI has been working in 
Kenya for 20 years and works with local partners in the landscapes. It has invested more than 
USD 450 million in over 80 countries. 
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium risk):  
52. 
Grant and loan financing under component 3: this includes (1) technical assistance; (2) 
an on-granting mechanism (small grants to community-based/women’s organizations and large 
grants for enabling action in value chains); and (3) an on-lending/revolving fund mechanism. 
The funding proposal states that mostly grants from GCF will be provided in the early stage and 
loans from CI will follow, should the business develop and become investable. According to the 
information provided by the AE, there will be opportunities to take a blended finance approach 
(grant and loan) on certain investments. During the implementation of component 3, the AE is 
relied upon to oversee how GCF grants will help to leverage additional financing that will 
strengthen the climate resilience of the beneficiaries. The AE is also expected to ensure that the 
GCF grant be beneficial to the end beneficiaries, not to CI; 
53. 
Reflows from the revolving fund: regarding the Community Resilience Facilities under 
activity 3.3, the funding proposal states that the grant to communities will be retained as an 
asset to the community for restoration purposes and the community will use this to establish 
and capitalize the solidarity revolving fund. The AE states that this is not commercial 
microfinance and there is no profit taking. In case loans from CI are used for scaling up the 
Community Resilience Facilities, it is recommended that reflows from activities jointly financed 
through GCF grant and CI loans are attributed proportionately to the community-managed 
revolving fund and CI; 
54. 
Selection criteria: the AE states that the grants to communities will be based on the 
criteria to be developed by communities for the climate-resilient land use/restoration plan. The 
funding proposal states that the criteria will be coherent with the county and national 
bylaws/laws, which would also include climate change elements. The selection and eligibility 
criteria for the grants and loans will be overseen by CI and based on its experience and 
processes. It is recommended that the AE and EEs ensure that climate change criteria will be 
detailed in the grant and loan assessments as well as county/national plans;  
55. 
Natural disaster: the AE has identified the risk of natural disasters such as prolonged 
droughts and torrential rainfalls delaying or destroying the project interventions. However, the

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 95 
 
 
funding proposal states that the project is not expected to insure the project intervention. It is 
expected that drought will occur during the project period. The AE is requested to explore the 
possibility of securing insurance coverage for the project to cover any potential damages during 
the implementation of the project; 
56. 
Possible other interventions that may affect the sustainability of the project: the AE has 
identified the risk of other investment decisions regarding irrigation that may be negative 
externalities and affect the effectiveness of the project. It also identified the risk of economic 
activities such as mining that could affect the sustainability of the project. The project will 
support policy dialogues with relevant authorities and will also establish landscape 
management mechanisms to improve planning of natural resources. The mechanisms are 
designed to manage competing land uses and claims, thus reducing the probability of the risk of 
such interventions occurring; and 
57. 
Economic viability: the AE has provided an economic analysis that yielded the economic 
internal rate of return of 31.15 per cent for the project over a 14 year-period as a base case. The 
analysis assumed that the project interventions will reduce economic losses by 5 per cent to 15 
per cent under the pessimistic and optimistic scenarios, respectively, and increase the income 
level. The analysis also considered the likelihood of droughts over 14 years based on data for 
the past 50 years. The sensitivity analysis was undertaken by varying the discount rate at 10 per 
cent and 14.5 per cent, which resulted in an overall positive net present value for the project. 
4.3.4. 
Compliance risk (medium risk):  
58. 
No adverse hits have been found in a preliminary sanctions screening for the 
programme, but additional sanctions screenings should be done prior to any funding 
disbursements and as additional parties are identified in the project; and 
59. 
Paragraph 35, above, recognizes the potential for conflicts to arise over resource use. No 
additional elaboration on the governance structure of the project, such as who will make 
decisions on resource use and how disputes will be addressed and resolved, has been provided 
by the AE. Nor has additional information been provided by the AE as to how corruption risks 
will be mitigated in cases of inequities in policymaking and power influence. In capacity-
building exercises, it is suggested that training include compliance-related issues, including but 
not limited to prevention of money laundering and financing terrorism, but also in terms of 
preventing corruption, fraud and waste, which could compound the risk of conflict over the 
access to, allocation of, and use of limited resources. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk):  
60. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio remains non-
material and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration level, results area or single 
proposal.  
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
61. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision. 
Summary risk assessment 
Rationale 
Overall programme 
Medium

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 96 
 
 
Accredited entity 
(AE)/executing entity (EE) 
capability 
Medium 
The proposal engages three EEs and 
the efficient coordination 
mechanism among the AE and EEs 
will be critical  
 
The grant from GCF and loans from 
CI may be blended. The AE is 
requested to ensure that the grant 
financing is beneficial to the end 
beneficiaries 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
62. 
The EEs for the project are the Government of Kenya (GoK), through the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI), the National Drought Management Authority (NDMA) and 
Conservation International (CI), which is also an AE of the GCF.  
63. 
Each of the EEs above will have a Subsidiary Agreement with IUCN as the AE for the 
project. As EE, they will enter into a service agreement with service providers and be 
accountable for the delivery of associated outputs under the three project components. Each of 
the EEs will undertake specific work with service providers that will support, through invited 
sub-contracts under the procurement and supervision of relevant EEs, while all other activities 
will be delivered by the EEs. CI will be responsible for: (i) making climate resilient investments 
in priority value chains that have been validated by local communities; (ii) providing grants to 
establish restoration created/led primarily by women’s groups; and (iii) providing grants to 
community-based enterprises for ecosystem-based adaptation that could create opportunities 
for investments in the value chains.  
64. 
The AE function will be undertaken by the regional office for Eastern and Southern 
Africa (ESARO) of IUCN, based in Nairobi, Kenya, while the thematic expertise on drylands 
management and general oversight will be from the Global Finance Unit and the IUCN Global 
Environment Facility (GEF) and GCF Coordination Unit. As AE, IUCN is responsible for providing 
strong technical oversight to the project and ensuring that all fiduciary rules, including 
procurement, are compliant with IUCN and GCF standards. In addition, IUCN will be accountable 
to the GCF on the use of funds, the overall implementation on the ground and achievement of 
the project’s outcomes. 
65. 
IUCN will establish a Project Management Unit (PMU), coordinated and managed by 
IUCN in partnership with and housed by the MoAI. The PMU will be responsible for the 
coordination of all activities funded by the project and undertaken by EEs. All members of the 
PMU will be recruited under IUCN terms and conditions. Given the geographical distribution of 
the project, the PMU will work with three landscape hub coordinators to ensure the smooth 
running of the project across the different institutions including EEs, county governments, 
consultants, service providers and other partners. The hubs will be hosted by one of the county 
governments and housed in government offices. Furthermore, a Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) will be established to provide strategic-level project guidance, technical and policy advice 
to the PMU and an implementing agreement will be signed between IUCN and the Chair of the 
PSC, representing the MoAI, to regulate relationships between IUCN and the PMU for the 
implementation of the project.

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 97 
 
 
66. 
The IUCN Global Finance Unit will manage fund disbursements to the PMU based on 
semi-annual work plans agreed by the ESARO supervision team. Funds will be transferred to 
IUCN and kept in a bank account dedicated to the project. The PMU will be responsible for the 
accounting and fiduciary management of all funds disbursed. The PMU will adopt IUCN’s 
accounting systems and will be audited independently by auditors selected through a 
competitive bidding process where TORs are approved by IUCN Global Finance Unit on a yearly 
basis. 
67. 
IUCN will develop and implement a monitoring, evaluation, reporting and learning 
system, which will include providing to the GCF the Annual Performance Report, an Interim 
Independent Evaluation Report and Final Independent Evaluation Report. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
68. 
This proposal addresses adaptation impact on two result areas – most vulnerable 
people/communities and ecosystem/ecosystem services, with the expected number of direct 
and indirect beneficiaries at 155,000 and 620,000, respectively.  
69. 
In terms of the logical framework, the funding proposal adequately designs the 
indicators and the methodologies to be used for their measurement at the impact, outcome and 
output level. For monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements, an M&E plan has been 
developed to measure and track impact and project indicators, including time of availability, 
reporting line, and methodologies used detailing overall responsibility of the AE for project 
M&E. The alignment of the M&E plan and relevant sections in the funding proposal has also 
been addressed. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
70. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement (“AMA”) was signed with the Accredited Entity on 
11 October 2016, and it became effective on 11 January 2017. 
71. 
The Accredited Entity has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. It 
is recommended that, prior to submission of the Funding Proposal to the Board (a) the 
Accredited Entity has obtained all its internal approvals and (b) the Fund has received a 
certificate or legal opinion from the Accredited Entity in form and substance satisfactory to the 
Fund confirming that all final internal approvals by the Accredited Entity have been obtained 
and that the entity has the authority and capacity to implement the project. Pursuant to section 
A.3 of the Funding Proposal, the Accredited Entity obtained its internal approvals for the 
proposed project on 25 May 2018.  
72. 
The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of Kenya, a country in which 
GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other things, GCF 
is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be 
further assessed.  The Secretariat sent a draft agreement on privileges and immunities, together 
with a background note, to the Treasury Department of Kenya on March 2016, and several 
exchanges have taken place to respond to comments received from the Attorney General’s Office 
and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kenya. In this regard, discussions on the draft agreement 
on privileges and immunities are ongoing. 
73. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 98 
 
 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
74. 
The proposed project envisages the financing by GCF of the provision of grants and 
loans under four different activities within the same Project component, for which Conservation 
International (“CI”) will act as the executing entity. However, the eligibility criteria for the 
selection of the beneficiaries and sub-projects, and the relevant legal arrangements for the flow 
of funds, are not entirely nor clearly described in the funding proposal. Accordingly, for 
purposes of establishing the eligibility criteria for each of the abovementioned activities and 
defining how the granting and lending mechanisms will be implemented by CI, the Accredited 
Entity shall submit an initial eligibility criteria prior to the signing of the funded activity 
agreement and a Grants Award Manual approved by CI and the Accredited Entity prior to first 
disbursement by GCF, both in form and substance satisfactory to the Secretariat. Relevant 
provisions have been agreed with the Accredited Entity in the term sheet to ensure that the 
above matters are timely addressed and clarified prior to the signing of the funded activity 
agreement and complied with during the implementation of the Project.  
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
75. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion confirming 
that it has obtained all its internal approvals within 120 days of the Board approval; 
(b) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval or the date in which the 
Accredited Entity has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals, whichever is later; and 
(c) 
Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 99 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP113 
Proposal name: 
TWENDE – Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem 
Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid Rangelands 
Accredited entity: 
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1. 
Kenya is a country impacted by climate change. The country is located in Eastern Africa, 
which receives little rainfall. However, it has arid and semi-arid regions, which are not 
particularly suitable for crop agriculture due to high evaporative losses. Rather than crop 
agriculture, these arid and semi-arid lands (ASAL) used to be more suitable for livestock 
management, given the low rainfall and pockets of water storages and pastures around them. 
However, with increasing population, many people have started to take advantage of such mini 
community-managed water reservoirs and have begun irrigated crop agriculture. This has 
resulted in competition over resources, gradually destroyed community-managed governance 
norms and practices, subsequently led to much reduced availability of water in such reservoirs 
for the livestock, and initiated social conflists. 
2. 
ASALs occupy 89 per cent of Kenya, and such lands are home to 36 per cent of the 
population. Pastoralism has been the dominant livelihood in ASALs, providing for 70 per cent of 
the national livestock herd. Livestock is important for local economy in ASALs. Livestock 
production contributes to 80 per cent of household income in arid and 65 per cent of income in 
semi-arid lands. In recent times, however, ASALs have been experiencing repeated occurrances 
of droughts, which has affected livestock rearing. It is estimated that drought has been 
responsible for decelerating Kenya’s economic growth by 2.8 per cent points. 
3. 
To make things worse, climate variability and change placed further stresses on water 
resources by increasing potential evapo-transpirative losses, with further shrinking water 
reservoirs for both pastures and crop agriculture. As a consequence, both sources of livelihoods 
have begun to incur losses, which could not be offset by profits made in non-drought years 
between two severe drought episodes. As a result, the economic conditions of rangeland 
pastoralists and farmers have deteriorated significantly over the years, leading them to consider 
distress coping modalities. As a result the affected rangeland population has become further 
marginalized in economic and social terms.  
4. 
The funding proposal presents evidence through the trend analysis of meteorological 
data for the period 1960 to 2009, which informs us that (a) there has been a warming trend and 
(b) total rainfall has been declining with intensification of rainfall episodes during the wet 
periods. The trend analysis also indicates that the potential evapo-transpirative losses are on 
the rise. The maps generated by the geographical information system clearly identify the areas 
where drought-related impacts are most pronounced. Ground evidence presents anecdotal data 
that support the scientifically represented results on the changing climate system.

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 100 
 
 
5. 
The projected climate change is most likely to increase drought-related problems in 
Kenya. While the water availability is likely to decline further due to dwindling rainfall, the 
projected data suggest that drought intensity will increase further with increasing evapo-
transpirative losses. Certain anecdotal evidence from the field suggest that, as much as 40 per 
cent loss of water availability in community-managed ponds in the rangelands may be 
attributed to climate change-induced droughts. Droughts have already affected vegetation and 
grazing grounds, which will be significantly worse under climate change. Therefore, the 
productivity from livestock management and crop agriculture will decline further with 
increasing risks of food insecurity involving poor pastoralists and farmers in the ASAL regions. 
This warrants immediate actions in the ASAL regions.  
6. 
The objective of the project is to reduce the cost of climate change-induced drought on 
Kenya’s national economy by increasing resilience of the livestock and other land use sectors in 
restored and effectively governed rangeland ecosystems. The project is expected to strengthen 
climate change adaptation in Kenya’s ASALs. In addition to building adaptive capacities at 
community and institutional levels, the project aims at strengthening institutional capacities to 
support poor communities by providing them with early information on climate change, and 
intervene to develop planned allocation of water resources in community-managed mini water 
reservoirs to facilitate both pastures and crop agriculture. Moreover, the project aims at 
developing a financial window, in the form of a fund, to facilitate micro-enterprises that are run 
and managed by the affected communities in target ASALs. 
7. 
The project comprises the following three components: 
(a) 
Component 1: Climate change adapted planning for drought resilience; 
(b) 
Component 2: Restoration of rangeland landscape for ecosystem-based adaptation 
(EBA); and 
(c) 
Component 3: Investment and incentives for climate change resilient ecosystem 
management. 
8. 
Under component 1, the project will strengthen management capacity of governance 
and local institutions so that informed decisions are made to develop climate change-resilient 
landscape planning and management plans. A critical step to achieve this is the establishment of 
an information system to make use of downscaled climate data in improved analyses regarding 
climate change sensitivity and vulnerability, with the latter being integrated in cross-county 
landscape planning. The outcome of the component will contribute to the long-term 
sustainability of county-level processes related to landscape planning and implementation. 
9. 
Component 2 focuses on implementation of landscape plans that are centred around 
EBA, by involving communities for drought management. However, the other aspects of the 
component are to: (a) develop (operational) bylaws; (b) incorporate such bylaws into county 
laws; and (c) increase implementation capacity of local institutions. Here, the emphasis is placed 
on considering proven approaches and technologies for EBA in dry areas. Interventions which 
are generally proven in ASAL conditions as effective towards reducing vulnerabilities in a local 
context will be given priority in implementation of component 2, where a participatory process 
will be the key delivery modality. 
10. 
Component 3 will focus on removal of investment barriers and creating access to 
markets and financial services. It is envisaged that, if investment barriers are removed and 
access to markets and financial services are ensured simultaneously, the local producers will 
participate in value chains in agriculture, forestry and livestock products and thereby will gain 
in terms of incremental income. To this end, the project will encourage the development of

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 101 
 
 
community-owned and managed revolving funds and facilitate the operationalization of 
community-based micro-enterprises to benefit from penetrating the value chains. It is proposed 
that micro- and small community-based enterprises will be supported through a dedicated 
funding window, created under this component. The independent Technical Advisory Panel 
(iTAP) understands that implementation challenges exist for participation in value chains, 
where prior knowledge (i.e. through studies) and the establishment of a business model will be 
key to operating these micro-enterprises. Helping these nascent business units with financial 
packages will perhaps not be sufficient to transform them into successful business ventures. 
11. 
The funding proposal indicates that a total of 155,000 people will directly benefit, of 
which 74,400 will be women beneficiaries. The beneficiaries are spread in two landscapes, 
involving 11 counties in drought-affected parts of Kenya. The methodology applied for the 
identification of target areas and population has been based on strong scientific reasoning. The 
number of indirect beneficiaries is estimated at 620,000 (297,600 of them will be women), who 
will learn from the process and may emulate successful participants of the project. An estimated 
500,000 hectares of degraded land will be brought under restoration, protection and 
rehabilitation. The indicators used in the logical framework matrix are logically placed and a 
monitoring and evaluation plan is developed so that progress may be monitored and reported 
periodically. The project will be implemented within a time frame of five years. 
12. 
In view of the above discussions, the iTAP understands that the impact potential is 
“high”. However, to realize the potential fully, coordination involving various grassroots 
institutions in 11 counties and across two target landscapes and the administration and 
financing of grants and loan awards need to be strengthened. Moreover, adequate capacity-
building and guidance will be needed to involve the micro-enterprises in gainfully participating 
in existing value chains. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
13. 
The project offers climate change information services to reach the target grassroots, 
which is likely to catalyze impacts beyond a one-off project investment. The good management 
practices, the development of bylaws and potential incorporation of such bylaws in county laws 
provide for learning and subsequent opportunities to scale up further consolidating resilience in 
drought affected ASALs. There is also potential to expand in counties which are not considered 
under the current project. When the current business as usual modalities of dealing with 
climate-induced vulnerabilities are considered, the project offers a potential paradigm shift in 
addressing the prevailing issues. 
14. 
There is a theory of change that also indicates how the expected replication will be 
realized in future years. The activities will rely on local experiences, which may be easier to 
replicate elsewhere at minimum additional financing because of their contextual grounding and 
their implementation in a participatory process. 
15. 
Capacity-building is considered as an inherent key mehanism to strengthen both local 
institutional capacities and the adaptive capacities of poor pastoralists and farmers. A number 
of activities are foreseen which are likely to contribute to the creation or strengthening of 
knowledge, especially through a collaborative learning process and institutional learning and 
strengthening. The monitoring and evaluation plan that accompanies the funding proposal 
highlights how indicators will be used to capture the progress and outcome of the entire 
learning opportunity. However, a robust baseline, including a knowledge-attitude-practices 
(KAP) baseline study, will allow a comparative study to be conducted towards the end of the 
project to highlight the effectiveness of the learning process.

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 102 
 
 
16. 
As indicated above, component 2 is designed to create an enabling environment along 
with contributing to the reduction of community vulnerability to drought. There are clear 
indications that some of the institutional mechanisms, including the development and effective 
application of bylaws will enable improved governance in terms of accessing water from 
diminishing water pockets in the rangelands in ASALs. Such interventions along with 
sustainable resource management plans will enhance sustainability of the resources which are 
critical for livestock, forestry and agricultural production in these areas. If production cannot be 
streamlined to contrast the impacts of climate-induced droughts, it will not be possible to 
benefit from value chains in ASALs. 
17. 
Since the forest regeneration, restoration and rehabilitation processes are planned as 
incentive-based community endeavours, subject to available modest resources in the future, 
their replication potential is significant. In addition, it is likely to bring about behavioural 
change among the managers and users of ecosystem-based services, thus bringing an element of 
inherent long-term sustainability to the project. As the theory of change suggests, if benefits 
accrue from such EBA-based goods and services, especially through the operation of micro-
enterprises in value chains, then the direct benefits will incentivize future protection of the 
rangeland ecosystems in the long term. 
18. 
The project does not directly create new markets for goods and services generated from 
the restoration of rangelands. However, the incentives designed for micro-enterprises, 
facilitating access to credit services and creating links to existing value chains will immensely 
help them to make financial profits from ecosystem-based products. Under the current scenario, 
local people do not often get the larger share of profit from sales of such products. With project-
related support, local micro-scale businesses will flourish and are more likely to penetrate the 
value chains optimizing profits and sharing it among stakeholders at the local level. This also 
offers significant learning opportunities.   
19. 
Project component 3 addresses removal of barriers to access financial support so that 
local people can establish and run micro-scale enterprises. In addition, component 1 addresses 
removal of barriers to access climate information at the micro-level. These are specific activities 
which are likely to help in overcoming systematic barriers that currently hinder progress for 
local people. It is expected that the project will directly intervene to remove such barriers. 
20. 
As indicated earlier, the regulatory barriers and diminishing community governance 
practices will be addressed under component 2. As suggested in the funding proposal, if the 
local-level bylaws could be grafted into regulatory regimes for the participating counties, they 
could represent significant dividends in re-establishment of fair and just community-wide 
practices towards managing scarce resources that are critical for all the competing users. This 
can contribute greatly to future sustenance of resources in these fragile ecosystems. 
21. 
EBA has not been given due importance in the formulation of policies and strategies 
towards managing natural resources in degraded ASALs in Kenya. This project provides an 
opportunity to consider EBA as a central element to address vulnerabilities of the rangelands 
and their direct users. If the project establishes norms and practices for the sustainable use and 
management of rangeland ecosystems, it will offer significant replication potential within and 
beyond Kenya as similar degraded ecosystems are abundant throughout Africa. 
22. 
In view of the above discussions, the iTAP understands that the paradigm shift potential 
of the project is “high”. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
Scale: High

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 103 
 
 
23. 
The project will directly contribute to the achievement of a number of Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), which are as follows: 
(a) 
SDG 1 (no poverty): end poverty, which will be addressed by allowing rangeland 
pastoralists and farmers to gain from sustainable management of water pockets and by 
taking part in both harnessing ecosystem-based goods and services sustainably and 
taking part in the value chain of products derived from such activities;  
(b) 
SDG 5 (gender equality): empower women and girls and achieve gender equality, through 
participation in the project which will directly benefit women; 
(c) 
SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation): ensure availability and sustainable management of 
water, where equitable water conservation and allocation among competing users will 
be ensured; 
(d) 
SDG 13 (climate action): take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts, 
being the specific target of the project; and 
(e) 
SDG 15 (life on land): protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial 
ecosystems, and sustainable forest management, the project objectives fully reflect these 
aims. 
24. 
In addition, the project will indirectly contribute to other SDGs, in particular: 
(a) 
SDG 2 (zero hunger): end hunger and achieve food security, where rangeland restoration 
and drought management are likely to increase food production; and 
(b) 
SDG 16 (peace, justice, strong institutions): promote peaceful (and inclusive) societies, as 
reflected in the efforts to develop norms, bylaws and practices towards equitable 
sharing of water resources; the related governance mechanism will help reduce social 
tension among competing users and also help restore harmony within the participating 
communities. 
25. 
The project is expected to result in some environmental co-benefits. If improved 
governance of rangelands is established, as expected, this will reduce soil erosion and enable 
more sustainable management of rangeland resources. Restoration of degraded rangelands is 
expected to lead to rehabilitation of the ecosystem, which will in turn contribute to restoration 
of ecosystem services and an increase in biodiversity. Although the focus of the project is to 
achieve adaptation, there will be some sequestration of carbon in restored forests and 
rangeland vegetation. With increasing vegetation and natural interactions with soil, conditions 
will be conducive to produce higher levels of moisture storage and infiltration, which in turn is 
expected to cause higher levels of recharge of aquifers. As a longer-term consequence, the 
changed conditions will boost productivity of the rangelands and its biodiversity.   
26. 
Although the potential rehabilitation of the water cycle is expected only in the medium 
to longer terms, it will have positive externality not only on environmental aspects, but also on 
social aspects. For example, increased water availability through increased infiltration will 
enhance access to water, reduce social tension and competition and increase quality of life in 
the arid and semi-arid conditions. Moreover, reduced sedimentation is likely to increase water 
quality with positive effects on the communities, especially during the dry seasons when water 
scarcity is generally high. 
27. 
It is expected that the project will contribute to strengthening of local governance, 
participation and accountability, which in turn will contribute to wider processes of citizen 
engagement and accountability. A possible revival of communal herding arrangements will 
reinforce the traditional social fabric of the pastoralists, which is a cornerstone of life in 
rangelands in Kenya.

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 104 
 
 
28. 
There is a strong gender-based agenda in the design of the project. In addition to 
women’s engagement in the participatory processes, a women’s partnership with the private 
sector will be facilitated. A number of programmes targeting women, youth and marginalized 
groups are included in the project design. Women’s involvement in the value chain and/or in 
the micro-enterprises will directly contribute to their empowerment. The climate change 
information system will enable women to address their differential perspective of vulnerability, 
and will offer them options that might suit their specific contexts. The project must ensure that 
solutions offered in building resilience are neither difficult for women to implement nor create 
an extra burden on their daily lives.  
29. 
The expected financial returns from ecosystem-based services will stimulate the 
economy of Kenya following implementation of the project. Ecosystem restoration will translate 
into higher productivity by mitigating the adverse effects of drought.  
30. 
Apart from such macro-scale benefits, there will be household-level economic benefits. 
Enhanced production will mean additional income for households and perhaps greater food 
security involving poor producers (both livestock and crop). Increased infiltration in restored 
landscapes is likely to recharge aquifers, contributing to livestock productivity and health. This 
in turn will contribute to higher incomes at the farm level while outputs from rangeland 
vegetation will also increase. Furthermore, greater participation in the value chain and income 
from the micro-enterprises are likely to boost local economies. 
31. 
It is expected that restored landscapes will foster an increase in adaptive capacity in any 
given community. The entire process will enable the actors to initiate climate proofing of value 
chains. Improved grazing management in the selected landscapes will contribute to improved 
livestock health, productivity, survival rates and post-drought recovery. A resilient production 
system will eventually result in an increase in farm-level income through greater and assured 
production and subsequent generation of revenues.  
32. 
On the basis of the above, it may be inferred that the sustainable potential of the project 
is “high”. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
    
 
        Scale: High 
33. 
Kenya, as a country with arid and semi-arid regions, has been facing severe droughts. 
The country witnessed 23 drought events in 51 consecutive years between 1960 and 2011. The 
rangelands in ASALs are particularly vulnerable to drought, which is being exacerbated due to 
climate variability and change. Under drought conditions the rangeland population, particularly 
the pastoralists and crop producers, are the primary victims of climate change. Pastoralists are 
among the most disadvantaged population in Kenya, performing poorly on basic human 
development indicators such as mortality rates and literacy levels. Kenya’s ASALs have fewer 
social services per capita, while the availability of infrastructure is much less than elsewhere. 
Having such a limited resource base, the pastoralists in ASALs account for over 70 per cent of 
the national livestock production in terms of milk, meat and hide.   
34. 
Due to frequent exposure to severe droughts in ASALs, people are forced to consider 
distress coping methods, which have adverse implications on the economies of pastoralist 
households. Food insecurity and erosion of nutrition resulting from frequent droughts further 
undermine coping capacities of the pastoralist households.  
35. 
In the wake of climate change-related water shortages in ASALs, crop producers also 
face frequent crop losses and food insecurity. The adverse effects of drought are often

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 105 
 
 
characterized by complete depletion of pastures, lack of water for livestock, massive movement 
of animals in search of water and pastures and much aggravated incidences of livestock 
diseases. Crops often perish when the top soil loses moisture without being replenished to 
compensate for the depletion. In such cases, crop loss is quite common. Overall, drought related 
risks are very high in ASALs and the need of the population for adaptive measures is high. 
36. 
ASAL regions are generally lagging behind in Kenya in economic terms, compared to 
other areas. Moreover, the backward counties in ASAL regions cannot make much progress due 
to weak institutional capacities, despite having greater access to resources following the 
decentralization in recent times. Agriculture, forestry and fishing contribute 15.2 per cent of 
gross domestic product, which represents the highest contributing sector to the gross domestic 
product. However, pastoralism is struggling under climate change and making way for the 
expansion of crop agriculture – giving rise to further competition over remaining and ever 
diminishing water resources in the rangelands. In such conditions, neither livestock 
management, nor crop agriculture can ensure sustainable livelihoods in the rangelands. 
Consequently, poverty is perpetuated in the rangelands of ASAL regions. 
37. 
The request for financing to GCF will be for the investment in creating public goods and 
services. As an African country, a financing gap exists in Kenya in this regard. Unfortunately, 
there is no other alternative financing opportunity to fill in the gap. Private financing in such a 
sector cannot be leveraged if the state-owned institutions are not able to fill the critical initial 
financing gap. GCF financing is intended to address the prevailing financing gap and remove 
current barriers. Although it is a developing country, Kenya is entitled to access adaptation 
finance from GCF with full concessionality as an African country. Therefore, the requested grant 
financing appears fully justified. 
38. 
Component 2 of the project is intended to create an enabling environment through the 
strengthening of institutional mechanisms. Such opportunities to strengthen institutional and 
implementation capacities in relevant institutions should be encouraged towards provisioning 
of better services to overcome climate change-related vulnerabilities.  
39. 
The situational analysis clearly indicates that the needs of the recipients for the project 
are “high”. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
40. 
The current project is designed on the foundation of a rich policy framework on climate 
change and drought. Kenya, the beneficiary country, enacted the Climate Change Act in 2016, 
which has been a result of documentation on and responses to droughts in the past few decades. 
As a precursor to the enactment of the law, Kenya launched its National Climate Change 
Response Strategy in 2010 and its National Climate Change Action Plan in 2013. Kenya carried 
out an adaptation technical analysis of economic sectors and prioritized adaptation actions, 
including integration of resilience into planning, budgeting and implementation of activities at 
both national and county levels. The current project is a reflection of such policy elements. 
41. 
The proposed specific objectives and outcomes are in synergy with national policies and 
strategies of Kenya on climate change and sectoral aspects such as agriculture, forestry and 
sustainable land management. For example, the project aligns with the National Climate Change 
Response Strategy, National Climate Change Action Plan and key plans of Kenya such as the 
Nationally Determined Contribution and National Adaptation Plan. The project also aligns with 
the Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Strategy as well as Kenya Strategic Ivestment Framework 
for Sustainable Land Management, Livestock Policy and ASAL Policy. Therefore, the project

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 106 
 
 
appears to be well grounded within the policy and strategic approach to address the issues that 
are relevant in ASAL productivity involving crop, forestry and livestock resources. 
42. 
The Government of Kenya is a member of the International Union for Conservation of 
Nature (IUCN). IUCN has been a trusted partner of the Government having experience in 
working on policy formulation and implementation, particularly in the field of resource 
conservation and environmentally sustainable development. IUCN is unique in the sense that it 
may work as a trusted interface between the government bodies and the non-state actors on the 
above issues. IUCN have excellent field-based experience in dealing with land degradation, 
ecological restoration and EBA. It has working experience in ASAL regions of Kenya. IUCN has 
implemented ASAL management and forest landscape restoration in Kenya since 2008, in close 
partnership with governmental and non-governmental organizations working there.  
43. 
IUCN in Kenya has chosen suitable institutions as partners in delivering the three 
components of the project. The State Department for Livestock (SDL), under the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Irrigation, a line ministry of the Government of Kenya, will execute the project 
on behalf of the ministry. SDL has experience in strengthening management of rangeland 
resources through the Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience Project. Another partner is the 
National Drought Management Authority, which implements project-based interventions 
directly affecting household food security and livelihoods of more than ten million people. It 
provides a platform for long-term planning and action, as well as a mechanism for solid 
coordination across Government and with all other stakeholders in matters relating to drought 
management in Kenya together with adaptation and resilience-building in the ASALs. 
Conservation International is another partner that has experience in creating trust funds and 
mobilizing such funds towards conservation-related activities in various countries. In this 
project, Conservation International has come forward with co-finance in a bid to offer funds for 
the establishment of community-led micro-enterprises, so that they may participate effectively 
in the value chains. 
44. 
The key approach to define the context of the project and the apparent solutions to 
address the key issues revolves around the engagement of local people in both the identification 
and implementation of adaptive responses. Solutions are mostly oriented towards community-
based approaches, where institutional capacity-building will complement such activities to 
facilitate the EBA processes. The funding proposal shows evidence of intense stakeholder 
engagement and consultations, including from disadvantaged groups and women in the 
communities, during the identification of target areas (i.e. counties and the contiguous 
landscapes involving various counties) and in setting priorities among response options. 
Therefore, the robust design of the project may be considered as a reflection of strong 
community ownership. 
45. 
The assessments of various investment criteria on country ownership suggest that the 
overall country ownership for the project is “high”. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
46. 
Pasture management and crop agriculture are both micro-scale private activities in 
ASAL regions of Kenya. Yet, private investment is highly constrained in the ASALs, mostly due to 
high risks associated with frequent droughts. The project therefore requests USD 23.15 million 
from GCF as a grant, with co-financing of USD 11.39 million. The co-financing ratio appears on 
the higher side than most GCF financed projects.

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 107 
 
 
47. 
The proposed grant from GCF will target activities that tend to have pay-offs that fully 
accrue only in the long-run or that are of a “public good” nature, and therefore cannot be 
addressed by the private sector. The costs of the activities identified are determined in such a 
way as to cover the minimum cost possible to achieve project objectives. Activities are related to 
cover the additional cost of responding to climate change threats in the target counties. It is 
therefore argued that the project is intrinsically efficient and cost-effective. The project design 
focuses on community-based rangeland management, which itself is a low-cost approach with 
minimal material interventions. Therefore, the project is cost efficient. Moreover, the overall 
delivery cost per beneficiary falls within the range where GCF financing has been granted on 
various similar projects in the recent past. Therefore, the project is cost-wise efficient. 
48. 
Kenya incurs significant losses due to drought. The economic and financial analysis 
presented in the feasibility study document estimates that, in the absence of GCF financing, the 
expected economic losses due to droughts over the next 14 years in the target landscapes will 
be in the order of USD 578 million. This is the cost of not mobilizing GCF finances, which may be 
avoided if finances are made available. In the context of Kenya, it is estimated that for every 
early spending of USD 1 on resilience-building, the potential benefit may exceed USD 2.8. A 
resilience-building investment in rangelands in Kenya results in an increase in income of USD 
450 per household, which translates into an average of USD 84 million per year of avoided 
“drought related losses” and “costs of humanitarian responses”. This means that, if losses 
emanating from even one severe drought were avoided following the investment, the saved cost 
could easily overweigh the total investment under this project.  
49. 
The financial and economic analyses considered 12 per cent discount rate, which is 
acceptable for developing countries. If the project related benefits are assumed to be realized 
over the next 14 years, the net present value of the project is USD 11.81 million, with an internal 
rate of return of 31.15 per cent. Such numbers indicate that the project is on solid economic 
ground. With the same discount rate, if the project is considered to generate benefits for only 5 
years (instead of 14 years), then the net present value still appears positive (USD 3.255 million) 
and the internal rate of return appears 20.98 per cent, which is still very high. In both scenarios, 
the potential benefits outweigh costs, which also indicate that the project is cost effective. 
50. 
The project management appears to have strong foundations, involving most relevant 
national and international institutions with adequate relevant experience to deliver project 
components. A few of these institutions have developed ‘industry best practices’ in dealing with 
drought in rangelands and operating with funding schemes to promote micro-enterprises 
involving vulnerable communities. However, the ultimate success of these micro-enterprises 
will depend on effective coordination, capacity-building and guidance by experienced 
organizations, which will also require coordination among various actors and stakeholders. 
Accessing funds for the participation in value chains will not be the only criterion and a range of 
support services will have to be developed for the nascent micro-enterprises to succeed in their 
new ventures. Overall, the effectiveness and efficiency of the project appears to be “medium to 
high”. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
51. 
Based on the assessment as above, the iTAP recommends the project for approval by the 
Board. 
52. 
The iTAP recommends that the accredited entity and the project management unit work 
closely with the executing entity on component 3 so that recipients of the proposed fund for 
value chain intermediaries will also receive proper training and other auxiliary support, as

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.07 
Page 108 
 
 
needed. Effective implementation of component 3 will enable the community-run micro-
enterprises to succeed in following a business model and become a source of inspiration for 
other similar micro-enterprises in the ASALs.  
53. 
The iTAP also recommends that a baseline KAP study is conducted involving the 
members of the target communities, as a part of the monitoring framework. The study findings 
will be compared with KAP findings at the end of the project in order to understand progress 
made in community mobilization for achieving the objectives of the EBA project.

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.22/02/Add.07 
Page 109 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP113) 
Proposal name: 
TWENDE – Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem Based 
Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid Rangelands 
Accredited entity: 
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) 
Impact potential 
No comment. 
Paradigm shift potential 
No comment. 
Sustainable development potential 
No comment. 
Needs of the recipient 
No comment. 
Country ownership 
No comment. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
No comment. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
No comment.

=== PAGE 110 ===
i
ANNEX 6. GENDER ANALYSIS REPORT
TWENDE* Towards Ending Drought Emergencies:
Ecosystem Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-
Arid Rangelands
2018
*Twende is Swahili for “let’s go”. Ending Drought Emergencies is Kenya’s flagship policy for
the arid and semi-arid lands
Gender documentation for FP113

=== PAGE 111 ===
ii 
Table of Contents 
ABBREVIATIONS ............................................................................................................................................. II 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................................... IV 
1 
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................1 
1.1 
GENDER ANALYSIS IN THE CONTEXT OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT ........................................................................... 1 
1.1.1 
Access .............................................................................................................................................. 1 
1.1.2 
Knowledge, Beliefs, and Perception ................................................................................................ 1 
1.1.3 
Practices and participation ............................................................................................................. 1 
1.1.4 
Time and Space ............................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1.5 
Legal rights and status .................................................................................................................... 2 
1.1.6 
Power and Decision Making ........................................................................................................... 2 
2 
METHODOLOGY .......................................................................................................................................2 
2.1 
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS ............................................................................................................................. 4 
3 
BACKGROUND ..........................................................................................................................................5 
3.1 
DESCRIPTION OF THE DRYLANDS OF KENYA AND PROJECT AREA ............................................................................ 5 
4 
EXISTING GENDER INEQUALITIES FACING WOMEN IN DRYLANDS ............................................................6 
4.1 
GENDER INEQUALITIES FACING WOMEN IN DRYLANDS ......................................................................................... 6 
4.1.1 
Access to productive assets............................................................................................................. 6 
4.1.2 
Women land ownership .................................................................................................................. 6 
4.1.3 
Social stipulations regarding land inheritance ................................................................................ 6 
4.1.4 
Access to credit by Women as compared to Men ........................................................................... 6 
4.1.5 
Time and space ............................................................................................................................... 6 
4.1.6 
Power and decision to spend income .............................................................................................. 7 
4.1.7 
Female headed households face greater inequalities ..................................................................... 7 
5 
GENDER CHALLENGES FACING WOMEN IN DRYLANDS .............................................................................8 
5.1 
UNEQUAL DISTRIBUTION OF RESOURCES AND ACCESS TO SERVICES ......................................................................... 8 
5.2 
UNEVEN DISTRIBUTION OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCE RIGHTS ......................................................................... 8 
5.3 
UNEVEN LIVESTOCK OWNERSHIP AND ACCESS TO RELATED PRODUCTS ..................................................................... 8 
5.4 
UNEVEN ACCESS TO HEALTH, EDUCATION AND SOCIAL PROTECTION SERVICES ........................................................... 9 
5.5 
UNEVEN ACCESS TO CLIMATE CHANGE RESPONSES AND DISASTER RISK REDUCTION MEASURES ..................................... 9 
5.6 
UNEVEN ACCESS TO ANIMAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES ........................................................................................... 9 
5.7 
UNEVEN ACCESS TO MARKETS AND PRODUCER GROUPS ....................................................................................... 9 
5.8 
LACK OF RECOGNITION OF WOMEN’S ROLES, KNOWLEDGE AND BARRIERS TO GENDER ROLES .................................... 10 
5.9 
EDUCATION AS A LONG-TERM DRIVER OF LIVELIHOOD DIVERSIFICATION ................................................................. 10 
5.10 
NEGLECT OF DRYLAND WOMEN’S TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE .............................................................................. 10 
6 
ACTION TO ADDRESS GENDER INEQUALITIES AND CHALLENGES ............................................................ 11 
6.1 
IMPROVING DRYLAND WOMEN’S ACCESS TO HEALTH SERVICES TO UNDERPIN DRYLAND RESILIENCE ............................. 11 
6.2 
IMPROVING GENDER-EQUITABLE SOCIAL PROTECTION SERVICES FOR DRYLANDS RESILIENCE ........................................ 11 
6.3 
IMPROVING WOMEN’S ACCESS TO RISK MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE PRODUCTS ................................................. 11 
6.4 
IMPROVING WOMEN’S ACCESS TO ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES .............................................................................. 12 
6.5 
IMPROVING WOMEN’S ACCESS TO LIVESTOCK MARKETS AND DEVELOPMENT ........................................................... 12 
6.6 
IMPROVING DRYLAND WOMEN’S ACCESS TO MARKETS FOR CROPS AND PROCESSING ................................................ 12 
6.7 
IMPROVING SUPPORT FOR WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION IN ALTERNATIVE LIVELIHOODS AND THEIR ABILITY TO CAPTURE VALUE
12 
Citadel of Resilience and Sustainability

=== PAGE 112 ===
iii 
6.8 
IMPROVING OUR UNDERSTANDING OF GENDER RELATIONS TO INFORM POLICY AND PROGRAMMING THROUGH THE 
DEVOLUTION STRUCTURE-COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ....................................................................................................... 12 
6.9 
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING ACTIONS THROUGH CSOS ....................................................................................... 12 
7 
SOCIO-ECONOMIC BACKGROUND OF THE PROJECT AREA ...................................................................... 14 
7.1 
MOYALE-WAJIR NORTH BANISA HILLS LANDSCAPE SITE .................................................................................... 14 
7.1.1 
Sabarwawa Landscape ................................................................................................................. 19 
7.1.2 
Mid Tana River Landscape Site ..................................................................................................... 23 
8 
GENDER ISSUES IN THE PROJECT AREA ................................................................................................... 33 
8.1 
MOYALE-WAJIR NORTH BANISA HILLS LANDSCAPE SITE .................................................................................... 33 
8.2 
SABARWAWA LANDSCAPE SITE ..................................................................................................................... 33 
8.3 
MID TANA RIVER LANDSCAPE SITE ................................................................................................................ 34 
8.4 
CHYULU HILLS LANDSCAPE SITE .................................................................................................................... 36 
9 
GENDER ASSESSMENT OF PROJECT AREA ............................................................................................... 37 
9.1 
METHODOLOGY FOR ACTIVITY SCHEDULES ...................................................................................................... 37 
9.2 
MOYALE-WAJIR NORTH BANISA HILLS LANDSCAPE SITE-MARSABIT AND MANDERA COUNTIES ................................ 38 
9.2.1 
Activity Schedules ......................................................................................................................... 38 
9.2.2 
Methodology: Access and Control Profiles.................................................................................... 41 
9.2.3 
Access and Control Profiles ........................................................................................................... 42 
9.2.4 
Opportunities and Constraints ...................................................................................................... 45 
9.3 
MID TANA RIVER LANDSCAPE SITE ................................................................................................................ 46 
9.3.1 
Activity Schedules ......................................................................................................................... 46 
9.3.3 
Access and Control Profiles ........................................................................................................... 50 
9.3.4 
Opportunities and Constraints ...................................................................................................... 52 
9.4 
CHYULU HILLS LANDSCAPE SITE .................................................................................................................... 55 
9.4.1 
Activity Schedules ......................................................................................................................... 56 
9.4.2 
Access and Control Profiles ........................................................................................................... 57 
9.4.3 
Opportunities and Constraints ...................................................................................................... 58 
10 
SUMMARY OF GENDER DOMAINS RELATIONSHIPS ACROSS THE PRIORITY LANDSCAPES .... ...............59 
11 
LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE FRAMEWORK PROTECTING WOMEN AND PROTECTING GENDER 
EQUALITY ....................................................................................................................................................... 60 
11.1 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK PROTECTING WOMEN GENDER EQUALITY ........................................................................... 60 
11.2 
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK TO PROMOTE GENDER EQUALITY AND FREEDOM FROM DISCRIMINATION ....................... 61 
12 
RESILIENCE OF COMMUNITIES DEPENDENT ON DRYLANDS ECOSYSTEMS WHICH ARE VULNERABLE TO 
CLIMATE CHANGE .......................................................................................................................................... 63 
13 
RESILIENCE AS DEMONSTRATED IN THE PROJECT AREA ..................................................................... 65 
13.1.1 
Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills Landscape Site .......................................................................... 65 
13.1.2 
Sabarwawa Land Scape Site ......................................................................................................... 65 
13.1.3 
Mid Tana River Landscape Site ..................................................................................................... 66 
13.1.4 
Chyulu Hills Landscape Site ........................................................................................................... 68 
14 
RESILIENCE AND CLIMATE FINANCING ................................................................................................ 69 
1.
Impacts of County level funds on building dryland resilience............................................................. 69
2.
Building dryland resilience at County level through climate funds .................................................... 69
15 
GENDER ISSUES IN RESPONSE TO THE IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON DRYLANDS ......................... 71 
16 
GENERAL FINDINGS ............................................................................................................................ 72

=== PAGE 113 ===
iv 
17 
SPECIFIC FINDINGS IN LINE WITH GENDER ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK ................................................... 74 
18 
PROJECT SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................................................ 76 
18.1 
SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS ...................................................................................................................... 76 
19 
GENDER ACTION PLAN ....................................................................................................................... 77 
20 
ANNEX 1. GENDER RESPONSIVENESS ACTION TOOL (GREACT) FOR TWENDE IMPLEMENTATION ....... 82 
21 
REFERENCES ....................................................................................................................................... 88

=== PAGE 114 ===
i 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Type of documents reviewed and their importance ......................................................................... 3 
Table 2: Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills Landscape Site ................................................................... 15 
Table 3: Sabarwawa Landscape Site ................................................................................................... 20 
Table 4: Mid Tana River Landscape Site .............................................................................................. 24 
Table 5: Chyulu Hills Landscape Site ................................................................................................... 30 
Table 6: Gender Inequalities in Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills Landscape Site ............................... 33 
Table 7: Gender Inequalities in Sabarwawa Landscape Site ............................................................... 34 
Table 8: Gender Inequalities in Mid Tana River Landscape Site.......................................................... 35 
Table 9: Gender Inequalities in Chyulu Hills Landscape Site ............................................................... 36 
Table 10: Activity schedules for Marsabit County ................................................................................. 39 
Table 11: Activity schedules for Mandera County................................................................................. 40 
Table 12: Access and Control Profiles for Marsabit County ................................................................. 43 
Table 13: Access and Control Profiles for Mandera County ................................................................. 44 
Table 14: Opportunities and Constraints for Marsabit County .............................................................. 45 
Table 15: Opportunities and Constraints for Mandera County ............................................................. 46 
Table 16: Activity Schedules for Tharaka Nithi ..................................................................................... 47 
Table 17: Activity schedule for Kitui County .......................................................................................... 48 
Table 18: Activity schedule for Tana River County ............................................................................... 49 
Table 19: Access and Control Profiles for Tharaka Nithi ...................................................................... 50 
Table 20: Access and Control Profiles for Kitui County ........................................................................ 51 
Table 21: Access and Control Profiles for Tana River County ............................................................. 52 
Table 22: Opportunities and Constraints in Tharaka Nithi County........................................................ 53 
Table 23: Opportunities and Constraints in Kitui County ...................................................................... 54 
Table 24: Opportunities and Constraints in Tana River County ........................................................... 54 
Table 25: Activity Schedules for Taita Taveta County .......................................................................... 56 
Table 26: Access and Control Profiles for Taita Taveta ....................................................................... 57 
Table 27: Access and Control Profiles for Taita Taveta ....................................................................... 58 
Table 28: Gender domains relationships across landscapes ............................................................... 59 
Table 29: Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills Landscape Site ................................................................. 65 
Table 30: Sabarwawa Landscape Site ................................................................................................. 65 
Table 31: Mid Tana River Landscape Site ............................................................................................ 66 
Table 32: Chyullu Hills landscape Site .................................................................................................. 68 
List of Figures 
Figure 3:1 Priority Landscapes ............................................................................................................... 5 
Figure 0:2 Challenges facing women in drylands ................................................................................... 8

=== PAGE 115 ===
ii 
 
 
Abbreviations 
ASAL .................... Arid and Semi-Arid Lands 
C&E ...................... Climate and Energy Advisory Ltd 
CAHWs ................. Community-based Animal Health Workers 
CCVI ..................... Climate Change Variability Index 
CEDAW ................ Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against 
 ............................. Women 
CIDP ..................... County Integrated Development Plans 
CSOs .................... Civil Society Organizations 
DRM ..................... Disaster Risk Management 
EbA ....................... Ecosystem-based Adaptation 
FAO ...................... Food and Agriculture Organization 
FGM ..................... Female Genital Mutilation 
GII ......................... Gender Inequality Index 
HARITA ................ Horn of Africa Risk Transfer for Adaptation Program 
IFW ....................... Insurance for Work 
IPCC ..................... Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
GCF ...................... Green Climate Fund 
HIV/ AIDS ............. Human Immunodeficiency Virus/ Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
HDI ....................... Human Development Index 
IFAD ..................... International Fund for Agricultural Development 
IUCN – ESARO .... IUCN Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Office 
KEWOPA.............. Kenya Women Parliamentarians Association 
KEWOSA.............. Kenya Women Senators Association 
KNHRC ................. Kenya National Human rights Commission 
MoALF - SDL ....... Ministry 
of 
Agriculture, 
Livestock 
and 
Fisheries, 
State 
Department 
of 
 ............................. Livestock 
NDMA ................... National Drought Management Authority 
NGEC ................... National Gender and Equality Commission 
NGO ..................... Non-Governmental Organization 
NRM ..................... Natural Resource Management 
PSNP .................... Productive Safety Net Program 
SDG ...................... Sustainable Development Goal 
SGBV ................... Sexual and Gender Based Violence 
SIG ....................... Special Interest Groups

=== PAGE 116 ===
iii 
 
UNCCD ................ United Nation Convention to Combat Desertification  
UNDP ................... United Nations Development Program 
UNEP ................... United Nations Environment Program 
WEF ..................... Women Enterprise Fund 
WISP .................... World Initiative for Sustainable Pastoralism 
YDI ....................... Youth Development Index 
YEDF .................... Youth Enterprise Development Fund

=== PAGE 117 ===
iv 
 
Executive Summary 
The Gender analysis in this report was carried out for the initially identified four project landscapes 
namely Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills; Sabarwawa; Mid Tana River; and Chyulu Hills. These 
landscapes were reduced after further consultations and the Moyale- Banisa Hills landscape dropped 
and two other landscapes were combined.  The project will therefore focus on two landscapes namely 
1) the Mid Tana River and Sabarwawa landscapes located in the arid zone and the 2) Chyulu Hills 
landscape located in the semi-arid zone. Much of the analysis in this report refers to the original 4 
landscapes but the analysis in the report to the project proposal as now described remains relevant. 
Gender analysis is a systematic analytical process used to identify, understand, and describe gender 
differences and the relevance of gender roles and power dynamics in a project or programme. This 
analysis employed the Six Domains of Gender Analysis Framework Approach, namely: access; 
knowledge, beliefs and perceptions; practices and participation; time and space; legal rights and status; 
power and decision making. The Harvard Gender Analysis Framework was also used to explain how 
men, women, boys and girls spend a typical 24-hour day, while the Rani Parker’s Gender Analysis 
Matrix was used to gather insight into power relations and interests based on gender roles. Specific 
activities undertaken included a desk review of relevant literature, and stakeholder consultations. 
Ethical considerations were applied during the exercise. Overall, the collection and analysis of sex-
disaggregated information is critical in order to understand gender differences and meet the different 
needs of men and women. 
Women in drylands face numerous gender inequalities, that include restricted access to productive 
assets; minimal land ownership; reduced access to credit as compared to men; glaring differences in 
workload difference between men and women, and lack of power and decision to spend income. 
Further, female-headed households face greater inequalities, with most being facing acute poverty. 
Additional challenges faced by women in drylands include uneven access to health, education and 
social protection services; uneven access to climate change responses and disaster risk reduction; 
uneven access to markets and producer groups; lack of recognition of women’s roles, knowledge and 
representation; and neglect of dryland women’s traditional knowledge. Specific actions that may be 
taken to address the gender inequalities and challenges include education as a long-term driver of 
livelihood diversification; improvement in women’s access to health services; gender equitable social 
protection services; improved access to risk management and insurance products; improved access to 
markets for crops and processing; and capacity strengthening through CSOs. 
The socio-economic background of the project area was explored, with key socio-economic indicators 
presented, namely: population size and composition; population type; population growth rate; literacy; 
housing; land and land use; land tenure system; self-help, women and youth groups; crops produced; 
livestock bred; fishing activities; industry; cultural practices; poverty; Human Development Index (HDI); 
and Youth Development Index (YDI). The purpose of presenting the socio-economic background of the 
project area is to enable an appreciation of the socio-cultural fabric that community members live, and 
the effects of this on their livelihoods and day-to-day activities. 
The Gender Inequality Index (GII), which reflects gender-based disadvantage in the areas of 
reproductive health, empowerment and the labour market, was used to demonstrate gender issues in 
the project area. Kenya has an overall GII of 0.651. Almost all the Counties in the project area 
demonstrated higher gender inequality than the national average, except Isiolo, Meru, Tharaka Nithi 
and Kitui Counties. Most of the high GIIs were attributed to socio-cultural factors. GII scores were not 
available for Makueni, Kajiado and Taita Taveta Counties. 
In most of the project area, women are involved in most household chores and activities, while men 
primarily take care of mature livestock and participate in leadership-related activities. Girls support their 
mothers and female relatives in household chores and activities, while boys similarly support their 
fathers and male relatives in taking care of livestock. With regard to access and control of productive 
resources, women in the project area have access to resources that include land, water, livestock 
(milking), crops, shelter, farming tools and some economic resources. However, these same resources 
are controlled by men.

=== PAGE 118 ===
v 
 
Despite the above situation, women in Kenya are valued and protected through the legal and 
administrative framework, such as the Constitution, and Kenya’s ratification of international instruments 
that promote gender equity and equality. Various institutions have also been established by the 
Government of Kenya to promote gender equality and equity, as well as empowerment of both men 
and women in the development process. These include the Directorate of Gender in the Ministry of 
Devolution and Planning, National Gender and Equality Commission (NGEC), Kenya National Human 
Rights Commission (KNHRC) and the Anti–Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) Board. Civil Society 
Organizations (CSOs), private sector and religious organizations are also responsible for both 
implementation and act as accountability bodies. 
Within the project area, resilience is demonstrated through traditional early warning systems, county 
information sharing forums, reforestation, promotion of rainwater harvesting, use of drought-resistant 
seed varieties for food, destocking, and awareness and education, among other measures. Pre- 
established county level funds could prove to be versatile mechanisms through which to channel 
dryland projects funding to support community driven development and resilience building priorities. 
Arrangements that increase women’s and men’s authority over resources should be promoted, and 
indigenous knowledge valued. 
Men control access to most productive assets in Kenya, with dryland communities in Kenya sharing a 
patriarchal culture. For dryland conservation, activities should include both local men and women as 
key stakeholders. Access to credit and markets has been identified as a key constraint in improving 
economic productivity, therefore improving women’s access to credit and opening up markets for 
products is an important area of focus. Any conservation activity that might result in girls having to go 
farther to fetch water or firewood or that would increase the workload of women and girls in a household 
may negatively impact on the schooling of girls. For this project working with women in polygynous 
unions may require first working with the husbands to gain agreement on any proposed activities. The 
project should target men as “key change agents”. 
The gender analysis report generated a Gender Action Plan in section 19.  This provides entry points 
for gender‐responsive actions to be taken under each of the activity areas of the Twende project. The 
plan will be refined in the inception phase of the project to more effectively support youth programming 
and at that point will become a Gender and Youth Action plan in the inception phase of the project. To 
avoid developing an unwieldy system three or four of the most critical gender responsive indicators 
identified here will be incorporated into the detailed M&E plan to be developed at the start of 
implementation, where baseline data will be incorporated.  All data collected during implementation of 
the project will be gender disaggregated and subjected to the requisite data quality assessment 
process.   
A gender task group will be established early in the project drawn from the different institutions of the 
project.  IUCN will lead that task group that will be responsible for implementing the GAP. Specific 
support will be provided by IUCN’s Global Gender Office to the gender task group.

=== PAGE 119 ===
1 
 
1 Introduction 
The goal of the proposed project is to contribute to ending recurring national drought emergencies in 
Kenya. This will be achieved, in part, by building the resilience of communities and ecosystems to future 
climate shocks and stresses, taking into consideration the unique conditions, challenges and 
opportunities of dry rangelands. These include: climate uncertainty, ecological fragility, seasonal and 
annual water deficits, historical marginalization, low human capital, large-scale commons, new (but 
rapidly developing) devolved public structures, and strong cultural grass-roots natural resource 
management institutions and practices. 
1.1 Gender Analysis in the Context of the Proposed Project  
Gender analysis is a systematic analytical process used to identify, understand, and describe gender 
differences and the relevance of gender roles and power dynamics in a project or programme. This 
involves examining the differential impacts of development policies and programs on women and men, 
and may include the collection of sex‐disaggregated or gender‐sensitive data. Secondly, it examines 
the different roles, rights, and opportunities of men and women and relations between them (USAID, 
2011).  
This analysis will employ the Six Domains of Gender Analysis Framework Approach namely: 
Access, Knowledge, beliefs and perceptions, Practices and participation, time and 
space, legal rights and status, power and decision making.  
1.1.1 Access 
This domain as used in this gender analysis looks at a person’s or community’s ability to use the 
necessary resources to be a fully active and productive member of the society-socially, economically, 
and politically. It will look at access to resources, income, services, employment, information, and 
benefits. 
1.1.2 Knowledge, Beliefs, and Perception   
This domain will look at knowledge that men and women possess; the beliefs that shape gender 
identities and behavior, and the different perceptions that guide people’s understanding of their lives, 
depending upon their gender identity. 
1.1.3 Practices and participation 
This domain will look at peoples’ behaviors and actions in terms of what they actually do and how this 
varies by gender roles and responsibilities. The questions include not only current patterns of action, 
but also the ways in which men and women may engage differently in development activities. Some of 
these types of action include attendance at meetings and training courses, and accepting or seeking 
out services. Their participation can be both active and passive.  
1.1.4 Time and Space   
This domain looks at and recognizes gender differences in the availability and allocation of time and 
the locations in which time is spent.  It will analyse the division of both productive and reproductive 
labor, identification of how time is spent during the day (weekly, monthly or yearly, and in different 
seasons); and determines how men and women each contribute to the welfare of the family, community, 
and society.  The overall objective of this domain is to determine how men and women spend their time 
and what implications their time commitments have on their availability for program activities.

=== PAGE 120 ===
2 
 
1.1.5 Legal rights and status 
This domain will assess how people are regarded and treated by customary legal codes, formal legal 
codes, and judicial systems. The domain encompasses legal documentation such as identification 
cards, voter registration, and property titles. Additionally, the domain includes the right to inheritance, 
right to title deeds, employment, atonement of wrongs, and legal representation. 
1.1.6 Power and Decision Making   
This domain pertains to the ability of people to decide, influence, control, and enforce personal and 
governmental power. It will assess community’s capacity to make decisions freely, and to exercise 
power over one’s body, within an individual’s household, community, municipality, and state. This 
domain also details the capacity of adults to make household and individual economic decisions 
including the use of household and individual economic resources, income, and their choice of 
employment.  
 
2 METHODOLOGY 
Gender analysis requires the collecting and analysing sex-disaggregated information in order to 
understand gender differences. Gender analysis explores gender differences so policies, programs and 
projects can identify and meet the different needs of men and women. It also facilitates the strategic 
use of the distinct knowledge and skills women and men possess1.   
A gender analysis was proposed and carried out in order to: 
• 
Design and implement the project in a way that will close gender inequality gaps so that both 
women and men benefit from development and are equitably empowered. 
• 
Understand how gender roles, responsibilities and inequalities affect the project’s effectiveness 
and the sustainability of its results. 
The analysis adopted the gender analysis framework approach elaborated in the previous chapter.  
Three (3) key steps were employed at different stages of the process namely: 
 
Preparing for the gender study- This involved developing the scope of work and work plan, 
assembling the team, clarifying stakeholder expectations, acquiring necessary resources, 
conducting a desk review and selecting appropriate tools and methodologies. 
 
Clarifying client expectations- This involved taking time to understand the client and proposal 
needs for this study and expectations.  Initial interviews were organised with IUCN senior 
technical team(s) and directors. These interviews were arranged at the beginning and 
throughout the study period to clarify any outstanding issues and incorporate input from the 
client team(s).  
 
Overall this provided us with an opportunity to make sure you we are clear on required 
deliverables and timeframes.  
 
Preparation of scope of work and scheduling of timelines- Once the team was clear on 
priorities and expectations, a schedule of timelines and intended deliverables was developed 
jointly with IUCN and a basis for regular communication and follow-up established on both 
sides. Regular check-ins were done both by phone, email and face to face conversations. 
 
Conducting a desk review- This involved reviewing current literature to understand the target 
population and the context in which the project proposal is operating. The Desk review helped 
to gather sex-disaggregated, qualitative and quantitative background information for the four 
(4) priority landscapes and counties as base information to complement the results and findings 
of later participatory processes and rather avoid repeating what is already known. Some of the 
desk review documents included: statistics reports from government departments and 
 
1 GENDER Analysis, Assessment and Audit Manual & Toolkit For use by ACDI/VOCA staff and consultants in completing 
gender studies

=== PAGE 121 ===
3 
 
ministries, population dynamic studies from county integrated development plans (CIDPs), 
demographic and health surveys), government policy documents, third-party gender studies, 
qualitative reports and quantitative surveys from the World Bank, United Nations, and IUCN 
dryland resource organisational documents.  
 
Table 1: Type of documents reviewed and their importance 
Type of Study 
What type of docs were reviewed 
How the documents helped 
Gender 
analysis study 
Program, project or organizational 
documents: work plans, program 
description, baseline study report, barrier 
analysis report, monitoring and evaluation 
plan and other start-up reports  
Understanding project context and 
whether/how gender considerations 
have been integrated into planning 
Quantitative data: demographic and 
health surveys, and data from the World 
Bank, UN and government 
Quantitative, contextual information 
on gender 
dynamics within the country 
Third-party gender studies: gender 
analyses, assessments or research 
papers.  
Qualitative, contextual information on 
gender dynamics within the counties 
and priority landscapes 
 
Conducting field work- Fieldwork is one of the most significant stages of a gender study2. Several 
field work methodologies were used in our gender study namely: focus groups discussions, informant 
Interviews and quantitative surveys. These tools helped to gain information on specific topics and 
themes. 
 
Triangulation was also done to ensure cross-checking information from three or more different 
perspectives to ensure information for accuracy. A number of quantitative tools were employed in the 
study:  
1) Focus group discussions- This involved gathering small groups of participants and 
community members together to discuss ideas, beliefs, perceptions and experiences. The 
focus groups provided information relating to activity schedules, access and control of 
resources and opportunities and constraints related to gender issues in the different 
counties. The focus groups were conducted using different groups from numerous regions, a 
wide age-range, with 
Men-only, with women-only, and in mixed groups of men and women together. However, some 
topics could only be discussed with separate groups of women and men. This ensured that 
groups of the “voiceless” heard. Most communities interviewed have a dominant patriarchal 
society and mixing them with women would suppress full participation and airing of views. 
 
2) Informant interviews- Informant interviews were carried out with various groups across 
selected counties and priority landscapes. These were semi-structured. They allowed the 
interviewer to ask additional follow-up questions as respondents participated in the discussion. 
It allowed the interviewer to remain focused on the objectives of the interview and to use the 
interview time efficiently, while allowing questions to be asked about unforeseen issues and 
topics that arose in the discussion. A core set of semi-structured interview questions was 
developed in advance. The questions were open-ended and allowed interviewees the 
opportunity to answer at their own pace thus helping to control, probe, direct and gather 
information as accurately. 
 
 
2   GENDER Analysis, Assessment and Audit Manual & Toolkit For use by ACDI/VOCA staff and consultants in completing 
gender studies

=== PAGE 122 ===
4 
 
3) Stakeholder consultations- This involved organising workshop stakeholder meetings with key 
persons and professionals at all the targeted thirteen counties plus IUCN and other government 
representatives. The meetings discussed and came up with key priority areas for intervention.   
Stakeholder consultation and meeting reports were developed and shared with IUCN and 
partners.  
 
4) Note-taking and recording-All fieldwork was properly documented and recorded to assist in 
analysing data and meeting gender study deliverables. The study used assistant note takers to 
sit in on fieldwork sessions.  
 
5) Constraints analysis- The analysis served to identify gender-based constraints and 
opportunities that have the potential to either impede or facilitate (also referred to as gender 
determinants of health) achievement of project objectives. For example, in many places, 
women are constrained in receiving skilled care in delivery because they do not have power to 
make autonomous or joint decisions about their health care. The constraints analysis begins 
with a process to uncover gender-based constraints by identifying the condition of inequality. 
The second step was to identify the gender-based factors that contribute to the condition of 
inequality. The constraint was articulated by linking the constraining factors to the outcome 
2.1 Ethical considerations 
A number of ethical considerations were outlined and considered when conducting the gender study:  
 
Respect for Informants- The project team and interviewers demonstrated respect for 
participants by gaining informed consent from them before beginning fieldwork.  
 
Minimising harm- Project team made sure that participants are protected and adhered to 
confidentiality in the reporting and sharing of data.  
 
Maximising benefits- The project team asked participants to discuss attitudes, beliefs and 
experiences as important processes of self-reflection and empowerment.  
 
Managing expectations- During the gender study, it was prudent to manage expectations of 
participants by giving realistic estimates of what participants should expect and when resources 
will be implemented. 
 
1) Analysing and validating gender field data- Data analysis was carried out using activity 
schedules, access and control tables, constraints and opportunities tables to clearly bring out 
the differentiated gender roles. Symbols were used to fill out activity chart and to visualize data 
and compare the different groups’ responses from the same county and landscape priority site.  
 
2) Developing findings & recommendations- The gender analysis identified actions that are 
most important to highlight as priority recommendations. Overall, findings were general whilst 
recommendations should be specific, action-oriented and realistic. Recommendations focused 
less on what to do, and more on how to do it. In devising our recommendations, the gender 
analysis actioned the following: 
 
Developed a Logical Results framework and associated indicators that could be 
incorporated into program/project planning and activity design. A logical framework 
was developed with clear gender-focussed SMART indicators for the different 
outcomes, outputs and project activities 
 
Identified supportive strategies and resources by county governments, national 
government, IUCN and other partners. 
 
Developed specific activities related to gender equality and equity that should be 
incorporated within the program/project’s current activities to achieve greater equality 
and empowerment for women.

=== PAGE 123 ===
5 
 
3 Background  
The project is proposed to be located in eleven of Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid (ASAL) counties: Garissa, 
Tana River, Isiolo, Marsabit, Samburu, Kajiado, Kitui, Makueni, Tharaka- Nithi, Meru and Taita Taveta. 
The focus of the project will be on 2 large scale drought reserves that cut across county boundaries to 
coordinate movement of livestock across different counties.  The priority landscapes are:  
1. Mid Tana river/ Sabarwawa 
2. Chyulu Hills  
The project will use an Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA) approach with emphasis on integration of 
restoration and sustainable land management options between natural resource sectors - rangelands, 
agriculture, forests, and water - as well as mainstreaming rangeland and forest concerns into other 
sectors. The program will provide science and policy guidance and dialogue mechanisms to the latter 
sectors to mitigate the impact of large infrastructure on dry rangeland social and ecological systems. 
The project area is shown in the map below. 
 
Figure 3:1 Priority Landscapes 
3.1 Description of the Drylands of Kenya and Project Area 
Drylands – commonly referred to Arid and Semi-arid regions (ASALs) - in Kenya make up to 80% of 
the country’s total land surface and are mainly found in the Northern, Eastern and Rift Valley regions. 
This region supports approximately 36% of Kenya’s population with pastoralists and rangeland users 
dominating the region. The drylands also support nearly 75% of wildlife population and consequently 
account for around 80% of the country’s eco-tourism interests. However, despite the significant 
resource base, people of the drylands regions are relatively poorer with fewer social services and less 
infrastructure. Drought is common in these regions and its prolonged nature has been attributed to 
climate change. Livestock production accounts for 24% of agricultural outputs in Kenya with over 70% 
of the countries livestock coming from the ASALs region. Despite this, drylands receive insufficient 
investments; in terms of policy, financing, incentives and under-recognition of their potential value in 
poverty reduction and national development.

=== PAGE 124 ===
6 
 
4 Existing Gender Inequalities facing women in 
drylands 
4.1 Gender Inequalities facing women in drylands 
4.1.1 Access to productive assets 
Men control access to most productive assets in Kenya (World Bank 2003). The main ethnic groups in 
Kenya have a patriarchal culture in which men own either formally or informally the key productive 
assets such as land, livestock and businesses. A woman, for example, may milk the family cow and 
sell the milk products, but she could not sell the cow itself because it is “owned” by her husband.  
4.1.2 Women land ownership 
Only 3% of the land is owned by women (CEDAW 2011) in Kenya. With land being the primary asset 
in Kenya and 70% of livelihoods in agriculture and rigid inheritance traditions, means that men own 
almost all land in Kenya. In 2010, it became legal for women to have their name on a land deed, but 
women’s access to land is still controlled by men. 
4.1.3 Social stipulations regarding land inheritance 
In Kenya, social stipulations prohibit a woman inheriting land (CEWAD 2011). While women can legally 
inherit land under the 2010 constitution, in practice it is forbidden and rare. Among Kenya’s 47 counties, 
majority of people view women inheriting property as socially unacceptable. The general argument is 
that women inheriting land is that she will have access to land in her place of marriage and that for her 
to inherit land in her place of birth it means she has access to double portions. This is perceived to be 
unfair to her male siblings. This assumes a woman will marry (5% of Kenyan women never do), will not 
be widowed or divorced (10% of Kenyan women are) and that access and ownership are equal (which 
they clearly are not) (CEDAW 2011).  
4.1.4 Access to credit by Women as compared to Men 
Women have less access to credit than men (CEDAW 2011). This is because women rarely have land 
deeds, meaning they often lack collateral for a formal loan. Access to banking has improved markedly 
in recent years, and all the major commercial banks in Kenya now have at least one financial credit or 
mortgage product targeting women. The government has initiated several programs to provide women 
with credit. The traditional ‘merry-go-rounds’ remain a primary form of credit access for women in most 
remote areas of Kenya. It works by women group members pooling resources, with each member 
consecutively being able to borrow the pooled balance.  
4.1.5 Time and space 
One of the greatest gender difference in Kenya is in the workload difference between of men and 
women. Data from the agriculture sector shows that women do 80% of the food production, 50% of 
cash crop production, 80% of the food storage and transport from farm to the home, 90% of weeding, 
and 60% of the harvesting and marketing of crops (AfDB 2007). Women have simultaneous and 
competing demands for productive (market) and reproductive (household) labor time. Time poverty and 
income poverty often reinforce each other. This means any activity that adds to a women’s time burden 
may negatively impact other areas of her life. Avoiding such activities, reducing them to a minimum, or 
mitigating them with offsets should be the hierarchy. Understanding season calendars and daily time 
use are critical for designing local activities and avoid deepening the time poverty of women.

=== PAGE 125 ===
7 
 
4.1.6 Power and decision to spend income 
42% of women who earn cash income say they mainly decide how to spend it (DHS 2010). Many 
women can decide on their own how to spend money they earn, but for almost half the women who 
earn cash income (49%), their spending decisions are made jointly with the husband. For 9% of women 
with cash income, the husband mainly decides how to spend it. In light of this aspect, women in Kenya 
invest more of their cash income in family needs and children’s education than men do.  
4.1.7 Female headed households face greater inequalities 
In Kenya, 29% of households are female-headed (DHS 2010). Poverty among female headed 
households is particularly acute compared to male headed households. This is because they face 
greater time and mobility constraints than do male heads or other women. The majority of female-
headed households in Kenya are below the poverty line. Including female-headed households in this 
project can help ensure project benefits are distributed to both poor and better off households.

=== PAGE 126 ===
8 
 
5 Gender Challenges facing women in drylands 
Women living in drylands face a myriad of challenges in drylands namely: Unequal distribution of 
resources and access to services, uneven distribution of land and natural resource rights, uneven 
livestock ownership and access to related livestock products, uneven access to health, education and 
social protection, uneven access to animal health care services and uneven access to markets and 
neglect of women’s traditional knowledge. These challenges are expounded in more detail below: 
Figure 5:2 Challenges facing women in drylands 
Source: UNCCD (Achieving dryland women empowerment, 2015) 
5.1 Unequal distribution of resources and access to services 
With rising uncertainty caused by climate and other rural stressors, households need resources to cope 
and adapt to shocks and stresses. Women in drylands tend to have less access to these necessary 
resources for adaptation i.e land for cultivation, crops and livestock.  
5.2 Uneven distribution of land and natural resource rights 
Land rights are important for the resilience of women and their related communities. Women tend to 
have access to and control of smaller parcels of land compared to their male counterparts.  Most women 
have access rights to land but do not have absolute control rights over land. In drylands, natural 
resource and land resource rights can be as important as women’s livelihoods.   
5.3 Uneven livestock ownership and access to related products 
In drylands, livestock ownership and access to associated products is very important for ensuring 
survival, resilience and livelihoods of women. Livestock ownership is gendered in nature in the drylands. 
Women and girls face an increase in work burden when men have to graze livestock in more distant 
communal areas or are forced to find other employment (formal or informal) to feed the family. While 
access to livestock for pastoralist women may be more restricted than that of men, compared to other 
natural resources, they do have livestock rights – often for smaller stock – and rights over associated 
products such as milk and hides. A key opportunity that exists here is that women are also livestock 
managers (Kipuri and Ridgewell, 2008).

=== PAGE 127 ===
9 
5.4 Uneven access to health, education and social protection 
services 
A key challenge facing drylands is ineffective delivery of both curative and preventative health services 
to dryland communities especially women. This is compounded by the fact that pastoralist women face 
particular challenges due to their tasks in collecting water and firewood, cooking using smoky fuels, 
which can cause stress to the body (Flintan, 2008). The designs of current education systems are 
inappropriate for nomadic groups and schools are not sufficiently secure and decent (see Reidy, 2012). 
Women and girls experience long daily activity schedules, biased access and control of resources 
making learning and education difficult. Social protection programmes in dryland zones need to 
accommodate the diverse livelihood strategies of pastoralists, especially with respect to non-mobility of 
women and them taking care of elderly ones at household level (Morton and Kerven, 2013). 
5.5 Uneven access to climate change responses and disaster risk 
reduction measures 
Pastoralists and other dryland communities use limited seasonal forecast information for understanding 
climate scenarios for agricultural development, in coordinating input and credit supply, food crisis 
management, trade and agricultural insurance (Dasgupta et al, 2014). It is important to design gender-
specific climate services in drylands. Gender specific climate services targeting women farmers require 
a forecast of rainfall cessation, not onset, and that the choice of communication channels must relate 
to socio-cultural realities. Overall, location- and gender-specific needs should inform the design of new 
climate services in order to increase resilience (CGIAR CCA FS, 2015). 
5.6 Uneven access to animal health care services 
Animal health services are mainly received by men when receiving training and replacement stock. 
Most times information is shared through male dominated committees or livestock producer groups. 
There is limited sharing of animal health services information with their wives. There is need for women 
focussed training on small ruminant and poultry targeting women, training of female veterinarians to 
take care of young livestock and increased levels of literacy through adult education for women to 
participate in animal health services at the household level. 
5.7 Uneven access to markets and producer groups 
Dryland women tend to have more limited access to markets than their male counterparts. This is mainly 
because of: limited access to productive assets, such as livestock and land; low literacy levels; lack of 
expertise in running small businesses; lack of access to credit because of a lack of collateral; limited 
experience in capturing value in value chains; limited access to markets; a lack of time for income- 
generating activities; limited self-confidence; lack of access to family and community decision making, 
including in development projects (Rota et al, 2012). Specifically, dryland women have limited access 
to markets for animals and products due to numerous obstacles namely: 

A relative lack of market contacts and information

Limited participation in livestock cooperatives reducing their influence

Limited access to mobile phones which are essential for livestock trading

Higher illiteracy levels, lack of experience and limited financial skills

Lower prices offered by traders who know they have fewer options due to their limited
mobility; Limited access to credit

Need to have a husband’s permission to make livestock sales

A portion of the income being retained by male relatives when they sell a woman’s animal or
products

Milk checks by private sector dairy collection plants usually consult heads of household

Government regulations on informal milk sales and other foods of animal origin Miller,

=== PAGE 128 ===
10 
 
2011). 
5.8 Lack of recognition of women’s roles, knowledge and barriers 
to Gender roles 
Traditional gender norms often mean that women have heavier workloads, as well as the resultant 
unequal access to and control of resources. In most dryland communities, there is a lack of recognition 
of women as rights holders and members of a community group, who are entitled to land and natural 
resource rights and decision-making powers. There are also other specific barriers which women face, 
such as sexual and gender-based violence and harmful practices (Miller, 2011). 
5.9 Education as a long-term driver of livelihood diversification 
Dryland girls and women tend to have much less access to education. For pastoralists, especially girls, 
a combination of adult education, community and locally relevant broadcast programmes and 
participatory face-to-face teaching targeting the household is needed (Karli and Dyer, 2009). 
5.10 Neglect of dryland women’s traditional knowledge 
In general, pastoralists of both sexes have extensive knowledge of livestock and production i.e. tending 
animals, e.g. milking or caring for sick animals (Flintan, 2008). In the past, women’s traditional 
knowledge was often overlooked in analysing agricultural and livestock-related indigenous knowledge. 
While recognition of the gendered nature of indigenous knowledge and women’s knowledge has grown 
in recent years, further recognition is still needed. Currently, most institutions do not accord much value 
to women’s traditional knowledge and role in dryland resilience (Miller, 2011).

=== PAGE 129 ===
11 
 
6 Action to address Gender Inequalities and 
Challenges 
1. It is important for the project to include and target female headed households so as to ensure 
project benefits are distributed to both poor and better off households. Providing offsets greater 
than the opportunity costs of a new activity is critical for female-headed households 
2. Improving drinking water quality and quantity may have direct benefits to women and girls. 
3. Sensitivity to the traditional divisions of labor may help dryland initiatives to be more socially 
acceptable by both men and women.  
4. It is fundamentally critical to understand season calendars and daily time use for designing 
local activities that will not deepen the time poverty of women within a project.  
5. Activities which include the use of productive resources like land or livestock should include 
men and women in decision making so as to better understand and improve access and control 
between men and women of resources.  
6. The male dominance of land ownership will continue for some time hence it is important to 
include both local men and women as key stakeholders even though women may have no legal 
title to the land in question. 
7.  It is important to improve women’s access to agricultural inputs and integrate access to credit 
elements in dry land projects so as to improve women’s economic productivity. 
8. Providing support for the Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Development’s program to 
eliminate female genital cutting may be an option that would improve the health of girls locally 
and through this project 
6.1 Improving dryland women’s access to health services to 
underpin dryland resilience 
Improving health services for women in dryland zones can improve household resilience due to their 
critical role as caregivers and reproduction. There is also need for inclusion of on nutrition education in 
pastoral women’s health and indeed that of the wider family as women tend to pay greater attention to 
assuring family needs are met; also important is a package of interventions aimed at improving the 
livelihood systems of the household (Flintan, 2008). 
6.2 Improving gender-equitable social protection services for 
drylands resilience 
There is need to understand the gendered nature of the risks women and men face, and how gender 
dynamics shape responses while improving their opportunities through training and increasing their 
access to financial resources, such as micro-credit and micro- finance (World Bank, 2012). 
Social protection schemes have shown great promise in supporting vulnerable groups in dryland areas 
especially women. For example, the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) of the Ethiopian 
government funded by the World Bank is a promising example of a large-scale safety net programme, 
which has strengthened household and environmental resilience in a gender-equitable manner.  
6.3 Improving women’s access to risk management and insurance 
products 
A key avenue for improving women’s resilience to climate variability and shocks is through investment 
in their access to and uptake of risk management and insurance products. For example, the Horn of

=== PAGE 130 ===
12 
 
Africa Risk Transfer for Adaptation (HARITA) Programme in Tigray state, northern Ethiopia, strengthens 
poor farmers’ and herders’ resilience by increasing their capacity to manage weather- and livestock-
related risks through improved resource management, insurance, and micro-credit (World Bank, 2012).  
6.4 Improving Women’s access to animal health services 
Improving animal health is important for pastoralists and ago-pastoralists. In improving women access 
to animal health services there is need to ensure that more female Community based Animal Health 
Workers (CAHWs) are trained. Promising examples exist of collaboration between human and 
veterinary medicine which to reach women in remote locations including pastoralists. 
6.5 Improving women’s access to livestock markets and 
development 
Dryland women’s empowerment can be supported by linking women to markets for livestock-related 
products to promote social and economic empowerment. In pastoralist societies, although livestock 
assets are not equitably distributed, compared to other productive resources, women do own and have 
rights to livestock and associated products. Taking advantage of this critical right would go a long way 
to engendering access to livestock markets (Miller, 2011). Further, this can be strengthened through 
creation of women agricultural and market groups that enhance leadership and market skills (Miller, 
2011). 
6.6 Improving dryland women’s access to markets for crops and 
processing 
Promoting income generation for pastoralist women through value addition of dryland crops and 
processing can increase their socio-economic position in the household and sometimes in the wider 
community (IFAD, 2009). Investment in women producers makes commercial sense for companies that 
operate at both the low-value, high volume end of the market (Chan, 2011). 
6.7 Improving support for women’s participation in alternative 
livelihoods and their ability to capture value 
Investment is also needed to improve women’s participation in alternative livelihoods, to ensure that 
their rights and interests are recognized.  For example, there is significant potential for enhancing the 
collection and marketing of natural products from dryland areas i.e. gum arabica. This needs to have 
good quality support to enable women’s inclusion and their ability to benefit, without their rights being 
neglected (Morton and Keven, 2013) 
6.8 Improving our understanding of gender relations to inform 
policy and programming through the devolution structure-
county governments 
There is increasing support for gender equality around the world, but also investment and political will 
is important, and understanding how change might happen or could be facilitated is important. Through 
the county governments and devolution process, dryland counties have unique opportunity to facilitate 
women’s empowerment through affirmative action at the county, sub-county and ward levels.  
6.9  Capacity strengthening actions through CSOs 
Capacity strengthening actions are required to strengthen the resilience of drylands and to empower 
women.

=== PAGE 131 ===
13 

CSOs to support gender justice involving whole communities, men, and local leaders, to
challenge discriminatory social norms and harmful practices.

CSOs, academic institutions and the media to increase awareness of gender, pastoralist,
and environmental sustainability issues in the drylands.

This awareness raising should seek to counter the negative stereotypes of dryland areas
to culturally revalue them and women’s knowledge and equal rights in particular

=== PAGE 132 ===
14 
7 Socio-economic Background of the Project Area 
The Gender analysis in this report was carried out for the initially identified four project landscapes 
namely Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills; Sabarwawa; Mid Tana River; and Chyulu Hills. These 
landscapes were reduced after further consultations and the Moyale- Banisa Hills landscape dropped 
and two other landscapes were combined.  The project will therefore focus on two landscapes namely 
1) the Mid Tana River and Sabarwawa landscapes located in the arid zone and the 2) Chyulu Hills
landscape located in the semi-arid zone. Much of the analysis in this report refers to the original 4 
landscapes but the analysis in the report to the project proposal as now described remains relevant. 
The purpose of presenting the socio-economic background of the project area is to enable an 
appreciation of the socio-cultural fabric that community members live, and the effects of this on their 
livelihoods and day-to-day activities. 
7.1 Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills Landscape Site 
The above landscape site occurs in three (3) Counties, namely: Marsabit, Wajir and Mandera. The key 
socio-economic indicators for each County are presented below: 

Population size and composition

Population type

Population growth rate

Literacy

Housing

Land and land use

Land tenure system

Self-help, women and youth groups

Crops produced

Livestock bred

Fishing activities

Industry

Cultural practices

Poverty

Human Development Index (HDI)

Youth Development Index (YDI)

=== PAGE 133 ===
15 
Table 2: Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills Landscape Site 
Counties 
No.  Pattern 
Marsabit 
Wajir 
Mandera 
1 
Population Size & 
Composition 
316,206 people for year 2012:164,105 male & 
152,101 female (2009 Population & Housing 
Census) 
727,965 people: 55% male & 45% female 
(2009 Population & Housing Census) 
1,025, 756 people for 55% male & 45%  
Female (2009 population & housing 
Census) 
2 
Population Type 
Over 67.8% of population is below 24 years. 
This is an indicator of a growing population. 
The county expects greater pressure on 
resources in future if the trend continues 
84.2% of population is below 29 
years (youthful population) 
67 % of the age cohort    0– 19 years of the 
total population is composed of infants and 
the school going-age. 
3 
Population Growth 
Rate 
2.75% per annum 
3.22% per annum 
2.67% 
4 
Literacy 
Literacy 4.1%: Male-4.9% and Female-
3.4% 
Literacy 4.5%: Male-7.4% and Female-
1.5%. 
Literacy 4.8%: Male-7.2% and Female-
2.4%. 
6. 
Health Issues 
Sanitation-Pit latrine coverage accounts for 
34.3% of population 
Morbidity- Most prevalent disease is 
Malaria/fever accounting for 44.8% of the 
population.  
Average morbidity for the county is 21.4 
percent 
Immunization coverage is 63.6 % 
Contraceptive acceptance is low at 8.3 per 
cent due to cultural and religious beliefs. 
HIV prevalence is at 1.8% 
The most prevalent disease is Malaria 
at 54.8%. The morbidity rate is 16.3% 
with men and women accounting for 
14.4 per cent and 18.3 per cent 
respectively. Only 48% of the children 
aged 12-23 months received 
vaccinations. Access to family planning 
very low with only 4% of married 
women using modern methods 
 Sanitation-the main types of toilet 
facilities in the county are pit latrines 
(38.9%), uncovered pit latrines (34.8%). 
Two most prevalent diseases are Upper 
Respiratory Tract Infection (URTI), 
Malaria. Vaccination coverage is very 
low at 7.6%. Only 4% of married women 
use modern methods of family planning

=== PAGE 134 ===
16 
 
Counties 
No.  Pattern 
Marsabit 
Wajir 
Mandera 
7. 
Food security/ 
Nutritional security 
Chronic malnutrition is prevalent with 31% of 
the children under five years malnourished 
while 40 % per cent are stunted. 
The nutrition status is poor, 35% of 
children under age five in the county 
are stunted. 35 per cent is high and 
there is need for deliberate efforts to 
reduce this figure. 
Chronic malnutrition is prevalent with 
31.8%  of children (6-59 months) being 
chronically undernourished, 
8 
Land and Land Use 
Most of the land in the county is owned 
communally. Less than 1% of land is 
registered in the county. Agriculture and rural 
development contributes to approximately 60 
% of the county‘s economy. 
Entire categorized as Trust Land apart 
from a small percentage of the total 
area occupied by townships. 
Land is communally owned in the county. 
The main challenge in the county is land 
degradation resulting in some areas 
rendered unsuitable for crop production. 
The available land for agriculture has not 
been fully exploited due to resource 
constraints. 
9 
Land Tenure System 
Most land owned communally or by group 
ranches. Women have less control over land 
resources 
Most land owned communally or by 
group ranches. Women have less 
control over land resources 
Most land owned communally. Women 
have less control over land resources.  
10 
Self Help, Women & 
Youth Groups 
480 self-help groups, 310 women groups & 
504 youth groups in the County. Activities 
include goat keeping, bee keeping, poultry- 
rearing & small micro enterprises. 
A total of 70  SHGs,  50  (CBOs),  700  
women  groups,  900  youth  groups  
and  146  Farmers  groups. Youth 
groups are involved in small 
businesses in  towns  and  are  mostly 
funded  by  Youth  Enterprise  
Development  Fund  (YEDF).  Women 
are engaged  in  selling  groceries  and  
food  kiosks 
There are 940 SHGs groups, 577 women 
groups, 39 groups for Persons with 
Disabilities, 143 CBO‘s and 645 youth 
groups. They are involved in farm 
produce marketing, Jua Kali, Building 
and construction and consumer 
business.

=== PAGE 135 ===
17 
Counties 
No.  Pattern 
Marsabit 
Wajir 
Mandera 
11 
Crops produced 
Vegetables & fruits, maize, teff, beans & 
millet. Crop trees include oranges, 
avocadoes, mangoes & miraa. 
Practised in depressions & along 
drainage lines. More reliance on 
livestock products (milk & meat). 
Maize, sorghum, cowpeas, simsim, 
vegetables (Sukuma wiki, cow peas, 
onions, spinach, tomatoes, capsicum) 
and fruits (mangoes, bananas, water 
melons) 
12 
Housing 
Most (91.3%) of houses have earth floors & 
a majority (37.5% are roofed with ‘makuti’ 
(palm leaves). 
75.9% of houses are grass straw 
walled, 91.5% have earth floors & 
86.2% are grass thatched. (Collapsible 
mobile Somali Herio (made of 
grass/palm mats and withies)   
Mainly traditional huts (‘manyatta’) used 
by 73.8% of households, while walls are 
mainly grass/ straw and mud/ wood. 
{Collapsible mobile Somali Herio (made 
of grass/palm mats and withies} 
13 
Livestock bred 
Cattle, goats, sheep, camels, donkeys & 
chicken + bee keeping. 
Cattle (Borana & dairy crosses), sheep 
(mainly Toggenberg), camels & 
donkeys. Poultry keeping in Wajir 
Town. 
Goats (galla breeds), cattle (boran 
breeds), camels (Somali breeds), sheep 
(Somali black head breeds), donkeys 
(Somali breeds) and chicken (indigenous 
breeds). 
14 
Fishing activities 
Mainly in Lake Turkana, for tilapia, labeo and 
Nile Perch. 
 Fish framing is restricted to artificial 
ponds from seasonal rivers and 
boreholes with majority of fish being 
Tilapia 
River Daua covers around 150Km along 
the border. Mud fish is mostly reared in 
River Daua 
15 
Industry 
Mining of blue quamline and mica is done at 
South Horr in Laisamis Constituency. County 
has high potential for manufacturing blue 
quamline and exploration of petroleum.  
There exists small scale industries in 
lime production, gums & resins, juice 
production and hides & skins tannery. 
The gum and resin factory were built in 
Wajir East. County has high potential 
for limestone manufacture. 
There are small scales Jua Kali 
enterprises. These include welding and 
fabrication of, motor vehicle repair, 
carpentry and handcrafts, tailoring. and 
clothing, Bakery, watch and shoe repair.

=== PAGE 136 ===
18 
 
Counties 
No.  Pattern 
Marsabit 
Wajir 
Mandera 
16 
Cultural Practices 
Include Female Genital Mutilation (FGM), 
early marriages & cattle rustling. The boy 
child is preferred to the girl child with the latter 
in most cases being considered as a source 
of wealth.  
Early and forced marriages of girls, as well 
as FGM have led to low development. 
Women and girls are subjected to cultural 
practices 
such 
as 
Female 
Genital 
Mutilation and child marriage. 
17 
Poverty 
92% of persons in County experience 
absolute poverty, 83% experience food 
poverty, & 68% hard core poverty. Caused by 
emphasis of livestock as wealth, poor road 
network, persistent drought, environmental 
degradation, insecurity, over- dependence on 
foreign aid, & HIV/ AIDS. 
84% of the population live under absolute 
poverty. This is caused by unreliable 
rainfall, high levels of illiteracy, poor crop 
and animal husbandry practices, poor 
infrastructure, 
inaccessibility 
to 
credit 
facilities, poor marketing systems, natural 
disasters, wildlife menace & environmental 
degradation. 
Poverty levels are high. 
18 
Human 
Development Index 
(HDI) 
0.438 (national average is 0.520) 
0.421 (national average is 0.520) 
0.420 (national average is 0.520) 
19 
Youth Development 
Index (YDI) 
0.3969 (national average 0.5817) 
0.8951 (Based on 2009 provincial average 
figures) National average 0.5817 
0.8951 (Based on 2009 provincial 
average figures) National average 
0.5817

=== PAGE 137 ===
19 
 
7.1.1 Sabarwawa Landscape 
The above landscape site occurs in three (3) Counties, namely: Isiolo, Samburu and Marsabit. 
The key socio-economic indicators presented below include the following: 
 
Population size and composition 
 
Population type 
 
Population growth rate 
 
Literacy 
 
Housing 
 
Land and land use 
 
Land tenure system 
 
Self-help, women and youth groups 
 
Crops produced 
 
Livestock bred 
 
Fishing activities 
 
Industry 
 
Cultural practices 
 
Poverty 
 
Human Development Index (HDI) 
 
Youth Development Index (YDI)

=== PAGE 138 ===
20 
 
Table 3: Sabarwawa Landscape Site 
No 
Patterns 
Counties 
 
Isiolo 
Samburu  
Marsabit  
1 
Population Size 
& Composition 
143,294: 73,694 male & 69,600 
female (2009 Population & Housing 
Census) 
223,947 
people: 
112,007 
male 
& 
111,940 female (2009 Population & 
Housing Census) 
316,206 people for year 2012: 164,105 male & 
152,101 female (2009 Population & Housing Census) 
2 
Population type 
Majority of population is the young 
population (0-14) account for 44.4 
percent of the population. While the 
aged 65 and above account for 3.6 
percent. Both groups add up 48%. 
Youthful (over 80% below 35 years of 
age) 
Over 67.8% of population is below 24 years. This is 
an indicator of a growing population. The county 
expects greater pressure on resources in future if the 
trend continues 
3 
Population 
Growth Rate 
  3.6% 
4.45% per annum 
2.67% 
4 
Literacy 
Literacy 35.5%: Male-35.9% and F-
35.1% (national average-71.4%) 
Literacy 
12.5%: 
Male- 
12.8% 
and 
Female-12.2% 
Literacy 4.1%: Male-4.9% and Female-3.4% 
5 
Housing 
Most houses constructed of mud, 
grass 
& 
wood 
(‘manyatta’). 
Permanent housing structures only 
found in Isiolo town & other urban 
centres. 
Towns of Maralal, Wamba & Baragoi 
have decent housing, with rest of County 
dotted with manyattas. 
Individual 
settlements 
are 
poorly 
planned and informal settlements are 
emerging. 
Mud/ wood walled houses = 34.2%; grass straw type 
= 22.8%. 
Other materials include stone walls, brick/ block, 
mud/ cement, wood only, corrugated iron sheets, tin 
and others. Most (91.3%) of houses have earth floors 
& a majority (37.5% are roofed with ‘makuti’ (palm 
leaves). 
6.  
Health Issues 
Sanitation- 
Open 
defecation 
by 
adults and disposal of children 
faeces in the open is still rampant. 
The two most prevalent diseases 
are: malaria & diarrhoea, stomach. 
90% of the children in the county 
have been immunized. 73% of the 
deliver at home. 
Sanitation in the county is poor due to 
low latrine coverage. The two most 
prevalent diseases in the county are 
respiratory diseases (35.7 percent), 
malaria (28.9 %).  
Sanitation-Pit latrine coverage accounts for 34.3% of 
population 
Morbidity- Most prevalent disease is Malaria/fever 
accounting for 44.8% of the population.  Average 
morbidity for the county is 21.4% 
Immunization coverage is 63.6 % 
Contraceptive acceptance is low at 8.3 per cent due 
to cultural and religious beliefs. HIV prevalence is at 
1.8%

=== PAGE 139 ===
21 
 
No 
Patterns 
Counties 
 
Isiolo 
Samburu  
Marsabit  
7 
Food 
security/ 
Nutritional security 
Frequent famines and poor nutrition 
contributes to the high levels of 
wasting and stunting. Prevalence of 
stunting is 18.6%. 
Proportion 
of 
children 
at 
risk 
to 
malnutrition 
which 
stands 
at 17.8 
percent. More than one in three children 
(42 percent) in the County is stunted or 
too short for their age compared to 35 
percent nationally 
Chronic malnutrition is prevalent with 31% of the 
children under five years malnourished while 40 % 
per cent are stunted. 
8 
Land and Land Use 80% of the land is used as grazing 
land by the pastoralists. In some 
areas, agro-pastoralism is practised 
with the inhabitants engaging in both 
livestock and crop farming.  
Women have less control over land 
resources.  
Categories of land ownership: trust, 
communal, government & private. Bulk 
of land not registered. Primary land use 
is pastoralism and wildlife conservation. 
Gazetted forests occupy 15% of land 
area. Women have less control over 
land resources 
Most of the land in the county is owned communally. 
Less than 1% of land is registered in the county. 
Agriculture and rural development contributes to 
approximately 60 % of the county‘s economy. 
Women have less control over land resources.  
9 
Land 
Tenure 
system 
80% of land communally owned, 
under 
trusteeship 
of 
County 
government, while 10% of land under 
Government ownership & remaining 
10% under private ownership. 
Most land owned communally or by 
group ranches. 
Most land owned communally or by group ranches. 
10 
Self Help, Women & 
Youth Groups 
60 active women self- help groups, 
345 CBOs, & 280 youth groups 
600 registered women groups, 900 
youth groups & 130 CBOs in County 
480 self-help groups, 310 women groups & 504 youth 
groups in the County. Activities include goat keeping, 
bee keeping, poultry- rearing & small micro 
enterprises. 
11 
Crops produced 
Maize, beans, cowpeas, onions, 
mangoes, 
pawpaws 
& 
other 
horticultural crops 
Maize, beans, wheat, barley and millet 
Vegetables & fruits, maize, teff, beans & millet. Crop 
trees include oranges, avocadoes, mangoes & miraa.

=== PAGE 140 ===
22 
 
No 
Patterns 
Counties 
 
Isiolo 
Samburu  
Marsabit  
12 
Livestock bred 
Cows (Zebu and Boran), goats 
(galla, small East African, Saanen, 
Toggenburg, Swiss Alpine), sheep 
(black 
head 
Persian), 
camels 
(Somali, Turkana & Rendille). 
Indigenous cows (Zebu & Boran), goats 
(Small E.A, crosses of Toggenburg, 
Gerryman-alpine 
& 
Gala), 
sheep 
(Borpers 
& 
Red 
Maasai), 
camels 
(Somali, Rendille and Turkana) and 
donkeys. 
Cattle, goats, sheep, camels, donkeys & chicken + 
bee keeping. 
13 
Fishing activities 
Caroes, tilapia, barbus & labeo. 
Less than 10 individual fish farmers in 
Kirisia Division. Main fish species: 
Tilapia. 
Mainly in Lake Turkana, for tilapia, labeo and Nile 
Perch 
14 
Industry 
No manufacturing establishments/ 
industries. 
No manufacturing industries. 
Mining of blue quamline and mica is done at South 
Horr in Laisamis Constituency. County has high 
potential for manufacturing blue quamline and 
exploration of petroleum. 
15 
Cultural practices 
Women perform all domestic chores 
& take care of children, cattle 
rustling, 
and 
cattle 
raiding 
is 
common. FGM is common. 
Include 
Female 
Genital 
Mutilation 
(FGM), early marriages, moranism & 
cattle rustling. 
Include Female Genital Mutilation (FGM), early 
marriages & cattle rustling. The boy child is preferred 
to the girl child with the latter in most cases being 
considered as a source of wealth. 
16 
Poverty 
71% of county population live below 
the poverty line 
 
80% of County population live below the 
poverty line. Caused by: cross border 
insecurity, low enrolment in schools, 
unpredictable weather patterns, poor 
infrastructure & retrogressive cultural 
practices. 
92% of persons in County experience absolute 
poverty, 83% experience food poverty, & 68% hard 
core poverty. Caused by emphasis of livestock as 
wealth, poor road network, persistent drought, 
environmental 
degradation, 
insecurity, 
over- 
dependence on foreign aid, & HIV/ AIDS. 
17 
Human Development 
Index (HDI) 
0.438 (national average is 0.520) 
0.430 (NA is 0.520) 
 
0.438 (national average(NA) is 0.520) 
 
18 
Youth Development 
Index (YDI) 
0.3969 (national average 0.5817) 
No data 
0.3969 (national average 0.5817)

=== PAGE 141 ===
23 
7.1.2 Mid Tana River Landscape Site 
The above landscape site occurs in six Counties, namely: Isiolo, Meru, Tharaka Nithi, Kitui, 
Garissa and Tana River. 
The key socio-economic indicators presented below include the following: 

Population size and composition

Population growth rate

Literacy

Housing

Land and land use

Land tenure system

Self-help, women and youth groups

Crops produced

Livestock bred

Fishing activities

Industry

Cultural practices

Poverty

Human Development Index (HDI)

Youth Development Index (YDI)

=== PAGE 142 ===
24 
 
Table 4: Mid Tana River Landscape Site 
No. 
Socio- 
economic 
Category 
Counties 
Isiolo 
Meru 
Tharaka Nithi 
Kitui 
Garissa 
Tana River 
1 
Population 
Size & 
Composition 
143,294: 73,694 male 
& 69,600 female (2009 
Population & Housing 
Census) 
1,356,301: 670,656 
male & 685,645 female 
(2009 Population & 
Housing Census) 
399, 735 in 2012 
(195,256 males and 
204,479 females) 
1,012,709 (531,427 
female & 481,282 male 
(2009 Population & 
Housing Census) 
699,534: 375,985 
male & 323,549 
females (2012 est). 
261,348: 130,875 
female & 130,473 
male (2012 est). 
2 
Population 
type 
Majority of population 
is the young population 
(0-14) account for 44.4 
percent of the 
population. While the 
aged 65 and above 
account for 3.6 
percent. Both groups 
add up 48%. 
The youthful population 
accounts for 68% of 
the total population. 
About 72.5 % of the 
population is below 
35 years meaning 
that the youth were 
the majority of the 
population 
The county has a high 
population of children, 
population between the 
ages of 0-14 years is 
238,928 male and 
232,820 females which 
represented 46.6% of 
the total population 
Majority of the age 
group is between 
the age group (6-
13) which 
represents 49% of 
population 
The age group 15-
30 years 
constitutes 58% of 
the potential 
labour force 
3 
Population 
Growth Rate 
   3.6% 
2.1% 
1.8% 
2.1% 
3.96% 
3.4% 
4 
Literacy 
Literacy%: Male-51.6% 
and F-33.2%) national 
average-71.4% 
53% (40% male & 60% 
female) literacy 
percentage 
17% of population 
cannot read, & 13.2% 
cannot write. 16.9% 
cannot read or write. 
Literacy%:M-37.8% & 
F-48%. 
77.3% of population can 
read and write 
Literacy%: M-40.4%, F- 
61.4% 
39.7% of 
population can 
read, while 57.9% 
cannot read and 
write. 8.1% of 
women literate & 
20.2% of men 
literate. Literacy%: 
M-20.2%, F-8.1% 
33.7% of 
population able to 
read and write. 
Literacy%: M- 
60.5%, F-36.0%

=== PAGE 143 ===
25 
 
No. 
Socio- 
economic 
Category 
Counties 
Isiolo 
Meru 
Tharaka Nithi 
Kitui 
Garissa 
Tana River 
5 
Housing 
Most houses 
constructed of mud, 
grass & wood 
(‘manyatta’). 
Permanent housing 
structures only found in 
Isiolo town & other 
urban centres. 
97.5% roofs of 
corrugated iron sheets. 
Housing inadequate, 
unaffordable & 
indecent. 
Rural areas: mud- 
walled or wooden 
with earth or cement 
floors. Urban areas: 
stone houses with 
corrugated iron sheet 
roofs. 
76.4% corrugated iron 
sheets roofs, 66.3% 
earth floors, & 64% 
brick/ block walls. 
Majority of 
population live in 
‘manyattas’. 
 
6 
Land and Land 
Use 
80% of the land is used 
as grazing land by the 
pastoralists. In some 
areas, agro-
pastoralism is practised 
with the inhabitants 
engaging in both 
livestock and crop 
farming
Land use mainly for 
agricultural activities for 
both crops farming and 
livestock-keeping. 
Other uses include 
cultural and forestry 
conservation.  
Land use mainly for 
agricultural activities 
for both crops 
farming and 
livestock-keeping. 
Other uses include 
cultural and forestry 
conservation. 
Consists of the Tsavo 
East National Park, 
arable agricultural land 
(over 46%), & non-
arable land. 
Predominantly 
nomadic 
pastoralism, with 
farming activities 
along River Tana. 
Largely non-
arable. 
7 
Land Tenure 
System 
80% of land 
communally owned, 
under trusteeship of 
County government, 
while 10% of land 
under Government 
ownership & remaining 
10% under private 
ownership. Women 
have less control over 
land resources 
  Most land is 
individually owned 
through Land titles. 
Over 50% of owners 
have title deeds.  
Women have less 
control over land 
resources.  
There is a critical 
squatter problem due 
to boundary disputes 
and conflict over 
grazing land and land 
ownership. Women 
have less control 
over land resources  
83% of inhabitants lack 
title deeds. Women 
have less control over 
land resources 
Less than 1% of 
population have 
title deeds. Women 
have less control 
over land 
resources 
90% of land is 
either Trust Land 
or Government 
Land. Women 
have less control 
over land 
resources

=== PAGE 144 ===
26 
 
No. 
Socio- 
economic 
Category 
Counties 
Isiolo 
Meru 
Tharaka Nithi 
Kitui 
Garissa 
Tana River 
8 
Self Help, 
Women & 
Youth Groups 
60 active women self- 
help groups, 345 
CBOs, & 280 youth 
groups. 
1,841 women groups, 
& 1,200 youth groups. 
Over 500 registered 
and active self-help 
groups. 
161 women groups & 
312 youth groups. 
98 youth groups 
and 59 active 
women groups 
have been 
registered in the 
county. Activities 
groups undertake 
include, bee-
keeping, small 
scale, farming and 
small-scale 
business. 
405 self-help 
groups, 340 
women groups 
and about 385 
youth groups. 
Groups require 
equipping with 
entrepreneurial 
skills.  
9 
Crops 
Produced 
Maize, beans, 
cowpeas, onions, 
mangoes, pawpaws & 
other horticultural 
crops. 
Miraa is the major 
agricultural cash crop. 
Other crops include 
mangoes, citrus, 
coffee, maize, beans, 
bananas, pigeon peas 
& horticultural crops.  
Maize, beans, 
cowpeas, sorghum, 
green grams, millet, 
black beans. Cash 
crops include tea and 
coffee 
Cereals, maize, millet, 
sorghum, legumes, 
green grams, beans, 
cowpeas, pigeon peas, 
cassava & sweet 
potatoes. Cotton and 
sisal industrial crops & 
horticultural crops such 
as mangoes, pawpaws, 
water melons, tomatoes, 
Watermelons, 
mangoes, 
vegetables, 
tomatoes, 
pawpaws, 
bananas, 
cowpeas, simsim, 
maize, beans & 
green 
Mangoes, maize, 
cowpeas, 
bananas and 
green grams. 
10 
Livestock bred 
Cows (Zebu and 
Boran), goats (galla, 
small East African, 
Saanen, Toggenburg, 
Swiss Alpine), sheep 
(black head Persian), 
camels (Somali, 
Turkana & Rendille). 
Goats, cattle, sheep, 
pigs, rabbits & poultry. 
Cows (Friesian, 
Guernsey, Ayrshire, 
Zebu), sheep, goats 
and chicken. 
Cows (Ayrshire, 
Friesian, Guernsey, 
Jersey, Zebu), goats 
(Toggenburg), 
indigenous chicken, bee 
keeping, rabbits, and 
pigs. 
Cattle (Boran), 
goats (Galla), 
sheep (black 
headed Persian) 
and camel 
(dromedary one 
humped) 
Cattle (Orma- 
boran), donkey, 
camel, sheep 
(black head 
Persian), goat 
(Galla) and poultry 
(indigenous 
chicken and 
ducks).

=== PAGE 145 ===
27 
 
No. 
Socio- 
economic 
Category 
Counties 
Isiolo 
Meru 
Tharaka Nithi 
Kitui 
Garissa 
Tana River 
11 
Fishing 
activities 
Caroes, tilapia, barbus 
& labeo. 
Tilapia, mud fish and 
trout (fish ponds) 
Catfish, eel, trout & 
tilapia (fish ponds). 
Tilapia, cat fish, carp, 
black bass, eel, Barbus 
and mud fish. 
Mud fish, cat fish, 
bone fish, tilapia & 
eel (small scale 
along River Tana, 
in fish ponds). 
Tuna, catfish, 
rabbit fish, tilapia 
and Synodontis. 
12 
Industry 
No manufacturing 
establishments/ 
industries. 
Numerous factories 
which add value to 
agricultural products. 
Agricultural 
processing, 
especially tea and 
coffee 
9 established industries 
Single industry – 
Maua Milling 
Single mango and 
honey processing 
factory. 
13 
Cultural 
Practices 
Women perform all 
domestic chores & take 
care of children, cattle 
rustling, and cattle 
raiding is common. 
FGM is common. 
FGM is still practiced in 
some areas. Child 
labour is high at 35% 
and is mostly engaged 
in miraa production and 
supply chain system.  
Miraa chewing is a 
common cultural 
tradition used in 
dowry celebration. 
FGM is still practiced 
in some areas. 
Most land owned by 
men, which 
disadvantages women 
and youth. 
FGM is still 
dominant. Early 
and forced 
marriages of girl 
child and FGM.  
Early and forced 
marriages of girl 
child and FGM. 
14. Health Issues  
Sanitation- Open 
defecation by adults 
and disposal of 
children faeces in the 
open is still rampant. 
The two most prevalent 
diseases are: malaria & 
diarrhoea, stomach. 
90% of the children in 
the county have been 
immunized. 73% of the 
deliver at home.  
Sanitation-80.4% of 
population uses pit 
latrines.  The major 
diseases affecting the 
county populace are 
malaria, skin diseases. 
The prevalence rate of 
malaria stands at 15% 
while HIV/AIDS 
prevalence rate of 6.3 
per cent. Immunization 
coverage is 98% 
Over 87.7% of the 
county population 
uses pit latrines. The 
two most morbidity 
diseases in order of 
prevalence are: 
Malaria (33.8 %t), 
headaches (13.1%), 
Respiratory tract 
infections (9.5%). 
Immunization 
coverage is 76%. 
Sanitation- latrine 
coverage is at 55.1%. 
The 2 most common 
diseases causing 
morbidity are 
malaria/fever estimated 
at 49.1%, diarrhoea 
3.4%. HIV/AIDs 
prevalence is at 6.1%. 
The immunization for 
Kitui County is generally 
low at 69.9%. 
Sanitation-46.6% 
of the population 
uses pit latrines. 
50.63 % use other 
means of 
sanitation such as 
bushes (ODF). The 
most prevalent 
disease is Malaria, 
with a prevalence 
of 46.6%. 
Vaccination 
coverage is 62%.  
Sanitation level is 
at 48 per cent. 
Three most 
prevalent 
diseases are 
respiratory tract 
infections, 
diarrhoea, 
malaria. Average 
immunization 
coverage of 76 % 
below WHO 90% 
standard. Uptake 
of FP services is 
34.3 per cent.

=== PAGE 146 ===
28 
 
No. 
Socio- 
economic 
Category 
Counties 
Isiolo 
Meru 
Tharaka Nithi 
Kitui 
Garissa 
Tana River 
15. 
Food security / 
Nutritional 
security 
Frequent famines and 
poor nutrition 
contributes to the high 
levels of wasting and 
stunting. Prevalence of 
stunting is 18.6%. 
Cases of malnutrition 
are minimal because 
majority of the areas in 
the county are food 
secure. 
Over 70% of children 
of children are food & 
nutritionally secure.  
Nutrition status remains 
poor as a result of 
frequent droughts 
resulting to food 
insecurity. Wasting rates 
among children <5 
years are at 4.6%, 
Stunting at 38.2% way 
above the national 
average of 26%.  
The prevalence 
underweight 
children is 26% 
while stunting is 
38.6 %. There is 
high Food 
insecurity in the 
region with a 
majority of the 
population relying 
on relief food. 
Malnutrition rate of 
0-59 months 
children is at 
12.4%

=== PAGE 147 ===
29 
7.1.2.1 Chyulu Hills Landscape Site 
The above landscape site occurs in three Counties, namely: Makueni, Kajiado, and Taita Taveta. 
The key socio-economic indicators presented below include the following: 

Population size and composition

Population growth rate

Literacy

Housing

Land and land use

Land tenure system

Self-help, women and youth groups

Crops produced

Livestock bred

Fishing activities

Industry

Poverty

Human Development Index (HDI)

Youth Development Index (YDI)

=== PAGE 148 ===
30 
 
Table 5: Chyulu Hills Landscape Site 
 
No
. 
ocio-economic 
Category 
Counties 
Makueni 
Kajiado 
Taita Taveta 
1 
Population Size 
& Composition 
884,253: 430,567 male & 453,686 female 
(2009 Population & Housing Census) 
687,312: 345,146 male & 342,166 female (2009 
Population & Housing Census) 
284,657: 145,334 male & 139,323 
female 
2 
Population type 
Age group (15-64) years accounts for 51.1 
per cent of the total population and is the 
productive work force.  
The county productive population age group 
(15-64) years accounts for 56.1 percent of the 
total population. Male are more (50.06 percent) 
compared to females (49.94 percent). 
Age group (15-64) years accounts 
for 50% of the total population and 
is the productive work force. 
3 
Population 
Growth Rate 
1.4% 
5.5% 
1.6% 
4 
Literacy 
69.2% literacy rate: Male-75.2% and Femle-
63.2% 
65.2% literacy rate: Male-48.1% and Female-
52.3% 
79.1% of population aged 15 years 
and above can read and write. 
Literacy rate 84.1%: Male-88.3% 
and Female-80.1% 
5 
Housing 
72.6% of houses are brick/ blocks walled, 
53.5% have earth floors, and 86.6% are 
roofed with corrugated iron sheets. 
Urban areas have both high-end settlements 
and sprawling slums; peri urban areas have 
mainly permanent and semi-permanent houses; 
rural areas have semi-permanent houses and 
manyattas.
51.1% of houses have brick/ block 
walls, 64.7% have earth floors, and 
80.2% of houses are roofed using 
corrugated iron sheets. 
6 
Land and Land 
Use 
74% of total land area is arable, 21.9% is 
non-arable, and 7.4% is urban area. 
Land used mainly for livestock rearing and crop 
growing. Industrial and commercial use is 
gaining momentum. 
Only 12% of the land is arable. 
7 
Land 
Tenure 
System 
19.8% of land owners have title deeds. 
Women have less control over land 
resources. 
Most land in the rural areas is without title 
deeds, compared to the urban and peri-urban 
areas. Women have less control over land 
resources. 
35% of land owners have title 
deeds. A large proportion of the 
land is communally owned. Women 
have 
less 
control 
over 
land 
resources

=== PAGE 149 ===
31 
 
No
. 
ocio-economic 
Category 
Counties 
Makueni 
Kajiado 
Taita Taveta 
8 
Self 
Help, 
Women & Youth 
Groups 
444 youth groups and 811 registered women 
groups. 
Over 400 active women groups. 
1,328 registered women groups, 
1,534 youth groups and 4,597 self-
help groups. 
9 
Crops Produced 
Maize, green grams, pigeon peas and 
sorghum. Fruits include mangoes, pawpaw 
and oranges. Cotton is also grown. 
Maize, beans, potatoes, vegetables, onions, 
tomatoes. 
Maize, 
beans, 
green 
grams, 
sorghum, cowpeas, pigeon peas, 
cassava and sweet potatoes. 
10 
Livestock bred 
Dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, goat, 
donkeys chicken, pigs, and bees. 
Sheep, goats, beef and dairy cattle, commercial 
chicken, indigenous chicken, donkeys, pigs and 
camel. 
Beef cattle, dairy cows, sheep, 
goats, 
camels, 
donkeys, 
pigs, 
poultry (chicken and guinea fowl), 
rabbits, and bee keeping. 
11 
Fishing activities 
Tilapia fish (through fish farming) 
Tilapia, catfish, common cat (cyprinus corpio) 
and mosquito fish (gandusia affinis). 
Tilapia, claria, eel, crayfish, and 
sardines. 
12 
Industry 
One upcoming fruit processing plant at Wote 
town, as well as a ginnery for cotton 
processing. There are also light industries, 
especially in the ‘jua kali’ sector. 
County is home to TATA Chemicals which is a 
heavy industry. There are also numerous 
medium and light industries, such as steel 
fabrication and glass-making. 
Five (5) industries that range from 
small to medium scale in nature: 
sisal fibre production, & milk cooling 
plants 
13 
Poverty 
64.3% 
Human Poverty Index of 27%. More than 47% 
of the population live below the poverty line. 
Absolute poverty level of 57.2% 
14 
Human 
Development 
Index (HDI) 
  0.480 (national average is 0.52) 
0.59 (national average is 0.52) 
 0.54(national average is 0.52)

=== PAGE 150 ===
32 
 
 
No
. 
ocio-economic 
Category 
Counties 
Makueni 
Kajiado 
Taita Taveta 
15 
Youth 
Development 
Index (YDI) 
(0.5837) Based on 2009 provincial average 
figures) National average 0.5817 
 0.6931 (Based on 2009 provincial average 
figures) National average 0.5817) 
 0.5530 (Based on 2009 provincial 
average figures) National average 
0.5817 
16 
Health Issues 
80 per cent of the households have access 
to pit latrines. Town lack sewerage facilities 
and the sanitation condition is worsened by 
water shortage. Malaria is the most common 
disease in the County with a prevalence rate 
of 
51.1% 
followed 
by 
flu 
12.7%. 
Immunization 
rate 
is 
62.26% 
while 
contraceptive acceptance rate is 30.75%. 
 Sanitation-50% of HHs in the county practice 
open defecation. The two most common causes 
of morbidity in order of prevalence are: upper 
respiratory tract conditions (29.7%), skin 
diseases (8.4%). Immunization in the county 
stand at 67.2%. Only 36.7% of women of child 
bearing age in the county use family planning 
methods. 
Sanitation- 
86% 
of 
the 
total 
households in the County have 
access to toilet facilities. The two 
most prevalent diseases in the 
County are Malaria (38.7%), Upper 
Respiratory Tract Infection (URTI) 
(34.1%). Only 68.1% of the infants 
are 
fully 
immunized. 
The 
percentage of women using modern 
methods standing at 29.7% 
17 
Food 
security/Nutritio
nal security 
The county is classified under Stressed 
Phase (IPC Phase 2). Approximately 20 
percent of the households had a borderline 
or poor food consumption score. The 
number of children under-five years who 
were underweight increased to 5.16% 
Underweight (weight for age) is reported at 
22.7% while stunted (height for age) is 
estimated to be 29.5%. malnourished persons 
are offered relief foods and supplements to 
improve their health. 
The percentage of children under 5 
years classified as malnourished is 
34.0%, 11.2% and 28.5% as per 
height for age stunting, weight for 
height wasting, and weight for age 
underweight respectively.

=== PAGE 151 ===
33 
 
8 Gender issues in the project area 
The Gender Inequality Index (GII) reflects gender-based disadvantage in three dimensions – 
reproductive health, empowerment and the labour market. The index also demonstrates the loss in 
potential human development due to inequality between female and male achievements in these 
dimensions. It varies between 0 – when women and men fare equally, and 1 – where one gender fares 
as poorly as possible in all measured dimensions. 
Kenya has an overall GII of 0.651 (draft 7th Human Development Report). This is however, not equal 
everywhere, as there are regional disparities with Counties located in arid and semi-arid lands, having 
high Gender Inequality Indices. 
The assessment of the gender inequality index was done for the initially identified four project 
landscapes namely Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills; Sabarwawa; Mid Tana River; and Chyulu Hills. 
The target landscapes were however scaled down after further consultations and the Moyale-Wajir 
North Banisa Hills landscape dropped. The project will therefore focus two landscapes namely the Mid 
Tana River (including Sabarwawa) landscapes located in the arid zone and the Chyulu Hills landscape 
located in the semi-arid zone.  
8.1 Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills Landscape Site 
The Counties represented in this landscape site also have a higher GII than the national level, with 
Marsabit having the highest GII of 0,732. The high GIIs witnessed in this landscape site are attributed 
mainly to socio-cultural factors. 
Table 6: Gender Inequalities in Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills Landscape Site 
Marsabit 
Wajir 
Mandera 
 GII of 0.732. 
Women are adversely affected 
by such factors as traditional & 
social 
practices 
(early 
marriage, 
sexual 
violence, 
FGM), as well as poverty and 
insecurity, 
among 
other 
challenges. 
 GII of 0.693. 
Women in the county are more 
vulnerable to poverty than men 
as they spend most of their 
time searching for water and 
firewood. Women also do not 
own or control assets like 
livestock and rarely take part in 
decision making.   
Boys benefit more from formal 
education 
as 
young 
girls 
remain at home to help in 
household 
chores 
and 
herding. Whilst HHs headed 
by single or divorced mothers 
have 
fewer 
economic 
resources, land and capital. 
Women also do not enjoy 
equal rights to inheritance of 
assets like land, and are thus 
denied economic power.  
GII of 0.686 
The basic gender concerns in the 
County related to limited access 
to economic assets and negative 
cultural practices that hinder 
females from fully participating in 
the development activities and 
decision making. 
Women in the county are more 
vulnerable to poverty than men 
as they spend most of their time 
searching 
for 
water 
and 
firewood. Women also do not 
own 
or 
control 
assets 
like 
livestock and rarely take part in 
decision making. 
 
 
8.2 Sabarwawa Landscape Site 
Marsabit and Samburu Counties have a higher GII that the national level, while Isiolo is only slightly 
lower than the national level of 0.651. Socio-cultural factors are the primary cause of the GIIs witnessed 
in this landscape site.

=== PAGE 152 ===
34 
 
Table 7: Gender Inequalities in Sabarwawa Landscape Site 
Marsabit 
Samburu 
Isiolo 
GII of 0.732. 
Women are adversely affected by 
such factors as traditional & social 
practices (early marriage, sexual 
violence, FGM), as well as poverty 
and 
insecurity, 
among 
other 
challenges. 
GII of 0.693. 
Women are adversely affected by 
such factors as traditional & social 
practices (early marriage, sexual 
violence, FGM), as well as poverty 
and 
insecurity, 
among 
other 
challenges. 
Women also do not enjoy equal 
rights to inheritance of assets like 
land, 
and 
are 
thus 
denied 
economic power. 
 GII of 0.640 
Women in the county are more 
vulnerable to poverty than men 
as they spend most of their time 
searching 
for 
water 
and 
firewood. Women also do not 
own or control assets like 
livestock and rarely take part in 
decision making. 
Boys benefit more from formal 
education as young girls remain 
at home to help in household 
chores and herding. 
 
 
8.3 Mid Tana River Landscape Site 
Isiolo, Meru, Tharaka Nithi and Kitui Counties have GIIs that are lower than the national level, with Kitui 
having the lowest GII among the earlier mentioned three counties. Conversely, Tana River County has 
the highest GII. Similar to the other landscape sites, the GIIs may be attributed primarily to socio-cultural 
practices that result in men benefitting disproportionately from a patriarchal system.

=== PAGE 153 ===
35 
 
Table 8: Gender Inequalities in Mid Tana River Landscape Site 
Counties 
Isiolo 
Meru 
Tharaka Nithi 
Kitui 
Garissa 
Tana River 
GII of 0.640. 
Women 
in 
the 
county 
are 
more 
vulnerable to 
poverty than 
men as they 
spend most 
of their time 
searching for 
water 
and 
firewood. 
Women also 
do not own or 
control 
assets 
like 
livestock and 
rarely 
take 
part 
in 
decision 
making. 
Boys benefit 
more 
from 
formal 
education as 
young 
girls 
remain 
at 
home to help 
in household 
chores 
and 
herding. 
GII 0.640 
Highly 
patriarchal 
system 
that 
defines 
the 
spaces 
for 
women as being 
at home, tending 
to chores and 
raising children. 
Serious 
under-
representation of 
women 
in 
governance and 
decision-making 
structures 
with 
less than 1/3 of 
county 
Positions held by 
women. Inherent 
belief by women 
that they should 
be dominated by 
their men.  
GII 0.580 
Gender 
inequality 
is 
experienced 
during property 
inheritance, 
production and 
control 
of 
proceeds from 
production, 
meaningful 
engagement in 
all aspects of 
development, 
and 
human 
rights issues. 
GII 0.59 
Land ownership 
structure 
is 
skewed towards 
men, with most 
of 
land 
being 
owned 
and 
controlled 
by 
men.  
Gender 
inequality 
is 
experienced 
through lack of 
access to formal 
employment 
opportunities, 
credit 
and 
financial 
services, 
land 
ownership, 
education 
and 
health facilities. 
Additional 
challenges 
include 
sexual 
harassment, 
gender-based 
violence, 
harmful cultural 
practices, 
stigma 
and 
discrimination. 
GII 0.65 
Gender 
concerns in the 
County 
are 
related 
to 
access 
to 
economic 
assets 
and 
cultural 
practices 
that 
act against the 
female 
population. Men 
take the leading 
role in making 
most 
of 
the 
major decisions 
in 
terms 
of 
development 
activities. 
Women do not 
enjoy 
equal 
rights 
to 
inheritance 
of 
assets like land, 
which 
could 
enhance 
their 
development. 
GII 0.69 
Gender concerns 
also 
relate 
to 
access 
to 
economic assets, 
and 
cultural 
practices 
that 
marginalize 
women from fully 
participating 
in 
development.

=== PAGE 154 ===
36 
 
8.4 Chyulu Hills Landscape Site 
GII scores were not available for the counties in this landscape site. However, information obtained 
indicated that women are still disadvantaged such that they hold low positions in the family and society, 
with little hope of ownership of productive resources. 
 
Table 9: Gender Inequalities in Chyulu Hills Landscape Site 
Counties 
Makueni 
Kajiado 
Taita Taveta 
About 80% of small-scale farming and 
livestock 
rearing 
activities 
are 
managed and carried out by women. 
However, women hold a low position 
in the family set up and in the 
community, where they do not have 
control of product assets such as land 
and capital. The male child is also 
given preference over the girl child in, 
for example, access to education. 
Early marriages also severely and 
adversely affect the girl child. 
Gender 
Development 
Index (GDI) adjusts the 
HDI for disparities between 
men and women. GDI in 
the 
county 
has 
been 
estimated 
at 
0.415, 
compared to the national 
level estimated at 0.492 in 
2009. 
The County is affected due 
to 
negative 
cultural 
practices and beliefs (men 
own land and livestock), 
which impact on women 
development. 
75% of agricultural labour consists of 
women (mostly rural) yet they only control 
and have access to 40% of the accruing 
benefits. In leadership, women hold fewer 
positions in decision-making due to 
cultural 
barriers. 
With 
regard 
to 
reproductive health rights, women have 
little say on the number of children they 
should bear, leading to negative impacts 
on women health. Measures include 
improved education for girls, family 
planning 
for 
women, 
agricultural 
mechanization, output, training of women 
on appropriate farming technologies, 
awareness creation and implementation 
of one third gender rule as required by the 
constitution.

=== PAGE 155 ===
37 
9 Gender Assessment of Project Area 
A gender assessment was carried out through the Harvard Gender Analysis Framework and Rani 
Parker’s Gender Analysis Matrix. With the understanding that women and men are affected by 
development activities differently, the Harvard Gender Analysis Framework uses Activity 
Profiles/Schedules, and Access and Control Profiles. The use of Activity Schedules helps to explain 
how men, women, boys and girls in the project target areas spend a typical day from the time they wake 
up until they go to bed (24-hour day). Access and Control Profiles, on the other hand, are used to 
analyse current and potential impacts of development interventions on women and men, at the level of 
individuals, households and the community, against categories such as labour, time, resources and 
culture. The Access and Control Profiles are insightful in determining power relations and interests 
based on gender roles. 
The Gender analysis in this report was carried out for the initially identified four project landscapes 
namely Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills; Sabarwawa; Mid Tana River; and Chyulu Hills. These 
landscapes were reduced to two landscapes namely 1) the Mid Tana River and Sabarwawa landscapes 
and the 2) Chyulu Hills landscape. Much of the analysis in this report refers to the original 4 landscapes 
but the analysis in the report to the project proposal as now described remains relevant. 
9.1 Methodology for Activity Schedules 
Step 1: Identification of Seasons 
1.
Identifying the busiest and the quietest time of the year in terms of women’s workload.
2.
Preparing a daily activity chart for the busiest season and a separate one for the
quietest season.
3.
Making an assumption about the type of household (e.g. marital status, number of
adults and children) that will be represented by the information.
Step 2: Preparation of Busiest Schedule: Women describe their own activities 
1.
Asking the group at what time they wake up each morning during the busiest time of
the year and complete the time column (in hours).
2.
Asking the group to describe their day, starting from when they wake up and concluding
when they go to bed. Recording all the activities they undertake against an approximate
timing.
Step 3: Preparation of Busiest Schedule: Women describe men’s activities 
1.
Continuing with the busiest season, repeat step 2 but focusing on the opposite sex with
women describing the daily activities of the male members in their households.
Step 4: Preparation of Quietest Schedule 
1.
Repeat steps 2 and 3 for the quietest time of the year.
Step 5: Analysis 
1.
Concluding the exercise by asking the group to calculate (with reference to the
information collected) the number of hours worked by women and men during the
busiest and quietest times of the year, and their respective hours of rest during the
day.
2.
Reflecting on the findings

=== PAGE 156 ===
38 
 
9.2 Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills Landscape Site-Marsabit and 
Mandera Counties 
Presented below are the Activity Schedules for Marsabit and Mandera Counties. In Marsabit County, 
Women are involved in most household chores and activities, while boys participate in crop cultivation, 
rearing of young livestock and shoats. Customary law, cultural attitudes and rigidity to gender roles 
overburden women. Men primarily take care of mature livestock and ensure herds they seek for suitable 
grazing and watering points even if it means moving away with their livestock for several months and 
hundreds of kilometers. The boy child is preferred to the girl child with the latter in most cases being 
considered as a source of wealth (CIDP Marsabit, 2013). There is low enrolment and high drop-out 
rates in schools for girls, leading to limited opportunities for the girl child to acquire the necessary skills 
and training. Most Girls in Marsabit county spend their time sourcing for fuel wood, fetching water, child 
care for younger siblings, sourcing for food and food preparation.  
In Mandera County, men, women, boys and girls participate in all economic activities, and most 
household activities. Boys and girls do not participate in community meetings, while all except girls take 
a household leadership role (men, women and boys). Girls do not participate in household leadership 
roles as shown in the activity schedule below. The basic gender concerns in Mandera county relate to 
limited access to economic assets and negative cultural practices that hinder females from fully 
participating in the development activities and decision making. 
9.2.1 Activity Schedules 
MARSABIT COUNTY 
In Marsabit county, Men spend most of their daily time carrying out activities related to: land clearing, 
crop cultivation, Livestock management, trade and other informal sector activities. Women support the 
Men in land clearing however most of their daily time is spent on family care related activities. Girls in 
Marsabit are exempted from most tasks except child care, collecting firewood, water supply and food 
preparation. Long distances travelled by Girls in search of fuelwood and water can expose them to 
Gender based violence and also make them miss school and education or end performing poorly if 
enrolled.

=== PAGE 157 ===
39 
 
Table 10: Activity schedules for Marsabit County 
ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES 
Men 
(M) 
Women 
(W) 
Boys 
(B) 
Girls 
(G) 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Land clearing 
 
 
5 (M-2 hrs, W-3 hrs) 
Crop cultivation 
 
 
7 (M-3 hrs, B-4 hrs) 
Livestock care 
 
11 (M-11 hrs) 
Trade/ commerce 
 
11 (M-11 hrs) 
Formal sector employment 
 
 
8 (M-5 hrs, W-3 hrs) 
Informal sector activities 
 
 
7 (M-3 hrs, W-4 hrs) 
Other 
HOUSEHOLD ACTIVITIES 
Men 
(M) 
Women 
(W) 
Boys 
(B) 
Girls 
(G) 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Leadership 
 
 
2 (M-1.5 hrs, B-0.5 hrs) 
Maintenance & repair of house 
 
4 (W-4 hrs) 
Family care 
 
11 (W-11 hrs) 
Child care 
 
 
8 (W-8 hrs) 
Hygiene 
 
 
2 (W-1 hr, G-1 hr) 
Health-related issues 
 
 
Collecting fuel wood 
 
 
8 (W-3 hrs, G-5 hrs) 
Assuring water supply 
 
 
8 (W- 3hrs, G- 5hrs) 
Buying/ sourcing of food 
 
 
4 (M-1 hrs, W-3 hrs) 
Food preparation 
 
 
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily 
(hours) 
Assistance to disadvantaged persons 
 
 
 
 
4 (M-1hr,W-3, B-
1hrs) 
Cultural/ 
religious 
ceremonies 
(births, 
marriages & burials) 
 
 
 
 
6 (M-2hrs, W-2hrs, 
B-2hrs, G-2hrs) 
Community meetings 
 
 
3 (M-2hrs, W-1hr) 
Other (political involvement) 
 
 
 
 
5 (M-3hrs, W-1hr, B-
1hr, G-1hr)

=== PAGE 158 ===
40 
HOUSEHOLD ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Leadership 
24 (M-12hrs, W-6hrs B-6hrs) 
Maintenance & repair of house 
6 (M-2hrs, W-2hrs, B-2hrs, G-
2hrs) 
Family care 
24 (M-4hrs, W-12hrs, B-2hrs, 
G-6hrs) 
Child care 
18 (M-1hrs, W-10hrs, B-1hrs, 
G-4hrs) 
Hygiene 
12 (M-1hr, W-6hrs-B-1hr, G-4
hrs 
Health-related issues 
10 (M-2hr, W-6hrs, B-1hr G-
1hr) 
Collecting fuel wood 
6 (M-1hr, W-2, B-1, G-2hrs) 
Assuring water supply 
4 (M-1, W-1, B-1 G-1hr) 
Buying/ sourcing of food 
12 (M-2, W-6hrs, B-1hr,  G-
3hrs) 
Food preparation 
5 (W-3, G-2) 
MANDERA COUNTY 
In Mandera county, most economic activities are shared among the Men, Women, Boys and Girls. 
There is distribution of labour and responsibilities among family members. With this kind of responsibility 
sharing Women have time to take up leadership roles in groups, start small businesses and cultivate in 
their farms. Girls and Boys have more spare time to attend school since they are not overburdened with 
household work. 
Table 11: Activity schedules for Mandera County 
ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Land clearing 
8 (M-3hr, W-1hr, G-1hr, B-3hr) 
Crop cultivation 
10 (M-2hrs, W-4hr, B-1hrs, G-
1hr 
Livestock care 
12 (M-6hr, W-1hr,B-4hrs-G-
1hr) 
Trade/ commerce 
11 (M-3hrs, W-5hr, B-2hr, G—
1hr) 
Formal sector employment 
8 (M-4hr, W-1hr, B-2hr, G-1hr) 
Informal sector activities 
12 (M-6hrs, W-2hr, B-3hrs, G-
1hr)

=== PAGE 159 ===
41 
 
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys Girls Time spent daily (hours) 
Assistance 
to 
disadvantaged 
persons 
 
 
 
 
4 
Cultural/ 
religious 
ceremonies 
(births, marriages & burials) 
 
 
 
 
6 
Community meetings 
 
 
3 
Other (political involvement) 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
HOUSEHOLD ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys Girls Time spent daily (hours) 
Leadership 
 
 
 
24 (M-5hr, W-3hr, B-2hr, G-2hr) 
Maintenance & repair of house 
 
 
 
 
6 (M-2hr, W-2hr, B-3hr, G-1hr)  
Family care 
 
 
 
 
24 (M-2hr, W-12hrs, B-2hr, G-8hrs) 
Child care 
 
 
 
 
18 (M-2hr, W-8hr, B-2hr, G-6hr) 
Hygiene 
 
 
 
 
12 (M-1hr, W-4hr, B-1hr, G-6hr) 
Health-related issues 
 
 
 
 
10 (M-2hr, W-6hr, B-1hr, G-1hr) 
Collecting fuel wood 
 
 
 
 
6 (M-1hr, W-1hr, B-1hr, G-3hrs) 
Assuring water supply 
 
 
 
 
4 (M-1hr, W-1hr,B-1hr,G-1hr. 
Buying/ sourcing of food 
 
 
 
 
12 ( M-4hrs, W-6hr, B-1hr, G-1hr) 
Food preparation 
 
 
 
 
5 (1hr, W-3hr, B-1hr, G-1hr) 
 
9.2.2 Methodology: Access and Control Profiles 
Step 1: Resources 
1. With the group, draw up a list of all resources available to people in the village for domestic 
use, or for farming or off-farm work).  
2. Record the list in the left-hand column of the matrix. 
Step 2: Explain the difference between access and control 
Access-represents the opportunity to use a resource (such as an axe, or to work on the land) without 
having the authority to make decisions about its use. 
Control-represents the full authority to make decisions about the use of a resource.

=== PAGE 160 ===
42 
 
Step 3: Demonstrate Access to Resources 
1. Using 10 stones to represent 10 points, ask the group to indicate relative access to a resource 
by women and men. For example, 10 stones allocated to women and zero to men indicates 
that women have exclusive access to a particular resource, five stones to women and five to 
men indicates that both have equal access. Two stones allocated to women and eight to men 
indicates that men have more access to a resource than women. 
Step 3: Demonstrate Control over Resources 
1. Repeat step 2 to determine who has control over each resource, again allocating 10 points 
between women and men.  
2. In some cases, control of a resource may lie outside the household. For instance, an institution 
determines who receives credit or attends a training course. Such situations are indicated by 
the term ‘others’. 
Step 4: Analysis 
1. Once it is established who has access to and control over all the different resources on the list, 
rank the top five resources. Note who has access to and who has control over these five 
resources and discuss the reasons why. 
2. Ask the group to note the types of resources women and men tend to have either access to, or 
control over, or both.  
Step 5: Reflect on the findings. 
9.2.3 Access and Control Profiles 
Presented below are the Access and Control Profiles for Marsabit and Mandera Counties. In summary, 
in Marsabit men do not access/ use resources, but women do, yet men exclusively control the 
resources. In Mandera County, the situation is different as both men and women use and control the 
resources, including land. These means that the Woman in Mandera are in a better position when it 
comes to gender equality, power and decision making at household level.  
MARSABIT COUNTY 
In Marsabit County, women have access to utilization of resources namely: land, Water, Livestock 
(Milking), Crops, Shelter (Houses), Farming tools and other economic resources. However, the same 
women do not have control over these resources. The men have overall control these resources. These 
places women in a vulnerable position in terms of Gender equality because they lack the power and 
position to make decisions and influence power dynamics in the household level. By controlling 
ownership of resources, the man automatically controls power and decision making in the household.

=== PAGE 161 ===
43 
 
Table 12: Access and Control Profiles for Marsabit County 
RESOURCES 
ACCESS 
(use) Men 
ACCESS 
(use) Women 
CONTROL 
(ownership) Men 
CONTROL 
(ownership) Women 
Land 
 
 
 
 
Water 
 
 
 
 
Livestock 
 
 
 
 
Crops 
 
 
 
 
Shelter 
 
 
 
 
Tools/ equipment 
 
 
 
 
Economic 
resources 
(credit, cash income) 
 
 
 
 
Education 
 
 
 
 
Health 
 
 
 
 
Community leadership 
 
 
 
 
Political representation 
 
 
 
 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
MANDERA COUNTY 
In Mandera county, Women have access and control to resources like land, water, livestock, crops, 
shelter and farm equipment. These places women in a strong gender position in terms of Gender 
equality because they have the power and position to make decisions and influence power dynamics 
in the household level. By controlling ownership of resources, the wife automatically controls power and 
decision making in the household in partnership with the man.

=== PAGE 162 ===
44 
Table 13: Access and Control Profiles for Mandera County 
RESOURCES 
ACCESS 
(use) Men 
ACCESS 
(use) Women 
CONTROL 
(ownership) Men 
CONTROL 
(ownership) Women 
Land 




Water 




Livestock 




Crops 




Shelter 




Tools/ equipment 




Economic 
resources 
(credit, cash income) 




Education 




Health 




Community leadership 




Political representation 




Other

=== PAGE 163 ===
45 
9.2.4 Opportunities and Constraints 
Opinions on factors that presented opportunities or acted as constraints to both women and men were 
sought, and are presented below for the Counties of Marsabit and Mandera. 
MARSABIT COUNTY 
Key opportunities for women are related to access of resources like young livestock, land, crops and 
farming tools. This ensures that the household is food secure and nutritionally secure. Extra harvest 
can be sold or traded to bring income. Combined with affirmative action in the new constitution through 
devolution, women have an opportunity of taking up leadership positions in the community through 
welfare groups and other county government structures. There is need to raise awareness on need to 
educate the girl child while using ‘influential Men’ in the community as change agents. 
Table 14: Opportunities and Constraints for Marsabit County 
Women 
Men 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Many 
activists 
that 
support the girl child 
Cultural barriers- The boy 
is still preferred to the girl 
as 
his 
seen 
as 
the 
“inheritor “of the family tree
Adult education for 
Men  
Most time spent away 
from home in search 
of water & pasture for 
livestock 
Women have access to 
young livestock, land, crops 
and farming tools 
African tradition favours 
the position of men to 
control 
resources 
i.e 
resources 
that 
women 
could use as collateral to 
get loans from women 
groups. 
Traditional 
leadership support 
Recurrent conflict due 
to pastoralism has led 
to many loss of lives. 
These has weakened 
the 
traditional 
leadership structure 
Leadership support, e.g. 
Constitution of Kenya + 
Consideration 
of 
gender 
representation 
Position of women in the 
society, where the man is 
the head of the family and 
the woman is the neck 
Increased cultivation, 
food production and 
animal husbandry 
Severe drought, impacts 
of climate change have 
led to losses in crop and 
livestock systems 
Most are passionate about 
adult education and could 
learn from CBOs, NGOs.  
Women don’t have the 
time 
(tight 
Activity 
schedule) to attend adult 
education.  
Men control key capital 
resources 
that 
can 
create 
wealth 
and 
create businesses for 
HHs 
Lack of entrepreneurship 
skills, financial capital and 
collateral for loans

=== PAGE 164 ===
46 
 
MANDERA COUNTY 
Table 15: Opportunities and Constraints for Mandera County 
Women 
Men 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Women 
empowerment 
Inadequate 
women 
empowerment 
opportunities 
Education 
Poverty 
Gender 
mainstreaming 
Cultural norms and beliefs 
Employment 
opportunities 
Inadequate 
job 
opportunities 
County 
government 
support 
Low membership of women in 
groups 
Leadership 
Negotiated 
democracy 
Capacity building of 
women for sustainable 
development 
Decision-making 
is 
dominated by men 
Decision 
makers 
Equal sharing of 
scarce resources 
NGO programs 
Men considered more 
knowledgeable 
Head of family 
Unemployment 
Enactment of 1/3 
gender rule 
Lack of political goodwill 
Diverse 
business ideas 
Lack of trading 
capital 
Education 
Early girl child marriage 
Ownership 
of 
family 
resources 
Disagreement 
amongst 
family 
members 
Employment 
Late schooling 
Polygamy 
Lack 
of 
financial
capability 
Linking and bridging social 
capital 
Lack of labour and time saving 
household technology 
Joint ownership of family 
resources 
Low social capita among women, 
hindering enhancement of women 
in politics and finance 
 
9.3 Mid Tana River Landscape Site 
9.3.1 Activity Schedules 
Presented below are the Activity Schedules for Tharaka Nithi, Kitui and Tana River Counties. In Tharaka 
Nithi County, land clearing is undertaken by men and boys only, while women and girls cultivate the 
crops. Only men and boys also take care of livestock. Women are charged with most of the household 
activities.

=== PAGE 165 ===
47 
In Kitui County, girls only participate in land clearing and household activities. Only men take the 
leadership role, while both men and women participate in community activities. 
In Tana River County, girls participate in land clearing, community activities and household activities. 
Only men take the leadership role, while women carry out most of the household activities. 
THARAKA NITHI COUNTY 
In Tharaka County, land clearing is done predominantly by Men and Boys. It is viewed as a male chore. 
While crop cultivation is viewed as woman job assisted by the Girls. Trade and commerce is carried out 
by both Men and Woman. Both take part in earning income for the family with majority of men employed 
in formal jobs. 
Table 16: Activity Schedules for Tharaka Nithi 
ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Land clearing 
6 (M-4, B-2) 
Crop cultivation 
6 (W-4, G-2) 
Livestock care 
10 (M-6, B-4) 
Trade/ commerce 
8 (M-4, F-4) 
Formal sector employment 
8 (Male-8hrs) 
Informal sector activities 
9 (W-9hrs) 
HOUSEHOLD ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Leadership 
8 (M-6, B-2) 
Maintenance & repair of house 
6 (M-3, B-3) 
Family care 
10 (M-4, W-6) 
Child care 
12 (W-8hrs, G-4hrs) 
Hygiene 
8 (W-4hrs, G-4hrs) 
Health-related issues 
4 (W-2, G-2) 
Collecting fuel wood 
2 (W-1, G-1) 
Assuring water supply 
4 (W-4 hrs) 
Buying/ sourcing of food 
5 (M-2hrs, W-3hrs) 
Food preparation 
2-3 (W-2hrs, G-1hrs) 
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time 
spent 
daily 
(hours) 
Assistance to disadvantaged persons 
10 (W-4, G-6) 
Cultural/ 
religious 
ceremonies 
(births, 
marriages & burials) 
4 (M-2, W-2) 
Community meetings 
3 (M-2 W-1) 
Other (political involvement) 
10 (M-10 hrs)

=== PAGE 166 ===
48 
 
KITUI COUNTY 
In Kitui county, land clearing and cultivation is a family affair done by all members. This is meant to 
allow for larger farms and more crops to be cultivated in light of the severe drought and limited rains 
that are experienced in this area. Crop cultivation is seen as the main source of food and income 
therefore meaning more concerted effort is put together to feed the household. Majority of Men and 
Women in Kitui also participate in small trade and commerce related to wood carving and basket 
making. Kitui county is a leading producer of wood carvings and baskets in Kenya. 
Table 17: Activity schedule for Kitui County 
ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Land clearing 
 
 
 
 
6 (M-3, W-1,B-1, G-1) 
Crop cultivation 
 
 
 
6 (M-2, W-2, B-2) 
Livestock care 
 
10 (M-10hrs) 
Trade/ commerce 
 
 
8 (M-6hrs, W-2hrs) 
Formal sector employment 
 
 
8 (M-6hrs, W-2hrs) 
Informal sector activities 
 
 
8- (M-6hrs, F-2hrs) 
 
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily 
(hours) 
Assistance to disadvantaged persons 
 
12 (W-12hrs) 
Cultural/ 
religious 
ceremonies 
(births, 
marriages & burials) 
 
 
8 (M-6hrs, F-2hrs) 
Community meetings 
 
 
6 (M-4hrs, F-2hrs) 
Other (political involvement) 
 
 
2 (M-1, F-1) 
 
HOUSEHOLD ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Leadership 
 
12 (M-12hrs) 
Maintenance & repair of house 
 
 
12 (W-6hrs, B-6hrs) 
Family care 
 
12 (W-12hrs) 
Child care 
 
 
12 (W-6, G-6) 
Hygiene 
 
 
12 (W-6, G-6) 
Health-related issues 
 
 
12 (W-6, G-6) 
Collecting fuel wood 
 
 
4 (W-2, G-2) 
Assuring water supply 
 
 
4 (W-2, G-2) 
Buying/ sourcing of food 
 
 
 
2 (M-1, W-1) 
Food preparation 
 
 
3 (W-2, G-1)

=== PAGE 167 ===
49 
TANA RIVER COUNTY 
Table 18: Activity schedule for Tana River County 
ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Land clearing 
4 (M-3, B-1) 
Crop cultivation 
2 (W-1, G-1) 
Livestock care 
10 (M-6, B-4) 
Trade/ commerce 
10 (W-10hrs) 
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily 
(hours) 
Assistance to disadvantaged persons 
1 (W-1) 
Cultural/ 
religious 
ceremonies 
(births, 
marriages & burials) 
2 (W-1,G-1) 
Community meetings 
2 (M-1, W-1) 
Other (political involvement) 
6 (M-6hrs) 
HOUSEHOLD ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Leadership 
12 (M-12hrs) 
Maintenance & repair of house 
3 (M-1, W-1,B-1) 
Family care 
12 (W-6hrs, G-6hrs) 
Child care 
12 (W-6hrs, G-6hrs) 
Hygiene 
12 (W-6hrs, G-6hrs) 
Health-related issues 
2 (M-1, -1) 
Collecting fuel wood 
4 (W-2, G-2) 
Assuring water supply 
2 (W-1, G-1) 
Buying/ sourcing of food 
5 (M-2, W-3) 
Food preparation 
1 (W-1) 
ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Formal sector employment 
8 (M-4hrs, W-4hrs) 
Informal sector activities 
8 (M-4hrs, W-2hrs, B-2hrs) 
Other

=== PAGE 168 ===
50 
 
9.3.3 Access and Control Profiles 
Presented below are the Access and Control Profiles for Tharaka Nithi, Kitui and Tana River 
Counties. In Tharaka Nithi County, men and women use most of the resources, but control of most 
of the resources is taken by men. Only water and crops are owned by women. 
Similarly, in Kitui County, both men and women use most of the resources. Control of most of the 
resources is taken by men, but women also control some resources, particularly water and crops. 
In Tana River County, men access and control almost all the resources, except water, which is 
accessed and controlled by women. 
THARAKA NITHI COUNTY 
In Tharaka Nithi County, Women have access to utilization of resources namely: land, Water, 
Livestock (Milking), Crops, Shelter (Houses), Farming tools and other economic resources. 
However, the same women do not have control over these resources. The men have overall control 
these resources. This places women in a vulnerable position in terms of Gender equality because 
they lack the power and position to make decisions and influence power dynamics in the household 
level. By controlling ownership of resources, the man automatically controls power and decision 
making in the household. 
NB: Women have a unique control and ownership of water and crops. This means that women 
gender status can be improved by leveraging on their opportunity to control what is cultivated and 
sold in the market as surplus. The surplus produce will bring income and enable them to participate 
in welfare groups, SHGs and CBOs. They are also able to take up collateral loans using crops sold 
in the market. 
Table 19: Access and Control Profiles for Tharaka Nithi 
RESOURCES 
ACCESS 
(use) Men 
ACCESS 
(use) Women 
CONTROL 
(ownership) Men 
CONTROL (ownership) 
Women 
Land 
 
 
 
 
Water 
 
 
 
 
Livestock 
 
 
 
 
Crops 
 
 
 
 
Shelter 
 
 
 
 
Tools/ equipment 
 
 
 
 
Economic 
resources 
(credit, cash income) 
 
 
 
 
Education 
 
 
 
 
Health 
 
 
 
 
Community leadership 
 
 
 
 
Political 
representation 
 
 
 
 
Other

=== PAGE 169 ===
51 
KITUI COUNTY 
In Kitui County, Women have access to utilization of resources namely: land, Water, Livestock 
(Milking), Crops, Shelter (Houses), Farming tools and other economic resources. However, the same 
women do not have control over these resources. The men have overall control these resources. 
This places women in a vulnerable position in terms of Gender equality because they lack the power 
and position to make decisions and influence power dynamics in the household level. By controlling 
ownership of resources, the man automatically controls power and decision making in the household. 
NB: Women have a unique control and ownership of water and crops. This means that women 
gender status can be improved by leveraging on their opportunity to control what is cultivated and 
sold in the market as surplus. The surplus produce will bring income and enable them to participate 
in welfare groups, SHGs and CBOs. They are also able to take up collateral loans using crops sold 
in the market. 
Table 20: Access and Control Profiles for Kitui County 
RESOURCES 
ACCESS 
(use) Men 
ACCESS 
(use) Women 
CONTROL 
(ownership) Men 
CONTROL 
(ownership) 
Women 
Land 



Water 



Livestock 



Crops 



Shelter 



Tools/ equipment 



Economic 
resources 
(credit, cash income) 



Education 




Health 



Community leadership 




Political representation 




Other

=== PAGE 170 ===
52 
TANA RIVER COUNTY 
Compared to other counties mentioned above, Women here are most marginalized and affected 
when it comes to access and control of resources. Tana River Women have only access to one 
resource: water and no control over all resources. They have the least power to influence decisions 
at household and community level compared to other counties. This is a highly male dominated 
community with Women at the bottom echelons of decision making and development.  
NB: The project should raise awareness of access and control of resources through the county 
government act and devolution structures at county government.  
Table 21: Access and Control Profiles for Tana River County 
RESOURCES 
ACCESS 
(use) Men 
ACCESS 
(use) Women 
CONTROL 
(ownership) Men 
CONTROL 
(ownership) 
Women 
Land 


Water 


Livestock 


Crops 


Shelter 


Tools/ equipment 


Economic 
resources 
(credit, cash income) 


Education 


Health 


Community leadership 


Political representation 


Other 
9.3.4 Opportunities and Constraints 
Opinions on factors that presented opportunities or acted as constraints to both women and men 
were sought, and are presented below for the Counties of Tharaka Nithi, Kitui and Tana River. 
THARAKA NITHI COUNTY 
Key opportunities: Education, leadership and political representation, strong traditional marriage 
culture, many self-help groups and CBOs for Women.  
Constraints: Strong cultural beliefs about a woman as a homemaker, lethargy by women to take up 
leadership positions even after devolution. For men, inadequate climate smart agriculture skills, lack 
of business skills and marketing opportunities in agriculture, Miraa culture and drug use.

=== PAGE 171 ===
53 
 
Table 22: Opportunities and Constraints in Tharaka Nithi County 
Women 
Men 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Education 
Cultural factors – beliefs of 
women as home makers 
Entrepreneurship 
Unemployment 
Community 
leadership/ 
political 
representation 
Girls are a source of wealth to 
parents therefore married off 
early 
Construction 
raw materials 
and related 
activities 
No ready market 
for products 
Entrepreneurship 
Inadequate funds to pay 
school fees 
Crop farming 
activities & 
fertile agro-
ecological 
zones 
Lack of business 
oriented skills and 
knowledge to 
produce and 
market more 
 Affirmative action- 1/3 
Gender Rule-
Constitution 
Belief and perception that 
women are incapable of 
doing things 
Numerous rivers and 
streams harbouring 
fish 
Lack of financial 
capital resources 
to explore fishing 
opportunity 
  Strong traditional 
marriage culture has 
strengthened the 
marriage institution 
Globalization – time pressure/ 
shifts and relocation of offices to 
towns/ cities/ other countries 
creates a barrier for women with 
families and working spouses 
Potential non- 
wood forest 
products high  
Skilled worker 
shortage 
 More women 
education and job 
promotion opportunities 
Workplace discrimination/ 
prejudice – top management 
claims that women don’t desire 
to excel in their current job 
positions 
A big population is 
made up of youth who 
have finished form Four. 
Inadequate 
technical 
institutions 
Most Self-Help groups 
and CBOs formed by 
Women 
Lack of business oriented skills 
and knowledge 
 Practice Sustainable 
agriculture 
Inadequate 
knowledge and skills 
on climate smart 
agriculture

=== PAGE 172 ===
54 
KITUI COUNTY 
Table 23: Opportunities and Constraints in Kitui County 
Women 
Men 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Community based 
enterprises 
Cultural bias 
Leadership control 
Illiteracy 
Community based 
organizations 
Weak mechanisms of 
information dissemination 
Community based 
enterprises 
Weak mechanisms of 
information dissemination 
Cooperatives 
Illiteracy 
Community based 
organizations 
  Lack of 
entrepreneurship skills 
Women Enterprise 
Fund 
Inadequate economic 
power 
Cultural recognition 
and acceptance 
about wood carving 
  Deforestation and 
disappearance of 
preferred trees for carving 
Affirmative Action 
Plan 
 Men traditionally view 
women as subordinates 
TANA RIVER COUNTY 
Table 24: Opportunities and Constraints in Tana River County 
Women 
Men 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Business entrepreneurship 
Illiteracy 
and 
low 
leadership capacity 
Availability of natural 
resources within the 
County 
Alcoholism/ drug and 
substance 
abuse 
among young men 
Table banking for women 
Lack of capital to do 
business 
Devolution will create 
job opportunities 
Global climatic change 
leading to deterioration 
of crop produce 
Socio-economic 
activities, 
e.g. agri- business 
Restrictive 
cultural 
and religious beliefs 
that Women should 
not take the lead but 
Men should in such 
businesses 
Upscaling 
of 
cash 
transfer 
for 
elderly 
persons 
Community sees as an 
undignified way for the 
elderly to receive help 
and 
unsustainable 
lifestyle 
Devolution 
(governance 
system) 
has 
created 
opportunities 
for 
women 
leadership in the County 
Women 
still 
view 
themselves as lesser 
men and can’t take 
elective positions 
Cash for Asset i.e 
terracing, livestock 
Most men and boys are 
unwilling to do hard 
work. Prefer sitting idle 
and chewing miraa

=== PAGE 173 ===
55 
Women 
Men 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Untapped 
natural 
resources available within 
the County, e.g. river sand, 
water 
source, minerals, 
etc. 
Lack 
of 
empowerment 
in 
leadership 
and 
governance 
County development 
project and planning 
platforms 
Lack of capital due to 
poverty levels 
Access 
to 
micro-finance 
facilities for loans/ borrowing 
(Women Fund and County 
Devolved Fund) 
No gender equality 
and parity in sharing 
or 
distribution 
of 
resources 
Microfinance 
enterprises for loan 
borrowing 
Large 
extended 
family burden 
Women 
venturing 
in 
crafting 
skills/ 
basket 
weaving industry 
Climate change and 
inflation 
of 
the 
economy 
has 
a 
negative 
effect 
on 
women 
Establishment/ 
construction of new 
business markets in 
the sub- Counties 
Limited 
resources 
from 
the 
County 
government 
to 
support 
income 
generating projects 
Participating 
in 
Self-Help
groups 
and 
CBOs, 
table 
banking etc. 
The burden of child 
bearing 
and 
family 
care 
The presence of 
minor 
irrigation 
schemes 
Political bad will 
1/3 Gender rule- devolution 
and constitution 
Lack of participation/ 
decision making in 
development 
projects in the county 
High child birth rate because of 
traditional culture that practices 
natural family planning 
HIV/AIDS 
and 
maternal/ 
child 
health care is a 
burden 
9.4 Chyulu Hills Landscape Site 
Presented below are the Activity Schedules for Taita Taveta County. Information for Makueni and 
Kajiado Counties was not available by the time of preparation of this report. In Taita Taveta County, 
men are primarily engaged in livestock care and formal sector employment under economic 
activities, participate in most community activities, and maintain/ repair the house as well as provide 
leadership of the home. Women are involved in most economic activities except livestock care, as 
well as most community and household activities. Boys and girls are involved in land clearing and 
crop cultivation only.

=== PAGE 174 ===
56 
 
9.4.1 Activity Schedules 
9.4.1.1 TAITA TAVETA COUNTY  
Land clearing and crop cultivation is carried out by Women, Boys and Girls while livestock care is 
done by Men.  
Table 25: Activity Schedules for Taita Taveta County 
ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Land clearing 
 
 
 
8 (W-4, B-2, G-2) 
Crop cultivation 
 
 
 
6 (W-3, B-2, G-1) 
Livestock care 
 
8 (M-8hrs) 
Trade/ commerce 
 
8 (W-8hrs) 
Formal sector employment 
 
 
8 (M-5hrs, W-3hrs) 
Informal sector activities 
 
4-(W-4hrs) 
Other 
 
 
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Assistance to disadvantaged 
persons 
 
1 (W-1hr) 
Cultural/ religious ceremonies 
(births, marriages & burials) 
 
 
5 (M-3hr, W-2hrs) 
Community meetings 
 
 
4 (M-2, W-2) 
Other (political involvement) 
 
3 (M-3hrs) 
 
HOUSEHOLD ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Leadership 
 
 
18 (M-12hrs, W-6hrs) 
Maintenance & repair of house 
 
0.5 (M-0.5) 
Family care 
 
16 (W-16hrs) 
Child care 
 
14 (W-14hrs)

=== PAGE 175 ===
57 
HOUSEHOLD ACTIVITIES 
Men 
Women 
Boys 
Girls 
Time spent daily (hours) 
Hygiene 
4 (W-4hrs) 
Health-related issues 
1 (W-1hr) 
Collecting fuel wood 
2 (W-2hr) 
Assuring water supply 
4 (W-4hr) 
Buying/ sourcing of food 
3 (W-3hrs) 
Food preparation 
6 (W-6hrs) 
9.4.2 Access and Control Profiles 
Presented below are the Access and Control Profiles for Taita Taveta County. Men are able to 
access all resources, while women are also able to access most resources, except livestock, 
shelter, economic resources, community leadership and political representation. On the other 
hand, men control all the resources except water and crops, while women control water, crops, 
education and health. 
TAITA TAVETA COUNTY 
Women have access to utilization of resources namely: land, Water, Livestock (Milking), Crops, 
Shelter (Houses), Farming tools and other economic resources. However, the same women do 
not have control over these resources. The men have overall control these resources. This 
places women in a vulnerable position in terms of Gender equality because they lack the power 
and position to make decisions and influence power dynamics in the household level. By 
controlling ownership of resources, the man automatically controls power and decision making 
in the household. 
NB: Women have a unique control and ownership of water, education, health and crops. This 
means that women gender status can be improved by leveraging on their opportunity to control 
what is cultivated and sold in the market as surplus, water, education and health.  
Table 26: Access and Control Profiles for Taita Taveta 
RESOURCES 
ACCESS 
(use) Men 
ACCESS 
(use) 
Women 
CONTROL 
(ownership) Men 
CONTROL 
(ownership) 
Women 
Land 



Water 



Livestock 


Crops 



Shelter 


Tools/ equipment 



Economic 
resources 
(credit, cash income) 


Education 




Health 




Community leadership 


Political representation 


Other

=== PAGE 176 ===
58 
 
9.4.3 Opportunities and Constraints 
Opinions on factors that presented opportunities or acted as constraints to both women and 
men were sought, and are presented below for Taita Taveta County. 
TAITA TAVETA COUNTY 
Table 27: Access and Control Profiles for Taita Taveta 
Women 
Men 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Opportunities 
Constraints 
Alternative livelihoods 
Access to capital 
Use of land optimally 
Land use plans 
Alternative technology 
Capacity building 
Animal user rights 
Access methods for 
animal user rights 
Increase in safe use of 
biodiversity 
Access 
to 
markets 
Artisanal mining 
Unfair 
trade 
practices 
Cottage industries 
Access to post 
harvest storage 
Livestock 
rearing 
(commercial) 
Inadequate technical 
skills 
for 
formal 
employment 
Sale of agricultural produce 
Technology 
enhancement 
Formal employment 
Low 
access 
to 
capital 
Formal employment 
Lack of technical 
skills 
Large scale mining 
Low 
technical 
knowledge 
Tour guiding 
 Gender 
based 
violence 
and 
traditional beliefs 
Tourism enterprises 
Alcohol 
and 
drug 
abuse 
Safer use/ refuse recycling 
 Weak 
enforcement 
of 
laws and by laws 
Conservation as a business 
Lack 
of 
climate 
smart agriculture 
Alternative 
packaging 
materials, leading to access 
to markets 
 Competition 
from 
other 
markets 
Grazing in ranches 
 Lack of rangeland 
management 
practices 
Arts and crafts 
 Lack of market 
Construction industry 
 
Exploitation of clean energy, 
leading to access to capital 
and technical know-how 
Lack of financing 
capital 
Exploitation of clean energy, 
leading to access to capital 
and technical know-how 
 Lack of financing 
capital

=== PAGE 177 ===
59 
 
Table 28: Gender domains relationships across landscapes 
Domains 
 Moyale-Wajir 
North 
Banisa 
Hills 
Landscape Site 
Sabarwawa 
Land 
Scape Site 
Mid Tana River 
Landscape Site 
Chyulu 
Hills 
Landscape Site 
Access 
economic assets, 
Women support the 
Men in land clearing 
however most of their 
daily time is spent on 
family care related 
activities. 
access to utilisation 
of resources but 
limited control.  
Woman both 
take part in 
earning income 
for the family 
with majority of 
men employed 
in formal jobs 
access to 
utilisation of 
resources but 
limited control. 
Knowledg
e, beliefs 
& 
perceptio
ns 
unequal education or 
knowledge, land is 
owned by men, mostly 
a patriarchal society, 
women and girls 
viewed as less 
important to get 
education compared to 
men.     
unequal education 
or knowledge, land 
is owned by men, 
mostly a patriarchal 
society, women and 
girls viewed as less 
important to get 
education 
compared to men.    
beliefs about a 
woman as a 
homemaker, 
lethargy by 
women to take 
up leadership 
positions 
have unequal 
education or 
knowledge, land is 
owned by men, 
mostly a 
patriarchal society 
Practices 
& 
participati
on 
enrolment and high 
drop-out rates in 
schools for girls, girls 
travel long distances in 
search of fuel wood 
and water 
culturally allowed to 
take care of young 
livestock, land, 
crops and farming 
tools 
a unique control 
and ownership 
of water and 
crops, women 
and men 
participate in 
welfare groups, 
SHGs and 
CBOs 
culturally allowed 
to take care of 
land, crops and 
farming tools 
Time and 
space 
domestic chores & take 
care of children-time 
poverty is a big issue 
all domestic chores 
& take care of 
children, cattle 
rustling, and cattle 
raiding is common. 
FGM is common. 
perform all 
domestic chores 
& take care of 
children, cattle 
rustling, and 
cattle raiding is 
common. FGM 
is common. 
all domestic chores 
& take care of 
children- time 
poverty is a big 
issue 
Legal 
rights 
lack title deeds with 
women being majority. 
Women have less 
control over land 
resources 
control over land 
resources.  
less control over 
land resources 
and lack title 
deeds or the 
right to own land 
less control over 
land resources and 
lack title deeds or 
the right to own 
land 
Power & 
decision 
making 
control of land with 
80% land used as 
grazing land by the 
pastoralists majority 
being men, Customary 
law, cultural attitudes 
and rigidity to gender 
roles overburden 
women 
and position to 
make decisions and 
influence power 
dynamics in the 
household  
less control of 
land and lack 
title deeds, 
Customary law, 
cultural attitudes 
and rigidity to 
gender roles 
overburden 
women 
less control of land 
and livestock with 
land used for crop 
farming and 
livestock grazing 
land by the 
pastoralists 
majority being 
men.

=== PAGE 178 ===
60 
11 Legal and Administrative Framework 
Protecting Women and Protecting Gender 
Equality 
11.1 Legal framework Protecting Women Gender Equality 
Since its adoption in 1994, the UNCCD has been recognized as the only multilateral agreement 
on the environment that addresses gender issues, because of its explicit focus on the roles of 
women (Poulsen, 2003). Though many countries have implemented activities to foster women’s 
empowerment or gender mainstreaming as part of their national action programmes, others 
have not yet developed plans to promote gender equality. The Millennium Development Goals 
and the International Year of Deserts and Desertification urge governments to take action on 
reducing poverty and promoting gender equality. The Millennium Declaration has reconfirmed 
the commitment to gender equality already embodied in the Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing Platform of Action and presents 
new opportunities to link solutions to poverty with gender equality. In addition, Kenya is party 
to various international and regional gender instruments, which demonstrates the 
Government’s commitment to attaining gender equity and equality. These instruments include 
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW); the 
Beijing Platform for Action; the AU Heads of State Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in 
Africa; and the Optional Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the 
Rights of Women in Africa. 
On 27th August 2010, Kenya promulgated a new constitutional dispensation. This was hailed 
as the second republic. It ended the 20 years old struggle by Kenyan’s clamouring for a new 
constitutional order. It among other things brought in recognition women’s rights as human 
rights. The principle of equality and non-discrimination is established as a core value of 
leadership. The decentralization of power created 47 County governments this has 
revolutionized leadership at the lower level, bringing many women into public leadership space. 
Other additional gains for women from the 2010 Constitution include: 

Equality in leadership with 33% as the critical mass preferred for women leadership

Equality in marriage

Equality in employment

Equality in access to education

All discriminatory customary practices are prohibited

Matrimonial property is protected

Women rights to inheritance and to own land is guaranteed

Equal parental responsibility

Requirement for both public and private entities to comply with the inclusion principles
and gender.
The Constitution of Kenya (2010) under the Bill of Rights (Chapter 4) recognizes the rights and 
fundamental freedom of all citizens, and guarantees equality and freedom from discrimination 
on any ground, including sex. Furthermore, Article 27 in the Bill of Rights stipulates that women 
and men have the right to equal treatment including the right to equal opportunities in political, 
economic, cultural and social spheres. 
The Government has established various institutions with specific mandates to promote gender 
equality and equity and empowerment of women and men in the development process. These 
include the Directorate of Gender in the Ministry of Devolution and Planning, National Gender 
and Equality Commission (NGEC), Kenya National Human Rights Commission (KNHRC) and 
the Anti–Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) Board. Gender equality and empowerment of women

=== PAGE 179 ===
61 
is a priority in Vision 2030 and the 2nd Medium Term Plan.  Some interventions in these policy 
documents are being implemented through the Ministry of Devolution and Planning. They 
include: Finally, to promote the realization of gender equality and empowerment of women 
whilst also tracking progress in the realization of the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5 
(Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls); Majority of County Health Services 
have since established a gender mainstreaming committee which has further developed gender 
mainstreaming guidelines to fast track the purpose of gender mainstreaming within the County 
Health Services and hence achieving the County’s vision of a city of choice for all to invest, 
work and live. 
11.2 Institutional Framework to promote gender equality and 
freedom from Discrimination 
In order to facilitate implementation of gender equality and freedom from discrimination, the 
government has put in place the State Department of Gender under the Ministry of public 
service, Youth and Gender with the full mandate to:  
•
Institutionalize gender mainstreaming in ministries, departments and agencies as well
as in the devolved county level and private sector;
•
Promote the development and review of gender policies and legislations
•
Promote research, collection and analysis, storage and dissemination of sex
disaggregated data to inform programming
•
Coordinate programmes for reduction of Sexual and Gender Based Violence (SGBV)
•
Oversee the implementation of socio-economic empowerment for the benefit of women
and youth
•
Set standards to build the capacity of National and County level actors, monitor
compliance and report on progress in ensuring accountability on equality and non-
discrimination.
The Constitution established an independent commission, the National Gender and Equality 
Commission with the mandate to promote gender equality and freedom from discrimination and 
to hold the government accountable on implementation. At parliamentary level, two female 
parliamentary caucuses are in existence. These are the Kenya Women Parliamentarians 
Association - KEWOPA and the Kenya Women Senators Association-KEWOSA. The two 
contribute to Parliament’s work in the area of integrating gender into laws and policies. Similar 
caucuses are also established in the 47 County Assemblies. 
Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), private sector and religious organizations are also 
responsible for both implementation and act as accountability bodies in measuring service 
delivery on the not more than two third gender principle. It would be important to anchor the 
gender-mainstreaming mandate within a specific parliamentary committee for effectiveness. In 
the 11th parliament the Labour and Social Welfare Committee was charged with the 
responsibility of gender equality but its engagement was only limited to discussing budgets. 
The Kenyan poverty levels are very high with women bearing the brunt. Women are unable to 
access credit that requires collateral which majority do not have. Feminization of poverty is 
experienced across all regions. Women with disability and women with HIV and AIDS suffer 
the consequences. The Government of Kenya has put in place various programmes to 
empower women to overcome poverty, access leadership, begin businesses and live decently. 
The programmes include gender mainstreaming, affirmative action and gender responsive 
budgeting. There are special catalytic funds dedicated to women, persons with disabilities and 
the youth for development programmes. These are: -

=== PAGE 180 ===
62 
a)
Women Enterprise Fund (WEF) that provides micro-finance credit and other financial
support for women;
b)
The Youth Enterprise Development Fund (YEDF) that provides credit for young men
and women to enable them establish businesses to earn a living aimed at reducing
unemployment;
c)
The Uwezo fund (Kiswahili word for Ability) that empowers women, persons with
disabilities and youth that give seed money to the special interest groups as startup
capital for businesses. It gives up to 5000 USD to one group.
d)
The Social Protection Fund is given as credit and cash transfers to older members of
society and people with severe disability. The target is for senior citizens beyond age
65 years.
e)
30% procurement reservation affirmative action to Special Interest Groups (SIG)
that include women, persons with disabilities and the youth. The SIG access 30 % value
of all all-public procurement tenders
f)
There is the national Government Affirmative Action Fund, established in 2015
administered through female members of parliament to run programs targeting socio-
empowerment of women, youth, persons with disabilities, children and elderly persons.
g)
The Performance Contracts for all Ministries, Departments and Agencies have also
incorporated gender mainstreaming targets.
h)
In ensuring accountability on equality and non-discrimination, the Constitution
established an independent commission, the National Gender and Equality
Commission with the mandate to promote gender equality and freedom from
discrimination and to hold the government accountable on implementation.

=== PAGE 181 ===
63 
12 Resilience of communities dependent on 
drylands ecosystems which are vulnerable 
to climate change 
Dryland communities rely highly on ecosystem services, both directly and indirectly, to secure 
their livelihoods.  The same ecosystems face a myriad of threats from urbanisation, expansion 
of unsustainable farming settlements, degraded fragile soils and effects of climate change 
(UNDP, 2009). The livestock sector in Africa, for example, is being affected by climate change, 
leading to a decline in feed and fodder production, water availability and increased disease 
prevalence in drylands (WISP, 2010).  
To survive these changing trends, pastoralists employ a number of highly resilient climate 
change strategies to safeguard their herds in the face of unpredictable and sometimes extreme 
climatic events, disease outbreaks and social unrest. These resilience strategies try to promote 
the rational use of the natural resource base on which the herds depend on while building strong 
social networks (Hesse and MacGregor, 2006): 
Some of these strategies include: 

Building up herd size as insurance against times of hardship.

Splitting herds across different locations and movement patterns to spread risks from
lack of grazing and exposure to diseases etc

Keeping different species and breeds to make use of different ecological niches;

Selecting animals for different traits that enable survival in prevalent conditions;

Loaning surplus animals to family and friends for their subsistence requirements and
building of their herd, to develop and strengthen social relations as a form of social
capital.

Matching the number of animals to the availability of natural pastures and water.
Although pastoralist livelihood strategies are adaptive to changing climates vis a vis dynamic 
mobility in search of water and pasture, this mobility is declining over the years and undermining 
community resilience and their vulnerability.  (Dasgupta et al, 2014). When establishing water 
points, planners have overtime failed to consider the routes of traditional migration pathways 
for livestock. This has caused increased land degradation in surrounding areas (IFAD, 2009). 
Secondly conflict, cross-border or quasi-traditional conflicts due to raiding of livestock are other 
stressors, which increase vulnerability to drought and put pressure on supporting ecosystems 
(Morton, 2007).  
Increasing population pressure can also undermine the self-sufficiency of pastoral communities 
(IFAD, 2009). For African pastoralists, all members of the family have to contribute to the family 
unit’s livelihood security. The vulnerability of pastoralists to climate change is ‘induced 
vulnerability’, (Krätli et al., 2013). In other words, it is not an inherent vulnerability, but the result 
of external multiple pressures – social, economic, environmental and political – which lead to 
‘encroachment on rangelands; inappropriate land policy; undermining of pastoral culture and 
values; and economic policies promoting uniformity and competition over diversity and 
complementarity’ (IPCC, 2014, p637).  
Many drylands suffer from conflicts and insecurity: 80 percent of major armed conflicts occur 
within their borders, which adds to existing vulnerabilities (Middleton et al, 2011). Short-lived 
insecurity can exacerbate existing vulnerabilities, and there are also longer-term conflicts which 
can undermine the achievement of development goals (Middleton, et al, 2011). The mobility 
which is so important to pastoralist ways of life also makes them vulnerable to conflict or a fear 
of conflict, which can impede their access to markets and to critical natural resources (IFAD, 
2009).

=== PAGE 182 ===
64 
 
Pressures on land and natural resources, plus increasing poverty have led to increased 
livestock raiding as pastoralists seek to secure bride wealth payments (Kipuri and Ridgewell, 
2008).  
In northern Kenya a range of coping strategies for responding to drought and longer-term 
adaptive strategies can be identified (Morton, 2007), including:  
1) Mobility, herd accumulation  
2) Multi-species herds to exploit different ecological niches 
3) The combined labour of men, women and children’ 
4) Informal savings and credit mechanisms through shopkeepers and bank accounts 
5) Use of supplementary feed for livestock and intensification of animal disease 
management via both indigenous and scientific methods 
6) Payment for water from powered boreholes  
7) Livelihood diversification such as charcoal production  
8) Intracommunity mechanisms for sharing livestock products  
9) Use of live animals to assist the poorest although this may be declining as risk levels 
rise within communities.

=== PAGE 183 ===
65 
13 Resilience as demonstrated in the project 
area 
The resilience analysis was carried out for the initially identified four project landscapes namely 
Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills; Sabarwawa; Mid Tana River; and Chyulu Hills.  These 
landscapes were reduced to two landscapes namely 1) the Mid Tana River and Sabarwawa 
landscapes and the 2) Chyulu Hills landscape. 
More threats as well as specific coping strategies are presented in the tables below for each of 
the project intervention areas. 
13.1.1 Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills Landscape Site 
Table 29: Moyale-Wajir North Banisa Hills Landscape Site 
Marsabit 
Wajir 
Mandera 
County 
faces 
drought 
and 
floods. County has a high 
ranking in Climate Change 
Variability Index (CCVI) with 
0.39 for exposure, 0.25 for 
sensitivity and 0.31 for adaptive 
capacity. 
Measures 
include 
traditional 
early 
warning 
systems, 
advocacy 
campaigns, 
and 
county 
information 
sharing 
forums. 
County 
experiences 
floods, 
droughts, fires, soil erosion, 
desertification, 
HIV/AIDS, 
terrorism and conflicts. 
CCVI of 0.43 
County 
experiences 
floods, 
droughts, and diseases. 
13.1.2 Sabarwawa Land Scape Site 
Table 30: Sabarwawa Landscape Site 
Samburu 
Isiolo 
Marsabit 
County 
faces 
constant 
threats 
of 
drought, wildfires and cattle rustlers. 
Measures include the provision of relief 
food 
(WFP), 
quick 
reporting 
fire 
incidents, provision of security by arming 
home guards and police reservists, as 
well as precautionary measures that 
include encouraging pastoralists to 
dispose of their animals when an early 
warning alert is issued 
County 
experiences 
floods, droughts, fires, 
soil 
erosion, 
desertification, 
HIV/AIDS, terrorism and 
conflicts. 
County 
faces 
drought 
and 
floods. County has a high 
ranking in Climate Change 
Variability Index (CCVI) with 
0.39 for exposure, 0.25 for 
sensitivity and 0.31 for adaptive 
capacity. 
Measures 
include 
traditional 
early 
warning 
systems, advocacy campaigns, 
and county information sharing 
forums.

=== PAGE 184 ===
66 
 
13.1.3 Mid Tana River Landscape Site 
Table 31: Mid Tana River Landscape Site 
Counties 
Isiolo 
Meru 
Tharaka 
Nithi 
Kitui 
Garissa 
Tana River 
County faces 
drought, 
floods, water 
and vector-
borne 
diseases, 
scarcity of 
portable water, 
land 
degradation 
and 
desertification. 
County faces 
drought, erratic 
rainfall and 
increase in 
temperatures. 
Measures taken 
include 
reforestation & 
reclamation of 
wetlands, 
community 
sensitization 
and the 
implementation 
of various Acts 
of Parliament 
that enhance 
forest and 
natural 
resource 
conservation, 
e.g. 
Environment 
Management & 
Coordination 
Act, Kenya 
Forest Service 
Act, Water Act, 
among others. 
County 
faces floods, 
droughts, 
forest fires, 
border 
conflicts, 
bandits and 
increased 
spread of 
water-borne 
diseases, 
such as 
malaria and 
diarrhoea. 
Measures 
taken 
include the 
promotion of 
rainwater 
harvesting, 
conservation 
agriculture, 
and clean 
energy. 
County faces 
unreliable, 
erratic and 
inadequate 
rainfall, 
persistent and 
more frequent 
drought, 
floods, wild 
fires, famine, 
conflicts, HIV/ 
AIDS and 
increasing 
temperatures. 
Measures 
taken include 
promotion of 
reforestation 
and 
afforestation, 
use of 
drought-
resistant seed 
varieties for 
food, fodder, 
crops & trees, 
formulation of 
policies 
geared 
towards 
climate 
change 
mitigation, 
environmental 
conservation, 
education & 
awareness 
programs, 
sensitization 
and 
enforcement 
of 
environmental 
law, 
harmonization 
of 
environmental 
conservation 
laws, 
promotion of 
renewable 
energy & 
energy saving 
devices, and 
use of modern 
charcoal 
burning 
technology. 
County faces 
increase in 
water 
demand by 
livestock, 
decrease in 
availability of 
feed for 
livestock, soil 
erosion, land 
use changes, 
pests, spread 
of human and 
animal 
diseases. 
Measures 
taken include 
households 
pursuing 
livelihood 
strategies that 
are resilient to 
changing 
climate, 
community-
based 
adaptation, 
identification 
of 
development 
principles to 
guide the 
utilization of 
natural 
resources, 
identification 
of strategic 
responses to 
address 
identified 
challenges, 
strengthening 
of early 
warning 
system, 
afforestation 
programmes, 
and 
restocking/ 
destocking of 
livestock. 
County faces 
droughts, 
flooding, rise 
in sea levels, 
intrusion of 
salt water 
upstream, 
reduced fish 
population in 
the sea, 
drying of the 
ox bow lakes, 
reduced crop 
productivity, 
loss of 
biodiversity, 
changing 
ecosystems, 
conflicts and 
destruction of 
infrastructure. 
Measures 
taken include 
land use 
planning, 
identification 
and projection 
of ecologically 
sensitive and 
fragile areas, 
creation of 
awareness on 
the effects of 
climate 
change & 
embracing 
modern and 
sustainable 
practices/ 
technologies.

=== PAGE 185 ===
67

=== PAGE 186 ===
68 
 
13.1.4  Chyulu Hills Landscape Site 
Table 32: Chyullu Hills landscape Site 
Counties 
Makueni 
Kajiado 
Taita Taveta 
County faces drought and 
famine, 
air 
and 
water 
pollution, reduced forest cover 
due to charcoal burning, soil 
erosion 
due 
to 
sand 
harvesting, road accidents 
(Mombasa Road), human-
wildlife conflict (Tsavo East 
National Park and Chyulu 
Hills), disease epidemics and 
increasingly severe dry spells.  
Measures taken include the 
protection 
of 
hill 
tops, 
regulation of sand harvesting 
and charcoal burning, as well 
as 
initiating 
alternative 
economic activities. 
County faces erratic rains, 
extreme temperatures, and 
cyclic 
and 
prolonged 
droughts. 
Measures taken include tree 
planting, 
control 
of 
soil 
erosion through building of 
gabions, planting of drought 
resistant 
crops 
(e.g. 
cassava, 
sorghum, 
millet 
and early maturing maize 
varieties), 
greenhouse 
farming, 
and 
sinking 
of 
boreholes. 
County faces human wildlife conflict, 
droughts, floods, landslides, HIV/ 
AIDS, drug and substance abuse. 
Measures 
taken 
include 
water 
harvesting 
technologies, 
efficient 
water uses, adoption of Early Warning 
Systems (EWS), awareness and 
education, and introduction of drought 
resistant crop and animal varieties.  
Additional measures include reduced 
exposure 
to 
hazards, 
lessened 
vulnerability of people and property, 
wise management of land and the 
environment, 
and 
improved 
preparedness for adverse events.

=== PAGE 187 ===
69 
 
14 Resilience and Climate Financing 
1. 
Impacts of County level funds on building dryland resilience 
Pre-established county level funds could prove to be versatile mechanisms through which to 
channel dryland projects funding to support community driven development and resilience 
building priorities. Their devolved nature could also make them preferred mechanisms for direct 
access to fund disbursements, supporting the country and county driven focus of resilience. 
Access to such funds will be in accordance with the Kenyan constitution (2010) which grants 
county government’s authority and responsibility for developing the social and economic 
aspects of their county according to local priorities and as per County integrated development 
plans (CIDPS).  
2. 
Building dryland resilience at County level through climate funds 
The devolved climate finance 
The Adaptation Consortium (Ada) is one key institution helping to strengthen the institutional 
arrangements that will enable climate finance from the Green Climate Fund and other sources 
to flow through the National Drought Management Authority to Arid and Semi-Arid Lands 
(ASALs) counties. The County Climate Adaptation fund enables the prioritization of adaptation 
investments by vulnerable communities through representative ward-level institutions. 
At the county level, five Arid and Semi-Arid Counties of Garissa, Isiolo, Kitui, Makueni, and 
Wajir are institutionalizing the County Climate Change Fund (CCCF), formerly known as the 
County Adaptation Fund (CAF) within their county structure by drafting and passing CCCF 
regulations and bills. This is to build their readiness to draw down climate finance from the 
Green Climate Fund (GCF), and other climate finance sources, once the National Implementing 
Entities (NIE) have been accredited. The Department of International Development (UKAID) is 
providing seed money to the CCCF through the Adaptation Consortium within the National 
Drought Management Authority (NDMA). The CAF approach was initially piloted in Isiolo 
County and its success lead to its replication to the other four other counties of Garissa, Kitui, 
Makueni and Wajir (Ada consortium, 2015) 
Box 1: Piloted counties County Climate Adaptation Fund 
Initially piloted in Isiolo County, the approach is now being implemented in four other dryland 
counties of Garissa, Kitui, Makueni and Wajir which in total cover approximately 29% of Kenya’s 
land area and a population of 4 million plus. At the end of the project in 2017, it is expected that 
2.5 million people will be supported to cope with climate change through provision of climate 
information, while 800,000 people will benefit directly from adaptation investments. 
Source: Ada Consortium.  
The CCCF model conforms to the Constitution of Kenya where public participation is a core 
tenet of the fund. Through the participatory approach, local communities are authorized to 
prioritize the type of public investments that will build their resilience to climate change. The 
communities’ priorities are captured in proposals developed by Ward-level Adaptation 
Committees and are assessed by the County-level Planning Committee who strengthens them 
in order to meet the CAF funding criteria. The five counties selected so far are also taking 
advantage of the Kenya’s devolved system of governance to integrate climate change in their 
County Integrated Development Plans (CIDP). County and sub-county legislations and 
regulations are being enacted to integrate climate change in their County Integrated 
Development Plans (CIDP) and county budgets to finance adaptation. The five counties have 
draft CCCF bills and regulations and have already presented them to their respective county 
assemblies for approval. The approval will ensure that the structure adopted is fully owned by 
the county government and can be funded from the county budget. The CCCF bills and 
regulations recognize the participatory role of the communities in determining their prioritized 
investments (Ada consortium, 2015)

=== PAGE 188 ===
70 
 
The Ada consortium is therefore supporting county governments to address this gap through a 
combined approach that consists of four elements intended to strengthen their decentralized 
planning processes of building local resilience:  
3. 
Key Elements Strengthening Decentralized Planning Processes 
1. Establishing County Climate Change Fund (CCCF) – a devolved finance mechanism 
under the authority of each county government that allows climate finance to reach the 
most vulnerable with women and youth involved in decision making across counties 
through the ward and sub-county climate change committees.  
2. Integration of Climate information & resilience assessment into development planning 
and funding process 
3. Monitoring system to track how adaptation builds resilience and strengthens economic 
development 
4. 
Achievements of Decentralised Planning Processes 
The Adaptation Consortium has showcased that climate adaptation planning, supported by 
devolved funds and informed by climate information services, can significantly benefit 
vulnerable people in poor and marginalized dryland households. Key achievements include: 
i. 
Has contributed to transformative change through the enactment of CCCF legislation to 
institutionalize CCCF as public fund by ensuring county planning and budgeting process 
are drawn and incorporate climate finance from national and international sources.   For 
example, the CCCF legislation commits counties to contribute a certain minimum % of 
their development budget to adaptation finance (sustainability), and to empowering local 
people to prioritize majority (70%) of available adaptation finance (context driven, 
inclusion, community oversight). 
This is a huge step in addressing long-term resilience building in dryland counties. 
ii. 
The National Drought Management Authority is pursuing accreditation as NIE for GCF - 
This will institutionalize the process and enable counties to be accredited as Executing 
Entities (EE). 
iii. 
Linkage with national level processes in addition to piloting priority action from National 
Climate Change Action Plan 2013 (i.e. Tracking Adaptation and Measuring Development 
M+E framework), the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) and Ending Drought Emergency 
(EDE) strategy have picked on devolved climate finance and planning as good examples 
for scaling up. 
iv. 
By building capacity of over 1.5 Million vulnerable people in dry lands of Kenya and 
supporting them with climate adapted resilience projects  
v. 
By providing early evidence of effective community engagement (through Ward Adaptation 
Planning Committees) and through the county planning and budget process to deliver 
projects with high adaptation impact and in a cost-effective way (Ada consortium, 2015)

=== PAGE 189 ===
71 
 
15 Gender issues in response to the impact of 
climate change on drylands 
Climate change mitigation measures in the project area could include reforestation, and 
promotion/ development of alternative clean energy sources, while adaptation strategies 
include promotion of drought-resistant and fast maturing crops, agro-pastoralism, construction 
of water pans, institutionalization of traditional natural resource management structures (e.g. 
grazing councils), community education/awareness and diversification of livelihood systems. 
Additional measures include the improvement of livestock breeds, restocking, destocking and 
establishing an Early Warning System. 
• 
Encourage conservation through income generation-Associating credit 
facilities with natural resource management efforts is one of the best ways of 
encouraging rural women and men to take an interest in environmentally sound 
activities.  
• 
Involve local women and men- Local land use management arrangements that 
increase women’s and men’s authority over resources should be promoted, 
indigenous knowledge valued and special attention to local priorities given. This 
demonstrates how local women and men can be empowered and supported to 
assume greater local control over resources 
• 
Awareness raising and education- This should be aimed at attitudinal change in 
bringing about change. For instance, the Burkina Faso, Niger and Senegal field 
experience promoted improved cooking stove designs as a way of combating 
deforestation. Women rejected some of the new stoves because they did not take 
specific technical food preparation factors into account, while other models were 
widely adopted and resulted in dramatic savings in wood biomass. 
• 
Strengthen local institutions- Credit facilities through traditional women’s mutual 
assistance groups are successful in increasing household food security. However, 
local institutions are often not yet strong enough to continue the credit schemes, 
resulting in declining repayment rates and little new activity.  
• 
Promote sustainability- It is essential to promote both empowerment and the 
cultural traits that lead to sustainability. However, focusing on the traditional roles 
in order to improve the sustainability of drylands carries the built-in danger of 
reinforcing gender gaps. 
• 
Improve women’s and men’s access to and control over productive resources, 
such as land, agricultural support services, access to education, markets, etc. Also 
promoting a better access to resources can contribute to women’s and men’s 
empowerment.

=== PAGE 190 ===
72 
 
16 General Findings 
Findings 
The focus and scope of the gender analysis is clustered on 3-4 large scale drought reserves 
that cut across the thirteen county boundaries creating four (4) priority landscape sites for 
coordinated gender analysis namely: Moyale-Wajir North-Banisa Hills, Sabarwawa, Mid Tana 
river and Chyullu Hills. 
Below is a summary of general findings:  
1. Gender discrimination in drylands is a result of an unequal social, cultural and 
economic structure and limited political and organizational influence, which translate 
into marginalisation, poverty, food insecurity and limited access to resources. In 
general, men are responsible for decision-making and the planning of farming activities, 
while women have little authority and have to seek their husbands’ permission before 
they commit family resources or make decisions. Nonetheless, women in dryland areas 
play a key role in natural resource management and achieving food security. They often 
grow, process, manage and market food and other natural resources. They are 
generally responsible for small livestock, vegetable gardens and collecting fuel, fodder 
and water, as well as carrying out their traditional reproductive roles.  
2. In the project areas mentioned above it was generally found out that women’s 
traditional roles are particularly crucial in drylands in terms of natural resource 
management and food security. Men were found to be more responsible for decision-
making and planning of farming activities and livestock management but in other areas, 
they increasingly leave the degraded areas to look for jobs in urban areas, leaving 
women to assume new roles and responsibilities on the farm and rangelands. Women’s 
access to and control over natural resources (such as land) and agricultural support 
services (including credit, extension services, etc.) is often restricted. 
3. Through gender analysis it was observed that women’s limited access to agricultural 
resources and services is caused by a series of social, economic and cultural factors 
that force rural women into a subordinate role and hamper their productivity. As well as 
limiting their participation in decision-making processes and development initiatives. It 
was also clear that customary practices and laws have limited women’s rights to land 
despite legislation that guarantees those rights. Particularly pressing is the issue of 
insecure land tenure that reduces women’s and youth incentives to have no permanent 
rights to the land. Without secure land rights, women and youth have little or no access 
to credit, rural organizations and other agricultural inputs and services. 
4. Field experiences suggest that an interesting social and economic transition is under 
way in drylands of Kenya. An increasing number of households in these drylands are 
relying less on agricultural activities for income and more on off-farm employment (as 
well as on remittances from migrant labour). This has enabled households to meet their 
food security needs in an environment of declining land productivity and, at the same 
time, it reduces the pressure on drylands natural resources. 
5. Smallholders, particularly women, often face difficulties in obtaining credit. This is a 
direct consequence of their lacking ownership to land and to their low involvement in 
development projects and membership in rural organizations. It is crucial for this project 
to promote income-generating activities for women as a vital source of household food 
security. These projects provide women with management and organizational skills 
and empower them through increased revenues and self-esteem.  
6. While men are mostly represented in traditional farmers’ organizations and are the 
recipients of most extension initiatives, this analysis found that establishing and 
supporting women’s groups helps women to improve their own livelihoods. Through

=== PAGE 191 ===
73 
 
these groups, women are able to deal with their problems, voice their concerns and 
increase their confidence. These groups help women to tackle the extreme conditions 
that derive from drylands degradation, including reforestation and irrigation activities 
and overcoming barriers to income-generating activities. 
7. By recognition of the value of indigenous knowledge, as well as women’s and men’s 
roles as innovators regarding dryland conservation and farming techniques, then the 
project should ensure and promote the participation of women and men (as innovators 
and end users) in order to improve tools and techniques aimed at combating 
desertification. Both women and men should be viewed as the agents and beneficiaries 
of change. Involving rural communities, especially the “voiceless”, in resource 
management and in decisions regarding environmentally sound practices and 
techniques is a powerful way to mitigate the conditions and the impact of land 
degradation.  
8. The analysis observed that removal of gender-related barriers for greater access to 
resources was critical. Through a gender perspective eight (8) key issues related to 
access to, and control of resources were identified namely: land tenure, credit, 
education, time, information, awareness raising, decision making, support services and 
markets. The report has identified insecure lands tenure as a key constraint for women 
and youth to make long-term investments in land rehabilitation, conservation and 
maintain soil quality because they have no long-term or permanent rights to the land.  
9. Women usually have even less access to land (and control) than men. Across the 4 
project landscapes it was noted that customary practices and laws that limit women’s 
right to land are deeply entrenched and most of the time subjugate land legislation that 
guarantees women rights to land. Providing credit through traditional mutual assistance 
groups, is one of the best ways of encouraging rural women and men to take an interest 
in dryland management across the counties.  
10. Smallholders, particularly women, often face difficulties in obtaining credit due to lack 
of collateral. There is a need for the project to develop informal sector enterprises and 
alternative livelihood possibilities making credit available to small farmers, especially 
to women and youth. It was also noted that womens’ access to agricultural support 
services has been hampered despite their multiple roles in dryland management. 
Women’s groups have if supported well, are capable of tackling extreme livelihood 
conditions deriving from dryland degradation, including through reforestation and 
irrigation activities. Awareness raising and education concerning desertification can 
lead to changes in attitudes and longer term social change. 
11. It was observed that women in the targeted drylands counties face the difficulty of 
turning surplus products into cash income because of their lack of transport and access 
to markets. Women face particular constraints as marketing infrastructure and 
organizations are rarely geared towards small-scale production or to crops grown by 
women farmers. Project activities that provide women with management and 
organizational skills would help them to participate in decision making processes and 
project activities.  
12. Women living in drylands are particularly concerned as they usually have to walk longer 
distances to collect water and fuel wood and take on more farming responsibilities in 
the absence of men. It is thus important for the project to consider gender strategies 
and activities that free-up women from heavy workloads, such as the search for water 
and fuel wood. This is crucial if they are to spend more time on their gardens, income 
generating activities or dryland conservation agriculture.

=== PAGE 192 ===
74 
 
17 Specific findings in line with Gender 
Analysis Framework 
1. Men control access to most productive assets in Kenya (World Bank 2003). Most 
dryland communities in Kenya share a patriarchal culture in which men own the key 
productive assets such as land, livestock and medium to large businesses. A woman, 
for example, may milk the family cow and sell the milk products, but she could not sell 
the cow itself because it is “owned” by her husband. For dryland conservation, this 
means that activities which include the use of productive resources like land or livestock 
should include men and women in decision-making. Secondly, any proposed land-use 
change relating to dryland conservation should include both local men and women as 
key stakeholders.  
2. Access to credit is a key constraint in improving women’s economic productivity across 
the selected counties. Hence it is important that the project focuses on improving 
women’s access to credit. 
3. Women contribute up to 80% of the food production labor in drylands yet benefit from 
only 7% of the agricultural extension services. Most extension officers are men (85% 
in some provinces), and cultural sensitivities may prohibit men extension agents from 
talking to women farmers in group trainings and community dialogue meetings. For it 
is proposed that the project targets improving women’s access to agricultural inputs. 
4. The project can provide support and partner with Ministry of Gender, Child and Social 
Development’s across key counties still practicing FGM. Program activities that 
eliminate female genital cutting may be an option that would improve the health of girls 
locally. 
5. Illiteracy varies greatly among counties and is highest in the northern counties. There 
is a continuing belief among some men that it is a waste of time to educate girls 
because they will join someone else’s family when they marry and do not need to read 
to do their work. This is a backward belief that is hindering girls and women from not 
getting education. The project should assume a high degree of illiteracy in most areas 
of Kenya and deliberately design a strong communication strategy that will focus on 
verbal communications and visual media more than written media across select 
counties. 
6. Any conservation activity that might result in girls having to go farther to fetch water or 
firewood or that would increase the workload of women and girls in a household may 
negatively impact on the schooling of girls. For this project working with women in 
polygynous unions may require first working with the husbands to gain agreement on 
any proposed activities. The project should target men as “key change agents”.  
7. There is a primary objection across by men to contraceptives especially northern 
frontier counties. Addressing this concern with outreach and education should be part 
of the project activity that include improving access to contraceptives and general 
reproductive health for women and youth in dryland counties. Secondly, the inclusion 
of a focus on nutrition education is important in improving pastoral women’s health and 
indeed that of the wider family. 
8. Rampant cattle rustling and increased insecurity from raiding other communities for 
livestock due to dowry needs and banditry often hinders the participation of women in 
the community and the local economy because of fear of violence. This limits them 
close to home. Dryland initiatives that include protection for wildlife and people may be 
well received by local women. Secondly through dryland conservation initiatives, 
women are able participate in meetings and trainings.   
9. For pastoralists, especially girls, a combination of high-quality and locally relevant 
broadcast programmes, face-to-face teaching would be ideal avenues for raising 
awareness and challenging stereotypes on the many gender issues affecting dryland 
communities.

=== PAGE 193 ===
75 
 
10. Social protection schemes show great promise in supporting vulnerable groups in 
dryland areas and particularly women. This can be implemented by improving women’s 
access to risk management and insurance products. 
11. Promoting income generation for pastoralist women can increase their socio-economic 
position in the household. For example, by linking women to markets for livestock-
related products can promote social and economic empowerment, and can be culturally 
acceptable among most dryland communities. More investment is also needed to 
improve women’s participation in alternative livelihoods, to ensure that their rights and 
interests are recognized 
12. Increased collaboration and partnership with likeminded CSOs, academic institutions 
and the media working on dryland issues can help increase awareness of gender, 
pastoralist, and environmental sustainability issues in the drylands. This awareness 
raising should seek to counter the negative stereotypes of dryland areas to culturally 
revalue them and women’s knowledge and equal rights in particular. In addition, CSOs 
could support gender justice involving whole communities, men, and local leaders, to 
challenge discriminatory social norms and harmful practices. 
13. Women have simultaneous and competing demands for productive (market) and 
reproductive (household) labor time. Time poverty and income poverty often reinforce 
each other. For gender and conservation, this means any activity that adds to a 
women’s time burden may negatively impact other areas of her life. Avoiding such 
activities, reducing them to a minimum, or mitigating them with offsets should be the 
hierarchy of the project.  
14. It is critical for proposed activities to understand and integrate season calendars and 
daily labour time schedules in project design, planning and implementation of local 
activities that reduce the “time poverty” of women. Secondly, time poverty among 
female-headed households is particularly acute. Targeting female-headed households 
in the project can help ensure project benefits are distributed to both poor and better 
off households. Providing offsets greater than the opportunity costs of a new activity is 
critical for female-headed households. In other words, the women have to be clearly 
better off in time or money by participating in a new activity than they would have been 
without the activity. 
15. Sensitivity to the traditional divisions of labor may help to design the project better to 
be more socially acceptable. It is women and girls who collect the drinking water in 
most of Kenya, and as the time needed to fetch water increases, school attendance for 
girls may drop (Nankhuni & Findeis 2004, Ndiritu & Nyangan 2010). Improving drinking 
water quality and quantity may have direct benefits to women and girls in the project. 
16. The new constitution in August 2010 guarantees equal rights regardless of gender, and 
for the first time, customary laws are no longer exempt from constitutional provisions 
against discrimination. The project should build on Kenya’s legal framework for gender. 
This would help to reduce gender inequities in the project area. 
17. Increasing cash income for women is likely to have larger benefits for local human well-
being that doing the same for men.  Secondly, the government has encouraged the 
formation of local women’s groups.  Partnering with a women-orientated groups may 
help ensure women benefit at least as much as men from a conservation initiative.

=== PAGE 194 ===
76 
 
18 Project Specific Recommendations 
18.1 Specific Recommendations 
1) Promote the use of efficient technologies targeting women to increase agricultural 
production, particularly with improved crop varieties and drought-resistant inputs for 
crops and livestock.  
2) Enhance practices and technologies for animal production and health, including 
vaccination and animal health services targeting women and men. 
3) Promote capacity-building activities on proper livestock breeding, as well as agronomic 
practices and agribusiness while using men as key change agents. 
4) Strengthen surveillance mechanisms at county and ward levels to control pests and 
diseases. Hence there is a need to increase investments and resources for 
implementing sustainable disease control programmes and strategies targeting women 
and men in conjunction with the county governments. 
5) In coordination with counties, enforce existing laws governing disease control and 
improve the coverage of vaccination programmes and training of community animal 
health workers (CAHWs) targeting both men and women.  
6) Support targeted Government and community-based organizations in providing animal 
health and production services (e.g. veterinary associations, government veterinary 
extension services and cooperatives) through capacity development of women, CSOs 
and self-help groups (SHGs).  
7) Invest and pilot improved techniques and practices for reducing storage and post-
harvest losses with specific tailored trainings geared towards women.  
8) Invest in improved efficiency of processing and preservation of food products by 
women. These should be particularly related to the marketing of livestock products, and 
support for the development and rehabilitation of livestock infrastructure, such as 
markets and slaughterhouses.  
9) Support women in income-generating activities to enhance the diversification of income 
sources and livelihoods with both on-farm and off-farm productive activities and 
services. This is intended to reduce the impact of negative shocks on households by 
diversifying the risk exposure and mitigating the negative coping strategies employed 
by less resilient households.  
10) Expand access to financial support services targeting women in rural households to 
connect small-scale producers with a variety of savings, loan and grant schemes to 
strengthen and diversify their livelihood base and income potential. This should 
promote small business development by promoting small business development 
matching grants, with a focus on youth and women.  
11) Enhance and design programmes that target gender-based issues and youth to access 
to efficient financial products and services, such as access to credit and market 
information.  
12) Enhance environmental sustainability, and improve natural resource management and 
equitable access to resources through adoption of women centered approaches to 
negotiate and secure access to land, title deeds and contracts.  
13) Enhance participation of women and men in negotiated peace talks as pre-requisites 
for improving the sustainable and equitable use of natural resources (such as land, 
pasture, water, trees, etc.) so as to overcome natural resource-based conflicts.  
14) Enhance participation of women and men in rangeland rehabilitation and management 
while promoting fodder production to improve women access to production land, water 
and pasture for livestock, and can decrease natural resource-based conflicts and 
insecurity. 
15) Facilitate and support community-based management of rangeland and rehabilitation 
through women groups, women organisations and the improvement of rangelands 
through cash-for-work programmes that include women participating.

=== PAGE 195 ===
77 
 
19 Gender Action Plan 
The Gender Action Plan provides entry points for gender‐responsive actions to be taken under each of the activity areas of the Twende project. The plan will 
be refined in the inception phase of the project to more effectively support youth programming and at that point will become a Gender and Youth Action plan.  
The plan identifies the kinds of actions that will be incorporated in to the activities during the development of project work plans in the inception phase of the 
project. In addition an indicative set of indicators have been outlined to measure and track progress on these actions at the activity level.  To avoid developing 
an unwieldy system three or four of the most critical gender responsive indicators identified here will be incorporated into the detailed M&E plan to be developed 
at the start of implementation, where baseline data will be incorporated.  All data collected during implementation of the project will be gender disaggregated 
and subjected to the requisite data quality assessment process.   
In addition to monitoring through collecting indicator data, gender responsiveness of the project will be monitored though a participatory process.  A Gender 
Responsiveness Action Tool (annex 1) will be used to measure gender responsiveness on the project. This tool will be further refined during the inception 
phase. 
A gender task group will be established early in the project drawn from the different institutions of the project.  IUCN will lead that task group that will be 
responsible for implementing the GAP. Training and capacity building on gender and youth programming will be held for all the institutions working on the 
project. Specific support will be provided by IUCN’s Global Gender Office to the gender task group. 
Objective 
Actions 
Indicator 
Responsible Institutions 
 
Activity 1.1 
Establish 
information systems 
to inform climate 
change sensitive 
landscape planning 
and vulnerability/ 
risk management 
 
Identify female beneficiaries who are working in existing 
rangelands- communal or private 
 
Documentation of Gender responsive rangeland resource 
mapping, assessment and management. 
 
Identify the information needs and contributions of both men 
and women to inform a valuable dryland information system, 
and ensure information is differentiated by gender 
 
Ensure knowledge of both women and men inform dryland 
management plans 
 
Identify the different types of tools, training and infrastructure 
needed for men and women to implement dryland management 
plans 
 
Role of women incorporated in the 
information systems to inform 
climate change sensitive 
landscape planning and 
vulnerability management.  
NDMA, MOAI, ICRAF, 
County governments 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1.2 
Strengthen 
community 
institutions to 
coordinate 
community planning 
and to inform and 
 
Integration of gender and the roles/responsibilities around 
community and landscape planning.    
 
Engage women in contributing their unique knowledge to 
community and landscape planning  
 
Ensure the involvement of both men and women rangeland 
management activities, including equal participation in the 
landscape planning processes. 
 
Number of women and men 
engaged in community and 
landscape planning.   
 
Number of men and women 
participating in rangeland 
management activities.  
NDMA, County 
governments, MOAI, 
ICRAF, IUCN

=== PAGE 196 ===
78 
 
Objective 
Actions 
Indicator 
Responsible Institutions 
represent 
stakeholders in 
landscape planning.  
Activity 1.3 Develop 
county rangeland 
restoration plans 
that build on local 
community plans 
combined with 
enhanced climate 
change data. 
 
Ensure men and women are equally engaged in developing 
county rangeland restoration plans 
 
Clearly outline the role of women and the youth developing the 
county rangeland restoration plans. Women and youth involved 
in landscape level planning at county level using the SHARED 
and early warning data to integrate into county planning.  
 
The role of women, men and the 
youth clearly defined in the 
county rangeland restoration 
plans developed.  
 
Number of women and men 
engaged in developing the 
county rangeland restoration 
plans.  
IUCN, NDMA, County 
governments, MOAI 
Women groups/CSOs. 
Activity 1.4 
Establish functioning 
landscape 
management 
mechanisms in 
participating 
counties for climate 
change sensitive 
and accountable 
decision-making 
 
The role of women and youth clearly defined in the inter-county 
forums for landscape planning.  
 
Women and the youth involved in the inter-county forum for 
landscape planning.  
 
Women and the youth participate in the trainings on landscape 
planning and ecosystem management.  
 
Ensure both women and men are participating in committees 
and groups for managing local dryland areas, including 
ensuring women in leadership positions. 
 
Number of men and women 
participating in landscape 
management activities.  
 
Number of men and women 
participating in landscape 
management trainings.  
NDMA, County 
governments, Women 
groups/CSOs, 
Activity 1.5 
Establish 
participatory 
monitoring, 
evaluation and 
learning systems to 
support adaptive 
management 
 
The role of women and youth clearly defined in the annual 
review of the participatory rangeland management plans.  
 
Ensure both men and women in government institutions are 
engaged in training and monitoring of drylands 
 
Define indicators for measuring and monitoring drylands 
(including economic valuation, research and development) 
related to the needs of both men and women, and that are sex 
disaggregated.  
 
Number of women participating 
in the annual review of the 
participatory rangeland 
management plans.  
 
Number of women and men 
involved in trainings and 
monitoring of drylands activities.  
 
Indicators defined for measuring 
and monitoring drylands include 
needs for both men and women.  
IUCN, NDMA, County 
governments, MOAI county 
staff. 
 
 
Activity 2.1 
Implement priority 
community-based 
rangeland 
restoration activities 
 
 
Ensure women contribute to engendered community plans for 
afforestation & reforestation of dryland areas. 
 
Identify best practices to be scaled up based on the 
experiences of both men and women 
 
Identify and carry out best sensitization strategies for both men 
and women  
 
Ensure both men and women are equally engaged in planning 
and implementing restoration activities 
 
Number of women and youth 
participating in planning 
activities for implementing 
restoration activities.  
 
Number of women and youth 
implementing identified 
community based rangeland 
restoration activities.  
Communities, CSO with 
support

=== PAGE 197 ===
79 
 
Objective 
Actions 
Indicator 
Responsible Institutions 
 
Ensure all learning activities are tailored to needs and 
strategies of both men and women. 
Activity 2.2 
Implement priority 
actions for 
integrated 
land/water 
management in 
catchments 
 
 
 
 
Increase adoption of diversified crops for women in target dry 
land communities 
 
Introduce new agricultural practices for both women and men 
drawing on indigenous knowledge strategies from both genders 
 
Identification of agricultural practices that also align with the 
needs and priorities of both men and women 
 
Identify and document indigenous knowledge, practices and 
coping 
mechanisms informed by both men and women 
 
Engagement of both women and men in farmer and water user 
groups, including leadership positions 
 
Engagement of both women and men in learning and 
dissemination of good practices 
 
Develop appropriate climate change adaptation and mitigation 
plans for farmers. 
 
Number of women and youth 
participating in planning 
activities for integrated 
land/water management in 
catchments.  
 
Number of women and youth 
implementing identified actions 
for integrated land/water 
management in catchments. 
NDMA, MOAI, County 
governments, 
Activity 2.3 Install 
community-validated 
strategic water 
sources for 
sustainable 
rangeland utilization 
 
Women groups identified and involved in the restoration and 
construction of critical water infrastructure. 
 
Strengthen the role of existing women groups in participating in 
monitoring networks for water resources.  
 
Training on gender sensitive water harvesting techniques.  
 
Number of women groups 
involved in the restoration and 
construction of critical water 
infrastructure.  
 
Number of female recipients 
participating & benefitting from 
trainings on sensitive water 
harvesting techniques.   
WRA, KWTA, MOAI 
Activity 2.4 Assist 
communities to 
formulate bylaws 
and incorporate into 
county laws 
 
Analyse the role of women and youth in traditional resource 
management structures.  
 
Ensure women involvement in documenting traditional resource 
management arrangements. 
 
The role of women to be clearly included in the legal options 
developed to strengthen customary arrangements.  
 
Documented role of women and 
youth in traditional resource 
management structures. 
 
Number of women participating 
in documenting traditional 
resource management 
arrangements.  
 
Clearly defined role of women 
included in the legal options 
developed to strengthen 
customary arrangements. 
IUCN, County 
governments, NDMA, 
MOAI 
Activity 2.5 Build 
capacity of local 
institutions to 
implement climate-
 
Ensure women and youth involvement in trainings of local and 
customary institutions. 
 
Women involvement in the public dialogue consultations to 
develop a long term rangeland extension strategy.  
 
Number of women and youth 
participating in trainings of/on 
local and customary institutions. 
 
Number of women involved in 
the public dialogue consultations 
MOAI, NDMA, ICRAF, 
IUCN, CSOs,

=== PAGE 198 ===
80 
Objective 
Actions 
Indicator 
Responsible Institutions 
sensitive landscape 
management 

Integration of gender into trainings on interpretation and use of
climate information.
to develop a long term 
rangeland extension strategy. 
Activity 3.1 Invest 
in priority value 
chains that have 
been validated by 
local communities 

Develop improved methods to increase productivity in and
incomes from milk, meat, and skins processing by women
accessing improved gender-responsive technologies

Develop improved management systems for insect pests,
diseases, viruses, and parasitic weeds in cereal/grain cropping
systems by involving the responsible men and women

Develop improved quantity and nutrient quality of feed/fodder
for livestock through gender-sensitive improvement of
feed/fodder preparation and manufacture.

Improved post-harvest, storage, and processing technologies
developed/tested by women, especially for crops, vegetable,
fruits, and dairy, and constraints to adoption
identified/addressed.

Improved conservation agriculture methods to increase
resilience and benefit both men and women without increasing
gender inequity in workloads

Women involvement in strengthening market information
systems through cooperatives.

Women participation in trainings on branding, niche marketing,
quality management and sustainable harvesting of natural
resource.

Number of women and men
engaged and participating in the
implementation of priority value
chains.
CI, CSOs, Womens 
Groups,  
Activity 3.2 Provide 
grants to establish 
for restoration 
enterprises by 
women’s groups 

Establish women groups based grass seed production and
fodder bank enterprises:

Training women and men in grass seed production;

Entrepreneurship training for women;

Grant management training for women and youth;

Allocation of resources for start-up enterprises for both men and
women;

Training on resource mobilization for women and the youth.

Identification of female community members who are interested
in becoming entrepreneurs and setting up businesses

Ensure training/mentoring on business development,
entrepreneurship and innovative finance is provided equally to
both men and women

Identify and provide market infrastructure that is relevant for
both men’s and women’s needs.

Number women and youth
trained in entrepreneurship
activities.

Value of grants provided to
women and youth groups for
start-up activities.
CI, Justdigit, CSOs.

=== PAGE 199 ===
81 
Objective 
Actions 
Indicator 
Responsible Institutions 
Activity 3.3 
Establish financial 
incentive 
mechanism for 
sustainable land 
management 

Involvement of women and youth in the trainings, dialogue and
establishment of community resilience facilities in each
community

Allocation of funds to incentivize community land use plans
should be done equally between men and women, enduring
there are women and youth in leadership positions

Number of women and youth
involved in trainings and
dialogue on community
resilience facility.

Value of funds allocated to
women and youth groups to
incentivize community land use
plans.
IUCN, CI, County 
governments, Women 
groups/CSOs, 
Activity 3.4 Provide 
grants to community-
based enterprises for 
ecosystem based 
adaptation that could 
create opportunities for 
investments in the 
value chains  

Ensure training/mentoring on business development,
entrepreneurship and innovative finance is provided equally to
both men and women

Identify and provide market infrastructure that is relevant for
both men’s and women’s needs.

Number of women and youth
trained / mentored on business
development, entrepreneurship
and innovative finance.

Value of grants provided to
women and youth groups to
support ecosystem adaptation
activities.
CI, private sector support 
groups, County 
governments, Women 
groups/CSOs.

=== PAGE 200 ===
82 
 
20 Annex 1. Gender Responsiveness Action Tool (GReACT) for TWENDE 
Implementation  
The purpose of this tool is to help TWENDE implementing the Gender Action Plan, implement and monitor their interventions in a gender-
responsive manner.  Activities have been grouped according to “type”: e.g., assessments, training, policy advisory, etc.   For each type of activity, 
this tool provides an indication of associated gender-responsive objectives and gender-responsive actions to be taken in preparing and 
implementing these activities.  The actions are further illustrated with examples of concrete methods to carry them out.  The tool will be refined 
in the inception phase of the project. 
 
How to use this tool in a context where activities are both ongoing and new activities are being designed/coming online:  
 Half-day to full day workshop, either with several implementing partners at a time (global to cluster level), or with a single implementing 
partner in order to go into more depth with each. (Alternatively could be conducted over 2 half-day webinar sessions across the partnership.)  
 Session 1 (30 mins): Introduce revised Gender Guidance note and the Gender responsiveness action tool  
Session 2 (90 mins): Group work and discussion on what partners have been doing so far within each type of activity, and using this tool 
to suggest adjustments and practical methods.  Report to plenary and discussion; feedback on possible refinements to the tool to 
make it simple to use/easy to uptake.  
Session 3 (90 minutes): Group work: each IP identifies the set of concrete actions it will incorporate in its workplan.  Share back with plenary 
and discussion.    
Session 4 (45 minutes): Monitoring and reporting on gender-responsive interventions in TWENDE

=== PAGE 201 ===
83 
 
Activities under TWENDE   
Gender responsive  
objectives 
Ex-ante gender-responsive action: 
Practical methods  
(examples) 
Ex-post Learning: 
Grouped by phase of 
implementation 
 
What gender equality 
objectives will this type of 
activity support? 
Is this activity being 
planned/implemented in a gender 
responsive way?  Three or more actions 
are suggested for each type of activity. 
For each activity, the following monitoring 
scale will be used in reporting: 
High gender responsiveness: three or 
more actions are carried out. 
Medium gender responsiveness: at 
least two of the actions are carried out. 
Low gender responsiveness: only one 
action is carried out.   
What are some specific 
methods/mechanisms 
to do this? 
 Was the activity 
successfully 
implemented in a 
gender-responsive 
manner? How, why or 
why not? 
 If not, what can be 
done differently in the 
future to design and 
implement similar 
activities? 
 Are there outcomes or 
early signs of impact 
that can be attributed 
(at least in part) to 
implementing this 
activity in a gender-
responsive way? 
1. Planning phase of Twende 
Activity planning and design 
assessments phase - (e.g.,  
rangeland and water demand 
assessment, community 
governance, household social 
surveys,   
Gender focus questions-   
What is the current situation of 
men and women in the target 
area? 
 
Specific perspectives, 
practices and needs of 
women and women are 
explicitly assessed 
alongside or within 
broader assessment 
objectives 
 
Specific barriers to 
women’s  and men’s 
involvement in or 
benefit from actions is 
 
Assessment incorporates gender 
responsive methods to e.g.  
disaggregate women and men’s 
perspectives, needs, practices, 
institutional participation, etc.  
 
Address/analyse main assessment 
question overall and through a gender 
equality lens, i.e. by considering what 
gender responsiveness issues need to be 
specifically addressed. 
 
Assessment makes recommendations 
on gender-responsive interventions, 
including to overcome historical gender 
 
Convene women’s 
focus groups to 
collect qualitative 
data 
 
Include women 
“heads of HH” in HH 
surveys (And ensure 
women and men 
members of a HH fill 
out the survey 
independently) 
Monitor gender-
responsiveness of 
assessment report: did the 
assessment meet both 
actions?

=== PAGE 202 ===
84 
 
Activities under TWENDE   
Gender responsive  
objectives 
Ex-ante gender-responsive action: 
Practical methods  
(examples) 
Ex-post Learning: 
Will Twende contribute to 
existing inequalities? 
Will Twende challenge the 
existing situation? 
What should Twende do 
differently to strengthen 
gender perspectives? 
identified and included 
in assessment 
 
Women’s and men’s 
knowledge is tapped to 
inform assessments 
biases/gender-based barriers and to 
advance gender equality 
 
 
Conduct sex-
disaggregated data 
collection and gender 
analysis  
2. Activity mobilization and implementation phase 
Establishing/strengthening 
local formal or informal 
institutions (WUAs, NRMCs, 
multi-stakeholder platforms, 
etc.)  
Gender focus questions–  
Are both men and women 
involved in the process of 
Twende project organizations 
development? 
Have any gender issues arisen 
that were not identified at the 
project design? 
 
 
 
Women’s and men’s 
representation and 
meaningful 
participation is 
ensured/promoted 
 
Women’s access to and 
use of the resource are 
treated equitably with 
those of men; women’s 
control over resources 
is considered [and 
enhanced?] in 
comparison to men’s. 
 
Women’s informal/ 
formal institutions are 
also considered, such as 
women’s cooperatives, 
VSLAs, farmers’ 
networks, etc.) 
 
 
Understand existing obstacles, if any, to 
women’s representation and meaningful  
participation in local formal and 
informal institutions 
 
Assist in developing statutes that ensure 
representation of women in governance 
structures 
 
Assist in developing rules and 
procedures that ensure women’s active 
participation in consultation, planning 
and deliberation processes, (including 
for example through liaising with 
women’s groups/networks) 
 
 
Conduct focus group 
interviews with 
women and men to 
learn about potential 
obstacles, if any, to 
women’s 
representation and 
meaningful  
participation 
 
Identify, through 
interviews and 
observation, women 
with leadership 
abilities in the 
relevant 
setting/context 
 
Invite women and in 
particular, identified 
women leaders, as 
well as gender 
champions, to any 
relevant meetings 
Monitor women’s 
experience of collaborative 
planning activities: did 
they feel appropriately 
consulted, included, 
represented, was their 
voice heard?  Did 
participation increase? 
Was it sustained?

=== PAGE 203 ===
85 
 
Activities under TWENDE   
Gender responsive  
objectives 
Ex-ante gender-responsive action: 
Practical methods  
(examples) 
Ex-post Learning: 
convened through 
TWENDE 
 
Organise 
consultations among 
women on how to 
develop rules and 
procedures that will 
be conducive to 
women’s active 
participation in (…) 
Collaborative planning 
activities (e.g., Land use, NRM, 
integrated landscape planning, 
etc., including application of 
collaborative planning tools) 
Gender questions – 
Will the planning process 
involve women and men 
equally? 
Will customary barriers and 
stereotypes affect access to 
resources by women and men? 
Will Twende result in greater or 
fewer resources to male or 
female indirect beneficiaries? 
 
Women’s 
representation and 
meaningful 
participation in 
ensured/promoted 
 
Women’s access to, use 
of, and control over the 
resource are treated 
equitably with those of 
men 
 
 
Ensure that women and women’s 
groups are invited to participate 
 
Include gender issues and gender-
responsive planning in the agenda, 
explicitly (e.g., what issues /barriers do 
women face, and how can planning 
avoid exacerbating gender inequities 
and overcome gender barriers) Support 
women’s participation in decision-
making processes  
 
 
When facilitating, 
actively encourage 
women to speak and 
share their 
perspectives 
 
Identify, through 
interviews and 
observation, women 
with leadership 
abilities in the 
relevant 
setting/context 
 
Invite women and in 
particular, identified 
women leaders,  
including gender 
champions, to any 
relevant meetings 
convened through 
TWENDE 
Monitor women’s 
experience of collaborative 
planning activities: did 
they feel appropriately 
consulted, included, 
represented, was their 
voice heard? 
Training workshops and events 
(e.g., water quality monitoring, 
rangelands restoration, 
 
Women’s 
representation and 
meaningful 
 
Ensure that women and women’s 
groups are invited to participate  
 
Design sessions to 
encourage women’s 
voice: e.g. check 
Monitor women’s and 
men’s experience of 
workshops and training

=== PAGE 204 ===
86 
 
Activities under TWENDE   
Gender responsive  
objectives 
Ex-ante gender-responsive action: 
Practical methods  
(examples) 
Ex-post Learning: 
integrated water and land use 
planning, climate smart 
farming practices) 
Gender focus questions - 
What specific training or other 
interventions might be 
necessary to make trainers 
more responsive to both men’s 
and women’s specific needs?  
 
 
participation is 
ensured/fostered 
 
Effective training of 
women on equal 
footing with men 
 
A significant percentage 
(TBD according to 
context) of trainees are 
women 
 
Awareness-raising on 
gender-related 
concerns at different 
events, on different 
sub-topics (e.g., water, 
forest management, 
land tenure, value 
chains, access to 
finance, etc.). 
 
Ensure that training is socio culturally  
appropriate for women (e.g., a separate 
women’s training might be advisable in 
some cases) 
 
Explicitly incorporate into training a 
gender-responsive take on theme at 
hand  
 
When designing training, consider 
different needs and constraints of 
women vs. men in adopting new 
techniques or in changing behaviours  
 
whether women-only 
small group work is 
more conducive 
 
When facilitating, 
actively encourage 
women to speak and 
share their 
perspectives 
 
events and of gender-
responsiveness 
components: did they feel 
it was useful, that they 
were appropriately 
consulted, included, 
represented, was their 
voice heard? 
Brokering innovative 
partnership agreements 
(between e.g., businesses, 
farmers and other 
communities) 
Gender questions – 
Are numbers of men and 
women equally represented in 
business agreements 
ratification? 
Do women and men have an 
equal opportunity to benefit 
from partnership agreements? 
 
Active participation or 
women in new 
partnership 
opportunities 
 
Women and men 
benefit from new 
partnerships promoting 
IGG, including women 
entrepreneurs/women-
owned businesses. 
 
Approach and encourage women 
leaders and women’s groups, including 
women-owned businesses, to engage in 
forming new partnerships 
 
Ensure that women’s perspectives and 
gender-specific issues are addressed 
during design, planning and 
establishment of new partnerships 
 
Ensure that the partnership will be 
beneficial to both men and women 
equally 
 
Conduct rapid survey 
during partnership 
design to understand 
how it might affect 
women and men 
differently 
Monitor women’s and 
men’s engagement in 
agreements, including 
for example how many 
women-owned 
businesses or women 
entrepreneurs are 
approached/engaged.

=== PAGE 205 ===
87 
 
Activities under TWENDE   
Gender responsive  
objectives 
Ex-ante gender-responsive action: 
Practical methods  
(examples) 
Ex-post Learning: 
Support to new NBE and IG 
value chain development, 
including access to markets and 
finance 
Gender questions 
How will women be 
encouraged to take part in 
enterprise activities that are 
traditionally dominated by 
men?  
Will credit be affordably priced 
for disadvantaged women and 
men in the project area? 
Do men and women have equal 
access to markets in the remote 
locations where Twende 
operates? 
 
Women entrepreneurs 
and farmers gain access 
to new markets and 
financing for IG and 
NBE work 
 
Target both women and men during 
roll-out 
 
Take stock of gender-specific concerns 
in e.g., access to markets and finance 
 
Adapt intervention to facilitate benefits 
to both women and men 
 
Identify value chains 
in which women are 
more active 
Monitor women’s ability 
to engage, e.g. if 
restricted access to 
formal markets of 
financial institutions 
poses a problem, and 
changes to women’s 
roles in value chains 
Advisory and support for policy 
changes 
Gender focus – 
Has the perception of men and 
women (norms, stereotypes, 
values) been at all altered 
during the course of this 
project? 
 
 
Awareness-raising on 
gender-related 
concerns at different 
events, on different 
sub-topics (e.g., water, 
forest management, 
land tenure, value 
chains, access to 
finance, compliance 
with existing policy 
frameworks on gender-
environment links etc.) 
 
Target both women and men  in 
leadership positions 
 
Bring gender-specific learning into 
specific policy theme at hand 
 
Include equitable participation of 
women on panels and high profile 
speaking slots 
 
Engage women’s 
advocacy groups, 
women’s national 
networks, etc.] 
Monitor policy reforms 
through a gender lens

=== PAGE 206 ===
21 References 
Barrett, S. (2013) Local level climate justice? Adaptation finance and vulnerability reduction. Global 
Environmental Change. 23(6). p. 1819–1829.  
Car-Hill et al (2004). The education of nomadic peoples in East Africa—Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, 
Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda: review of relevant literature. African Development Bank and 
UNESCO, UNESCO Publishing, International Institute for Educational Planning.  
Chan 2011. Improving Opportunities for Women in Smallholder-based Supply Chains: Business case 
and practical guidance for international food companies’. 
Commission on the Status of Women 2008. “Gender perspectives on climate change,” Issues paper 
for interactive expert panel on Emerging issues, trends and new approaches to issues 
affecting the situation of women or equality between women and men. 
County Integrated Development Plans (2013 – 2017) for the following Counties: 
Garissa County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/Garissa-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf 
Isiolo County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/Isiolo-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf 
Kajiado County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/Kajiado-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf 
Kitui County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/Kitui-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf 
Marsabit County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/Marsabit-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf 
Makueni County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/Makueni-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf 
Mandera County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/Mandera-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf 
Meru County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/MERU-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf 
Tharaka Nithi County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/TharakaNithi-County-Integrated-Development-
Plan_CIDP_2013-2017.pdf 
Tana River County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/TanaRiver-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf 
Samburu County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/Samburu-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf 
Wajir County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/Wajir-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf 
Taita Taveta County Integrated Development Plan (2013-2017). https://roggkenya.org/wp-
content/uploads/docs/CIDPs/TaitaTaveta-County-Integrated-Development-Plan_CIDP_2013-
2017.pdf

=== PAGE 207 ===
Cooper et al 2008. Coping better with current climatic variability in the rain-fed farming systems of 
sub-Saharan Africa: an essential first step in adapting to  
future climate change? 
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 126, 24–35. 
Dasgupta et al 2014. Rural areas. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. 
Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of  
Working Group II to the 
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
FAO 2007. Women and Food Security. FAO FOCUS http://www.fao.org/FOCUS/E/Women/Sustin-
e.html. 
Fintan 2008. Women’s Empowerment in pastoral societies. Report for IUCN, Ethiopia Addis Ababa. 
Fraser 2008. Scales of Justice: Reimagining Political Space in a Globalizing World. New York: 
Columbia University Press. 
IFAD 2009. Livestock and Pastoralists. Livestock Thematic Papers: Tools for project design. IFAD.  
IPCC 2014. Fifth Assessment report. Key messages from the Fifth Assessment Report for Africa  
Kippur and Ridgewell 2008. A Double Bind: The Exclusion of Pastoralist Women in the East and Horn 
of Africa. Report for Minority Rights Group International (MRG). London: MRG. 
Krätli et al., 2013. Valuing variability: New perspectives on climate resilient drylands development. 
IIED. 
Middleton et al 2011. The Forgotten Billion: MDG Achievement in the Drylands. UNDP, UNCCD. 
Millennium development, 2011.  The Forgotten Billion: MDG Achievement in the Drylands. UNDP, 
UNCCD. 
Miller 2011. The Gender and Social Dimensions to Livestock Keeping in Africa: Implications for 
Animal Health Interventions. Prepared for GALVmed. 
Mortimore et al 2009. Dryland Opportunities: A new paradigm for people, ecosystems and 
development. 
Morton 2007. The impact of climate change on smallholder and subsistence agriculture. 
Morton and Keven 2013. Livelihoods and basic service support in the drylands of the Horn of Africa. 
Brief prepared by a Technical Consortium hosted by CGIAR in partnership with the FAO 
Investment Centre. 
Oxtail 1997. Gender and empowerment: definitions, approaches and implications for policy. Report 
No. 40 UK: BRIDGE IDS. 
Pelling and Holden 2004. Adaptation to Climate Change: From Resilience to Transformation. London: 
Routledge. 
Pelling 2011. Adaptation to Climate Change: From Resilience to Transformation. London: Routledge. 
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues 2008. Issue paper on indigenous peoples and climate 
change. (E/C.19/2008/CRP.2 7). New York.  Available at 
http://www.cbd.int/doc/meetings/tk/emccilc- 01/other/emccilc-01-ipcc-en.pdf 
Ramboll et al 2015. Achieving dryland women’s empowerment: environmental resilience and social 
transformation imperatives. 88pp. Natural Resources Institute, University of Greenwich, 
Chatham, UK. 
REGLAP. 2012. Key statistics on the drylands of Kenya, Uganda and Ethiopia. Nairobi: REGLAP 
Secretariat.  
Republic of Kenya. 2010. Constitution of Kenya. 
http://www.kenyalaw.org/lex/actview.xql?actid=Const2010 
Republic of Kenya. 2013. 7th Human Development Report. 
http://www.ke.undp.org/content/dam/kenya/docs/SPAU/KNHD%20Report%202013.pdf 
Rota and Chakrabarti 2008. Women and Pastoralism’ Livestock Thematic Papers. Tools for Project 
Design. IFAD. Rome: Italy. 
Rota et al 2012. Women and Pastoralism’ Livestock Thematic Papers. Tools for Project Design. IFAD. 
Rome: Italy.  
Save the Children 2012. Social Protection and Child Malnutrition Pakistan Takahashi et al 2015

=== PAGE 208 ===
United Nations 2014. World Survey on the Role of Women in Development 2014, Gender Equality
and Sustainable Development’. United Nations Convention 
 to Combat
Desertification (UNCCD) (2011) Draft advocacy policy framework on gender.
UNDP 2014. World Survey on the Role of Women in Development 2014, Gender Equality and
Sustainable Development.
UNDP, UNCCD, UNEP 2009. Climate Change in the African Drylands: Options and Opportunities for
Adaptation and Mitigation.
UN Women Watch. Available at www.un.org/womenwatch
USGS. 2017. U.S. Department of the Interior U.S. Geological Survey. Earth Explorer. Retrieved from:
https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/
Wiggins and Keats 2013.  Leaping and Learning: Linking smallholders to markets in Africa. London:
Agriculture for Impact, Imperial College and Overseas Development Institute
World Bank 2012. Making Livelihoods and Social Protection Gender-Sensitive. Gender and Risk
Management – Guidance Notes. Guidance Note 7. East and Pacific Region – Sustainable
Development. Washington: USA.
_____________
